Vectorized Conditional Neural Fields: A Framework for Solving
Time-dependent Parametric Partial Differential Equations

Query Points

Transformer models are increasingly used for
solving Partial Differential Equations (PDEs).
Several adaptations have been proposed, all of
which suffer from the typical problems of Transformers, such as quadratic memory and time complexity. Furthermore, all prevalent architectures
for PDE solving lack at least one of several desirable properties of an ideal surrogate model, such
as (i) generalization to PDE parameters not seen
during training, (ii) spatial and temporal zero-shot
super-resolution, (iii) continuous temporal extrapolation, (iv) support for 1D, 2D, and 3D PDEs,
and (v) efficient inference for longer temporal
rollouts. To address these limitations, we propose
Vectorized Conditional Neural Fields (VCNeFs),
which represent the solution of time-dependent
PDEs as neural fields. Contrary to prior methods,
however, VCNeFs compute, for a set of multiple
spatio-temporal query points, their solutions in
parallel and model their dependencies through attention mechanisms. Moreover, VCNeF can condition the neural field on both the initial conditions
and the parameters of the PDEs. An extensive set
of experiments demonstrates that VCNeFs are
competitive with and often outperform existing
ML-based surrogate models.

CNeF

VCNeF

Independent

Dependent and Parallel

⋮

Self-Attention

Abstract

Conditioning

Jan Hagnberger 1 Marimuthu Kalimuthu 1 2 3 Daniel Musekamp 1 3 Mathias Niepert 1 2 3

Conditioning Factors

Figure 1: Conditional Neural Field (CNeF) vs proposed
Vectorized CNeF (VCNeF) for solving parameterized PDEs.

2021). Utilizing ML for solving PDEs has several advantages, such as faster simulation time than classical numerical PDE solvers, differentiability of the surrogate models
(Takamoto et al., 2022), and their ability to be used even
when the underlying PDEs are not known exactly (Li et al.,
2020a). However, if knowledge about the PDEs is available,
it can be added to the model as in Physics-Informed Neural
Networks (PINNs; Raissi et al. (2017)).
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) and its numerous variants are successfully used in natural language processing
(Devlin et al., 2018), speech processing (Gulati et al., 2020),
and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Due to their
remarkable ability to effectively model long-range dependencies in sequential data and to have favorable scaling
behavior, Transformers are used in an increasing number
of additional applications. Transformer models have been
gaining traction in Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) to
model physical systems (Geneva & Zabaras, 2020), solve
PDEs (Cao, 2021; Li et al., 2023a;b; Hao et al., 2023), and
pretrain multiphysics SciML foundation models (McCabe
et al., 2023). Meanwhile, recent advances in neural networks for computer graphics tasks have introduced Neural
Fields (Xie et al., 2021), which have proven to be an efficient method to solve PDEs (Sitzmann et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2023b;a; Yin et al., 2023; Serrano et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
The simulation of physical systems often involves solving
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs), and machine learningbased surrogate models are increasingly used to address this
challenging task (Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020b; Cao,
1

Machine Learning and Simulation Lab, Institute for Artificial Intelligence, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany
2
Stuttgart Center for Simulation Science (SimTech) 3 International
Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS).
Correspondence to: Jan Hagnberger <j.hagnberger@gmail.com>.

Despite these recent advances in neural architectures for

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The source code of VCNeF is available at https://
github.com/jhagnberger/vcnef/

1

