Conditionally-Conjugate Gaussian Process Factor Analysis for Spike Count Data
via Data Augmentation

Yididiya Y. Nadew 1 Xuhui Fan 2 Christopher J. Quinn 1

Abstract

recording from activity of population of neurons (Steinmetz et al., 2021). Analyzing such high-dimensional data
is a challenging statistical problem. A recent line of
works adopts a generative view using latent variable models
(LVMs). These methods assume the activity of a neural population lies in a low-dimensional subspace and thus can be
captured with a small number of latent variables. Such lowdimensional representations can provide insight through
encoding internal neural activity (Yu et al., 2008) and also
capture relevant information to decode external behaviour
such as motor activities (Glaser et al., 2020).

Gaussian process factor analysis (GPFA) is a latent variable modeling technique commonly used
to identify smooth, low-dimensional latent trajectories underlying high-dimensional neural recordings. Specifically, researchers model spiking rates
as Gaussian observations, resulting in tractable
inference. Recently, GPFA has been extended
to model spike count data. However, due to the
non-conjugacy of the likelihood, the inference
becomes intractable. Prior works rely on either
black-box inference techniques, numerical integration or polynomial approximations of the likelihood to handle intractability. To overcome this
challenge, we propose a conditionally-conjugate
Gaussian process factor analysis (ccGPFA) resulting in both analytically and computationally
tractable inference for modeling neural activity
from spike count data. In particular, we develop a
novel data augmentation based method that renders the model conditionally conjugate. Consequently, our model enjoys the advantage of simple
closed-form updates using a variational EM algorithm. Furthermore, due to its conditional conjugacy, we show our model can be readily scaled
using sparse Gaussian Processes and accelerated
inference via natural gradients. To validate our
method, we empirically demonstrate its efficacy
through experiments.

Generally, these models range from classical techniques
such as principal component analysis (PCA) and factor
analysis (FA) to more advanced methods such as linear
dynamical systems (LDS) (Semedo et al., 2014; Gao et al.,
2015) and Gaussian process (GP) based models (Yu et al.,
2008). Unlike classical methods, GP-based models assume
the latent variables follow a smooth temporal structure. Extending the idea of factor analysis to time series, Yu et al.
(2008) proposed a novel method called Gaussian process
factor analysis (GPFA). GPFA couples dimensionality reduction and temporal smoothness of Gaussian processes
in a probabilistic model. The observations are modeled as
conditionally Gaussian, leading to tractable updates within
expectation-maximization (EM) based inference.
Building on (Yu et al., 2008) for Gaussian observations,
researchers have proposed GPFA variants for count observation models, such as for Poisson distributions or negative
binomial distributions, and developed corresponding inference methods, to more accurately model spike count data
(Keeley et al., 2020a;b; Jensen et al., 2021). While models
with discrete distributions of the observations can provide a
better fit than Gaussian observation models, they are nonconjugate, which makes Bayesian inference intractable.

1. Introduction
In neuroscience, recent advances in recording techniques
have made large-scale neural recordings ubiquitous. Common techniques such as neural probes enable simultaneous

To deal with this non-conjugacy, Fourier-domain black-box
variational inference (BBVI) (Keeley et al., 2020a) and numerical integration methods (Jensen et al., 2021) have been
proposed, though such approaches have the potential to
result in unstable and inaccurate approximations. Furthermore, such methods may require complicated settings such
as learning rate tuning to ensure convergence and annealing techniques to effectively balance model exploration and

1
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, USA 2 School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Correspondence to: Christopher J. Quinn
<cjquinn@iastate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

