Neural Jump-Diffusion Temporal Point Processes

Shuai Zhang 1 Chuan Zhou 1 2 Yang Liu 1 Peng Zhang 3 Xixun Lin 4 Zhi-Ming Ma 1

Abstract

Modeling such data has become increasingly important for
tasks such as predicting the occurrence of future events (Du
et al., 2016; Mei & Eisner, 2017; Zhang et al., 2020a; Zuo
et al., 2020), detecting anomalies in event sequences (Liu &
Hauskrecht, 2021; Shchur et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023),
and performing causal inference on events (Xu et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2020b; Gao et al., 2021).

We present a novel perspective on temporal point
processes (TPPs) by reformulating their intensity processes as solutions to stochastic differential equations (SDEs). In particular, we first
prove the equivalent SDE formulations of several classical TPPs, including Poisson processes,
Hawkes processes, and self-correcting processes.
Based on these proofs, we introduce a unified TPP
framework called Neural Jump-Diffusion Temporal Point Process (NJDTPP), whose intensity process is governed by a neural jump-diffusion SDE
(NJDSDE) where the drift, diffusion, and jump
coefficient functions are parameterized by neural
networks. Compared to previous works, NJDTPP
exhibits model flexibility in capturing intensity dynamics without relying on any specific functional
form, and provides theoretical guarantees regarding the existence and uniqueness of the solution to
the proposed NJDSDE. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that
NJDTPP is capable of capturing the dynamics
of intensity processes in different scenarios and
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art TPP
models in prediction tasks.

Temporal point processes (TPPs) (Daley et al., 2003) serve
as a useful mathematical tool for modeling sequences of discrete events in continuous time. Classical examples of TPPs
include Poisson processes (Kingman, 1992), Hawkes processes (Hawkes, 1971), and self-correcting processes (Isham
& Westcott, 1979). A central concept in TPPs is the intensity
process1 (Oakes, 1975), also known as the intensity function (Zhang et al., 2020b), which measures the expected rate
of events occurrence given historical events. While these
classical models exhibit favorable statistical properties, the
fixed parametric form of their intensity functions prevents
them from capturing complicated dynamics.
To enhance the capability of TPP models, there has been
a surge in modeling the intensity function as a transformation of the hidden state of neural networks. Depending on
the neural network structures, these TPP models can be divided into two categories, i.e., those based on either RNNs
or Transformers (Du et al., 2016; Zuo et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2022), and those based on continuous-depth neural
networks (Jia & Benson, 2019; Chen et al., 2020). While being more expressive than classical TPPs, the former models
usually assume a specific functional form for the intensity
function. For example, RMTPP (Du et al., 2016) assumes
that the intensity exponentially decreases or increases between events. However, relying on such an assumption
would limit model expressiveness when the employed assumption deviates from reality (Omi et al., 2019). The latter
models represent the hidden state as the solution to a neural
jump stochastic differential equation (Jia & Benson, 2019).
These models, however, provide no theoretical guarantee
for the global existence and uniqueness of the solution.

1. Introduction
Many real-world scenarios often generate a large amount
of asynchronous event sequences. Each event consists of a
timestamp and a type mark, indicating when and what the
event occurred. Examples include user activities on social
media platforms (Farajtabar et al., 2017), electronic health
records in healthcare (Liu & Hauskrecht, 2021), and transaction behaviors in e-commerce systems (Xue et al., 2022).
1
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 School of Cyber Security, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Cyberspace Institute of Advanced
Technology, Guangzhou University 4 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to:
Chuan Zhou <zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn>.

In this paper, we provide a new view for TPPs by reformulating the intensity process as the solution to a stochastic differential equation (SDE) (Ikeda & Watanabe, 2014). Specifi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
In this paper, we use intensity process and intensity function
interchangeably.

1

