Foundations of Testing for Finite-Sample Causal Discovery

Tom Yan 1 Ziyu Xu 2 Zachary Lipton 1

Abstract

physics and economics (Spirtes et al., 2000; Pearl, 2009). As
a result, there has great interest in discovery methods with
provable guarantees. In the task of causal discovery, one
assumes access to the observational distribution, from which
one can compute the undirected graph skeleton G with an
unoriented edge between every cause and effect. Under
specific functional assumptions on the graph, the underlying
causal DAG can be identified from observational data alone.
In more general settings, interventional data is needed for
discovery. The goal of causal discovery is thus to minimize
the amount of interventional data needed to identify the true
causal graph. A typical discovery algorithm is outlined as in
Algorithm 1, where the two key subroutines are the “query
step” (adaptively determine which interventional data to
collect next) and the “update step” (given the latest sample,
orient edges in G using all the data collected so far).

Discovery of causal relationships is a fundamental goal of science and vital for sound decision
making. As such, there has been considerable
interest in causal discovery methods with provable guarantees. Existing works have thus far
largely focused on discovery under hard intervention and infinite-samples, in which intervening
on a node readily reveals the orientation of every edge incident to the node. This setup however overlooks the stochasticity inherent in realworld, finite-sample settings. Our work takes a
step towards studying finite-sample causal discovery, wherein multiple interventions on a node are
now needed for edge orientation. In this work,
we study the canonical setup in theoretical causal
discovery literature, where one assumes causal
sufficiency and access to the graph skeleton. Our
key observation is that discovery may be viewed
as structured, multiple testing, and we develop a
novel testing framework to this end. Crucially,
our framework allows for anytime valid testing as
multiple tests are needed to conclude an edge orientation. It also allows for flexible combination
of structured test-statistics (enabling one to use
Meek rules to propagate edge orientation) as well
as robust testing. Through empirical simulations,
we confirm the usefulness of our framework. In
closing, using this testing framework, we show
how one may efficiently verify graph structure by
drawing a connection to multi-constraint bandits
and designing a novel algorithm to this end.

The existing line of work on causal discovery with provable guarantees have largely focused on the query step; a
non-exhaustive list of such papers include (Eberhardt, 2007;
Hyttinen et al., 2013; Hu et al., 2014; Shanmugam et al.,
2015; Kocaoglu et al., 2017; Ghassami et al., 2018; Lindgren et al., 2018; Choo et al., 2022). Key to the analysis is
the assumption of hard intervention (under infinite samples),
an idealized model of node intervention. That is, when node
v is intervened on, the orientation of all edges in G incident
to v is revealed. Thus, the update step can be easily implemented, and the algorithm performance be neatly defined
in terms of the number of intervened nodes needed to fully
orient the graph.
Importantly, this idealized model of node intervention overlooks the statistical complexity of orienting an edge in real
world settings. If we view each edge orientation as a hypothesis, then almost always multiple samples are needed to
reject with high probability (w.h.p.) an incorrect hypothesis
(edge orientation), due to stochasticity in the data samples.
Thus, towards studying finite-sample discovery, we consider
the setup considered by Greenewald et al. (2019). An experiment with intervention v now provides one sample from
v’s interventional distribution, which by itself is may not be
sufficient to orient the edge.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery is a fundamental goal of natural and social
sciences, with widespread use across fields such as biology,
1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence
to: Tom Yan <tyyan@cmu.edu>.

In this setting, it is no longer trivial to implement the update
step. Thus, to even begin to study the finite-sample setting,
we first need a framework that can implement the update

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

