High-Dimensional Geometric Streaming for Nearly Low Rank Data

Hossein Esfandiari * 1 Praneeth Kacham * 1 2 Vahab Mirrokni * 1 David P. Woodruff * 2 Peilin Zhong * 1

Abstract

dataset that is useful to solve a certain problem. In this work,
we focus on streaming algorithms for high-dimensional geometric problems such as subspace approximation, width
estimation, etc. Suppose we are given a set of d-dimensional
points a1 , . . . , an and an integer parameter k ≤ d. Given a
subspace V , we define d(a, V ) to be distance between the
point a and subspace V given by minv∈V ka − vk2 . The `p
subspace approximation problem (Deshpande et al., 2011b),
for p ∈ [1, ∞],
Pnasks to find a k-dimensional subspace that
minimizes ( i=1 d(ai , V )p )1/p .

We study streaming algorithms for the `p subspace approximation problem. Given points
a1 , . . . , an as an insertion-only stream and a rank
parameter k, the `p subspace approximation problem isP
to find a k-dimensional subspace V such
n
that ( i=1 d(ai , V )p )1/p is minimized, where
d(a, V ) denotes the Euclidean distance between a
and V defined as minv∈V ka−vk2 . When p = ∞,
we need to find a subspace V that minimizes
maxi d(ai , V ). For `∞ subspace approximation,
we give a deterministic strong coreset construction algorithm and show that it can be used to compute a poly(k, log n) approximate solution. We
show that the distortion obtained by our coreset is
nearly tight for any sublinear space algorithm. For
`p subspace approximation, we show that suitably
scaling the points and then using our `∞ coreset construction, we can compute a poly(k, log n)
approximation. Our algorithms are easy to implement and run very fast on large datasets. We also
use our strong coreset construction to improve the
results in a recent work of Woodruff and Yasuda
(FOCS 2022) which gives streaming algorithms
for high-dimensional geometric problems such
as width estimation, convex hull estimation, and
volume estimation.

Note that for p = ∞, we want to find a k-dimensional subspace that minimizes the maximum distance from the given
set of points. Related to the `∞ subspace approximation
problem is the widely studied outer (d−k) radius estimation
problem (Varadarajan et al., 2007) which instead asks for
a k-dimensional flat1 F that minimizes maxi∈[n] d(ai , F ).
The outer (d−k) radius is a measure of how far the point set
is from being inside a k-dimensional flat. Varadarajan et al.
(2007) give a polynomial time algorithm
√ for approximating
the outer (d − k) radius up to an O( log n) multiplicative
factor. Their algorithm is based on rounding of a semidefinite program (SDP) relaxation. When n is very large, their
algorithm is not practical and cannot be implemented in the
streaming setting. We give a time and space-efficient single
pass streaming algorithm
that approximates the outer (d−k)
√
radius up to an Õ( k log(nκ)) factor, where κ is a suitably
defined condition number. Typically, the value of k used is
much smaller than n and d since in many settings, we have
that the n × d matrix A is a noisy version of an underlying
rank k matrix, for a small value of k.

1. Introduction
Modern datasets are usually very high-dimensional and have
a large number of data points. Storing the entire dataset to analyze them is often impractical and in certain settings impossible. In recent years, streaming algorithms have emerged as
a way to process and understand the datasets in both a space
and time-efficient manner. In a single-pass streaming setting,
an algorithm is allowed to make only a single pass over the
entire dataset and is required to output a “summary” of the

Our main contribution is a simple deterministic algorithm that constructs a strong coreset for approximating
maxi d(ai , V ) for any k-dimensional subspace V in a
single-pass streaming setting. We note that this notion of
strong coreset is different from the strong/weak coreset definitions in some computational geometry works. When run
on the stream of points a1 , . . . , an , our algorithm selects a
subset S ⊆ [n] of points with |S| = O(k log2 (nκ)), such
that for all k-dimensional subspaces
V , maxi∈S d(ai , V ) ≤
√
maxi∈[n] d(ai , V ) ≤ O( k log(nκ)) maxi∈S d(ai , V ).
We stress that our coreset can be used to approximate the

*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, USA 2 Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA.
Correspondence to: Praneeth Kacham <pkacham@google.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A k-dimensional flat is defined as a k dimensional subspace
that is translated by some c.

1

