DNA-SE: Towards Deep Neural-Nets Assisted Semiparametric Estimation

Qinshuo Liu 1 Zixin Wang 2 Xi-An Li 3 Xinyao Ji Lei Zhang 3 Lin Liu † 3 4 Zhonghua Liu † 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep Neural-Nets (DNN) have made unprecedented
progress in a variety of scientific and industrial problems,
such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), and scientific
computing (E & Yu, 2018). Recently, the statistical literature has also garnered increasing interests in deploying
DNN to solve statistical problems that baffled traditional
methods, for example, nonparametric regression (Chen &
White, 1999; Suzuki, 2019; Schmidt-Hieber, 2020; Padilla
et al., 2022) and nonparametric density estimation (Liu et al.,
2021b; Liang, 2021). A common theme in these applications
is to view DNN as an alternative method to approximate
infinite-dimensional nonparametric models, conventionally
done by splines, polynomials, etc. (Giné & Nickl, 2016).

Semiparametric statistics play a pivotal role in
a wide range of domains, including but not limited to missing data, causal inference, and transfer
learning, to name a few. In many settings, semiparametric theory leads to (nearly) statistically
optimal procedures that yet involve numerically
solving Fredholm integral equations of the second kind. Traditional numerical methods, such
as polynomial or spline approximations, are difficult to scale to multi-dimensional problems. Alternatively, statisticians may choose to approximate the original integral equations by ones with
closed-form solutions, resulting in computationally more efficient, but statistically suboptimal or
even incorrect procedures. To bridge this gap, we
propose a novel framework by formulating the
semiparametric estimation problem as a bi-level
optimization problem; and then we develop a scalable algorithm called Deep Neural-Nets Assisted
Semiparametric Estimation (DNA-SE) by leveraging the universal approximation property of Deep
Neural-Nets (DNN) to streamline semiparametric
procedures. Through extensive numerical experiments and a real data analysis, we demonstrate the
numerical and statistical advantages of DNA-SE
over traditional methods. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to bring DNN into semiparametric statistics as a numerical solver of integral
equations in our proposed general framework.

Interpretability is at the core of many statistical problems. A
conceptually appealing statistical paradigm is semiparametric statistics (including semiparametric statistical models,
methods and related theory). In semiparametric statistics,
one models the part of the Data Generating Process (DGP)
of scientific interest with low-dimensional parametric models to improve interpretability, while leaving the remaining
part (termed as nuisance parameters) either completely unspecified or modeled by infinite-dimensional nonparametric
models to avoid unnecessary model misspecification bias
(Newey, 1990; Bickel et al., 1998). As a result, semiparametric statistics have been very popular in problems calling for
both interpretability and robustness against model misspecification, such as missing data (Robins et al., 1994), causal
inference (van der Laan & Robins, 2003), and more recently,
transfer learning (Qiu et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023). It is
natural to employ DNN to estimate the infinite-dimensional
nuisance parameters in semiparametric models, an extension
of the aforementioned idea from nonparametric statistics.
In fact, this is the route that most recent semiparametric
statistics literature has taken (Farrell et al., 2021; Shi et al.,
2021; Zhong et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022; Kompa et al.,
2022; Chernozhukov et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023a; 2024).

The two corresponding authors are alphabetically ordered and
contributed equally to this project. 1 Department of Statistics
and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR, China 2 School of Life Sciences, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China 3 Institute of Natural Sciences, MOE-LSC, School of Mathematical Sciences, CMAShanghai, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 4 SJTUYale Joint Center for Biostatistics and Data Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 5 Department of Biostatistics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Lin Liu <linliu@sjtu.edu.cn>, Zhonghua Liu
<zl2509@cumc.columbia.edu>.

In this paper, we take a different path and instead propose to
treat DNN as a numerical solver for semiparametric statistics. Here is our motivation. All the above cited works on
semiparametric statistics are special cases, where the statistically optimal (i.e. semiparametric efficient) estimator

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

