Conformal Prediction with Learned Features
Shayan Kiyani 1 George Pappas 1 Hamed Hassani 1

Abstract

guarantee if for a test sample (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) we have

In this paper, we focus on the problem of conformal prediction with conditional guarantees. Prior
work has shown that it is impossible to construct
nontrivial prediction sets with full conditional
coverage guarantees. A wealth of research has
considered relaxations of full conditional guarantees, relying on some predefined uncertainty
structures. Departing from this line of thinking,
we propose Partition Learning Conformal Prediction (PLCP), a framework to improve conditional validity of prediction sets through learning
uncertainty-guided features from the calibration
data. We implement PLCP efficiently with alternating gradient descent, utilizing off-the-shelf
machine learning models. We further analyze
PLCP theoretically and provide conditional guarantees for infinite and finite sample sizes. Finally,
our experimental results over four real-world and
synthetic datasets show the superior performance
of PLCP compared to state-of-the-art methods in
terms of coverage and length in both classification
and regression scenarios.

Pr (Yn+1 ∈ C (Xn+1 )) = 1 − α,

(1)

where α is the miscoverage rate, and the probability is taken
over the randomness in calibration and test points.
Oftentimes in practice, methods that only guarantee
marginal coverage fail to provide valid coverage with respect to specific subgroups or under changing conditions
(Romano et al., 2020a; Guan, 2021; Lei & Wasserman,
2014). This issue is particularly evident in applications
such as healthcare, where obtaining valid prediction sets for
different patient demographics is crucial. For instance, a
marginal method might perform well on average over new
patients but fail to construct accurate prediction sets for
certain age groups or medical conditions.
Ultimately, we may seek to construct prediction sets that
achieve full conditional coverage which requires for every
x∈X
Pr (Yn+1 ∈ C (Xn+1 ) | Xn+1 = x) = 1 − α.

(2)

Despite the importance of achieving conditional guarantees, there are some fundamental limitations. Prior work
(Vovk, 2012; Foygel Barber et al., 2019; Lei & Wasserman,
2014) has shown that it is impossible to construct nontrivial
prediction sets with distribution-free, full conditional coverage when we have access to a finite-size calibration set.
Consequently, relaxations of (2) have been considered. For
instance, (Gibbs et al., 2023; Tibshirani et al., 2019) develop
frameworks to guarantee coverage under a predefined class
of covariate shifts. Another line of work (Romano et al.,
2020a; Jung et al., 2023; Barber et al., 2019) considers predefined groups of the covariates and guarantees coverage
conditioned on those groups. A more detailed discussion on
the existing methods and their implications is provided in
the related works section 1.1.

1. Introduction
Consider a distribution D over a domain X × Y, where X
denotes the space of covariates and Y denotes the space of
labels. Let f : X → Y be a (pre-trained) model that provides for every input x a point estimate of the corresponding
label y. Using the model f and a set of new calibration
samples (X1 , Y1 ) , . . . , (Xn , Yn ), generated i.i.d. from D,
the goal of conformal prediction is to construct for every
input x a prediction set C(x) that is guaranteed to cover
the true label y with high probability. Formally, we say
that the prediction sets C(x) ⊆ Y have marginal coverage

In this paper, we take a new approach and, instead of considering predefined structures, propose to learn structures
from the calibration data that are informative about uncertainty quantification. Our algorithmic framework aims at
learning such structures in conjunction with constructing
the prediction sets in an iterative fashion. To better illustrate
our approach and contributions, we will proceed with the
following toy example.

1

The Electrical and Systems Engineering Department, University of Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Shayan Kiyani <shayank@seas.upenn.edu>,
George Pappas <pappasg@seas.upenn.edu>, Hamed Hassani <hassani@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

