Scribble-Supervised Semantic Segmentation with
Prototype-based Feature Augmentation

Guiyang Chan 1 2 Pengcheng Zhang 1 2 Hai Dong 3 Shunhui Ji 1 2 Bainian Chen 1 2

Abstract

F

Scribble-supervised semantic segmentation
presents a cost-effective training method that
utilizes annotations generated through scribbling.
It is valued in attaining high performance while
minimizing annotation costs, which has made
it highly regarded among researchers. Scribble
supervision propagates information from labeled
pixels to the surrounding unlabeled pixels,
enabling semantic segmentation for the entire
image. However, existing methods often ignore
the features of classified pixels during feature
propagation. To address these limitations, this
paper proposes a prototype-based feature augmentation method that leverages feature prototypes
to augment scribble supervision. Experimental
results demonstrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the PASCAL
VOC 2012 dataset in scribble-supervised semantic segmentation tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/TranquilChan/PFA.

P

P

F
F’

(a) Regularization loss

Ft

Pt

Ft+1

Pt+1

(c) Pseudo proposal

F

P

(e) Label diffusion

(b) Consistency loss

P

F

(d) Auxiliary task

F

P

F’

P’

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of existing scribble-supervised semantic segmentation approaches. F represents the feature map, and P represents the prediction map.

the annotation process can be tedious. Therefore, in scenarios where data dependency is strong, researchers are
increasingly focusing on methods that utilize scribble labels
for supervised learning. Training with scribble labels falls
under weakly supervised learning, allowing annotators to
mark regions in the image using simple lines or sketches and
assign corresponding labels to those regions. Compared to
pixel-level annotation, using scribble labels can significantly
reduce the workload of annotation and improve efficiency.
Additionally, compared to point (Bearman et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2021), bounding box (Kulharia et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021), and image-level (Zhang et al., 2020; Du et al.,
2022) labels, scribble labels provide more crucial semantic
information to the models, helping them better learn the
semantic structure of the images.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid progress of deep learning techniques has propelled deep neural networks to achieve significant advancements in image semantic segmentation tasks.
These networks play a pivotal role in aiding human comprehension of image content, providing precise pixel-level
segmentation. As one of the most intricate tasks in the field
of computer vision, training semantic segmentation models
typically requires a large number of high-quality annotated
samples. However, annotating samples at the pixel level
demands a substantial amount of manpower and time, and
1
Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology of Ministry
of Water Resources, Hohai University, Nanjing, China 2 College
of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing, China 3 School of Computing Technologies, RMIT
University, Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Pengcheng
Zhang <pchzhang@hhu.edu.cn>.

As shown in Figure 1, existing methods mainly rely on
regularization loss (Tang et al., 2018a;b; Obukhov et al.,
2019; Marin et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2022), consistency
loss (Ke et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2021), pseudo proposal (Lin
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021), auxiliary
tasks (Wang et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2021), and label diffu-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

