Online Learning in Betting Markets: Profit versus Prediction

Haiqing Zhu 1 Alexander Soen 1 2 Yun Kuen Cheung 1 Lexing Xie 1

Abstract

pirical studies on bettor and bookmaker strategies in betting
markets, what is a theoretical model for setting the book?
Also, can prediction-market-style online algorithms help
profit-oriented bookmakers?

We examine two types of binary betting markets,
whose primary goal is for profit (such as sports
gambling) or to gain information (such as prediction markets). We articulate the interplay between
belief and price-setting to analyse both types of
markets, and show that the goals of maximising
bookmaker profit and eliciting information are
fundamentally incompatible. A key insight is
that profit hinges on the deviation between (the
distribution of) bettor and true beliefs, and that
heavier tails in bettor belief distribution imply
higher profit. Our algorithmic contribution is
to introduce online learning methods for pricesetting. Traditionally bookmakers update their
prices rather infrequently, we present two algorithms that guide price updates upon seeing each
bet, assuming very little of bettor belief distributions. The online √
pricing algorithm achieves
stochastic regret of O(
√ T ) against the worst local maximum, or O( T log T ) with high probability against the global maximum under fair
odds. More broadly, the inherent trade-off between profit and information-seeking in binary
betting may inspire new understandings of largescale multi-agent behaviour.

Related work. Prediction markets (Wolfers & Zitzewitz,
2006) have had great algorithmic success as information aggregators. Early development focused on how market maker
used proper scoring rule to reward forecasters and encourage honest predictions (Brier, 1950; Good, 1952; McCarthy,
1956; Savage, 1971; Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). A landmark
result is the automated market maker (Hanson, 2007) using
the logarithmic market scoring rule (LMSR). The inherent
connection of LMSR to online optimisation led to various
generalisations of LMSR in algorithms and market structures (Chen & Pennock, 2007; Chen et al., 2008; Agrawal
et al., 2008; Guo & Pennock, 2009; Chen & Vaughan, 2010;
Agrawal et al., 2011; Abernethy et al., 2013; Frongillo et al.,
2012; Othman et al., 2013), and convergence analyses of
the relevant dynamic processes (Frongillo & Reid, 2015; Yu
et al., 2022b).
For betting markets, Kelly betting (Kelly, 1956; Rotando
& Thorp, 1992; Busseti et al., 2016) is a prominent model
and applicable to different domains (Thorp, 2008). Levitt
(2004)’s empirical work on bookmaker strategy identified
that better prediction ability and their systematic exploitation of bettor biases as two main drivers of bookmakers’
profit. More recently, Yu et al. (2022a) characterised the
uniqueness of the equilibrium of the betting market model
under the special case that the odds are fair and no profit
is earned. Compared to the above, our work provides theoretical explanations of Levitt’s findings based on a more
general online betting model. Furthermore, we show that
bookmakers can earn higher profit not only by exploiting
bettor biases, but also by exploiting polarised bettor belief
distributions that have heavy tails. Remarkably, we show
that such exploitation is not only feasible, but can be done
in an online setting with little knowledge of bettor belief
distribution beforehand.

1. Introduction
Betting on future events is interesting for at least two reasons: to elicit and aggregate belief as done in online prediction markets, or to profit from correct forecasts as done in
traditional betting market. There is a vast (albeit separate)
literature about prediction and betting markets. A closer
examination prompts us to ask three questions. Can one
describe prediction market and traditional betting market
using a shared mathematical model? Given the many em1
School of Computing, The Australian National University,
Canberra, Australia 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
<{haiqing.zhu,
alexander.soen, yunkuen.cheung, lexing.xie}@anu.edu.au>.

Our profit-maximisation problem is distinct from other online learning problems. For example, multi-armed bandits (Thompson, 1933; Slivkins et al., 2019; Lattimore &
Szepesvári, 2020) optimise profit for the (repeating) bettor
when the rate of return is unknown, whereas our problem

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

