Protein Conformation Generation via Force-Guided SE(3) Diffusion Models

Yan Wang * 1 2 Lihao Wang * 1 Yuning Shen 1 Yiqun Wang 1 Huizhuo Yuan 3 Yue Wu 3 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

other molecules. Depicting the protein conformational landscape provides vital insights for (1) identifying potential
druggable sites hidden beneath the protein surface, and (2)
revealing transition pathways between multiple metastable
states. A comprehensive understanding of protein conformations facilitates the elucidation of biological reaction mechanisms, thereby empowering researchers to design targeted
inhibitors and therapeutic agents with improved specificity
and efficacy.
Traditional physics-based simulation methods such as
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been extensively studied for protein conformation sampling. With a
well-designed empirical force field and numerical integrator,
the model propagates the 3D structure of a protein system
over time following Newtonian mechanics. MD simulations converge towards the equilibrium distribution (i.e., the
Boltzmann distribution) given sufficient time, which facilitates estimation of significant thermodynamic properties,
e.g., binding free energy change (Wang et al., 2015). However, to preserve energy conservation and ensure numerical
stability, the time step of MD simulations is typically only
a few femtoseconds. This poses a challenge as certain biological processes of interest, such as protein folding, span
much longer timescales, ranging from microseconds to seconds (Shaw et al., 2021). This results in limited sampling
efficiency within conventional MD simulations, further compounded by the rare event sampling problem (TrendelkampSchroer & Noé, 2016), impeding the research community
to widely adopt MD for high throughput studies.
Building upon the cornerstone of powerful folding models
(e.g., AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021), RoseTTAFold (Baek
et al., 2021), OmegaFold (Wu et al., 2022b), etc.), several attempts have been made to tailor these deep neural networks
for protein conformation sampling. By perturbing the model
input, such as multiple sequence alignment (MSA) masking
(Stein & Mchaourab, 2022) or clustering (Wayment-Steele
et al., 2023), the folding model provides a more diverse
set of possible folded structures, i.e., alternative conformations. However, this heuristic approach cannot guarantee
the predicted structure to be a low energy state of the target
sequence. More recently, several works have incorporated
diffusion models (Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020) for
protein conformation generation (Jing et al., 2023; Lu et al.,
2024; Zheng et al., 2023). By pretraining on a large amount

The conformational landscape of proteins is crucial to understanding their functionality in complex biological processes. Traditional physicsbased computational methods, such as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, suffer from rare
event sampling and long equilibration time problems, hindering their applications in general protein systems. Recently, deep generative modeling techniques, especially diffusion models, have
been employed to generate novel protein conformations. However, existing score-based diffusion
methods cannot properly incorporate important
physical prior knowledge to guide the generation
process, causing large deviations in the sampled
protein conformations from the equilibrium distribution. In this paper, to overcome these limitations, we propose a force-guided SE(3) diffusion model, C ONF D IFF, for protein conformation
generation. By incorporating a force-guided network with a mixture of data-based score models,
C ONF D IFF can generate protein conformations
with rich diversity while preserving high fidelity.
Experiments on a variety of protein conformation
prediction tasks, including 12 fast-folding proteins and the Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin Inhibitor
(BPTI), demonstrate that our method surpasses
the state-of-the-art method.

1

Introduction

Proteins are dynamic macromolecules that play pivotal
roles in various biological processes. Their functionality is realized primarily through conformational changes–
structural alterations that enable proteins to interact with
*

Equal contribution 1 ByteDance Research 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Tongji University, Shanghai (this work was
done during Yan’s internship at ByteDance Research) 3 Department
of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
(this work was done during Huizhuo and Yue’s internship at
ByteDance Research). Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <quanquan.gu@bytedance.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

