C ON T EXTUAL: Evaluating Context-Sensitive Text-Rich Visual Reasoning in
Large Multimodal Models
Rohan Wadhawan * 1 Hritik Bansal * 1 Kai-Wei Chang 1 Nanyun Peng 1

Abstract
Many real-world tasks require an agent to reason
jointly over text and visual objects, (e.g., navigating in public spaces), which we refer to as contextsensitive text-rich visual reasoning. Specifically,
these tasks require an understanding of the context
in which the text interacts with visual elements
within an image. However, there is a lack of existing datasets to benchmark the state-of-the-art multimodal models’ capability on context-sensitive
text-rich visual reasoning. In this paper, we introduce C ON T EXTUAL, a novel dataset featuring
human-crafted instructions that require contextsensitive reasoning for text-rich images. We
conduct experiments to assess the performance
of 14 foundation models (GPT-4V, Gemini-ProVision, LLaVA-Next) and establish a human performance baseline. Further, we perform human
evaluations of the model responses and observe
a significant performance gap of 30.8% between
GPT-4V (the current best-performing Large Multimodal Model) and human performance. Our finegrained analysis reveals that GPT-4V encounters
difficulties interpreting time-related data and infographics. However, it demonstrates proficiency
in comprehending abstract visual contexts such
as memes and quotes. Finally, our qualitative
analysis uncovers various factors contributing to
poor performance including lack of precise visual
perception and hallucinations. Our dataset, code,
and leaderboard can be found on the project page
https://con-textual.github.io/.

ESTVQA

ConTextual

What can we eat here?

Get the number of the boat with
three yellow and one red round
items hanging from it.

OCR

Angelo's Car Hop Service
Hamburgers Laundromat

SS273 WH97 SS266 SS681 SS138

GPT4 w/ OCR
Response

You can eat hamburgers at
Angelo's Car Hop Service.

SS681

Instruction

(a) Comparing an instance of C ON T EXTUAL to existing
datasets (e.g., ESTVQA). C ON T EXTUAL requires contextualized understanding of the interactions between the textual and
visual elements in the image while ESTVQA can be solved
solely through text-based reasoning combined with accurate
OCR detection.

(b) Performance of GPT-4V, Gemini-Pro-Vision, ShareGPT-4V-7B,
and humans on the C ON T EXTUAL dataset, with Human Evaluation (left sub-graph) and GPT4 Evaluation (right sub-graph).
Figure 1. Comparisons between our dataset C ON T EXTUAL and
prior work ESTVQA, along with benchmark performances of large
multimodal models on C ON T EXTUAL.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to:
Rohan Wadhawan <rwadhawan7@g.ucla.edu>, Hritik Bansal
<hbansal@g.ucla.edu>.

1. Introduction
The recent development of large multimodal models
(LMMs) has resulted in models capable of responding to
human instructions, posed as questions or imperative tasks,
over images (Liu et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023b; Team et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

