PriorBoost: An Adaptive Algorithm for Learning from Aggregate Responses

Adel Javanmard * 1 2 Matthew Fahrbach * 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract

tice is to let the learner access responses in an aggregate
manner. In the framework of learning from aggregate responses (LAR), the learner is given access to a collection of
unlabeled feature vectors called bags and an aggregate summary of the responses in each bag. A widely used choice is
the mean response or label proportions of each bag (Yu et al.,
2014). The learner then fits a model using the aggregate
responses with the goal of accurately predicting individual
responses on future data.

This work studies algorithms for learning from aggregate responses. We focus on the construction
of aggregation sets (called bags in the literature)
for event-level loss functions. We prove for linear
regression and generalized linear models (GLMs)
that the optimal bagging problem reduces to onedimensional size-constrained k-means clustering.
Further, we theoretically quantify the advantage
of using curated bags over random bags. We then
propose the PriorBoost algorithm, which adaptively forms bags of samples that are increasingly
homogeneous with respect to (unobserved) individual responses to improve model quality. We
study label differential privacy for aggregate learning, and we also provide extensive experiments
showing that PriorBoost regularly achieves optimal model quality for event-level predictions, in
stark contrast to non-adaptive algorithms.

The problem of learning from aggregate responses (a.k.a.
learning from label proportions in the context of classification) dates back to at least Wein & Zenios (1996) in the
context of group testing, a technique used in many different
fields including medical diagnostics, population screening,
and quality control. The idea is to combine multiple samples
into a group and test them together rather than individually.
This approach has been widely adopted in cases where testing resources are limited or the prevalence of the condition
being tested for is low. LAR has also been studied in other
earlier work (de Freitas & Kück, 2005; Musicant et al., 2007;
Quadrianto et al., 2008; Rueping, 2010; Patrini et al., 2014)
for settings where direct access to the individual responses
is not possible (e.g., in political party elections where aggregate votes are only available at discrete district levels).

1. Introduction
In supervised learning, the learner is given a training dataset
of n i.i.d pairs (xi , yi ), where xi ∈ Rd is a feature vector and yi is the corresponding response. Responses are
real-valued for regression problems, and belong to a finite
discrete set for multi-class classification. The fundamental
problem in supervised learning is to (1) train a model with
this data, and (2) use this model to infer the response/label
of unseen test instances. However, in many practical applications (e.g., medical tests and elections), the responses contain sensitive information, but the features are far less sensitive (e.g., demographic information or zip codes/regions). In
such applications, there are valid concerns about revealing
individual responses to the learning algorithm, even if it is a
trusted party.

Recently, there has been a resurgence in the LAR framework
primarily due to the rise of privacy concerns; see (Scott &
Zhang, 2020; Saket, 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Busa-Fekete
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023; Brahmbhatt et al., 2023; Javanmard et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024) for a non-exhaustive
list. Specifically, if the aggregation bags are large enough
and have no (or little) overlap, revealing only the aggregate
responses provides a layer of privacy protection, often formalized in terms of k-anonymity (Sweeney, 2002). Large
tech companies have recently deployed aggregate learning
frameworks, including Apple’s SKAdNetwork library (Kollnig et al., 2022) and the Private Aggregation API in the
Google Privacy Sandbox (Geradin et al., 2020). Aggregate
responses can further be perturbed to provide label differential privacy (Chaudhuri & Hsu, 2011), a popular notion of
privacy that measures the leakage of personal label/response
information, which we discuss in detail in Section 6.

A popular approach to mitigate this privacy concern in prac*

Equal contribution 1 University of Southern California
Google Research. Correspondence to: Adel Javanmard <ajavanma@usc.edu>.
2

In some applications, the bagging configurations are naturally determined by the problem at hand (e.g., in the voting

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

