convSeq: Fast and Scalable Method for Detecting Patterns in Spike Data

Roman Koshkin 1 Tomoki Fukai 1

Abstract

neous activity might encode sensory priors and therefore be
a form of biological memory.

Spontaneous neural activity, crucial in memory,
learning, and spatial navigation, often manifests
itself as repetitive spatiotemporal patterns. Despite their importance, analyzing these patterns in
large neural recordings remains challenging due
to a lack of efficient and scalable detection methods. Addressing this gap, we introduce convSeq,
an unsupervised method that employs backpropagation for optimizing spatiotemporal filters that
effectively identify these neural patterns. Our
method’s performance is validated on various synthetic data and real neural recordings, revealing
spike sequences with unprecedented scalability
and efficiency. Significantly surpassing existing
methods in speed, convSeq sets a new standard
for analyzing spontaneous neural activity, potentially advancing our understanding of information
processing in neural circuits.

To address questions about the role of structured spontaneous activity, a number of methods have been proposed for
unsupervised detection of neural activity patterns in the absence of an observable behavioral reference. These existing
methods perform well and in reasonable time on modestly
sized datasets. However, the study of spontaneous activity
would benefit from the analysis of much larger datasets (with
hundreds of neurons recorded over several days), which calls
for more scalable pattern detection methods.
We introduce an efficient and scalable method for unsupervised detection of spatiotemporal patterns in neural activity
based on optimizing a set of constrained 2D filters. Distinct from existing approaches (e.g. convNMF, seqNMF),
we optimize the filters with backpropagation, which allows
us to take advantage of popular automatic differentiation
frameworks and GPU acceleration. To reduce the number
of learnable parameters, we also propose an alternative formulation of our method, in which the filters themselves
are parameterized as fixed-width truncated Gaussians. Our
speed benchmarks show that the method, which we call
convSeq1 , works significanly faster than existing pattern
detection methods.

1. Introduction
A fundamental property of biological neural networks – and
one that distinguishes them from the majority of modern
deep neural networks – is the ability to change state not
only in response to external input, but also spontaneously
(Arieli et al., 1996; Beggs & Plenz, 2003). A prominent
example of this is what is known as ”hippocampal replay”
(Lee & Wilson, 2002; Foster & Wilson, 2006; Pfeiffer &
Foster, 2013), normally observed in animals during sleep
or periods of immobility, which represents reactivation of
spatio-temporal patterns present during a behavioral task
performed before. Hippocampal replay has been shown to
be crucial for memory, learning and navigation (Girardeau
et al., 2009). In addition, animals’ behavior in response to
external stimuli depends on the structure of spontaneous
activity before and at the time of stimulation (Fiser et al.,
2004), which raises the intriguing possibility that sponta-

Our main contributions are as follows:
1. Our method advances the SOTA in terms of speed:
given the same dataset, it performs over a 100 times
faster than similar recently published methods;
2. Unlike convNMF and seqNMF, which are conceptually similar to our method, ours provides uncertainty
estimates for the patterns detected, without requiring
multiple optimization runs.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
2 briefly reviews existing methods for detecting spatiotemporal patterns in neural data. After introducing our
method (in Section 3), we showcase its ability to detect
various patterns in synthetic and real datasets (in Section 4),
as well as accuracy and speed comparisons with a selection
of other methods (in Section 5). We discuss training, implementation and the choice of hyperparameters in Section

1

Neural Coding and Brain Computing Unit, Okinawa Institute
of Science and Technology, Okinawa, Japan. Correspondence to:
Roman Koshkin <roman.koshkin@oist.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

https://github.com/RomanKoshkin/conv-seq

