Hidden Traveling Waves bind Working Memory Variables
in Recurrent Neural Networks
Arjun Karuvally 1 Terrence J. Sejnowski 2 Hava T. Siegelmann 1
Input

Abstract
Traveling waves are a fundamental phenomenon
in the brain, playing a crucial role in short-term
information storage. In this study, we leverage
the concept of traveling wave dynamics within a
neural lattice to formulate a theoretical model of
neural working memory in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), study its properties, and its real
world implications in AI. The proposed model
diverges from traditional approaches, which assume information storage in static, register-like
locations updated by interference. Instead, the
model stores data as waves that is updated by
the wave’s boundary conditions. We rigorously
examine the model’s capabilities in representing
and learning state histories, which are vital for
learning history-dependent dynamical systems.
The findings reveal that the model reliably stores
external information and enhances the learning
process by addressing the diminishing gradient
problem of RNNs. To understand the model’s
real-world applicability, we explore two cases:
linear boundary condition and non-linear, selfattention-driven boundary condition. The experiments reveal that the linear scenario is effectively
learned by RNNs through backpropagation when
modeling history-dependent dynamical systems.
Conversely, the non-linear scenario parallels an
attention-only transformer. Collectively, our findings suggest the broader relevance of traveling
waves in AI and its potential in advancing neural
network architectures.

Wave Field

time

Figure 1. Illustration of information storage in traveling waves
- A prominent hypothesis on the computational utility of traveling
waves says that information is stored as ripple like waves that
propagate outwards with time. A snapshot of the resulting wavefield provides all information necessary to reconstruct the recent
history by encoding both when and where (in the dimensions of
the stimulus) a stimulus occured.

1. Introduction
Traveling waves are ubiquitous in neurobiological experiments of human memory (Davis et al., 2020a). They have
been observed during awake and sleep states throughout
the brain, including the cortex and hippocampus and have
been shown to impact behavior (Davis et al., 2020b). Several hypotheses based on experimental evidence point to the
utility of these waves in memory storage (Benigno et al.,
2023). One of the hypothesis suggests external stimuli interacts with neural networks to form neural activity that
propagates through the brain (Muller et al., 2018; Perrard
et al., 2016). A snapshot of this wave field in the brain
provide the information necessary to reconstruct the recent
past, a mechanism ideal for the memory storage. Recent
empirical evidence also points to the potential utility of traveling waves in artificial intelligence. Of note is a recent
empirical work that introduced traveling waves explicitly in
the parameters of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and
found that this simple addition improves its learnability and
generalization properties (Keller et al., 2023).

1
Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA-01002, USA.
2
Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA.. Correspondence to:
Arjun Karuvally <akaruvally@umass.edu>, Hava T. Siegelmann
<hava@umass.edu>.

Current hypotheses of working memory in RNNs, however,
assume variables as bound in fixed register-like locations
(Sreenivasan et al., 2014; Chumbley et al., 2008; Compte
et al., 2000) that are updated by interference (McGeoch,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

