Junk DNA Hypothesis: Pruning Small Pre-Trained Weights Irreversibly and
Monotonically Impairs “Difficult" Downstream Tasks in LLMs

Lu Yin * 1 2 Ajay Jaiswal * 3 Shiwei Liu 1 4 Souvik Kundu 5 Zhangyang Wang 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
A prevailing belief suggests that neural networks contain
significant and non-significant components across their
parameters that record necessary or unnecessary expertise
respectively to handle a task, which forms the inherent basis
of numerous model compression techniques (Han et al.,
2016). Moreover, as model sizes continue to expand, the
volume of redundant parameters is poised to escalate (Liu
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2021). This principle extends its
effectiveness even to billion-level Large Language Models
(LLMs) (Jaiswal et al., 2023b; Frantar & Alistarh, 2023;
Hu et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023b). With the negligible
loss in performance stemming from the absence of nonsignificant components, a widely held belief has taken root:
these non-significant components are essentially superfluous
components that make a scant contribution to the model’s
functionality. Yet we pause and pose a question: Could
there be crucial facets overlooked in the context of whether
these non-significant components are truly inconsequential
artifacts for large-scale models?

We present Junk DNA Hypothesis by adopting
a novel task-centric angle for the pre-trained
weights of large language models (LLMs). It has
been believed that weights in LLMs contain significant redundancy, leading to the conception that
a considerable chunk of the parameters can be removed by pruning without compromising performance. Contrary to this belief, this paper presents
a counter-argument: small-magnitude weights of
pre-trained model weights encode vital knowledge essential for tackling difficult downstream
tasks - manifested as the monotonic relationship
between the performance drop of downstream
tasks across the difficulty spectrum, as we prune
more pre-trained weights by magnitude. Moreover, we reveal that these seemingly inconsequential weights can result in irreparable loss of
knowledge and performance degradation in difficult tasks, even when downstream continual
training is allowed. Interestingly, our evaluations show that the other popular compression,
namely quantization fail to exhibit similar “monotonic" effect and does not as convincingly disentangle this task-difficulty information. To study
formally, we introduce several quantifiable metrics to gauge the downstream task difficulty: ❶
within the same task category, and ❷ across different task categories. Our extensive experiments
substantiate the Junk DNA Hypothesis across
a diverse range of model sizes, tasks, datasets,
and even pruning methods. Codes are available
at https://github.com/VITA-Group/
Junk_DNA_Hypothesis.git.

This paper addresses the aforementioned query by employing two popular weight compression methods namely, pruning, and quantization, to concretely discern “what nonsignificant components are in pre-trained LLM weights,
what they do, and what is the best way to disentangle them".
At this point, it is important to clarify that this paper neither
aims to be an LLM compression exposition nor to re-justify
the commonsense that large pre-trained models are compressible - but rather, to use existing popular compression
techniques as quantitative and easily controllable tool to
probe and comprehend the existence and the functional role
of non-significant weight components. The crux of our
research lies in adopting a novel task-centric viewpoint towards pre-trained weights. In other words, we investigate
how the non-significant weights fraction and their embodied
information correlate with model’s ability to successfully
perform downstream tasks of different complexity levels.

*
Equal contribution 1 Eindhoven University of Technology
University of Surrey 3 University of Texas at Austin 4 University
of Oxford 5 Intel Labs. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang
<atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
2

Our extensive experiment-based study disrupts conventional
assumptions by providing three key observations: ❶ the
assumed non-significant weight components play a pivotal
role in handling challenging tasks, ❷ element-wise pruning
simply by pre-trained weight magnitudes, despite being a

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

