Unified Training of Universal Time Series Forecasting Transformers

Gerald Woo 1 2 Chenghao Liu 1 Akshat Kumar 2 Caiming Xiong 1 Silvio Savarese 1 Doyen Sahoo 1
Multiple Domains

Abstract
Deep learning for time series forecasting has traditionally operated within a one-model-per-dataset
framework, limiting its potential to leverage
the game-changing impact of large pre-trained
models. The concept of universal forecasting,
emerging from pre-training on a vast collection
of time series datasets, envisions a single Large
Time Series Model capable of addressing diverse
downstream forecasting tasks. However, constructing such a model poses unique challenges
specific to time series data: i) cross-frequency
learning, ii) accommodating an arbitrary number
of variates for multivariate time series, and iii)
addressing the varying distributional properties
inherent in large-scale data. To address these
challenges, we present novel enhancements to the
conventional time series Transformer architecture,
resulting in our proposed Masked EncOder-based
UnIveRsAl TIme Series Forecasting Transformer
(M OIRAI). Trained on our newly introduced
Large-scale Open Time Series Archive (LOTSA)
featuring over 27B observations across nine domains, M OIRAI achieves competitive or superior
performance as a zero-shot forecaster when compared to full-shot models. Code, data, and model
weights can be found at https://github.
com/SalesforceAIResearch/uni2ts.

Universal Forecaster

1) Multiple Frequencies

2) Any-variate Forecasting

3) Varying Distributions

Figure 1. A universal forecaster is a large pre-trained model capable of handling any time series forecasting problem. It is trained
on a large-scale time series dataset spanning multiple domains.
Compared to the existing paradigm, universal forecasting faces the
three key issues of i) multiple frequencies, ii) any-variate forecasting, and iii) varying distributions.

appears increasingly antiquated, lacking the capacity to generalize or adapt to diverse scenarios or datasets. Given
the unreasonable effectiveness of large pre-trained models
in improving performance and data efficiency via transfer
learning in modalities like vision and language (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020), we are starting to see a
push to transition away from the existing paradigm, towards
a universal forecasting paradigm (see Figure 1), where a single large pre-trained model is able to handle any time series
forecasting problem. However, the road to building a universal time series forecasting model is mired with challenges.

1. Introduction

Unlike the modalities of vision and language which have the
unified formats of images and text respectively, time series
data is highly heterogeneous. Firstly, the frequency (e.g.
minutely, hourly, daily sampling rates) of time series plays
an important role in determining the patterns present in the
time series. Cross-frequency learning has been shown to be
a challenging task due to negative interference (Van Ness
et al., 2023), with existing work simply avoiding this
problem for multi-frequency datasets by learning one model
per frequency (Oreshkin et al., 2020). Secondly, time series
data are heterogeneous in terms of dimensionality, whereby
multivariate time series can have different number of
variates. Furthermore, each variate measures a semantically
different quantity across datasets. While considering each

In the era of foundation models (FMs) (Bommasani et al.,
2021), the landscape of deep learning for time series forecasting is experiencing a revolution. In contrast to FMs capable of tackling a multitude of downstream tasks, the current
deep forecasting paradigm, involving training a model on
a single dataset with a fixed context and prediction length,
1
Salesforce AI Research 2 School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University. Correspondence to: Gerald Woo <gwoo@salesforce.com>, Chenghao Liu
<chenghao.liu@salesforce.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

