Generative Enzyme Design Guided by Functionally Important Sites and
Small-Molecule Substrates
Zhenqiao Song 1 Yunlong Zhao 2 Wenxian Shi 3 Wengong Jin 4 Yang Yang 5 Lei Li 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Enzymes are genetically encoded biocatalysts capable of accelerating chemical reactions. How
can we automatically design functional enzymes?
In this paper, we propose EnzyGen, an approach
to learn a unified model to design enzymes across
all functional families. Our key idea is to generate
an enzyme’s amino acid sequence and their threedimensional (3D) coordinates based on functionally important sites and substrates corresponding
to a desired catalytic function. These sites are
automatically mined from enzyme databases. EnzyGen consists of a novel interleaving network
of attention and neighborhood equivariant layers, which captures both long-range correlation
in an entire protein sequence and local influence
from nearest amino acids in 3D space. To learn
the generative model, we devise a joint training objective, including a sequence generation
loss, a position prediction loss and an enzymesubstrate interaction loss. We further construct
EnzyBench, a dataset with 3157 enzyme families,
covering all available enzymes within the protein data bank (PDB). Experimental results show
that our EnzyGen consistently achieves the best
performance across all 323 testing families, surpassing the best baseline by 10.79% in terms of
substrate binding affinity. These findings demonstrate EnzyGen’s superior capability in designing well-folded and effective enzymes binding
to specific substrates with high affinities. The
code, model and dataset are released at https:
//github.com/LeiLiLab/EnzyGen.

Enzymes are biological catalysts to accelerate challenging
chemical reactions underlying a range of biological processes. They enjoy widespread applications in the production of pharmaceuticals (Wu et al., 2012), specialty chemicals (Carbonell et al., 2018) and biofuels (Liao et al., 2016).
In enzymatic reactions, the substrate is a small molecule
being converted by the enzyme catalyst. By binding with
and acting on specific substrates, enzymes allow for dramatically accelerated rates in the transformation of their
substrates (Bar-Even et al., 2011). Designing enzymes that
can bind to specific substrates is a critical yet challenging
problem.
Recently, deep learning methods are promising in protein
design (Huang et al., 2016; Pearce & Zhang, 2021). Existing deep learning approaches for functional protein design
fall into three categories: (a) generative models for protein sequence design guided by fitness landscape (Brookes
et al., 2019; Rives et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2022; Song & Li,
2023; Wang et al., 2023); (b) structure to sequence generation based on a targeted protein backbone (Ingraham et al.,
2019; Dauparas et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023); (c) codesign of a backbone structure and a protein sequence that
encodes it (Anishchenko et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Shi
et al., 2022; Yeh et al., 2023). However, these methods face
many limitations on enzyme design. First, fitness-guided
approaches are limited by the lack of fitness data for the vast
majority of enzyme families. Second, the structures of many
enzymes remain unknown (Binz et al., 2005; Fischman &
Ofran, 2018). Third, prior approaches do not model substrates in enzyme design process. Finally, there is no unified
model applicable to all enzyme families.
In this paper, we aim to learn a unified generative model
to design functional enzymes across thousands of enzyme
families. The key design idea lies in the notion that the
biological function of an enzyme is enabled by a subset of
residues (amino acids), known as functionally important
sites (Bickel et al., 2002; Chakrabarti & Lanczycki, 2007;
Wang et al., 2022), and that an ideal enzyme should be able
to bind its substrate(s) in enzymatic reactions. Therefore, we
formulate the enzyme design problem as jointly generating
the enzyme sequence and backbone structure given auto-

1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. 2 Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. 5 Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Lei Li <leili@cs.cmu.edu>, Yang Yang
<yang@chem.ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

