Efficient Contrastive Learning for Fast and Accurate Inference on Graphs

Teng Xiao 1 Huaisheng Zhu 1 Zhiwei Zhang 1 Zhimeng Guo 1
Charu C. Aggarwal 2 Suhang Wang 1 Vasant G Honavar 1

Abstract

there is a scarcity of task-specific labels (Zhu et al., 2021;
Thakoor et al., 2021). On many key benchmarks, GCL has
been shown to achieve performance that is competitive with
or superior to that of state-of-the-art methods trained using
ground truth labels (Zhu et al., 2021; Thakoor et al., 2021).

Graph contrastive learning has made remarkable
advances in settings where there is a scarcity
of task-specific labels. Despite these advances,
the significant computational overhead for representation inference incurred by existing methods that rely on intensive message passing makes
them unsuitable for latency-constrained applications. In this paper, we present GraphECL, a
simple and efficient contrastive learning method
for fast inference on graphs. GraphECL does
away with the need for expensive message passing during inference. Specifically, it introduces
a novel coupling of the MLP and GNN models,
where the former learns to computationally efficiently mimic the computations performed by the
latter. We provide a theoretical analysis showing
why MLP can capture essential structural information in neighbors well enough to match the
performance of GNN in downstream tasks. The
extensive experiments on widely used real-world
benchmarks that show that GraphECL achieves
superior performance and inference efficiency
compared to state-of-the-art graph constrastive
learning (GCL) methods on homophilous and heterophilous graphs. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/tengxiao1/GraphECL.

However, the significant computational overhead incurred
by existing GCL methods, which rely on message passing for representation inference, limits their usefulness in
latency-constrained applications. In particular, we observe
that the state-of-the-art GCL methods achieve their superior performance using a graph neural network (GNN) encoder (see Figure 1). The message passing in GNN involves
fetching the topology and features of numerous neighboring nodes to perform inference on a target node, which is
computation-intensive during inference. Hence, there is an
urgent need for inference-efficient alternatives to the stateof-the-art GCL methods. Recent work has begun to tackle
the inference latency of GNN (Zheng et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2021b; Tian et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023), e.g., using
knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015) to learn
an inference-efficient student MLP to mimick the output of
a teacher GNN. However, they require task-specific labels to
first train a good teacher GNN, limiting their applicability to
GCL in settings where there is a lack of task-specific labels.
To the best of our knowledge, the following critical question, with important implications for real-world latencyconstrained applications of GCL, remains unanswered: How
can we design a new GCL algorithm that outperforms
state-of-the-art GCL methods on downstream tasks while
avoiding high inference latency? To answer this question,
we present GraphECL, a simple, effective, and efficient
contrastive regime on graphs. Specifically, to capture the
graph structure of the nodes and achieve fast inference,
GraphECL introduces a cross-model contrastive architecture in which positive examples consist of cross-model pairs
(e.g., MLP-GNN) directly derived from neighborhood relations extracted from the graph. These positive samples are
obtained from the representations of MLP and GNN of central nodes and their neighbors, respectively. This simple
architecture allows GraphECL to benefit from the graph
structure during training via GNN while using MLP to avoid
relying on the graph structure during inference. Based on
this cross-model architecture, we introduce a novel general-

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, there has been considerable interest
in graph learning problems such as node classification, link
prediction, and graph classification (Grover & Leskovec,
2016; Cui et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020; Xiao
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2024). Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has recently emerged as an attractive
approach to graph representation learning in settings where
1
Penn State University, USA 2 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, USA. Correspondence to: Teng Xiao <tengxiao@psu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

