Stereographic Spherical Sliced Wasserstein Distances

Huy Tran * 1 Yikun Bai * 1 Abihith Kothapalli * 1 Ashkan Shahbazi 1 Xinran Liu 1 Rocio Diaz Martin 2
Soheil Kolouri 1

Abstract

imaging (Vrba & Robinson, 2001) in medical domains, 3)
spherical image representations and 360◦ images (Coors
et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2023), such as omnidirectional
images in computer vision (Khasanova & Frossard, 2017),
4) texture mapping in computer graphics (Elad et al., 2005;
Dominitz & Tannenbaum, 2010), and more recently, 5) deep
representation learning, where the latent representation is often mapped to a bounded space, commonly a sphere, where
cosine similarity is utilized for effective representation learning (Chen et al., 2020; Wang & Isola, 2020).

Comparing spherical probability distributions is
of great interest in various fields, including geology, medical domains, computer vision, and deep
representation learning. The utility of optimal
transport-based distances, such as the Wasserstein
distance, for comparing probability measures has
spurred active research in developing computationally efficient variations of these distances for
spherical probability measures. This paper introduces a high-speed and highly parallelizable
distance for comparing spherical measures using the stereographic projection and the generalized Radon transform, which we refer to as
the Stereographic Spherical Sliced Wasserstein
(S3W) distance. We carefully address the distance distortion caused by the stereographic projection and provide an extensive theoretical analysis of our proposed metric and its rotationally
invariant variation. Finally, we evaluate the performance of the proposed metrics and compare
them with recent baselines in terms of both speed
and accuracy through a wide range of numerical studies, including gradient flows and selfsupervised learning. Our code is available at
https://github.com/mint-vu/s3wd.

The analysis of distributions on hyperspheres is traditionally
approached through directional statistics, also referred to
as circular/spherical statistics (Jammalamadaka et al., 2001;
Mardia et al., 2000; Ley & Verdebout, 2017; Pewsey &
Garcı́a-Portugués, 2021). This specialized field is dedicated
to the statistical analysis of directions, orientations, and
rotations. More recently, with the growing application of optimal transport theory (Villani, 2008; Peyré & Cuturi, 2018)
in machine learning, due in part to its favorable statistical,
geometrical, and topological properties, there has been an
increasing interest in using optimal transport to compare
spherical probability measures (Cui et al., 2019; Hamfeldt
& Turnquist, 2022).
One of the main bottlenecks in optimal transport theory is
its high computational cost, generally of cubic complexity. This has sparked extensive research to develop faster
solvers (Cuturi, 2013; Scetbon & Cuturi, 2022; Charikar
et al., 2023) or computationally superior equivalent distances (Rabin et al., 2012; Bonneel et al., 2015; Kolouri
et al., 2019a). Notably, sliced variations of optimal transport
distances, such as sliced Wasserstein distances (Rabin et al.,
2012) and their various extensions (Kolouri et al., 2019a; Le
et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2022), have emerged as effective
solutions. These methods use integral geometry and the
Radon transform (Helgason et al., 2011) to represent highdimensional distributions via a set of their one-dimensional
marginals. By doing so, they take advantage of more efficient optimal transport solvers designed for one-dimensional
probability measures, offering a pragmatic approach to comparing probability measures. Owing to their computational
efficiency and implementation simplicity, these methods
have been recently adapted for spherical measures, leading
to the development of spherical sliced optimal transport

1. Introduction
Applications involving distributions defined on a hypersphere are remarkably diverse, highlighting the importance
of spherical geometries across various disciplines. These
applications include: 1) mapping the distribution of geographic or geological features on celestial bodies, such as
stars and planets (Jupp, 2020; Cabella & Marinucci, 2009;
Perraudin et al., 2019), 2) magnetoencephalography (MEG)
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 2 Department of Mathematics,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN. Correspondence to: Soheil
Kolouri <soheil.kolouri@vanderbilt.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

