Learning and Forgetting Unsafe Examples in Large Language Models

Jiachen Zhao 1 Zhun Deng 2 David Madras 3 James Zou 4 Mengye Ren 5

Abstract

finetuning.” Before model release, the party will implement
safety finetuning to ensure the LLM aligned with human
preference. Then, a user can finetune the aligned LLM
on their own data to personalize its performance for user’s
desired downstream task. For instance, if a third-party
business wants to deploy a customer service chatbot in their
domain, then finetuning using their conversation data on
top of a pre-trained LLM could be an effective solution.

As the number of large language models (LLMs)
released to the public grows, there is a pressing
need to understand the safety implications
associated with these models learning from
third-party custom finetuning data. We explore
the behavior of LLMs finetuned on noisy custom
data containing unsafe content, represented by
datasets that contain biases, toxicity, and harmfulness, finding that while aligned LLMs can readily
learn this unsafe content, they also tend to forget
it more significantly than other examples when
subsequently finetuned on safer content. Drawing
inspiration from the discrepancies in forgetting,
we introduce the “ForgetFilter” algorithm, which
filters unsafe data based on how strong the
model’s forgetting signal is for that data. We
demonstrate that the ForgetFilter algorithm
ensures safety in customized finetuning without
compromising downstream task performance,
unlike sequential safety finetuning. ForgetFilter
outperforms alternative strategies like replay
and moral self-correction in curbing LLMs’
ability to assimilate unsafe content during custom
finetuning, e.g. 75% lower than not applying
any safety measures and 62% lower than using
self-correction in toxicity score. 1

1

While the flexibility of LLMs in this paradigm has great
potential value for downstream users, it also raises risks, as
it allows LLMs to engage in a wide variety of user-directed
behaviors, including potentially unsafe ones. Take the same
example of the third party business training a customer
service chatbot. Suppose that the company’s own chat
history contains some amount of toxic and discriminatory
language, then finetuning on such data will likely result in
a chatbot which replicates similar unsafe behaviors. In an
extreme scenario, an adversary may even deliberately train
a harmful AI by maliciously adding harmful content into
the finetuning data.
Given the prevalance and risks of the release-and-finetune
paradigm, it is important to study how to ensure the safety
of released LLMs in downstream finetuning. However, existing AI safety research efforts (Korbak et al., 2023; Ziegler
et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022b) have mostly assumed that the
LLM and training data are kept in-house and will never be
released. Accordingly, a popular defense strategy is safety
finetuning—LLMs will be finetuned through supervised or
reinforcement learning on curated data. The implementation
of pre-release safety finetuning serves as an initial defense
mechanism for publicly released LLMs. However, the
efficacy of these precautions in resisting potential vulnerabilities during customized finetuning remains uncertain. If
aligned LLMs can be jailbroken during customized finetuning, it is crucial to study whether safety finetuning following
downstream finetuning is still suitable for recovering the
safety in this case. See Figure 1 for a work flow diagram
of downstream finetuning and safety finetuning before
and after the release of LLMs. Furthermore, catastrophic
forgetting (CF) (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989) may happen
during safety finetuning, which can cause LLMs to forget
previously learned knowledge apart from unsafe knowledge.

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed
in high-stakes, real-world settings, it becomes increasingly
important to understand their behaviors on a range of
undesirable or unsafe inputs. In particular, a common
paradigm for LLM usage has emerged: “release-andfinetune,” where the party who pre-trained the LLM makes
it available through an API for “customized downstream
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Columbia University
Google 4 Stanford University 5 New York University. Correspondence to: Jiachen Zhao <jiachenzhao@umass.edu>, Mengye Ren
<mengye@nyu.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Code is available at https://github.com/
andotalao24/learn-forget-unsafe-llm.

1

