Accelerating Iterative Retrieval-augmented Language Model Serving with
Speculation

Zhihao Zhang 1 Alan Zhu 1 Lijie Yang 1 Yihua Xu 2 Lanting Li 1 Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana 3
Zhihao Jia 1

Abstract

model with a non-parametric knowledge base through retrieval augmentation (Khandelwal et al., 2019; Shi et al.,
2023; Ram et al., 2023; Khattab et al., 2022).

This paper introduces RaLMSpec, a framework
that accelerates iterative retrieval-augmented language model (RaLM) with speculative retrieval
and batched verification. RaLMSpec further introduces several important systems optimizations,
including prefetching, optimal speculation stride
scheduler, and asynchronous verification. The
combination of these techniques allows RaLMSPec to significantly outperform existing systems.
For document-level iterative RaLM serving, evaluation over three LLMs on four QA datasets
shows that RaLMSpec improves over existing approaches by 1.75-2.39×, 1.04-1.39×, and 1.311.77× when the retriever is an exact dense retriever, approximate dense retriever, and sparse
retriever respectively. For token-level iterative
RaLM (KNN-LM) serving, RaLMSpec is up to
7.59× and 2.45× faster than existing methods
for exact dense and approximate dense retrievers,
respectively.

Existing RaLM methods can be categorized into two classes
based on the interaction between the knowledge base and
language model. First, one-shot RaLM performs retrieval
once for each request and combines the retrieved documents
with the original request to assist generation. On the other
hand, iterative RaLM enables iterative interactions between
the language model and knowledge base for a request so
that the language model can opportunistically query the
knowledge base to retrieve more relevant documents during
generation. Compared to iterative RaLM, one-shot RaLM
introduces less retrieval overhead but is inherently limited
when the required information varies from time to time
during the generation process. On the other hand, iterative RaLM achieves better generative performance while
suffering from frequent retrievals and, thus, high retrieval
overhead. This paper answers the following research question: can we reduce the overhead of iterative RaLM without
affecting generative quality?
We propose RaLMSpec, a framework that employs speculative retrieval with batched verification to reduce the serving
overhead for iterative RaLM while provably preserving the
model output. A critical bottleneck of existing iterative
RaLM methods is the inefficiency of retrieval. In particular,
due to the auto-regressive nature of generative language
models, the retrieval step is usually performed with a single
query summarizing the current context. As shown in Figure 1(a), existing iterative RaLM approaches interleave the
retrieval step and the generation step by constantly retrieving
from the knowledge base with the latest context-dependent
queries (i.e., q0 , q1 , and q2 ). The corresponding retrieved
contents (A, B, C) can then assist the generation process
by contributing relevant information to the language model
through a prompt or attention-level combination. However,
issuing these queries for knowledge base retrieval sequentially is inefficient.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models such as
LLaMA-2, GPT-3, and PaLM have shown promising results
in diverse NLP tasks (Touvron et al., 2023; Brown et al.,
2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022). However, encoding a massive amount of knowledge into a fully parametric model
requires excessive effort in both training and deployment.
The situation can be further exacerbated when the foundation model is required to adapt to new data or various
downstream tasks (Asai et al., 2023). To address this challenge, recent work introduces retrieval-augmented language
models (RaLM), which integrate the parametric language
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California, Berkeley Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Zhihao Zhang <zhihaoz3@cs.cmu.edu>.
3

The idea of speculative retrieval is conceptually similar to
speculative execution from the computer architecture literature (Burton, 1985). More specifically, RaLMSpec replaces

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

