Causal Discovery via Conditional Independence Testing with Proxy Variables

Mingzhou Liu 1 2 Xinwei Sun

3

Abstract

Yu Qiao 4 Yizhou Wang 2 1 5 6 7

caused by confounding bias or mediation bias, it facilitates
drawing reliable conclusions and thereby making informed
decisions. Under the causal sufficiency condition where all
confounders are observed, one can directly conduct conditional independence testing (Zhang et al., 2012) to examine
the existence of causation, as employed by constraint-based
methods for causal discovery (Glymour et al., 2019).

Distinguishing causal connections from correlations is important in many scenarios. However,
the presence of unobserved variables, such as the
latent confounder, can introduce bias in conditional independence testing commonly employed
in constraint-based causal discovery for identifying causal relations. To address this issue, existing methods introduced proxy variables to adjust for the bias caused by unobserveness. However, these methods were either limited to categorical variables or relied on strong parametric assumptions for identification. In this paper, we propose a novel hypothesis-testing procedure that can effectively examine the existence
of the causal relationship over continuous variables, without any parametric constraint. Our
procedure is based on discretization, which under
completeness conditions, is able to asymptotically
establish a linear equation whose coefficient vector is identifiable under the causal null hypothesis. Based on this, we introduce our test statistic
and demonstrate its asymptotic level and power.
We validate the effectiveness of our procedure using both synthetic and real-world data. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
lmz123321/proxy_causal_discovery.

However, this procedure will suffer from nonignorable bias
when unobserved variables are present, such as latent confounders or mediators, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Typically,
these variables refer to attributes that are difficult to measure
(e.g., health status, living habits) but exhibit correlations to
both variables within the specific pair of causal interests.
To address this challenge, recent studies in proximal causal
learning introduced the proxy variable, which can be a noisy
measurement (Kuroki & Pearl, 2014) or an observed descendant (Miao et al., 2018) of the unobserved variable, to adjust
for the bias caused by unobserveness. Examples include
(Tchetgen et al., 2020; Deaner, 2021; Sverdrup & Cui, 2023)
that explored proxy variables for causal effect estimation;
and (Ghassami et al., 2021; Dukes et al., 2023) that studied
proximal mediation analysis. However, most of these works
focused on causal inference. The works that are mostly
related to us are (Miao et al., 2018) and (Miao et al., 2022),
which introduced testing procedures to examine the null
hypothesis of no causal relationship. However, their procedures were either limited to the discrete variables (Miao
et al., 2018) or relied on strong parametric assumptions to
ensure the testing validity (Miao et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a novel hypothesis-testing procedure that can effectively identify the causal relationship
between two continuous variables, without any parametric
assumption. Our strategy is to find a proper discretization
procedure such that, under the causal null hypothesis, the
probability matrices over discretized variables satisfy a linear equation whose coefficient vector is identifiable. For this
purpose, we first introduce a discretization procedure that,
under the completeness assumption, makes the probability
matrices over discrete variables satisfy rank regularities that
are crucial for the identifiability of the coefficient vector.
Then, we proceed to analyze the errors in the linear equation
after discretization and show that they can be controlled to
be arbitrarily small, given that the bin numbers for discretiza-

Distinguishing causation from correlation is a fundamental task in various fields, such as economics, healthcare,
and policy formulation. By avoiding spurious correlations
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University (liumingzhou@stu.pku.edu.cn) 2 Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies (CFCS), Peking University 3 Sch. of Data Science, Fudan University 4 Dep. of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Inst.
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 6 Nat’l Eng. Research
Center of Visual Technology, Peking University 7 Nat’l Key Lab of
General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence
to: Xinwei Sun <sunxinwei@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

