Second-Order Uncertainty Quantification:
A Distance-Based Approach

Yusuf Sale 1 2 Viktor Bengs 1 2 Michele Caprio 3 Eyke Hüllermeier 1 2

Abstract

ming from inherent data variability, and epistemic, which
arises from a model’s incomplete knowledge of the datagenerating process. By its very nature, epistemic uncertainty
(EU) – often being characterized as reducible – can be decreased with further information. In contrast, aleatoric uncertainty (AU), rooted in the data generating process itself,
is fixed and cannot be mitigated (Hüllermeier & Waegeman,
2021). The distinction between these uncertainty types has
been a subject of keen interest in recent ML and statistical research (Gruber et al., 2023), finding applications in
areas such as Bayesian neural networks (Kendall & Gal,
2017), adversarial attack detection mechanisms (Smith &
Gal, 2018), and data augmentation strategies in Bayesian
classification (Kapoor et al., 2022).

In the past couple of years, various approaches
to representing and quantifying different types of
predictive uncertainty in machine learning, notably in the setting of classification, have been
proposed on the basis of second-order probability distributions, i.e., predictions in the form of
distributions on probability distributions. A completely conclusive solution has not yet been found,
however, as shown by recent criticisms of commonly used uncertainty measures associated with
second-order distributions, identifying undesirable theoretical properties of these measures. In
light of these criticisms, we propose a set of formal criteria that meaningful uncertainty measures
for predictive uncertainty based on second-order
distributions should obey. Moreover, we provide
a general framework for developing uncertainty
measures to account for these criteria, and offer
an instantiation based on the Wasserstein distance,
for which we prove that all criteria are satisfied.

Arguably, predictive uncertainty is the most studied form of
uncertainty in both ML and statistics. It pertains prediction
tasks such as those in supervised learning. In the latter,
we consider a hypothesis space H, where each hypothesis
h ∈ H maps a query instance xq ∈ X to a probability
measure p on (Y, σ(Y)), where Y denotes the outcome
space, and σ(Y) a suitable σ-algebra on Y. By producing estimates of the ground-truth probability measure p∗ on
(Y, σ(Y)), this probabilistic approach encapsulates aleatoric
uncertainty about the actual outcome y ∈ Y. Since epistemic uncertainty is difficult to represent with conventional
probability distributions (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021),
such predictions fail to capture the epistemic part of (predictive) uncertainty. In order to account for both types of
uncertainty, machine learning methods founded on more
general theories of probability such as imprecise probabilities or credal sets (Walley, 1991; Augustin et al., 2014) have
been considered (Corani et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
The need for representing and quantifying uncertainty in
machine learning (ML) – particularly in supervised learning
scenarios – has become more and more obvious in the recent
past (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021). This is largely due
to the increasing use of AI-driven systems in safety-critical
real-world applications having stringent safety requirements,
such as healthcare (Lambrou et al., 2010; Senge et al., 2014;
Yang et al., 2009) and socio-technical systems (Varshney &
Alemzadeh, 2017). Dealing appropriately with uncertainty
is a fundamental necessity in all these domains.

Another popular approach in this regard is to let the learner
map a query instance xq to a second-order distribution,
i.e., a distribution on distributions, effectively assigning
a probability to each candidate probability distribution p.
Such an approach is realized, for example, by classical
Bayesian inference (Gelman et al., 2013) or by the Evidential Deep Learning (EDL) paradigm, which has recently
become increasingly popular (Ulmer et al., 2023). In the
EDL paradigm, one essentially learns a model (usually a
deep neural network) by empirical risk minimization, whose

Broadly, uncertainties are categorized as aleatoric, stem1
Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany 3 Precise
Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Yusuf Sale <yusuf.sale@ifi.lmu.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

