Beyond Chinchilla-Optimal:
Accounting for Inference in Language Model Scaling Laws

Nikhil Sardana 1 Jacob Portes 1 Sasha Doubov 1 Jonathan Frankle 1

Abstract

of the model. This volume can be significant; demand
for popular models can exceed billions of tokens per day
(OpenAI & Pilipiszyn, 2021; Shazeer & Freitas, 2022).

Large language model (LLM) scaling laws are empirical formulas that estimate changes in model
quality as a result of increasing parameter count
and training data. However, these formulas, including the popular Deepmind Chinchilla scaling
laws, neglect to include the cost of inference. We
modify the Chinchilla scaling laws to calculate the
optimal LLM parameter count and pre-training
data size to train and deploy a model of a given
quality and inference demand. We conduct our
analysis both in terms of a compute budget and
real-world costs and find that LLM researchers expecting reasonably large inference demand (~1B
requests) should train models smaller and longer
than Chinchilla-optimal. Furthermore, we train
47 models of varying sizes and parameter counts
to validate our formula and find that model quality
continues to improve as we scale tokens per parameter to extreme ranges (up to 10,000). Finally,
we ablate the procedure used to fit the Chinchilla
scaling law coefficients and find that developing
scaling laws only from data collected at typical
token/parameter ratios overestimates the impact
of additional tokens at these extreme ranges.

Accounting for both training and inference, how does one
minimize the cost required to produce and serve a high
quality model?
Recent studies have proposed scaling laws, empirical formulas that estimate how changes in model and training data
size impact model quality (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann
et al., 2022). Hoffmann et al. (2022) is perhaps the most
influential of these works, finding that to scale language
models most efficiently, parameters and tokens should grow
approximately linearly. The authors applied this scaling law
to train a 70B parameter model (dubbed Chinchilla) that
outperformed much larger and more expensive models such
as GPT-3. As a result, many subsequent LLMs have been
trained following the Chinchilla scaling laws (Dey et al.,
2023; Muennighoff et al., 2023).
However, the Chinchilla scaling laws only account for the
computational costs of training. By contrast, the Llama 2
family of models were trained on 2 trillion tokens and the
Llama 3 family of models were trained on 15 trillion tokens,
which is far more data than the Chinchilla scaling laws
would deem “optimal” (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; AI@Meta,
2024). Since inference costs are lower for smaller models,
the extra training compute required to train a Llama-style
model over a Chinchilla-style model of equivalent quality
pays off after enough inference requests.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have substantial training
and inference compute and energy costs (Knight, 2023;
Pope et al., 2022). Training computation costs are primarily
determined by the size of the model and the amount of data
seen during training (Hoffmann et al., 2022). For state-ofthe-art models with tens of billions of parameters trained on
trillions of tokens, training costs can easily exceed millions
of dollars. Similarly, inference costs depend on the size of
the model and the volume of user queries over the lifetime

Prior work has discussed the training-inference compute
trade-off (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Tow et al.; De Vries,
2023; Villalobos & Atkinson, 2023). Touvron et al. (2023a)
cites the lower inference cost of smaller models as inspiration for the LLaMA series. De Vries (2023) calculates the
compute overhead of training longer than Chinchilla, but
does not discuss quantify compute savings from inference.
Villalobos & Atkinson (2023) discuss this trade-off in more
detail, but show the shift in scaling laws for only a single
particular number of inferences.

1
Databricks MosaicML, United States of America. Correspondence to: Nikhil Sardana <nikhil@mosaicml.com>.

Other related work includes Muennighoff et al. (2023),
which adapts the Chinchilla scaling laws for the dataconstrained regime, where we have to repeat training tokens.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

