Generalization to New Sequential Decision Making Tasks with
In-Context Learning

Sharath Chandra Raparthy 1 Eric Hambro 1 Robert Kirk 2 Mikael Henaff 1 Roberta Raileanu 1

Abstract

often struggle to learn new tasks from a limited number of
demonstrations.

Training autonomous agents that can learn new
tasks from only a handful of demonstrations is a
long-standing problem in machine learning. Recently, transformers have been shown to learn
new language or vision tasks without any weight
updates from only a few examples, also referred
to as in-context learning. However, the sequential decision making setting poses additional challenges having a lower tolerance for errors since
the environment’s stochasticity or the agent’s actions can lead to unseen, and sometimes unrecoverable, states. In this paper, we use an illustrative example to show that naively applying transformers to sequential decision making problems
does not enable in-context learning of new tasks.
We then demonstrate how training on sequences
of trajectories with certain distributional properties leads to in-context learning of new sequential
decision making tasks. We investigate different
design choices and find that larger model and
dataset sizes, as well as more task diversity, environment stochasticity, and trajectory burstiness,
all result in better in-context learning of new outof-distribution tasks. By training on large diverse
offline datasets, our model is able to learn new
MiniHack and Procgen tasks without any weight
updates from just a handful of demonstrations.

Prior work attempts to address this problem using metalearning (Schmidhuber, 1987; Duan et al., 2016; Finn et al.,
2017; Pong et al., 2022; Mitchell et al., 2021; Beck et al.,
2023) but these methods tend to be difficult to use in practice and require more than a handful of demonstrations or
extensive fine-tuning. In contrast, large transformers trained
on vast amounts of data can learn new tasks from only a
few examples without any parameter updates (Brown et al.,
2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Olsson et al., 2022a; Chan et al.,
2022b). This emergent phenomenon is called few-shot or
in-context learning (ICL), and is achieved by simply conditioning the model’s outputs on a context containing a few
examples for solving the task (Brown et al., 2020; Ganguli
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022).
While in-context learning has been observed in multiple
domains from language (Brown et al., 2020) to vision (Chan
et al., 2022b), it has not yet been extensively studied in sequential decision making settings. The sequential decision
making problem poses additional challenges that do not
appear in the supervised or self-supervised settings. For example, this setting tends to have a lower tolerance for errors
since the environment’s stochasticity or the agent’s actions
can lead to unseen, and sometimes unrecoverable, states.
In this paper, we study in-context learning of sequential
decision making tasks. To test our approach, we consider a
challenging setting where the train and the test task distributions are disjoint with different states, actions, dynamics,
and reward functions. For example, on Procgen we train on
12 of the games and test on the remaining 4. To emphasize
how different the train and test tasks are, one of the training
tasks is Bigfish where the must eat as many smaller fish as
possible while avoiding larger fish than itself and it grows
in size as it eats more. In contrast, one of our test tasks
is Ninja, where the agent must jump across ledges while
avoiding bombs or destroying them by tossing starsin order
to collect the mushroom at the end of the platform. Figure 1
illustrates some of our train and test task, emphasizing how
different they are. To our knowledge, no prior work has
demonstrated the ability to generalize to new MiniHack or
Procgen tasks using only a handful of demonstrations and

1. Introduction
For many real-world application domains such as robotics
or virtual assistants, collecting large amounts of data for
training an agent can be time consuming, expensive, or even
dangerous. Hence, the ability to learn new tasks from a
handful of demonstrations is crucial for enabling a wider
range of use cases. However, current deep learning agents
*
Equal contribution 1 AI at Meta 2 UCL. Correspondence to:
Sharath Chandra Raparthy <sharathraparthy@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

