MLAgentBench: Evaluating Language Agents on
Machine Learning Experimentation

Qian Huang 1 Jian Vora 1 Percy Liang 1 Jure Leskovec 1

Abstract

tion), a researcher develops a method (e.g., choice of model
architecture and learning algorithm), runs an experiment,
and then evaluates the results. Based on the outcome of
the experiment (e.g., validation accuracy), they revise their
method to improve performance on the task. This iterative process is challenging, as it requires the researcher to
possess extensive prior knowledge about potential methods,
to produce functional code, and to interpret experimental
results for future improvements.

A central aspect of machine learning research is
experimentation, the process of designing and
running experiments, analyzing the results, and
iterating towards some positive outcome (e.g., improving accuracy). Could agents driven by powerful language models perform machine learning experimentation effectively? To answer this
question, we introduce MLAgentBench, a suite
of 13 tasks ranging from improving model performance on CIFAR-10 to recent research problems like BabyLM. For each task, an agent can
perform actions like reading/writing files, executing code, and inspecting outputs. We then construct an agent that can perform ML experimentation based on ReAct framework. We benchmark
agents based on Claude v1.0, Claude v2.1, Claude
v3 Opus, GPT-4, GPT-4-turbo, Gemini-Pro, and
Mixtral and find that a Claude v3 Opus agent is
the best in terms of success rate. It can build
compelling ML models over many tasks in MLAgentBench with 37.5% average success rate. Our
agents also display highly interpretable plans and
actions. However, the success rates vary considerably; they span from 100% on well-established
older datasets to as low as 0% on recent Kaggle
challenges created potentially after the underlying
LM was trained. Finally, we identify several key
challenges for LM-based agents such as long-term
planning and reducing hallucination. 2

The complexity and expertise required for successful machine learning experimentation pose significant barriers to
entry. In light of these challenges, there has been interest in
the possibility of automating aspects of the machine learning workflow, such as Neural Architecture Search (Elsken
et al., 2019) and AutoML (He et al., 2021). The emergence
of advanced language models, with their ability to understand and generate human-like text, presents an promising
opportunity to further automate ML experimentation end
to end. Can we develop an agent capable of conducting
machine learning experimentation autonomously?
In this paper, we propose MLAgentBench, the first benchmark for evaluating agents capable of machine learning
experimentation (Figure 1). MLAgentBench is a general
framework for specifying experimentation tasks with clear
goals and automatically evaluates agents on these tasks.
Concretely, each task is specified with a task description,
a set of starter files (including starter code and data, e.g.,
Kaggle data package), and an evaluator that can assign a
performance metric score to a final submission (such as test
set accuracy of the submitted test set prediction). Given
these, an agent can perform actions like reading/writing
files and executing Python code in a workspace. During the
agent’s interaction with the environment, we collect its interaction trace for evaluation, which is the agent actions and
intermediate snapshots of the workspace (i.e., the set of files
and directories in the working directory). We evaluate the
agent along two aspects: 1) competence in accomplishing
the task, i.e., the fraction of time that the agent was able to
improve the performance metric (e.g., test accuracy) by at
least 10% over the baseline in the starter code; 2) efficiency,
the amount of time and number of tokens LM queries spent
by the agent. While our benchmark is framed in terms of

1. Introduction
Much of the progress in machine learning is driven by effective experimentation: Given a task (e.g., image classifica1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Qian Huang <qhwang@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
2
Our code is released at https://github.com/snapstanford/MLAgentBench/.

1

