Refining Minimax Regret for Unsupervised Environment Design

Michael Beukman * 1 Samuel Coward * 1 Michael Matthews 1
Mattie Fellows 1 Minqi Jiang 2 Michael Dennis 3 Jakob Foerster 1
MMR Policy Regret:
Optimal Regret:
Learnability:

Abstract
In unsupervised environment design, reinforcement learning agents are trained on environment
configurations (levels) generated by an adversary
that maximises some objective. Regret is a commonly used objective that theoretically results in
a minimax regret (MMR) policy with desirable
robustness guarantees; in particular, the agent’s
maximum regret is bounded. However, once the
agent reaches this regret bound on all levels, the
adversary will only sample levels where regret
cannot be further reduced. Although there may be
possible performance improvements to be made
outside of these regret-maximising levels, learning stagnates. In this work, we introduce Bayesian
level-perfect MMR (BLP), a refinement of the
minimax regret objective that overcomes this limitation. We formally show that solving for this
objective results in a subset of MMR policies, and
that BLP policies act consistently with a Perfect
Bayesian policy over all levels. We further introduce an algorithm, ReMiDi, that results in a BLP
policy at convergence. We empirically demonstrate that training on levels from a minimax regret
adversary causes learning to prematurely stagnate,
but that ReMiDi continues learning.

1.0
1.0
0.0

MMR Policy Regret:
Optimal Regret:
Learnability:

0.9
0.0
0.9

Figure 1. An illustration of the regret stagnation problem of minimax regret that our work addresses. In the T-mazes, the reward
for reaching the goal is 1.0 and −1.0 for failing. The reward
for the mazes is 0.9 for reaching the goal, and zero otherwise.
Regret-based UED methods gravitate towards sampling high regret environments (T-mazes in this case with a regret of 1.0), even
if the agent cannot improve on these levels. This is despite the
existence of non-high-regret levels (the mazes, with regret upperbounded by 0.9) on which the agent can still improve.

and the agent. In other words, regret measures how much
better a particular agent could perform on a particular level.
Empirically, training on these regret-maximising levels has
been shown to improve generalisation to out-of-distribution
levels in challenging domains (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang
et al., 2021a; Parker-Holder et al., 2022; Samvelyan et al.,
2023; Team et al., 2023). Furthermore, at equilibrium, UED
methods theoretically result in a minimax regret policy (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021a), meaning that the policy’s worst-case regret is bounded. Minimax regret (MMR)
works well when the agent can simultaneously perform
optimally on all levels: at convergence, the MMR policy
would achieve zero regret for each level. However, this is
not possible in all environments (Sukhbaatar et al., 2018).
As an example, consider the T-mazes in Figure 1: these
levels have different optimal behaviours but, due to partial
observability, are indistinguishable to the agent. In this case,
the agent cannot simultaneously perform optimally on both
levels, and therefore suffers some irreducible regret. Since
MMR-based UED methods prioritise sampling the highest
regret levels, these two levels will continually be sampled
for training—even though they provide nothing more for
the agent to learn.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised environment design (UED) is an approach
to automatically generate a training curriculum of environments for deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents (Dennis
et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021a). Regret-based UED trains
an adversary to select environment configurations (referred
to as levels) that maximise the agent’s regret, i.e., the difference in performance between an optimal policy on that level
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 University College London 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Michael Beukman <mbeukman@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Samuel Coward <scoward@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

This phenomenon is problematic if we have a subset of levels that (a) are distinguishable from the irreducible regret
levels and (b) have lower, but reducible, regret; for instance,
the set of all simultaneously solvable mazes in Figure 1

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

