Random Latent Exploration for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Srinath Mahankali 1 Zhang-Wei Hong 1 Ayush Sekhari 1 Alexander Rakhlin 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract

duces dithering actions (i.e., moving back and forth around
the initial state), which limit exploration to areas close to
the initial states. There are currently two popular families
of strategies for deep exploration: (i) adding exploration
bonus to the reward (Pathak et al., 2017; 2019; Bellemare
et al., 2016; Pritzel et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019) and (ii)
utilizing randomized value functions (Osband et al., 2013;
2016a;b; Fortunato et al., 2017; Ishfaq et al., 2023; 2021)
for exploration. Based on the guidance of Optimism in the
Face of Uncertainty (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), exploration bonuses are purposed to estimate the novelty of
states and encourage the policy to visit new states. As states
distant from initial ones are seldom visited and hence novel,
these bonuses facilitate deeper exploration. However, it
necessitates training an additional deep neural network and
fails to improve the action noise exploration method over
the majority of tasks in both discrete (Chen et al., 2022)
and continuous (Schwarke et al., 2023) control tasks, which
limits the widespread adoption of exploration bonuses as a
default exploration strategy in deep RL (Chen et al., 2022).

The ability to efficiently explore high-dimensional
state spaces is essential for the practical success of
deep Reinforcement Learning (RL). This paper introduces a new exploration technique called Random Latent Exploration (RLE), that combines the
strengths of exploration bonuses and randomized
value functions (two popular approaches for effective exploration in deep RL). RLE leverages
the idea of perturbing rewards by adding structured random rewards to the original task rewards
in certain (random) states of the environment, to
encourage the agent to explore the environment
during training. RLE is straightforward to implement and performs well in practice. To demonstrate the practical effectiveness of RLE, we evaluate it on the challenging ATARI and I SAAC G YM
benchmarks and show that RLE exhibits higher
overall scores across all the tasks than other approaches, including action-noise and randomized
value function exploration.

On the other hand, randomized value function methods are
grounded on the framework of Thompson sampling (Russo
et al., 2018), and are simpler to implement, as they do not
necessitate estimating state novelty. These methods roll out
trajectories using policies sampled from a distribution over
learned value functions. As each trajectory is rolled out by
the same policy, there are no action noises. Hence, those
trajectories are temporally consistent (Dabney et al., 2020)
and can move the agent further from initial states, thereby
enabling exploration. However, neither bonus-based nor
randomized value function methods improve over action
noise exploration significantly (Chen et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Exploration is a central problem in Reinforcement Learning
(RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), which is even more challenging in sparse-reward scenarios where the learning signal is
rarely available. The essence of exploration lies in uncovering rewards that surpass those obtained from the current
policy. Typical exploration approaches use action noise
(e.g., ϵ-greedy, Boltzmann sampling, etc.) to search for
useful reward signals. However, action noise alone cannot
perform so-called deep exploration (Osband et al., 2016a)
that requires the agent to discover rewards far away from
the initial states.

We conjecture that current randomized value function approaches fail to substantially improve action noise based
exploration strategies (Schulman et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2022; Taïga et al., 2019) because practical implementations
of randomized value function approaches fail to represent
a diverse enough value function distribution. If the value
function distribution is not rich enough, the policies induced
from them will be similar and hence won’t be able to cover
diverse states in the environments. These methods are thus
ineffective at discovering states associated with rewards.
The practical implementations either train an ensemble of
value functions (Osband et al., 2016a) to approximate the

Action noise fails to enable deep exploration because it proProject website: https://srinathm1359.github.
io/random-latent-exploration
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Srinath Mahankali <srinathm@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

