Wasserstein Wormhole: Scalable Optimal Transport Distance with Transformer

Doron Haviv 1 2 Russell Zhang Kunes 1 3 Thomas Dougherty 1 2 Cassandra Burdziak 1 Tal Nawy 1
Anna Gilbert 4 Dana Pe’er 1 5

1. Introduction

Abstract

Many problems in statistical learning boil down to computing and comparing probability distributions that fit empirical data, and different approaches vary in their attention to
distribution shape, spread, and degree of parameterization.
Optimal transport (OT) methods attempt to find an ideal
pairing between individual data points from two distributions (Villani et al., 2009) by representing distances as the
minimum cost of mapping between (weighted) point clouds.
While original OT solvers, which rely on linear programming, scale poorly (Peyré et al., 2019), newer approaches
can reduce the computational complexity and generalize
OT to new domains such as computational biology (Nitzan
et al., 2019; Schiebinger et al., 2019; Bunne et al., 2023),
numerical geometry (Su et al., 2015), chemistry (Wu et al.,
2023), and image processing (Feydy et al., 2017).

Optimal transport (OT) and the related Wasserstein metric (W ) are powerful and ubiquitous
tools for comparing distributions. However, computing pairwise Wasserstein distances rapidly becomes intractable as cohort size grows. An attractive alternative would be to find an embedding space in which pairwise Euclidean distances
map to OT distances, akin to standard multidimensional scaling (MDS). We present Wasserstein Wormhole, a transformer-based autoencoder
that embeds empirical distributions into a latent space wherein Euclidean distances approximate OT distances. Extending MDS theory,
we show that our objective function implies a
bound on the error incurred when embedding
non-Euclidean distances. Empirically, distances
between Wormhole embeddings closely match
Wasserstein distances, enabling linear time computation of OT distances. Along with an encoder
that maps distributions to embeddings, Wasserstein Wormhole includes a decoder that maps
embeddings back to distributions, allowing for
operations in the embedding space to generalize to OT spaces, such as Wasserstein barycenter estimation and OT interpolation. By lending
scalability and interpretability to OT approaches,
Wasserstein Wormhole unlocks new avenues for
data analysis in the fields of computational geometry and single-cell biology. Software is available at http://wassersteinwormhole.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/.

We are specifically interested in massive cohorts of empirical distributions, each with up to thousands of points. The
computational complexity of finding the Wasserstein distance between two point clouds with Sinkhorn’s algorithm
(Cuturi, 2013), the current favored (Flamary et al., 2021)
OT solver, is O(n2 · I), where n is the size of each point
cloud and I is the number of Sinkhorn iterations until convergence. As we must repeat Sinkhorn’s algorithm for all
pairs in a cohort, requiring O(N 2 · n2 · I) time to analyze N
distributions, current OT algorithms are unable to analyze
large cohorts despite improvements in scalability.
Here, we present Wasserstein Wormhole, an algorithm that
represents each point cloud as a single embedded point, such
that the Euclidean distance in the embedding space matches
the OT distance between point clouds. In Wormhole space,
we compute Euclidean distance in O(d) time for an embedding space with dimension d, which acts as an approximate
OT distance and enables Wasserstein-based analysis without
expensive Sinkhorn iterations.

1

Computational and Systems Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 2 TriInstitutional Training Program in Computational Biology and
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine 3 Department of Statistics,
Columbia University 4 Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Yale University 5 Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Correspondence to: Dana Peer <peerd@mskcc.com>.

Point clouds contain a variable number of unordered samples, hence neural architectures that require a fixed-sized or
ordered input are not suited to encode them. On the contrary,
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are uniquely poised to
do so, due to their permutation equivariance, indifference
to input length, and ability to model relationships between
samples in each point cloud via attention.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

