LESS: Selecting Influential Data for Targeted Instruction Tuning

Mengzhou Xia 1 * Sadhika Malladi 1 * Suchin Gururangan 2 Sanjeev Arora 1 Danqi Chen 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Instruction tuning has made large language models (LLMs)
adept at following human instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022)
as versatile chatbots (OpenAI, 2022; 2023; Anthropic, 2023;
Google, 2023). Recent efforts curating highly diverse and
wide-ranging instruction tuning datasets (Taori et al., 2023;
Wang et al.; Mukherjee et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023, inter
alia) induce remarkably strong generalization even from a
small number of examples (Zhou et al., 2023). Regardless,
it remains an open problem to understand how to best utilize
these various datasets.

Instruction tuning has unlocked powerful capabilities in large language models (LLMs), using combined datasets to develop general-purpose chatbots. However, real-world applications often require a specialized suite of skills (e.g., reasoning).
The challenge lies in identifying the most relevant
data from these extensive datasets to effectively
develop specific capabilities, a setting we frame
as targeted instruction tuning. We propose LESS,
an optimizer-aware and practically efficient algorithm to estimate data influences and perform
Low-rank gradiEnt Similarity Search for instruction data selection. Crucially, LESS adapts existing influence formulations to work with the Adam
optimizer and variable-length instruction data.
LESS first constructs a highly reusable and transferable gradient datastore with low-dimensional
gradient features and then selects examples based
on their similarity to few-shot examples embodying a specific capability. Experiments show that
training on a LESS-selected 5% of the data can often outperform training on the full dataset across
diverse downstream tasks. Furthermore, the selected data is highly transferable: smaller models
can be leveraged to select useful data for larger
models and models from different families. Our
qualitative analysis shows that our method goes
beyond surface form cues to identify data that exemplifies the necessary reasoning skills for the
intended downstream application. To facilitate future work, we release code and data at princetonnlp/LESS.

Many real-world applications call for cultivating a specific
suite of capabilities in LLMs (e.g., reasoning skills). However, training LLMs with mixed instruction tuning datasets
can hinder the development of these specific capabilities.
For example, Wang et al. (2023b) demonstrates that LLMs
trained on a mix of instruction tuning datasets exhibit worse
performance than those trained on a subset of the data. Additionally, considering the broad spectrum of user queries
and the multitude of skills required to respond to them,
there may not always be enough in-domain data available.
Therefore, we hope to be able to effectively use the general
instruction tuning data to improve specific capabilities. We
frame this setting as targeted instruction tuning:
Given just a handful of examples embodying a specific
capability, how can we effectively select relevant fine-tuning
data from a large collection of instruction datasets?
We approach this problem by prioritizing training on data
that directly minimizes loss on a target task instead of relying on surface form features (Gururangan et al., 2020;
Xie et al., 2023b). Inspired by past works estimating the
influence of individual training datapoints with gradient information (Pruthi et al., 2020; Han et al., 2023), we design
an optimizer-aware approach to select such data. However, straightforward application of this influence formulation faces several challenges unique to the instruction tuning setting: (1) LLMs are traditionally fine-tuned with the
Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) instead of the canonical SGD optimizer; (2) using sequence-level gradients of
variable-length instruction data can derail the influence estimation; and (3) the large number of trainable parameters
in LLMs makes the computation and storage of gradient
information extremely resource-intensive.

*

Equal contribution 1 Princeton Language and Intelligence
(PLI), Princeton University, USA 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Washington, USA. Correspondence
to: Mengzhou Xia, Sadhika Malladi <mengzhou, smalladi@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

