Discounted Adaptive Online Learning: Towards Better Regularization

Zhiyu Zhang 1 David Bombara 1 Heng Yang 1

Abstract

to exclude the obsolete data that possibly contradicts the
current environment. This leads to a natural challenge for
the resulting online learning problem: how do we handle
the possible shortage of data after forgetting?

We study online learning in adversarial nonstationary environments. Since the future can be
very different from the past, a critical challenge
is to gracefully forget the history while new data
comes in. To formalize this intuition, we revisit
the discounted regret in online convex optimization, and propose an adaptive (i.e., instance optimal), FTRL-based algorithm that improves the
widespread non-adaptive baseline – gradient descent with a constant learning rate. From a practical perspective, this refines the classical idea of
regularization in lifelong learning: we show that
designing better regularizers can be guided by the
principled theory of adaptive online optimization.
Complementing this result, we also consider the
(Gibbs & Candes, 2021)-style online conformal
prediction problem, where the goal is to sequentially predict the uncertainty sets of a black-box
machine learning model. We show that the FTRL
nature of our algorithm can simplify the conventional gradient-descent-based analysis, leading to
instance-dependent performance guarantees.

One potential solution is to inject suitable inductive bias
into the algorithm, which is among the most important ideas
in machine learning. Specifically, the inductive bias refers
to our prior belief of the ground truth, before observing
the data of interest. Regarding the drone example, physics
provides general principles on the evolution of the nature,
while modern foundation models can encode diverse “world
knowledge” from large scale pre-training. The point is that
even though forgetting reduces the amount of online data,
one could still exploit such inductive bias to improve the
learning performance.
Despite this natural intuition, algorithmically achieving it
remains a nontrivial task. In particular, the associated online learning algorithm has two considerations to trade off
(i.e., the inductive bias and the online data), and optimally
balancing them requires going beyond simple heuristics.
The present work studies this problem from a theoretical
perspective, based on a discounted variant of Online Convex Optimization (OCO; Zinkevich 2003; Cesa-Bianchi &
Lugosi 2006). Our results emphasize the importance of
regularization in nonstationary online learning:

1. Introduction

On an algorithm that gradually forgets the online
data, one could use regularizers to inject the inductive bias, which the algorithm never forgets.

Online learning can be broadly defined as a sequential decision making problem, where each decision leverages the
learned knowledge from previous observations. However,
while forgetting is often thought as the opposite of learning,
the two concepts are actually coherent due to the distribution shifts in practice. Think about deploying a drone in
the wild: a common subtask is to learn its time-varying
dynamics model on the fly, but when doing that, we have

Furthermore, designing better optimizers can be guided by
the theory of adaptive OCO.
1.1. Contribution
This paper presents new results on two related topics: (Section 2) nonstationary online learning, and (Section 3) Online
Conformal Prediction (OCP; Gibbs & Candes, 2021).

Future versions available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2402.02720. Link to the code: https://github.com/
ComputationalRobotics/discounted-adaptive.
1
Harvard University.
Correspondence to:
Zhiyu
Zhang
<zhiyuz@seas.harvard.edu>,
David
Bombara
<davidbombara@g.harvard.edu>,
Heng
Yang
<hankyang@seas.harvard.edu>.

• First, we consider the discounted OCO problem, formally
introduced in Section 2. It is known that under standard
assumptions on the complexity of the problem, the minimax optimal discounted regret bound can be achieved by
an extremely simple and widespread baseline – Online
Gradient Descent with constant1 learning rate (denoted

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Non-annealing and horizon-independent.

