EquiAV: Leveraging Equivariance for Audio-Visual Contrastive Learning

Jongsuk Kim * 1 Hyeongkeun Lee * 1 Kyeongha Rho * 1 Junmo Kim 1 Joon Son Chung 1
: original embedding
: augmented embedding

Abstract
Recent advancements in self-supervised audiovisual representation learning have demonstrated
its potential to capture rich and comprehensive
representations. However, despite the advantages
of data augmentation verified in many learning
methods, audio-visual learning has struggled to
fully harness these benefits, as augmentations
can easily disrupt the correspondence between
input pairs. To address this limitation, we introduce EquiAV, a novel framework that leverages
equivariance for audio-visual contrastive learning. Our approach begins with extending equivariance to audio-visual learning, facilitated by a
shared attention-based transformation predictor.
It enables the aggregation of features from diverse augmentations into a representative embedding, providing robust supervision. Notably, this
is achieved with minimal computational overhead.
Extensive ablation studies and qualitative results
verify the effectiveness of our method. EquiAV
outperforms previous works across various audiovisual benchmarks. The code is available on
https://github.com/JongSuk1/EquiAV

: similarity

: equivariant embedding
: centroid of embeddings
: similarity

: transformation predictor

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of EquiAV. Within the intramodal latent space, the model learns augmentation-related information by leveraging equivariance. Extending equivariance to the
inter-modal space provides robust cross-modal supervision.

1. Introduction
Audio and visual modalities play a pivotal role in how humans perceive their surroundings. Despite the differences in
their characteristics, there exists an inherent correspondence
between the two modalities. Learning such audio-visual
correspondence from large-scale unlabeled video data in
a self-supervised manner has recently become a major interest in the deep-learning research community. Among
various approaches for audio-visual self-supervised learning, Audio-Visual Contrastive Learning has been popular
due to its simplicity and effectiveness (Ma et al., 2021a;b;
Morgado et al., 2021a;b; Patrick et al., 2021; Recasens et al.,

2021; Wang et al., 2021; Sarkar & Etemad, 2023b). A key
challenge in audio-visual contrastive learning is to enhance
representational capability and diversity while maintaining
the correspondence between two different modalities. The
most straightforward and effective way to enrich the representation is to utilize data augmentation. However, data
augmentation has not been extensively applied in the field of
audio-visual contrastive learning. This is because correspondence between audio and visual modalities can be easily
distorted due to data augmentations. For this reason, previous works utilize a very limited range of data augmentation
and adopt alternatives to learn richer representations, such
as incorporating masked data modeling (Gong et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2023) or utilizing temporal supervision (Sarkar
& Etemad, 2023b; Jenni et al., 2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Jongsuk Kim <jskpop@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Meanwhile, there have been several recent studies (Dangovski et al., 2022; Devillers & Lefort, 2023; Garrido et al.,
1

