A Simple Early Exiting Framework
for Accelerated Sampling in Diffusion Models

Taehong Moon 1 Moonseok Choi 2 EungGu Yun 3 Jongmin Yoon 2 Gayoung Lee 4 Jaewoong Cho 1 Juho Lee 2 5

Abstract

point cloud generation (Luo & Hu, 2021), text-to-speech
generation (Jeong et al., 2021), and video generation (Ho
et al., 2022b). These models learn the reverse process of
introducing noise into the data to data and denoise inputs
progressively during inference using the learned reverse
model.

Diffusion models have shown remarkable performance in generation problems over various domains including images, videos, text, and audio.
A practical bottleneck of diffusion models is their
sampling speed, due to the repeated evaluation
of score estimation networks during the inference. In this work, we propose a novel framework capable of adaptively allocating compute
required for the score estimation, thereby reducing the overall sampling time of diffusion models. We observe that the amount of computation required for the score estimation may vary
along the time step for which the score is estimated. Based on this observation, we propose
an early-exiting scheme, where we skip the subset of parameters in the score estimation network
during the inference, based on a time-dependent
exit schedule. Using the diffusion models for image synthesis, we show that our method could
significantly improve the sampling throughput of
the diffusion models without compromising image quality. Furthermore, we also demonstrate
that our method seamlessly integrates with various types of solvers for faster sampling, capitalizing on their compatibility to enhance overall
efficiency.

One major drawback of diffusion models is their slow
sampling speed, as they require multiple steps of forward
passes through score estimation networks to generate a single sample, unlike the other methods such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) that require only a single forward pass
through a generator network. To address this issue, several approaches have been proposed to reduce the number
of steps required for the sampling of diffusion models, for
instance, by improving ODE/SDE solvers (Kong & Ping,
2021; Lu et al., 2022; Zhang & Chen, 2023) or distilling
into models requiring less number of sampling steps (Salimans & Ho, 2022; Song et al., 2023). Moreover, in accordance with the recent trend reflecting scaling laws of
large models over various domains, diffusion models with
a large number of parameters are quickly becoming mainstream as they are reported to produce high-quality samples (Peebles & Xie, 2022). Running such large diffusion
models for multiple sampling steps incurs significant computational overhead, necessitating further research to optimize calculations and efficiently allocate resources.
On the other hand, recent reports have highlighted the effectiveness of early-exiting schemes in reducing computational costs for Large Language Models (LLMs) (Schuster
et al., 2022; Hou et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Schuster
et al., 2021). The concept behind early-exiting is to bypass
the computation of transformer blocks when dealing with
relatively simple or confident words. Given that modern
score-estimation networks employed in diffusion models
share architectural similarities with LLMs, it is reasonable
to introduce the early-exiting idea to diffusion models as
well, with the aim of accelerating the sampling speed.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020) have shown remarkable success in diverse
domains including image synthesis (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2022a), text-to-image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022), 3D
This work is partially done at KAIST AI. 1 KRAFTON
Graduate School of AI, KAIST 3 Independent researcher 4 Naver
AI Lab, South Korea 5 AITRICS, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.

2

In this paper, we introduce Adaptive Score Estimation
(ASE) for faster sampling from diffusion models, drawing inspiration from the early-exiting schemes utilized in
LLMs. What sets diffusion models apart and distinguishes
our proposal from a straightforward application of the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

