Active Preference Learning for Large Language Models

William Muldrew 1 Peter Hayes 1 Mingtian Zhang 1 David Barber 1

Abstract

The most prominent class of fine-tuning technique in recent times is reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022). RLHF consists of a multistage process to adapt the pretrained autoregressive LLM
pθ (y|x). First, a preference data set is collected upfront. For
a given prompt x, two completions are sampled from the
model (y0 , y1 ) ∼ pθ (y|x) and an oracle judges which they
prefer. We denote yw as the preferred completion and yl as
the other. Typically the oracle is a human participant, however the use of LLMs to instead provide feedback has also
shown great promise (Bai et al., 2022). This process is repeated over N prompts resulting in the pairwise preference
dataset XP = {x, yw , yl }N . A reward model rϕ (x, y) is
then trained in a supervised manner on XP . The purpose of
this model is to assign a scalar score to prompt/completion
pairs to measure how well they align with the oracle preferences represented by XP . Finally, a reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithm such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
(Schulman et al., 2017) is used to fine-tune the parameters
of the language model θ by maximising the expected reward of a different set of prompt/completion pairs X as
measured by rϕ (x, y). The use of RL here circumvents the
non-differentiability of sampling from pθ (y|x). A downside
of RLHF is its complexity; PPO introduces separate reward
and value models that may be comparable in size to pθ (y|x),
which are typically kept in memory during training. Furthermore PPO is found to have high variance and be sensitive
to choices of hyper-parameters.

As large language models (LLMs) become more
capable, fine-tuning techniques for aligning with
human intent are increasingly important. A key
consideration for aligning these models is how to
most effectively use human resources, or model
resources in the case where LLMs themselves
are used as oracles. Reinforcement learning from
Human or AI preferences (RLHF/RLAIF) is the
most prominent example of such a technique, but
is complex and often unstable. Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has recently been proposed as a simpler and more stable alternative.
In this work, we develop an active learning strategy for DPO to make better use of preference
labels. We propose a practical acquisition function for prompt/completion pairs based on the
predictive entropy of the language model and a
measure of certainty of the implicit preference
model optimized by DPO. We demonstrate how
our approach improves both the rate of learning
and final performance of fine-tuning on pairwise
preference data.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in auto-regressive large language models (LLMs) have resulted in unprecedented capabilities in
zero-shot and few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023). These models are trained in an unsupervised manner using next token prediction on vast troves of
mostly internet data. Their perceived capabilities and alignment with human intent are then significantly improved
using various forms of fine-tuning on preference data. This
fine-tuning process is a key component to producing highly
capable, general purpose reasoning systems like ChatGPT.

Recently Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) has been
proposed as a simpler and more stable alternative to RLHF
(Rafailov et al., 2023). DPO also depends on the collection
of pairwise preference data, but crucially does not require
first training an explicit reward model or the subsequent use
of RL. Instead it relies on a straight forward binary cross
entropy objective that directly increases the likelihood yw
and decreases the likelihood of yl . The promise of this
approach is that it implicitly optimizes the same objective
as RLHF, without the added complexity.

1
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: William
Muldrew <william.muldrew.22@ucl.ac.uk>, Peter Hayes
<phayes@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.

Fine-tuning state-of-the-art LLMs using both of the aforementioned methods can require highly skilled domain experts, or expensive LLMs in the case of AI feedback, to
produce the required preference data. In this work, we focus on how best to utilize the available preference labelling
budget, specifically when using the DPO objective to avoid

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

