Two Heads are Actually Better than One:
Towards Better Adversarial Robustness via
Transduction and Rejection

Nils Palumbo * 1 Yang Guo * 1 Xi Wu 2 Jiefeng Chen 1 Yingyu Liang 1 Somesh Jha 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
A recent line of research (Goldwasser et al., 2020; Montasser et al., 2021; Goodfellow, 2019; Wang et al., 2021;
Wu et al., 2020) has investigated augmenting models with
transduction (leveraging unlabeled test input to revise the
learned model) and rejection (allowing a model to reject on
certain input) to defend against adversarial perturbations.
There are in general two classes of algorithms. One class
is transduction-only. For example, (Montasser et al., 2021)
showed that robust learning with transduction allows for
significant improvements in sample complexity, reducing
dependency on VC dimension from exponential to linear;
however, this comes at the cost of significantly greater assumptions on the data (OPTU2 for the realizable case rather
than the OPTU of the inductive setting 1 ).

Both transduction and rejection have emerged as
important techniques for defending against adversarial perturbations. A recent work by (Goldwasser et al., 2020) showed that rejection combined with transduction can give provable guarantees (for certain problems) that cannot be achieved
otherwise. Nevertheless, under recent strong adversarial attacks (GMSA (Chen et al., 2022)),
Goldwasser et al.’s work was shown to have low
performance in a practical deep-learning setting.
In this paper, we take a step towards realizing the
promise of transduction+rejection in more realistic scenarios. Our key observation is that a novel
application of a reduction technique in (Tramèr,
2022), which was until now only used to demonstrate the vulnerability of certain defenses, can
be used to actually construct effective defenses.
Theoretically, we show that a careful application
of this technique in the transductive setting can
give significantly improved sample-complexity
for robust generalization. Our theory guides us to
design a new transductive algorithm for learning
a selective model; extensive experiments using
state of the art attacks (AutoAttack, GMSA) show
that our approach provides significantly better robust accuracy (81.6% on CIFAR-10 and 57.9% on
CIFAR-100 under l∞ with budget 8/255) than existing techniques (Croce et al., 2020). The implementation is available at https://github.com/
nilspalumbo/transduction-rejection.

The other class is to have both transduction and rejection.
For example, (Goldwasser et al., 2020) studied this setting
and showed even more surprising results, not achievable
with transduction or rejection alone. However, one prominent limitation of these works seems to be that none has yet
resulted in practical robust learning mechanisms in the deep
learning setting typically considered.
In this paper, we take a step towards realizing the promise
of transduction+rejection in more realistic scenarios. Compared to (Goldwasser et al., 2020), which considers arbitrary
perturbations, we focus on the classic and practical scenario
of bounded perturbations for deep learning. Somewhat surprisingly, we show that a novel application of Tramèr’s
classifier-to-detector technique (Tramèr, 2022), which has
thus far only been applied to indicate that certain defenses
are vulnerable, in the transductive setting can give significantly improved sample-complexity for robust generalization, noting that bounded perturbations are critical for the
construction to work. To obtain these improvements, we
do not require stronger assumptions on the data, as with
(Montasser et al., 2021); in the realizable case, we only

*
Equal contribution 1 Depart of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA 2 Google. Correspondence to: Nils Palumbo <npalumbo@wisc.edu>, Yang Guo
<yguo@cs.wisc.edu>.

1
The
optimal
robust
risk
is
OPTU
=


inf h∈H Pr(x,y)∼D ∃z ∈ U(x) : h(z) , y . For U which are perturbations up to ϵ in some metric, U x is a perturbation of up to xϵ,
see Section 3 for more details.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

