Modular Learning of Deep Causal Generative Models
for High-dimensional Causal Inference

Md Musfiqur Rahman 1 Murat Kocaoglu 1

Abstract

Hospital
Location

Sound and complete algorithms have been proposed to compute identifiable causal queries using
the causal structure and data. However, most of
these algorithms assume accurate estimation of
the data distribution, which is impractical for highdimensional variables such as images. On the
other hand, modern deep generative architectures
can be trained to sample from high-dimensional
distributions. However, training these networks
are typically very costly. Thus, it is desirable
to leverage pre-trained models to answer causal
queries using such high-dimensional data. To address this, we propose modular training of deep
causal generative models that not only makes
learning more efficient, but also allows us to utilize large, pre-trained conditional generative models. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm,
Modular-DCM is the first algorithm that, given
the causal structure, uses adversarial training to
learn the network weights, and can make use of
pre-trained models to provably sample from any
identifiable causal query in the presence of latent confounders. With extensive experiments
on the Colored-MNIST dataset, we demonstrate
that our algorithm outperforms the baselines. We
also show our algorithm’s convergence on the
COVIDx dataset and its utility with a causal invariant prediction problem on CelebA-HQ.

Covid-19
Symptom (C)

Chest
X-ray(X)

Pneumonia
Diagnosis (N )

N)

(a) Causal graph

X
N(

G

nC ∼ N (0, 1)

,n

N,

U

C

UCN ∼ N (0, 1) (Represents the confounder)

+

C

X

+

+

N

GC (nC , UCN )
nX ∼ N (0, 1)

GX (C, nX )

nN ∼ N (0, 1)

(b) Deep Causal Generative Model
Figure 1. Causal graph for the XrayImg example (top) and its
deep causal generative model (bottom). For each variable, an NN
(GC , GX , GN ) is trained to mimic the true mechanism.

provide a principled approach to answering such queries
from data. Using SCMs, today we have a clear understanding of which causal queries can be answered from data,
and which cannot without further assumptions (Pearl, 1995;
Shpitser & Pearl, 2008; Huang & Valtorta, 2012; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012b). These identification algorithms find
a closed-form expression for an interventional distribution
using only observational data, by making use of the causal
structure via do-calculus rules (Pearl, 1995). Today, most
of our datasets contain high-dimensional variables, such
as images. Modern deep learning architectures can handle
high-dimensional data and solve non-causal machine learning problems such as classification, detection or generation.
The existing causal inference algorithms can answer any
identifiable causal question, but they cannot handle highdimensional variables as they require access to the joint
distribution, which is not practical with image data.

1. Introduction
Evaluating the causal effect of an intervention on a system
of interest is one of the fundamental questions that arise
across disciplines. Pearl’s structural causal models (SCMs)
1

As an example, consider a healthcare dataset of Covid symptoms (C), Pneumonia diagnosis (N ) and chest X-rays (X)
of patients from hospitals in two cities with different socioeconomic status, which we do not observe to ensure patient
privacy. Then, hospital location acts as a latent confounder
for both C and N since it might have effect on how likely pa-

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Md Musfiqur Rahman <rahman89@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

