Asymptotically Optimal and Computationally Efficient Average Treatment
Effect Estimation in A/B testing

Vikas Deep 1 Achal Bassamboo 1 Sandeep Juneja 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The simplest controlled experiment where two variants are
compared is referred to as an A/B test. In an A/B test, individuals arrive sequentially, the experiment designer assigns
an arriving individual to either treatment A or treatment
B and measures the response. There is a long history of
use of A/B tests in clinical trials to assess the efficacy of a
drug (treatment A) relative to another drug (treatment B).
In recent years, A/B testing has gained widespread adoption among large-scale online platforms for assessing the
performance of new product designs, web page layouts, or
services (see Kohavi & Thomke (2017)). A typical objective
of a sequential A/B test is to infer the better treatment. This
inference problem is well-studied in the literature as the
best arm identification or best treatment identification (BTI)
problem (see Bubeck et al. (2011), Garivier & Kaufmann
(2016)). A related but more informative metric of inference in an A/B test is the average treatment effect (ATE),
which measures the difference in performance of treatment
A vs treatment B. In this paper, we consider a sequential
A/B test with the aim of estimating ATE. An experiment
designer seeks to obtain a confidence interval (CI) with the
width at most ϵ > 0 such that the probability ATE does
not lie in the CI is at most δ > 0. We say that such CI
has (ϵ, δ)−coverage guarantee. We aim to minimize the
expected length of the experiment, i.e. expected sample size
of the A/B test while delivering a CI with (ϵ, δ)−coverage
guarantee. Both ϵ and δ are pre-specified at the beginning
of the experiment.

Motivated by practical applications in clinical trials and online platforms, we study A/B testing
with the aim of estimating a confidence interval
(CI) for the average treatment effect (ATE) using the minimum expected sample size. This CI
should have a width at most ϵ while ensuring that
the probability of the CI not containing the true
ATE is at most δ. To answer this, we first establish a lower bound on the expected sample size
needed for any adaptive policy which constructs
a CI of ATE with desired properties. Specifically,
we prove that the lower bound is based on the solution to a non-convex max-min optimization problem for small δ. Tailoring the “plug-in” approach
for the ATE problem, we construct an adaptive
policy that is asymptotically optimal, i.e., matches
the lower bound on the expected sample size for
small δ. Interestingly, we find that, for small ϵ
and δ, the asymptotically optimal fraction of treatment assignment for A and B is proportional to the
standard deviation of the outcome distributions
of treatments A and B, respectively. However, as
the proposed approach can be computationally intensive, we propose an alternative adaptive policy.
This new policy, informed by insights from our
lower bound analysis, is computationally efficient
while remaining asymptotically optimal for small
values of ϵ and δ. Numerical comparisons demonstrate that both policies perform similarly across
practical values of ϵ and δ, offering efficient solutions for A/B testing.

A CI of ATE can be extremely useful in decision-making for
online platforms in terms of deciding the design/treatment
to pursue in future. ATE is especially useful to know how
much value one is gaining via choosing the better treatment
over the alternative when there is a deployment cost of
designs/treatments. Further, a CI of ATE can be used in
the design of future experiments as it precisely quantifies
the value of one treatment over the other (see Johari et al.
(2022)). Also, this CI is useful in clinical trials, as stated in
Gardner & Altman (1986), “In medical studies investigators
are usually interested in determining the size of difference of
a measured outcome between groups, rather than a simple
indication of whether or not it is statistically significant.”

1
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60201 2 Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana, India.
Correspondence to: Vikas Deep
<vikas.deep@kellogg.northwestern.edu>,
Achal
Bassamboo <achalb@kellogg.northwestern.edu>, Sandeep Juneja
<sandeep.juneja2010@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

