An Image is Worth Multiple Words: Discovering Object Level Concepts using
Multi-Concept Prompt Learning

Chen Jin 1 Ryutaro Tanno 2 Amrutha Saseendran 1 Tom Diethe 1 Philip Teare 1
Crop-based

Mask-based

Cones / CD

Break-A-Scene

"a photo of
* (teddybear) "

"a photo of
& (skateboard)"

"a photo of
* (teddybear) and a
& (skateboard) at times square"

Mask-Free learning and editing multiple new concepts with MCPL (ours)
MCPL

Editing concepts

Recomposing

* (teddybear)

* (teddybear)

panda

cat

rolling & (skateboard)

rolling & (skateboard)

surfing board

flying blanket

"a photo of brown
* (teddybear) on a rolling
& (skateboard) at times square"
*

learnable prompts are represented as
coloured pseudo words

&

aligned cross-attention

Figure 1. Language driven multi-concepts learning and applications. Custom Diffusion (CD) and Cones learn concepts from crops of
objects, while Break-A-Scene uses masks. In contrast, our method learns object-level concepts using image-sentence pairs, aligning the
cross-attention of each learnable prompt with a semantically meaningful region, and enabling mask-free local editing. Project page, code,
and data are available at https://astrazeneca.github.io/mcpl.github.io.

Abstract

mask boundaries, we propose three regularisation techniques: Attention Masking, Prompts Contrastive Loss, and Bind Adjective. Extensive quantitative comparisons with both real-world categories and biomedical images demonstrate that
our method can learn new semantically disentangled concepts. Our approach emphasises learning
solely from textual embeddings, using less than
10% of the storage space compared to others.

Textual Inversion, a prompt learning method,
learns a singular text embedding for a new “word”
to represent image style and appearance, allowing
it to be integrated into natural language sentences
to generate novel synthesised images. However,
identifying multiple unknown object-level concepts within one scene remains a complex challenge. While recent methods have resorted to
cropping or masking individual images to learn
multiple concepts, these techniques require image
annotations which can be scarce or unavailable.
To address this challenge, we introduce MultiConcept Prompt Learning (MCPL), where multiple unknown “words” are simultaneously learned
from a single sentence-image pair, without any
imagery annotations. To enhance the accuracy
of word-concept correlation and refine attention

1. Introduction

Centre for AI, DS&AI, AstraZeneca, UK 2 Google DeepMind,
UK. Correspondence to: Chen Jin <chen.jin@astrazeneca.com>,
Philip Teare <philip.teare@astrazeneca.com>.

Language-driven vision concept discovery is a humanmachine interaction process in which the human describes
an image, leaving out multiple unfamiliar concepts. The
machine then learns to link each new concept with a corresponding learnable prompt (pseudo words in Figure 1) from
the sentence-image pair. Such capacity would accelerate the
scientific knowledge discovery process either from experimental observations or mining existing textbooks. It also
facilitates hypothesis generation through local image editing
without concrete knowledge of the new vision concept.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Recent research ((Gal et al., 2022; Ruiz et al., 2022)) shows
that the appearance and style of an image can be encapsulated as a cohesive concept via a learned prompt (“word”)

1

1

