Novel Spectral Algorithms for the Partial Credit Model

Duc Nguyen 1 Anderson Ye Zhang 2

Abstract

fundamental IRT model known as the Partial Credit Model
(PCM) (Andrich, 1978; Masters, 1982). The PCM is a generalization of the Rasch model to multi-level response data.
It models the ordered discrete response of an individual
l to an object i. Examples of ordered discrete responses
include product ratings and test scores where there is a
natural notion of monotonic progress from one level of response to the next (e.g., a product receiving 3 stars out of
5 stars review, a student scoring 6 out of 10 in a test). Let
Xli ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , K}, where K is a fixed integer, denote
the response of individual l with parameter θl∗ ∈ R to item

⊤
i with parameter βi∗ = βi∗ (1) , . . . , βi∗ (K)
∈ RK . The
PCM assumes that
 (1)
Qli ...Qli (K)

if k = 0

Nli


The Partial Credit Model (PCM) of Andrich
(1978) and Masters (1982) is a fundamental
model within the psychometric literature with
wide-ranging modern applications. It models the
integer-valued response that a subject gives to an
item where there is a natural notion of monotonic
progress between consecutive response values,
such as partial scores on a test and customer ratings of a product. In this paper, we introduce a
novel, time-efficient and accurate statistical spectral algorithm for inference under the PCM model.
We complement our algorithmic contribution with
in-depth non-asymptotic statistical analysis, the
first of its kind in the literature. We show that
the spectral algorithm enjoys the optimal error
guarantee under three different metrics, all under
reasonable sampling assumptions. We leverage
the efficiency of the spectral algorithm to propose
a novel EM-based algorithm for learning mixtures of PCMs. We perform comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real-life datasets covering
education testing, recommendation systems, and
financial investment applications. We show that
the proposed spectral algorithm is competitive
with previously introduced algorithms in terms of
accuracy while being orders of magnitude faster.

Pr (Xli = k) =

Pli (1) ...Pli (K)

Nli

(K)

...Qli
 Pli(1) ...Pli(k) Q(k+1)
li

if k = K

otherwise
(1)
∗
(k)
(k)
(k)
eθl
where Pli = θ∗ β∗ (k) , Qli = 1 − Pli and Nli =
e l +e i
QK
PK−1 (1)
(k′ )
(k′ ) (k′ +1)
(K)
Q
+
. . . Qli +
k′ =1 li
k′ =1 Pli . . . Pli Qli
′
QK
(k )
is a normalization factor. To build an intuk′ =1 Pli
tion behind (1), consider the context of education testing,
(k)
Pli is the probability that a student solves the k-th step of
a problem. The probability that a student receives partial
grade k ∈ [K] is proportional to the probability that the
student simultaneously solves all the steps 1, . . . , k while
simulatenously fails to solve steps k + 1, . . . , K where solving each step is independent of one another. In this sense,
we can loosely interpret θl∗ as the knowledge of student l
and βi∗ (k) as the difficulty of step k of problem i.
Nli

1. Introduction
Item Response Theory (IRT) is the study of how people
make choices in the presence of uncertainty. Since its popularization in the psychometric literature in the 1960s with the
Rasch model for binary response data (Rasch, 1960), IRT
has been utilized in many applications such as education
testing, recommendation systems, evaluation of machine
learning models, among others. Our work focuses on a

In this work and many classic papers in the PCM literature,
the focus is on the one-sided item estimation problem where
the goal is to estimate β ∗ accurately. Knowledge of β ∗
can be used to calibrate the scores/difficulty of different
versions of a standardized test, or to characterize items for
recommendation systems applications. The user parameters
can also be easily recovered from the data given an estimate
of β ∗ (Andrich, 1978; Masters, 1982). Previous inference
approaches in the PCM literature include the Maximum
Marginal Likelihood Estimate (MMLE) (Johnson, 2007)
and Joint Maximum Likelihood Estimate (JMLE) (Andrich,
1978; Masters, 1982). In JMLE, both the user parameters

1
Department of Computer & Information Science, University of
Pennsylvania 2 Department of Statistics & Data Science, Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Duc
Nguyen <mdnguyen@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

