Stochastic Gradient Flow Dynamics of Test Risk
and its Exact Solution for Weak Features
Rodrigo Veiga 1 Anastasia Remizova 1 Nicolas Macris 1

Abstract

ble descent phenomenon (Belkin et al., 2019; 2020; Belkin,
2021). Analytical derivations of double descent curves have
been achieved for relatively simple models, but are limited
to the use of least squares estimators (no dynamics) and pure
gradient flow (GF) approximations of gradient descent (GD).
The present work goes one step further by investigating the
effects of stochasticity on the double descent curve.

We investigate the test risk of a continuous time
stochastic gradient flow dynamics in learning theory. Using a path integral formulation we provide,
in the regime of small learning rate, a general formula for computing the difference between test
risk curves of pure gradient and stochastic gradient flows. We apply the general theory to a simple model of weak features, which displays the
double descent phenomenon, and explicitly compute the corrections brought about by the added
stochastic term in the dynamics, as a function
of time and model parameters. The analytical
results are compared to simulations of discrete
time stochastic gradient descent and show good
agreement.

Main contributions –
marized as follows:

Our main contributions are sum-

C1 We consider a general Itô stochastic differential equation (SDE) and represent the Markovian transition probability as a path integral, Eq. (11). A general ‘explicit’
formula for the transition probability, Eq. (17), is derived
in the limit of a small learning rate by using a Laplace approximation. This constitutes one of the main results of
this paper: suppose that wode (t) is the deterministic solution of pure GF (with no stochastic term), then by representing the large deviation of the Itô diffusion of SGF as
√
wode (t) + γz (t) we provide a general formula for the covariance C (t) ≡ E[z (t)z (t)⊤ ]. The formula is confronted
against a simple rigorously solvable SDE and we find exact
agreement.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning of neural networks and regression
models, understanding the dynamics of optimization algorithms, and in particular stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
is of utmost importance. However, despite much progress
in a number of directions, this still remains a highly challenging theoretical problem. A fruitful approach that allows
making analytical progress consists of suitably approximating SGD by a continuous time approximation, henceforth
called stochastic gradient flow (SGF). In this contribution,
we build up on this approach, to develop a general formalism
characterizing the dynamics of the stochastic process, and
apply it to the investigation of the test risk (or generalization
error) as a function of time.

C2 We use the simplest relevant SGF approximation of
SGD in a learning theory setting, which is known to come
with a first-order guarantee with respect to small learning
rates (Li et al., 2019). We use our general theory to express
the covariance C (t) in terms of the data matrix, training
cost and its Hessian, and the deterministic GF trajectory.
C3 This general theoretical framework is applied to a particular random weak features model, displaying the double descent phenomenon, first discussed by (Breiman &
Freedman, 1983) and revisited in (Belkin et al., 2020). We
explicitly compute the corrections brought about by the
added stochastic term in the whole learning dynamics. For
i.i.d. Gaussian data, and in a suitable large-size asymptotic
regime, the formula for the test risk of SGF is given explicitly by an expression involving only single and double
integrals over the Marchenko-Pastur distribution, Eqs. (29)
and (30). We check our analytical predictions against numerical simulations of SGD and find good agreement.

As is well known, the classical bias-variance trade-off has
been challenged in a number of models displaying the dou1

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lab
for Statistical Mechanics of Inference in Large Systems
(SMILS), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: R. Veiga <rodrigo.veiga@epfl.ch>, A. Remizova <anastasia.remizova@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

