SAPG: Split and Aggregate Policy Gradients

Jayesh Singla * 1 Ananye Agarwal * 1 Deepak Pathak 1

Abstract

Regular On-policy RL

Despite extreme sample inefficiency, on-policy reinforcement learning, aka policy gradients, has become a fundamental tool in decision-making problems. With the recent advances in GPU-driven
simulation, the ability to collect large amounts
of data for RL training has scaled exponentially.
However, we show that current RL methods, e.g.
PPO, fail to ingest the benefit of parallelized environments beyond a certain point and their performance saturates. To address this, we propose
a new on-policy RL algorithm that can effectively leverage large-scale environments by splitting them into chunks and fusing them back together via importance sampling. Our algorithm,
termed SAPG, shows significantly higher performance across a variety of challenging environments where vanilla PPO and other strong baselines fail to achieve high performance. Webpage
at https://sapg-rl.github.io.

Parallel
Envs
Single learner

Split and Aggregate Policy Gradients (SAPG)
Followers

Leader

1. Introduction
Broadly, there are two main categories in reinforcement
learning (RL): off-policy RL, e.g., Q-learning (Watkins &
Dayan, 1992), and on-policy RL, e.g., policy gradients (Sutton et al., 1999). On-policy methods are relatively more
sample inefficient than off-policy but often tend to converge to higher asymptotic performance. Due to this reason,
on-policy RL methods, especially PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017), are usually the preferred RL paradigm for almost all
sim2real robotic applications (Miki et al., 2022; Agarwal
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021) to games such as StarCraft
(Vinyals et al., 2019), where one could simulate years of
real-world experience in minutes to hours.

Figure 1. We introduce a new class of on-policy RL algorithms that
can scale to tens of thousands of parallel environments. In contrast
to regular on-policy RL, such as PPO, which learns a single policy
across environments leading to wasted environment capacity, our
method learns diverse followers and combines data from them to
learn a more optimal leader in a continuous online manner.

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Ananye Agarwal <ananyea@andrew.cmu.edu>, Jayesh
Singla <jsingla@andrew.cmu.edu>.

the case of on-policy methods because they can only use data
from current experience. Fortunately, in recent years, the
ability to simulate a large number of environments in parallel
has become exponentially larger due to GPU-driven physics
engines, such as IsaacGym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021),
PhysX, Mujoco-3.0, etc. This means that each RL update
can easily scale to batches of size hundreds of thousands
to millions, which are over two orders of magnitude higher
than what most RL benchmarks typically have.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we highlight an issue with typical on-policy
RL methods, e.g. PPO, that they are not able to ingest the
benefits with increasingly larger sample sizes for each up-

RL is fundamentally a trial-n-error-based framework and
hence is sample inefficient in nature. Due to this, one needs
to have large batch sizes for each policy update, especially in
*

1

