Proactive Detection of Voice Cloning with Localized Watermarking

Robin San Roman * 1 2 Pierre Fernandez * 1 2 Hady Elsahar * 1
Alexandre Défossez 3 Teddy Furon 2 Tuan Tran 1

Abstract

Proactively watermarked speech generator
Speech
editing

Watermark
Generator

Speech
Model

In the rapidly evolving field of speech generative models, there is a pressing need to ensure audio authenticity against the risks of voice
cloning. We present AudioSeal, the first audio
watermarking technique designed specifically for
localized detection of AI-generated speech. AudioSeal employs a generator / detector architecture trained jointly with a localization loss to
enable localized watermark detection up to the
sample level, and a novel perceptual loss inspired by auditory masking, that enables AudioSeal to achieve better imperceptibility. AudioSeal achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of robustness to real life audio manipulations and imperceptibility based on automatic
and human evaluation metrics. Additionally, AudioSeal is designed with a fast, single-pass detector, that significantly surpasses existing models
in speed, achieving detection up to two orders of
magnitude faster, making it ideal for large-scale
and real-time applications. Code is available at
github.com/facebookresearch/audioseal.

AI-Generated

Watermarked

‘AI generated?’
✔
✗

Published

Watermark
Detector

Figure 1. Proactive detection of AI-generated speech. We embed an imperceptible watermark in the audio, which can be used
to detect if a speech is AI-generated and identify the model that
generated it. It can also precisely pinpoint AI-generated segments
in a longer audio with a sample level resolution (1/16k seconds).

tent transparency and traceability, including forensics and
watermarking – see Chi (2023); Eur (2023); USA (2023).
The main forensics approach to detect synthesized audio is
to train binary classifiers to discriminate between natural
and synthesized audios, a technique highlighted in studies by Borsos et al. (2022); Kharitonov et al. (2023); Le
et al. (2023). We refer to this technique as passive detection since it does not alter of the audio source. Albeit being
a straightforward mitigation, it is prone to fail as generative models advance and the difference between synthesized and authentic content diminishes.

1. Introduction

Watermarking emerges as a strong alternative. It embeds
a signal in the generated audio, imperceptible to the ear
but robustly detectable by specific algorithms. There are
two watermarking types: multi-bit and zero-bit. Zero-bit
watermarking detects the presence or absence of a watermarking signal, which is valuable for AI content detection.
Multi-bit watermarking embeds a binary message in the
content, allowing to link content to a specific user or generative model. Most deep-learning based audio watermarking methods (Pavlović et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a; Chen
et al., 2023) are multi-bit. They train a generator to output
the watermarked audio from a sample and a message, and
an extractor retrieving the hidden message.

Generative speech models are now capable of synthesizing voices that are indistinguishable from real ones (Arik
et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021; Casanova et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023). Though speech generation and voice cloning
are not novel concepts, their recent advancements in quality and accessibility have raised new security concerns. A
notable incident occurred where a deepfake audio misleadingly urged US voters to abstain, showcasing the potential for misusing these technologies to spread false information (Murphy et al., 2024). Consequently, regulators
and governments are implementing measures for AI con*
Equal contribution 1 FAIR, Meta 2 Inria 3 Kyutai. Correspondence to: <robinsr, hadyelsahar, pfz@meta.com>.

Current watermarking methods have limitations. First, they
are not adapted for detection. The initial applications assumed any sound sample under scrutiny was watermarked
(e.g. IP protection). As a result, the decoders were never

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

