Cell2Sentence: Teaching Large Language Models the Language of Biology

Daniel Levine * 1 Syed Asad Rizvi * 1 Sacha Lévy 1 Nazreen Pallikkavaliyaveetil 1 David Zhang 1 Xingyu Chen 1
Sina Ghadermarzi 1 Ruiming Wu 2 Zihe Zheng 1 Ivan Vrkic 3 Anna Zhong 1 Daphne Raskin 1 Insu Han 1
Antonio Henrique de Oliveira Fonseca 1 4 Josue Ortega Caro 1 4 5 Amin Karbasi 6 1 7 8 Rahul M. Dhodapkar † 9 10
David van Dijk † 1 7 5 11 12 10

Abstract

applications.

We introduce Cell2Sentence (C2S), a novel
method to directly adapt large language models to
a biological context, specifically single-cell transcriptomics. By transforming gene expression
data into ”cell sentences,” C2S bridges the gap
between natural language processing and biology.
We demonstrate cell sentences enable the finetuning of language models for diverse tasks in
biology, including cell generation, complex celltype annotation, and direct data-driven text generation. Our experiments reveal that GPT-2, when
fine-tuned with C2S, can generate biologically
valid cells based on cell type inputs, and accurately predict cell types from cell sentences. This
illustrates that language models, through C2S finetuning, can acquire a significant understanding of
single-cell biology while maintaining robust text
generation capabilities. C2S offers a flexible, accessible framework to integrate natural language
processing with transcriptomics, utilizing existing
models and libraries for a wide range of biological

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT have demonstrated powerful capabilities in natural language processing
tasks including question answering, summarization, and
text generation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2018;
Devlin et al., 2019; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023;
Anil et al., 2023). However, their application to complex
fields like biology, especially in single-cell transcriptomics,
poses a novel challenge. Traditional methods in this domain,
largely reliant on specialized neural network architectures,
do not leverage the potential of LLMs’ pretrained knowledge and linguistic understanding.
In this paper, we introduce Cell2Sentence (C2S), a method
designed to adapt LLMs for transcriptomics. C2S converts
single-cell gene expression data into textual sequences by
rank-ordering gene names in descending order of expression levels. This formatting enables LLMs to process and
interpret this information (see Figures 1 and 2) while also
maintaining the richness and complexity in single-cell data
(Figures 3 and 4). Another advantage of C2S is that it takes
advantage of the highly optimized and user-friendly open
source libraries for transformer models such as Hugging
Face (Wolf et al., 2020).

*
Equal contribution † Co-corresponding authors 1 Department
of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
2
School of Engineering Applied Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 3 School of Computer and Communication Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland 4 Department of Neuroscience, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA 5 Wu Tsai Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 6 Google 7 Yale Institute for Foundations of Data Science, New Haven, CT, USA 8 Yale School of
Engineering and Applied Science, New Haven, CT, USA 9 Roski
Eye Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA 10 Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology), Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA 11 Cardiovascular Research Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
12
Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence to: Rahul M. Dhodapkar <rahul.dhodapkar@med.usc.edu>,
David van Dijk <david.vandijk@yale.edu>.

This approach not only allows the models to generate biologically relevant cells and predict cell types but also facilitates
the generation of descriptive natural language text from
single-cell data. This work demonstrates that combining
C2S with LLMs significantly enhances their performance in
transcriptomic tasks, notably outperforming models trained
solely on C2S.
In summary, our key contributions are:
1. Introducing Cell2Sentence, an effective method for
representing single-cell data as text sequences.
2. Fine-tuning language models on cell sentences to generate and perturb cells, predict combinatorial cell labels, and interpret single-cell data in natural language.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

