Structure Your Data: Towards Semantic Graph Counterfactuals

Angeliki Dimitriou 1 Maria Lymperaiou 1 Giorgos Filandrianos 1 Konstantinos Thomas 1 Giorgos Stamou 1

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations (CEs) based on concepts are explanations that consider alternative
scenarios to understand which high-level semantic features contributed to particular model predictions. In this work, we propose CEs based on
the semantic graphs accompanying input data to
achieve more descriptive, accurate, and humanaligned explanations. Building upon state-of-theart (SotA) conceptual attempts, we adopt a modelagnostic edit-based approach and introduce leveraging GNNs for efficient Graph Edit Distance
(GED) computation. With a focus on the visual
domain, we represent images as scene graphs and
obtain their GNN embeddings to bypass solving
the NP-hard graph similarity problem for all input pairs, an integral part of CE computation process. We apply our method to benchmark and realworld datasets with varying difficulty and availability of semantic annotations. Testing on diverse
classifiers, we find that our CEs outperform previous SotA explanation models based on semantics, including both white and black-box as well
as conceptual and pixel-level approaches. Their
superiority is proven quantitatively and qualitatively, as validated by human subjects, highlighting the significance of leveraging semantic edges
in the presence of intricate relationships. Our
model-agnostic graph-based approach is widely
applicable and easily extensible, producing actionable explanations across different contexts. The
code is available at https://github.com/
aggeliki-dimitriou/SGCE.

Figure 1. Examples where semantic graphs trump concept sets. Example 1 (top) shows the importance of the multiplicity of concepts
for edit distance and example 2 (bottom) emphasizes the intricacy
of relations. Edits (substitutions, insertions, deletions) are enclosed
in striped rectangles. Images sourced from Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017), except unsafe driver (Deccan Chronicle, 2016).

lights the widespread use of proprietary models due to their
state-of-the-art (SotA) performance across various modalities and datasets1 (Team et al., 2023). This underscores
the need for increased attention to black-box explainability
methods, especially with the growing related applications
in critical areas like medical image classification (Wu et al.,
2023; Hou & Ji, 2024). Users should have the ability to
understand decision-making processes without accessing
the classifier architecture, emphasizing the importance of
autonomy in scrutinizing proprietary models. To address
this, there is a rising demand for post-hoc/model-agnostic
explainability, an established field with publications in prestigious conferences (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Ying et al., 2019;
Dervakos et al., 2023). In this spirit, this paper proposes
a black-box method to compute Counterfactual Explanations (CEs) (Wachter et al., 2017) based on semantics. The
challenges posed to extract and interpret decision processes
of black-box models, although acknowledged as inherent
trade-offs (Rudin, 2019), lie beyond the scope of this work.

1. Introduction
The AI landscape, now dominated by advanced Large Multimodal Models such as GPT4, GPT4V, and Gemini, high1

Artificial Intelligence and Learning Systems Laboratory, National Technical University of Athens. Correspondence to: Angeliki Dimitriou <angelikidim@ails.ece.ntua.gr>.

The effectiveness of Conceptual XAI methods is closely tied
to the semantic context of the data they interpret. In fact,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

https://openai.com/research/image-gpt

