Towards Efficient Spiking Transformer: a Token
Sparsification Framework for Training and Inference Acceleration

Zhengyang Zhuge 1 2 Peisong Wang 1 2 3 Xingting Yao 1 4 Jian Cheng 1 2 3

Abstract

2019). The neurons in SNNs, inspired by biological counterparts, produce sparse and discrete events through the
emission of binary spikes, facilitating communication with
post-synaptic neurons (Krestinskaya et al., 2019). Due to
the event-driven nature, SNNs offer a distinct advantage
over Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) in terms of energy
efficiency (Furber et al., 2014; Merolla et al., 2014; Pei
et al., 2019), which becomes particularly beneficial to edge
computing scenarios where resources are constrained.

Nowadays Spiking Transformers have exhibited
remarkable performance close to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), while enjoying the inherent energy-efficiency of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs). However, training Spiking Transformers on GPUs is considerably more timeconsuming compared to the ANN counterparts,
despite the energy-efficient inference through neuromorphic computation. In this paper, we investigate the token sparsification technique for efficient training of Spiking Transformer and find
conventional methods suffer from noticeable performance degradation. We analyze the issue and
propose our Sparsification with Timestep-wise
Anchor Token and dual Alignments (STATA).
Timestep-wise Anchor Token enables precise
identification of important tokens across timesteps
based on standardized criteria. Additionally, dual
Alignments incorporate both Intra and Inter Alignment of the attention maps, fostering the learning
of inferior attention. Extensive experiments show
the effectiveness of STATA thoroughly, which
demonstrates up to ∼1.53× training speedup and
∼48% energy reduction with comparable performance on various datasets and architectures.

Recently, the pioneer Spiking Transformer (Zhou et al.,
2023b) successfully introduced the Transformer-style architecture design to SNNs. Following this, there has been
a growing emergence of Spiking Transformers (Yao et al.,
2023a; Zhou et al., 2023a), gradually narrowing the performance gap between Spiking Transformers and the ANN
counterparts (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) on various datasets.
However, despite the energy-efficient inference achieved
through neuromorphic computation, the training of Spiking Transformer is significantly more time-consuming compared to its corresponding ANN-Transformer counterpart
due to the incorporation of an additional temporal dimension.
For instance, training a Spiking Transformer on ImageNet
requires even thousands of GPU hours, demanding substantial computational resources and time. In addition to the
inefficient training, these Spiking Transformers always rely
on larger and more complex models to attain superior task
performance, resulting in increased energy consumption
during inference compared to traditional SNNs.

1. Introduction

To enhance the energy and computational efficiency in
SNNs, researchers have made some efforts through various
methods. One of the most effective approaches to enhance
computational efficiency is sparsification, commonly known
as pruning (Chen et al., 2022; Yin et al., 2023). Nevertheless,
existing pruning methods for SNNs primarily focus on enhancing inference efficiency, while paying less attention to
the efficiency of the training process. Some pruning works
(Chen et al., 2021c; Kim et al., 2022) typically require a considerable amount of additional training time and iterations
to obtain the pruned network, which can even result in increased training overhead. Other sparsification works utilize
unstructured pruning to achieve greater energy savings for
the inference phase. However, unstructured sparsification

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), considered the third generation of Neural Networks (Maass, 1997), hold immense
promise due to their low power consumption, event-driven
nature, and alignment with biological principles (Roy et al.,
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 AiRiA 4 School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to:
Peisong Wang <peisong.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>, Jian Cheng
<jcheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

