Benign Overfitting in Two-Layer ReLU Convolutional Neural
Networks for XOR Data
Xuran Meng 1 Difan Zou 2 Yuan Cao 1 3

Abstract

observed, where these models maintain remarkable performance on the test data despite the potential for overfitting
(Neyshabur et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021). Bartlett et al.
(2020) theoretically proved this phenomenon in linear regression and coined the term “benign overfitting”.

Modern deep learning models are usually highly
over-parameterized so that they can overfit the
training data. Surprisingly, such overfitting neural
networks can usually still achieve high prediction
accuracy. To study this “benign overfitting” phenomenon, a line of recent works has theoretically
studied the learning of linear models and twolayer neural networks. However, most of these
analyses are still limited to the very simple learning problems where the Bayes-optimal classifier
is linear. In this work, we investigate a class of
XOR-type classification tasks with label-flipping
noises. We show that, under a certain condition
on the sample complexity and signal-to-noise ratio, an over-parameterized ReLU CNN trained by
gradient descent can achieve near Bayes-optimal
accuracy. Moreover, we also establish a matching
lower bound result showing that when the previous condition is not satisfied, the prediction accuracy of the obtained CNN is an absolute constant
away from the Bayes-optimal rate. Our result
demonstrates that CNNs have a remarkable capacity to efficiently learn XOR problems, even in the
presence of highly correlated features.

There has been a recent surge of interest in studying benign
overfitting from a theoretical perspective. A line of recent
works provided significant insights under the settings of
linear/kernel/random feature models (Belkin et al., 2019;
2020; Bartlett et al., 2020; Chatterji & Long, 2021; Hastie
et al., 2022; Montanari & Zhong, 2022; Mei & Montanari,
2022; Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023). However, the analysis of
benign overfitting in neural networks under gradient descent is much more challenging due to the non-convexity in
the optimization and non-linearity of activation functions.
Nevertheless, several recent works have made significant
progress in this area. For instance, Frei et al. (2022) provided an upper bound of risk with smoothed leaky ReLU
activation when learning the log-concave mixture data with
label-flipping noise. By proposing a method named “signalnoise decomposition”, (Cao et al., 2022) established a condition for sharp phase transition between benign and harmful
overfitting in the learning of two-layer convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) with activation functions ReLUq (q > 2).
(Kou et al., 2023) further extended the analysis to ReLU
neural networks, and established a condition for such a
sharp phase transition with more general conditions. Despite the recent advances in the theoretical study of benign
overfitting, the existing studies are still mostly limited to
very simple learning problems where the Bayes-optimal
classifier is linear.

1. Introduction
Modern deep neural networks are often highly overparameterized, with the number of parameters far exceeding
the number of samples in the training data. This can lead to
overfitting, where the model performs well on the training
data but poorly on unseen test data. However, an interesting phenomenon, known as “benign overfitting”, has been

In this paper, we study the benign overfitting phenomenon
of two-layer ReLU CNNs in more complicated learning
tasks where linear models will provably fail. Specifically,
we consider binary classification problems where the label
of the data is jointly determined by the presence of two
types of signals with an XOR relation. We show that for this
XOR-type of data, any linear predictor will only achieve
50% test accuracy. On the other hand, we establish tight
upper and lower bounds of the test error achieved by twolayer CNNs trained by gradient descent, and demonstrate
that benign overfitting can occur even with the presence of
label-flipping noises.

1

Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 3 Department of Mathematics,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Yuan
Cao <yuancao@hku.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

