Improving Diffusion Models for Inverse Problems
Using Optimal Posterior Covariance

Xinyu Peng 1 Ziyang Zheng 1 Wenrui Dai 1 Nuoqian Xiao 1 Chenglin Li 1 Junni Zou 1 Hongkai Xiong 1

Abstract

egorized into two groups: 1) supervised methods that aim to
learn a conditional diffusion model using datasets consisting
of pairs of degraded and clean images (Saharia et al., 2022;
Whang et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2023),
and 2) zero-shot methods that leverage pre-trained unconditional diffusion models for conditional sampling in various
scenarios of inverse problems without the requirement of
retraining. In this paper, we focus on the zero-shot methods
that can accommodate various tasks without retraining. To
ensure the consistency of optimizing fidelity under conditional sampling, existing zero-shot methods adopt projection
onto the measurement subspace (Choi et al., 2021; Lugmayr
et al., 2022; Song et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023), leverage the similar idea as classifier guidance (Song
et al., 2021b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) to modify the sampling process with the likelihood score (Song et al., 2023;
Chung et al., 2023a), or resort to variational inference (Feng
et al., 2023; Mardani et al., 2024).

Recent diffusion models provide a promising zeroshot solution to noisy linear inverse problems
without retraining for specific inverse problems.
In this paper, we reveal that recent methods can
be uniformly interpreted as employing a Gaussian approximation with hand-crafted isotropic
covariance for the intractable denoising posterior
to approximate the conditional posterior mean. Inspired by this finding, we propose to improve recent methods by using more principled covariance
determined by maximum likelihood estimation.
To achieve posterior covariance optimization without retraining, we provide general plug-and-play
solutions based on two approaches specifically designed for leveraging pre-trained models with and
without reverse covariance. We further propose a
scalable method for learning posterior covariance
prediction based on representation with orthonormal basis. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed methods significantly enhance reconstruction performance without requiring hyperparameter tuning.

Diffusion models initially establish a forward process that
introduces noise to the original data x0 to generate noisy
data xt at time t. Subsequently, a reverse process generates x0 following the distribution of the original data.
The key to realizing the reverse process lies in the posterior mean E[x0 |xt ], which represents the optimal estimate
of x0 given xt in the sense of minimum mean square error (MMSE). In inverse problems, achieving conditional
sampling that ensures samples consistent with the measurement y requires considering the conditional posterior mean
E[x0 |xt , y], which plays a similar role to E[x0 |xt ] in unconditional sampling.

1. Introduction
Noisy linear inverse problems are widely studied for a variety of image processing tasks, including denoising, inpainting, deblurring, super-resolution, among others. The noisy
linear inverse problems are formulated to accommodate
the widely adopted degradation model, where images are
measured with a linear projection under noise corruption.

However, differing from the methods originated from approximating the conditional score ∇xt log pt (xt |y) that can
be regarded as explicitly approximating E[x0 |xt , y] (Song
et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2023a), the underlying motivations of recent methods can differ significantly from the
objective of approximating E[x0 |xt , y]. These methods
achieve conditional sampling by refining the null space
during the reverse diffusion process (Wang et al., 2023),
interpreting denoising diffusion models as plug-and-play
image priors (Zhu et al., 2023), or optimizing the data consistency in the tangent space (Chung et al., 2023b). There
remain two important problems unresolved, i.e., i) unified

Recently, diffusion models have been emerging as promising methods for solving inverse problems. According to the
training strategies, these diffusion-based solvers can be cat1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence
to: Ziyang Zheng <zhengziyang@sjtu.edu.cn>, Wenrui Dai <daiwenrui@sjtu.edu.cn>, Junni Zou <zoujunni@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

