DiffAug: Enhance Unsupervised Contrastive Learning
with Domain-Knowledge-Free Diffusion-based Data Augmentation
Zelin Zang 1 2 3 Hao Luo 2 4 Kai Wang 3 Panpan Zhang 3 Fan Wang 2 4 Stan.Z Li† 1 Yang You 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning, as shown by many studies (He et al.,
2020b; Chen et al., 2020; Cui et al., 2021; Wang & Qi, 2022;
Assran et al., 2022; Zang et al., 2023), has become important
in areas like vision (He et al., 2021; Zang et al., 2022b), natural language processing (Rethmeier & Augenstein, 2023),
and biology (Yu et al., 2023; Krishnan et al., 2022). The key
to contrastive learning (CL) lies in designing appropriate
data augmentation methods. Many studies (Tian et al., 2020;
Zhang & Ma, 2022; Peng et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b)
have found that data augmentation helps CL by making it
more robust and preventing model collapse problems.

Unsupervised Contrastive learning has gained
prominence in fields such as vision, and biology,
leveraging predefined positive/negative samples
for representation learning. Data augmentation,
categorized into hand-designed and model-based
methods, has been identified as a crucial component for enhancing contrastive learning. However,
hand-designed methods require human expertise
in domain-specific data while sometimes distorting the meaning of the data. In contrast, generative model-based approaches usually require
supervised or large-scale external data, which has
become a bottleneck constraining model training in many domains. To address the problems
presented above, this paper proposes DiffAug, a
novel unsupervised contrastive learning technique
with diffusion mode-based positive data generation. DiffAug consists of a semantic encoder and a
conditional diffusion model; the conditional diffusion model generates new positive samples conditioned on the semantic encoding to serve the training of unsupervised contrast learning. With the
help of iterative training of the semantic encoder
and diffusion model, DiffAug improves the representation ability in an uninterrupted and unsupervised manner. Experimental evaluations show that
DiffAug outperforms hand-designed and SOTA
model-based augmentation methods on DNA sequence, visual, and bio-feature datasets. The code
for review is released at https://github.
com/zangzelin/code_diffaug.

Data augmentation falls into two main types: hand-designed
methods and model-based methods (Xu et al., 2023). Handdesigned methods require humans to understand the meaning of the data and then change the input features while
maintaining or extending that meaning. For example, several methods in visual tasks (such as color change (Yan
et al., 2022), random cropping (Cubuk et al., 2020), and
rotation (Maharana et al., 2022)) and DNA sequence representation tasks (such as mutations, insertion, and noise (Lee
et al., 2023)) are used to aid in model training. However,
the problem is that the above techniques must be more dataspecific. For some data (genes or proteins or others), it isn’t
easy to understand due to the complexity of its meaning.
Consequently, it isn’t easy to design a good augmentation
strategy. Semantics-independent augmentation methods
such as adding noise (Huang et al., 2022) and random hiding (Theodoris et al., 2023) are used, but only sometimes
with significant results. Another issue with hand-designed
methods is their inability to subtly alter the semantics of the
data. For instance, a minor mutation in a DNA sequence can
lead to significant semantic changes, akin to a gene mutation
(as illustrated in Figure. 1). As a result, more positive/negative samples are needed to distribute these risks to obtain
a stable representation. It is also challenging to train CL
models with fewer samples for certain domains where data
acquisition is costly, such as biology.

1
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake
University, China 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 National
University of Singapore 4 Hupan Lab, Zhejiang Province. Correspondence to: Stan.Z Li <Stan.Z.Li@westlake.edu.cn>.

Given the challenges mentioned earlier, model-based methods (generative models) based on deep learning are used
to create better data. In the vision domain, techniques using VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2014), GAN (Goodfellow

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

