KV-Runahead: Scalable Causal LLM Inference by
Parallel Key-Value Cache Generation

Minsik Cho 1 Mohammad Rastegari 2 Devang Naik 1

Abstract

two challenges for efficient inferences: a) Time-to-firsttoken or TTFT: consuming potentially a long user context
and generate the first token b) Time Per Output Token
or TPOT: generating the subsequent tokens fast (Liu et al.,
2023a). The second challenge is known to be a memorybound problem, and a large body of research has been
done (Pope et al., 2022), including sparsification, quantization, or weight clustering (Frantar et al., 2023; Lin et al.,
2023; Cho et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b) or speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). But, the
first challenge for a long user context is largely a computebound problem (Liu et al., 2023a; NVidia-LLM, 2023) and
critical for favorable user experience with retrieval augmentation (Ram et al., 2023), in-context learning (Dong et al.,
2023), summarization (Zhang et al., 2023b), story generation (Zhang et al., 2023a), and so on.

Large Language Model or LLM inference has two
phases, the prompt (or prefill) phase to output the
first token and the extension (or decoding) phase
to the generate subsequent tokens. In this work,
we propose an efficient parallelization scheme,
KV-Runahead to accelerate the prompt phase.
The key observation is that the extension phase
generates tokens faster than the prompt phase because of key-value cache (KV-cache). Hence,
KV-Runahead parallelizes the prompt phase by
orchestrating multiple processes to populate the
KV-cache and minimizes the time-to-first-token
(TTFT). Dual-purposing the KV-cache scheme
has two main benefits. First, since KV-cache is
designed to leverage the causal attention map, we
minimize computation and computation automatically. Second, since it already exists for the extension phase, KV-Runahead is easy to implement.
We further propose context-level load-balancing
to handle uneven KV-cache generation (due to
the causal attention) and to optimize TTFT. Compared with an existing parallelization scheme such
as tensor or sequential parallelization where keys
and values are locally generated and exchanged
via all-gather collectives, our experimental results
demonstrate that KV-Runahead can offer over
1.4× and 1.6× speedups for Llama 7B and Falcon
7B respectively.

Since TTFT for a long context is compute-bound, one solution is to use more computing power in the form of parallelization. The current SOTA in LLM parallelization inlcudes tensor and sequential parallelization (Patel et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023; Korthikanti et al., 2022; NVidia-LLM, 2023)
where the key and value computations are distributed over
multiple processes and subsequently exchanged, aiming
to compute the attention map perfectly in parallel. The
methods above are generic enough to drive LLM inference (Vaswani et al., 2017), but not specialized enough
for scalable LLM inference, as the causality in attention is
not fully leveraged, resulting in up to 2× overhead in terms
of both computation and communication over the ideal case.
Therefore, we propose a novel yet effective parallelization
technique tailed for LLM inference, KV-Runahead to minimize TTFT. By re-purposing the key-value cache or KVcache (NVidia-LLM, 2023) mechanism (which exists anyway for subsequent token generation), our proposed KVRunahead uses other processes to populate KV-cache for the
last process with context-level load-balancing. Since KVcache assumes causal attention computation, KV-Runahead
reduces the computation and communication costs and offers lower TTFT over the existing methods. Further, KVRunahead requires minimal engineering costs, as it simply
makes the KV-cache interface dual-purposed. In detail, our
contributions are the following:

1. Introduction
Large language models or LLMs, and especially Generative
Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) models have shown excellent performance on many complex language tasks (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022a). However, the decoder
architecture and autoregression execution in LLMs pose
1
Apple. USA 2 Meta. USA (the work done while being with
Apple). Correspondence to: Minsik Cho <minsik@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

