Generative Marginalization Models

Sulin Liu 1 Peter J. Ramadge 1 Ryan P. Adams 1

Abstract

However, there remains a pressing need to better support
efficient probabilistic inference for key questions involving
marginal probabilities p(xS ) and conditional probabilities
p(xU |xV ), for appropriate subsets S, U, V of the variables.
The ability to directly address such quantities is critical
in applications such as outlier or machine-generated content detection [59, 48], masked language modeling [15, 85],
image inpainting [86], and constrained protein/molecule
design [81, 65]. Furthermore, the capacity to conduct such
inferences for arbitrary subsets of variables empowers users
to leverage the model according to their specific needs and
preferences. For instance, in protein design, scientists may
want to manually guide the generation of a protein from a
user-defined substructure under a particular path over the
relevant variables. This requires the generative model to
perform arbitrary marginal inferences.

Likelihood infer. time/memory

Sequential discrete generative models
GFlowNet-TB - MLE/EB
≫

We introduce marginalization models (M A Ms),
a new family of generative models for highdimensional discrete data. They offer scalable and
flexible generative modeling by explicitly modeling all induced marginal distributions. Marginalization models enable fast approximation of arbitrary marginal probabilities with a single forward
pass of the neural network, which overcomes a
major limitation of arbitrary marginal inference
models, such as any-order autoregressive models. M A Ms also address the scalability bottleneck
encountered in training any-order generative models for high-dimensional problems under the context of energy-based training, where the goal is
to match the learned distribution to a given desired probability (specified by an unnormalized
log-probability function such as energy or reward
function). We propose scalable methods for learning the marginals, grounded in the concept of
“marginalization self-consistency”. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model on
a variety of discrete data distributions, including
images, text, physical systems, and molecules,
for maximum likelihood and energy-based training settings. M A Ms achieve orders of magnitude speedup in evaluating the marginal probabilities on both settings. For energy-based training
tasks, M A Ms enable any-order generative modeling of high-dimensional problems beyond the
scale of previous methods. Code is available at
github.com/PrincetonLIPS/MaM.

(D)

AR Flow - MLE/EB
ARM - MLE ARM - EB

(1)

MaM - MLE/EB
(1)

Any-order
Fixed/Learned-order
Arbitrary marginal inference
(D)

Training NN forward pass (per sample)

𝒪

Figure 1. Scalability of sequential discrete generative models. The
y-axis unit is # of NN forward passes required.

Towards this end, neural autoregressive models (ARMs) [3,
38] have shown great performance in conditional/marginal
inference based on the idea of modeling a high-dimensional
joint distribution as a factorization of univariate conditionals
using the chain rule of probability. Many efforts have been
made to scale up ARMs and enable any-order generative
modeling under the setting of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) [38, 78, 24], and great progress has been made
in applications such as masked language modeling [85] and
image inpainting [24]. However, marginal likelihood evaluation on a sequence of D variables is limited by O(D)
neural network passes with the most widely-used modern
neural network architectures (e.g., Transformers [80] and
U-Nets [62]). This scaling makes it difficult to evaluate

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have enabled remarkable progress
across diverse fields, including image generation, audio synthesis, natural language modeling, and scientific discovery.
1
Princeton University.
<sulinl@princeton.edu>.

Correspondence to:

Sulin Liu

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

