Learning from Streaming Data when Users Choose

Jinyan Su 1 Sarah Dean 1

Abstract

Moreover, due to the data-driven nature of digital platforms, interesting dynamics emerge among users and service providers: on the one hand, users choose amongst
providers based on the quality of their services; on the other
hand, providers use the user data to improve and update
their services, affecting future user choices (Ginart et al.,
2021; Kwon et al., 2022; Dean et al., 2024; Jagadeesan et al.,
2023a). For example, in personalized music streaming platform, a user chooses amongst different music streaming
platforms based on how well they meet the user’s needs.
Data from the user’s interaction with the platform (such as
the music user searches for, saves, or skips) can be used to
update its recommendation model in order to better predict
users’ listening habits and create personalized playlists. The
newly updated model affects how well the platform will
meet a new user’s needs, impacting the future user choice.

In digital markets comprised of many competing services, each user chooses between multiple
service providers according to their preferences,
and the chosen service makes use of the user data
to incrementally improve its model. The service
providers’ models influence which service the
user will choose at the next time step, and the
user’s choice, in return, influences the model update, leading to a feedback loop. In this paper, we
formalize the above dynamics and develop a simple and efficient decentralized algorithm to locally
minimize the overall user loss. Theoretically, we
show that our algorithm asymptotically converges
to stationary points of of the overall loss almost
surely. We also experimentally demonstrate the
utility of our algorithm with real world data.

In this paper, we study the dynamics of such interactions
between users who choose and services which update their
models. Our focus is on streaming data, meaning that data
points arrive sequentially, uncoordinated services, meaning that data is not shared, and imperfectly rational users,
who do not always select the best performing service. In
particular, we study a range of imperfect user behaviors
to account for the fact that while users prefer better performing services, they might make mistakes or have limited
information. The degree of imperfection is characterized by
the parameter ζ: with probability ζ, users choose amongst
service providers uniformly at random, while with probability 1 − ζ, they choose the best performing model (i.e.
the one with the lowest loss). This setting is challenging
due to the fact that services have only limited information:
they observe only the data points of users who choose them.
Indeed, each service must contend with sampled data from
a high non-stationary distribution. Despite these challenges,
we propose a simple decentralized algorithm, Multi-learner
Streaming Gradient Descent (MSGD), and show that it converges to fixed points with desirable properties.

1. Introduction
Online services, ranging from social media and music
streaming to chatbots and search engines, collect user data
in real time to make small adjustments to the models they
use to serve and personalize content. Such digital platforms
must contend with the demand for instant action, handle
continuous data streams, and update their models in an incremental manner. For example, music streaming services
continuously process new feedback from user interaction
data to refine and enhance their personalized playlist and
recommendation models (Prey, 2016; Eriksson et al., 2019;
Anderson, 2013; Morris, 2015; Webster, 2023). Search
engines analyze user queries and click through rates to personalize future search suggestions (Yoganarasimhan, 2020;
Bi et al., 2021; Ustinovskiy & Serdyukov, 2013). Chatbots
learn from user interactions to provide more accurate and
context-aware responses over time (Clarizia et al., 2019;
Shumanov & Johnson, 2021; Ma et al., 2021).

Our analysis rests on the observation that user subpopulations are naturally induced by the selection between
models. Of course, these sub-populations are highly nonstationary and evolve in feedback with model updates. Prior
work shows that the coupled evolution of users and models
gives rise to nonlinear dynamics with multiple equilibria.
Ginart et al. (2021) and Dean et al. (2024) empirically and

1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Jinyan Su <js3673@cornell.edu>, Sarah Dean
<sdean@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

