Adaptively Perturbed Mirror Descent for Learning in Games

Kenshi Abe 1 2 Kaito Ariu 1 Mitsuki Sakamoto 1 Atsushi Iwasaki 2

Abstract

its variant, choose strategies with higher expected payoffs
more likely but do not move far away from current strategies via regularization. The dynamics is known to converge
to an equilibrium in an average sense, which is referred to
as average-iterate convergence. In other words, the averaged strategy profile over iterations converges to an equilibrium. Nevertheless, research has shown that the actual
trajectory of the updated strategy profiles fails to converge
even in two-player zero-sum games and a specific class
within monotone games (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018; Bailey
& Piliouras, 2018). On the contrary, optimistic learning
algorithms, incorporating recency bias, have shown success.
The updated strategy profile itself converges to a Nash equilibrium (Daskalakis et al., 2018; Daskalakis & Panageas,
2019; Mertikopoulos et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2021), termed
last-iterate convergence.

This paper proposes a payoff perturbation technique for the Mirror Descent (MD) algorithm in
games where the gradient of the payoff functions
is monotone in the strategy profile space, potentially containing additive noise. The optimistic
family of learning algorithms, exemplified by optimistic MD, successfully achieves last-iterate
convergence in scenarios devoid of noise, leading the dynamics to a Nash equilibrium. A recent re-emerging trend underscores the promise
of the perturbation approach, where payoff functions are perturbed based on the distance from
an anchoring, or slingshot, strategy. In response,
we propose Adaptively Perturbed MD (APMD),
which adjusts the magnitude of the perturbation
by repeatedly updating the slingshot strategy at a
predefined interval. This innovation empowers us
to find a Nash equilibrium of the underlying game
with guaranteed rates. Empirical demonstrations
affirm that our algorithm exhibits significantly accelerated convergence.

However, the optimistic approach faces challenges with
feedback contaminated by some noise. Typically, each agent
updates his or her strategy according to the perfect gradient
feedback of the payoff function at each iteration, denoted
as full feedback. In a more realistic scenario, noise might
distort this feedback. With noisy feedback, optimistic learning algorithms perform suboptimally. For instance, Abe
et al. (2023) empirically demonstrated that optimistic Multiplicative Weights Update (OMWU) fails to converge to an
equilibrium, orbiting around it.

1. Introduction
This study delves into a variant of Mirror Descent (MD) (Nemirovskij & Yudin, 1983; Beck & Teboulle, 2003) in the context of monotone games whose gradient of the payoff functions exhibits monotonicity concerning the strategy profile
space. This encompasses diverse games, including Cournot
competition (Bravo et al., 2018), λ-cocoercive games (Lin
et al., 2020), concave-convex games, and zero-sum polymatrix games (Cai & Daskalakis, 2011; Cai et al., 2016). Due
to their extensive applicability, various learning algorithms
have been developed and scrutinized to compute a Nash
equilibrium efficiently.

Alternatively, perturbation of payoffs has emerged again
as a pivotal concept for achieving last-iterate convergence,
even under noise (Abe et al., 2023). Payoff perturbation is a
classical technique, as seen in Facchinei & Pang (2003), and
introduces strongly convex penalties to the players’ payoff
functions to stabilize learning. This leads to convergence
to approximate equilibria, not only in the full feedback
setting but also in the noisy feedback setting. However,
to ensure convergence toward a Nash equilibrium of the
underlying game, the magnitude of perturbation requires
careful adjustment, which is calculated as the product of a
strongly convex penalty function and a perturbation strength
parameter. In fact, Liu et al. (2023) shrink the perturbation
strength based on the current strategy profile’s proximity
to an underlying equilibrium. Similarly, iterative Tikhonov
regularization methods (Koshal et al., 2010; Tatarenko &
Kamgarpour, 2019) adjust the magnitude of perturbation
by using a sequence of perturbation strengths that satisfy

Agents, which are prescribed to play according to MD or
1

CyberAgent, Tokyo, Japan 2 University of ElectroCommunications, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kenshi Abe
<abekenshi1224@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

