Large Scale Dataset Distillation with Domain Shift

Noel Loo 1 2 Alaa Maalouf 1 Ramin Hasani 1 2 Mathias Lechner 1 2 Alexander Amini 1 2 Daniel Rus 1

Abstract

crucial importance of compressing large datasets into more
manageable sizes, recent years have seen the introduction of
several algorithms, such as gradient or distribution matching (Zhao et al., 2021; Zhao & Bilen, 2023), kernel-induced
points (Nguyen et al., 2021b;c), feature alignment(Wang
et al., 2022), and matching training trajectories (Cazenavette
et al., 2022).

Dataset Distillation seeks to summarize a large
dataset by generating a reduced set of synthetic
samples. While there has been much success at
distilling small datasets such as CIFAR-10 on
smaller neural architectures, Dataset Distillation
methods fail to scale to larger high-resolution
datasets and architectures. In this work, we introduce Dataset Distillation with Domain Shift
(D3S), a scalable distillation algorithm, made by
reframing the dataset distillation problem as a
domain shift one. In doing so, we derive a universal bound on the distillation loss, and provide a
method for efficiently approximately optimizing
it. We achieve state-of-the-art results on TinyImageNet, ImageNet-1k, and ImageNet-21K over
a variety of recently proposed baselines, including
high cross-architecture generalization. Additionally, our ablation studies provide lessons on the
importance of validation-time hyperparameters
on distillation performance, motivating the need
for standardization.

Scaling dataset distillation to large datasets. While
dataset distillation techniques have shown impressive performance across diverse datasets and neural networks, they
fall short when it comes to scaling to large datasets. This
may stem from their significant GPU memory demands,
inability to generate an informative synthetic dataset as the
distilled set sizes increase, and difficulty in adapting to large,
complex models; see (Yu et al., 2023) for more details.
To this end, in this work, we present Dataset Distillation with
Domain Shift (D3S), a scalable distillation algorithm based
on framing the dataset distillation problem as Domain Shift
one. The problem of domain shift/adaptation deals with the
test-time distribution differing from the training distribution,
resembling the purpose of data distillation in some sense.
While domain shift is well-studied independently of Dataset
Distillation (Ben-David et al., 2010; Li et al., 2018), this
work is the first to draw connections to Dataset Distillation.
In doing so, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on
large-scale datasets such as ImageNet-1K. Specifically, we
contribute the following:

1. Introduction
Dataset Distillation (Wang et al., 2018) is the task aiming
to condense a large dataset into a smaller set of synthetic
samples. The primary objective is to ensure that models
trained with these synthetic samples can deliver competitive performance in comparison to models trained on the
complete dataset (Loo et al., 2023b; Zhao & Bilen, 2021;
Zhou et al., 2022; Maalouf et al., 2023b; Nguyen et al.,
2021c; Zhao et al., 2021). Diverging from conventional
core-sets or subset selection methods (Tukan et al., 2020;
Borsos et al., 2020), dataset distillation methodology entails
the generation of synthetic samples in a continuous space
rather than their selection from the original dataset. This
approach often leads to improved performance, particularly,
in scenarios with higher compression rates. Recognizing the

1. We formalize the problem of dataset distillation as one
of Domain Shift, leading to a universal upper bound
on the distillation loss.
2. We introduce an efficient method of approximating and
minimizing this bound, leading to the D3S algorithm.
3. We verify D3S on large scale datasets such as
ImageNet-1k, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art
by up to 17.8%. 1

2. Related Work

*

Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL 2 Liquid AI. Correspondence
to: Noel Loo <loo@mit.edu>.

Coresets (Borsos et al., 2020; Chen, 2009; Maalouf et al.,
2022a) are weighted subsets, selected from a larger train-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Code available at https://github.com/yolky/d3s_
distillation

1

