How Do Nonlinear Transformers Learn and Generalize in In-Context Learning?

Hongkang Li 1 Meng Wang 1 Songtao Lu 2 Xiaodong Cui 2 Pin-Yu Chen 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transformers now serve as the backbone architecture for
a wide range of modern, large-scale foundation models,
including prominent language models like GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), LLaMa (Touvron et al., 2023), as well as versatile visual and multimodal models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), DALL-E
(Ramesh et al., 2021), and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). One
intriguing capability exhibited by certain large language
models (LLMs) is known as “in-context learning” (ICL)
(Brown et al., 2020). Given a pre-trained model F (Ψ),
parameterized by weights Ψ, the conventional approach
fine-tunes Ψ separately for each downstream task using data
from that task. In contrast, ICL allows F (Ψ) to handle multiple unseen tasks simultaneously without any fine-tuning.
Garg et al. (2022) is the first paper to mathematically formulate ICL. Briefly speaking, to predict f (xquery ) of a query
input xquery for a new task represented by the label function f , ICL augments xquery by l example input-output pairs
(xi , f (xi ))li=1 . The resulting so-called prompt is sent to
the model F (Ψ), and, surprisingly, the model can output
a prediction close to f (xquery ). Thus, ICL is an efficient
alternative to the resource-consuming fine-tuning methods.
ICL has shown outstanding performance in multiple tasks
in practice, including question answering (Liu et al., 2022b;
Wu et al., 2023b), natural language inference (Liu et al.,
2022a; Wu et al., 2023b), text generation (Brown et al.,
2020; Lucy & Bamman, 2021), etc.

Transformer-based large language models have
displayed impressive in-context learning capabilities, where a pre-trained model can handle new
tasks without fine-tuning by simply augmenting
the query with some input-output examples from
that task. Despite the empirical success, the mechanics of how to train a Transformer to achieve
ICL and the corresponding ICL capacity is mostly
elusive due to the technical challenges of analyzing the nonconvex training problems resulting
from the nonlinear self-attention and nonlinear
activation in Transformers. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper provides the first theoretical analysis of the training dynamics of Transformers with nonlinear self-attention and nonlinear MLP, together with the ICL generalization
capability of the resulting model. Focusing on
a group of binary classification tasks, we train
Transformers using data from a subset of these
tasks and quantify the impact of various factors
on the ICL generalization performance on the remaining unseen tasks with and without data distribution shifts. We also analyze how different components in the learned Transformers contribute
to the ICL performance. Furthermore, we provide the first theoretical analysis of how model
pruning affects ICL performance and prove that
proper magnitude-based pruning can have a minimal impact on ICL while reducing inference costs.
These theoretical findings are justified through numerical experiments.

In parallel, model pruning (Han et al., 2015; Wen et al.,
2016) can reduce the inference cost by removing some
weights after training. It has been extensively evaluated
in various applications. Among various pruning techniques, such as gradient methods (Molchanov et al., 2016)
and reconstruction error minimization (Luo et al., 2017),
magnitude-based pruning (Wen et al., 2016) is the most
popular approach due to its simplicity and demonstrated
promising empirical results. A few recent works (Frantar &
Alistarh, 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023) also explore the pruning of LLMs to preserve their
ICL capacity while accelerating the inference.

1

Department of Electrical, Computer, and System Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA 2 IBM
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY,
USA. Correspondence to: Hongkang Li <lih35@rpi.edu>, Meng
Wang <wangm7@rpi.edu>, Songtao Lu <songtao@ibm.com>,
Xiaodong Cui <cuix@us.ibm.com>, Pin-Yu Chen <pinyu.chen@ibm.com>.

Despite the empirical success of ICL, one fundamental and
theoretical question is less investigated, which is:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

How can a Transformer be trained to perform ICL and
1

