This paper contains potentially offensive qualitative examples; reader discretion is advised.

PICLe: Eliciting Diverse Behaviors from Large Language Models
with Persona In-Context Learning

Hyeong Kyu Choi 1 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract

with the deployment of LLMs in various contexts, especially
when interacting with human users with diverse beliefs.

Large Language Models (LLMs) are trained on
massive text corpora, which are encoded with
diverse personality traits. This triggers an interesting goal of eliciting a desired personality trait
from the LLM, and probing its behavioral preferences. Accordingly, we formalize the persona elicitation task, aiming to customize LLM behaviors
to align with a target persona. We present Persona
In-Context Learning (PICLe), a novel persona
elicitation framework grounded in Bayesian inference. At the core, PICLe introduces a new ICL example selection criterion based on likelihood ratio,
which is designed to optimally guide the model
in eliciting a specific target persona. We demonstrate the effectiveness of PICLe through extensive comparisons against baseline methods across
three contemporary LLMs. Code is available at
https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/picle.

In light of this, we formalize and investigate the “persona
elicitation” task, which can be viewed as probing the language model’s diverse behavioral preferences. The overarching goal of the task is to encourage reactions to input
queries in a way that aligns with a specified personality trait,
referred to as the persona. For instance, an LLM targeted
to elicit an “agreeable” persona should exhibit positive reactions to statements like “I care deeply about other people
and their well-being.” More formally, for each persona ϕ,
our goal is to derive a mapping function fϕ : X → A, so
that it can return the correct action a ∈ A for an input query
regarding statement x ∈ X , where A is the action space.
To achieve effective persona elicitation, we introduce a
novel framework, Persona In-Context Learning (PICLe),
grounded in Bayesian inference. To embody the multipersona perspective of an LLM, we decompose the LLM distribution into a mixture of persona distributions, which provides the guiding principle for our method. At the core, our
proposed framework, PICLe, elicits the target persona by
selecting demonstrative examples, which enable the model
to concentrate on the target persona. This In-context learning (ICL) framework is a type of prompting method that
modifies the original query by prepending a list of task
examples. While ICL has been successful across many natural language processing tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Min et al.,
2022a; Xu et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023b), our study distinctly
revolves around selecting the optimal set of demonstrative
examples to encourage persona elicitation. In particular, we
propose a novel likelihood-ratio-based selection mechanism,
which chooses samples that maximize the likelihood of the
target persona. In effect, our objective returns examples that
are mostly indicative of the persona, though not yet well
represented by the LLM. Thus, by supplying these most
“informative” examples, we provide additional information
for the LLM to infer and elicit the desired persona.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), often trained on massive
text corpora, possess the ability to encode diverse personas
or behaviors (Wolf et al., 2023). These personas can span a
wide spectrum of personality traits, political views, moral
beliefs, etc. In particular, the persona categorization can
encompass well-studied ones such as helpfulness, honesty,
and harmlessness (Bai et al., 2022a), but can also extend to
much more diversified and nuanced ones like conscientiousness, non-racism, compassion, and so on. An intriguing
yet underexplored question arises: to what extent can we
elicit diverse personas encoded in LLMs? Answering this
question is important because it deepens our understanding
of the ethical implications and societal impacts associated
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–
Madison, United States. Correspondence to: Yixuan Li
<sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.

We comprehensively evaluate PICLe against various baselines on several modern LLMs including Llama-2 (Touvron
et al., 2023), Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), and GPT-J (Wang,
2021). On Llama-2, PICLe achieves an average success rate

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

