Counterfactual Image Editing

Yushu Pan 1 Elias Bareinboim 1

Abstract

questions regarding image generation and editing. For instance, one might ask “how would the image change had
the dog been a cat?” or “What would the image look like
had the person been smiling?”. Addressing these prototypical counterfactual questions is challenging and requires
the understanding of the causal relationships between the
features, with practical applications in various downstream
tasks, including data augmentation, fairness analysis, generalizability, and transportability (Bareinboim et al., 2015;
Schölkopf et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2020; Mao et al., 2022).

Counterfactual image editing is a challenging task
within generative AI. The current literature on the
topic focuses primarily on changing individual
features while being silent about the causal relationships between features, which are present in
the real world. In this paper, we first formalize
this task through causal language, modeling the
causal relationships between latent generative factors and images through a special type of causal
model called augmented structural causal models (ASCMs). Second, we show two fundamental
impossibility results: (1) counterfactual editing
is impossible from i.i.d. image samples and their
corresponding labels alone; (2) also, even when
the causal relationships between latent generative factors and images are available, no guarantees regarding the output of the generative model
can be provided. Third, we propose a relaxation
over this hard problem aiming to approximate
the non-identifiable target counterfactual distributions while still preserving features the users care
about and that are causally consistent with the true
generative model, which we call ctf-consistent
estimators. Finally, we develop an efficient algorithm to generate counterfactual image samples
leveraging neural causal models.

Some initial methods for counterfactual image editing tasks
typically involve searching for adversarial samples (Goyal
et al., 2019b; Wang & Vasconcelos, 2020; Dhurandhar et al.,
2018). For example, (Dhurandhar et al., 2018) proposed
a minimum-edit counterfactual method that aims to identify the minimum and most effective perturbations needed
to change the classifier’s prediction. With the ability to
generate high-quality synthetic images from a latent space
through GANs (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019),
VAEs (Child, 2021; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020), and Diffusion
Models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021), recent approaches edit images by manipulating vectors in the latent
space (Shen et al., 2020; Härkönen et al., 2020; Khorram &
Fuxin, 2022; Chai et al., 2021).
More recently, text information has also been leveraged in
image editing tasks. The image description in text is beneficial to the encoding process and guiding manipulations
in the latent space (Radford et al., 2021; Avrahami et al.,
2022; Crowson et al., 2022; Gal et al., 2022; Patashnik et al.,
2021); also the natural editing instruction text can be directly used to prompt the transition from the original to the
counterfactual images (Brooks et al., 2023). However, such
approaches focus primarily on changing a single categorical
label of a given image, and more fundamentally, do not
take the causal relationships among the underlying generative factors into account. We illustrate the challenge when
multiple features are involved in the generation task next.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual reasoning is a critical component of our
cognitive system. It is essential for solving various tasks,
including assigning credit, determining blame and responsibility, understanding why events occurred in a particular
way and articulating explanations, and generalizing across
changing conditions and environments (Pearl & Mackenzie,
2018; Bareinboim et al., 2022; Correa et al., 2021a). More
recently, there has been a growing interest in counterfactual

Example 1.1. Consider a dataset of human faces. Based
on our understanding of human anatomy and facial expressions, we know that both Gender and Age do not causally
affect each other while Age does affect Hair color. Meanwhile, the dataset collected has older males and younger
females, i.e., there exists a strong correlation between Age
and Gender. Formally, the causal relationships between

1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University,
New York, USA. Correspondence to: Yushu Pan <yushupan@cs.columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

