Continuous Treatment Effects with Surrogate Outcomes

Zhenghao Zeng 1 David Arbour 2 Avi Feller 3 Raghavendra Addanki 2 Ryan Rossi 2 Ritwik Sinha 2
Edward H. Kennedy 1

Abstract

measure, e.g., short-term health measures or an online ad’s
click-through rate, that are observed for a greater share of
the sample. These outcomes, which are typically informative about the primary outcomes themselves, are referred to
as surrogate outcomes or surrogates.

In many real-world causal inference applications,
the primary outcomes (labels) are often partially
missing, especially if they are expensive or difficult to collect. If the missingness depends on
covariates (i.e., missingness is not completely at
random), analyses based on fully observed samples alone may be biased. Incorporating surrogates, which are fully observed post-treatment
variables related to the primary outcome, can improve estimation in this case. In this paper, we
study the role of surrogates in estimating continuous treatment effects and propose a doubly robust
method to efficiently incorporate surrogates in the
analysis, which uses both labeled and unlabeled
data and does not suffer from the above selection bias problem. Importantly, we establish the
asymptotic normality of the proposed estimator
and show possible improvements on the variance
compared with methods that solely use labeled
data. Extensive simulations show our methods
enjoy appealing empirical performance.

There is a rich causal inference literature addressing missing
outcome data. Simply restricting to data with observed primary outcomes may induce strong bias (Hernán & Robins,
2010). Ignoring unlabeled data also reduces the effective
sample size for estimating the treatment effects and inflates
the variance. Chakrabortty et al. (2022) considered the missing completely at random (MCAR) setting and showed that
incorporating unlabeled data reduces variance. Zhang et al.
(2023) generalized the results to missing-at-random (MAR)
settings where the unlabeled data has a much larger size than
the labeled data. Kallus & Mao (2020) further examined the
role of surrogates in datasets with limited primary outcomes
and showed efficiency gains after including surrogates and
unlabeled data in the analysis. Singh (2022) proposed a
generalized kernel ridge regression framework, which incorporates information on surrogate outcomes in treatment
effect estimation. See also Zhang & Bradic (2022); Hou
et al. (2021); Zeng et al. (2023) for relevant discussions.
Continuous treatments appear in many applications; e.g.,
waiting time before follow-up, percent of discount, and drug
dosage. Existing estimation procedures include outcome
modeling (Newey, 1994) and treatment process modeling
(Galvao & Wang, 2015). Kennedy et al. (2017) proposed
doubly robust methods that model both the outcome and
the treatment process, and enjoy appealing robustness properties. Bonvini & Kennedy (2022) further examined highorder estimators to achieve faster rates.

1. Introduction
In many causal inference applications, the primary outcomes
are missing for a non-trivial number of observations. For
instance, in studies on long-term health effects of medical
interventions, some measurements require expensive testing
and a loss to follow-up is common (Hogan et al., 2004).
In evaluating commercial online ad effectiveness, some individuals may drop out from the panel because they use
multiple devices (Shankar et al., 2023), leading to missing
revenue measures. In many of these studies, however, there
often exist short-term outcomes that are easier and faster to

In this paper, we consider the estimation of dose-response
functions with limited primary outcome data. We propose
novel doubly robust methods using both labeled and unlabeled data, with the help of surrogates. Our approach
avoids the potential selection bias caused by restricting only
to labeled data and provably reduces the variance. Importantly, we study the theoretical properties of the estimator
proposed, and establish its asymptotic normality to facilitate statistical inference. Our work serves as a counterpart
for Kallus & Mao (2020) in continuous treatment effects

1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Adobe Research, San Jose, CA,
USA 3 Goldman School of Public Policy and Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Zhenghao Zeng <zhenghaz@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

