Robust Universal Adversarial Perturbations
Changming Xu 1 Gagandeep Singh 1 2
classify. While there is a large amount of work on generating
adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017; Carlini and Wagner, 2017;
Xiao et al., 2018a; Dong et al., 2018; Croce and Hein, 2019;
Wang et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2019; Andriushchenko et al.,
2019; Tramèr et al., 2020), these works depend upon unrealistic assumptions about the power of the attacker: the
attacker knows the DNN input in advance, generates inputspecific perturbations in real-time and exactly combines
the perturbation with the input before being processed by
the DNN. Thus, we argue that these threat models are not
realizable in many real-world applications.

Abstract
Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs) are
imperceptible, image-agnostic vectors that cause
deep neural networks (DNNs) to misclassify inputs with high probability. In practical attack
scenarios, adversarial perturbations may undergo
transformations such as changes in pixel intensity, scaling, etc. before being added to DNN
inputs. Existing methods do not create UAPs robust to these real-world transformations, thereby
limiting their applicability in practical attack scenarios. In this work, we introduce and formulate
UAPs robust against real-world transformations.
We build an iterative algorithm using probabilistic
robustness bounds and construct UAPs robust to
transformations generated by composing arbitrary
sub-differentiable transformation functions. We
perform an extensive evaluation on the popular
CIFAR-10 and ILSVRC 2012 datasets measuring
our UAPs’ robustness under a wide range common, real-world transformations such as rotation,
contrast changes, etc. We further show that by using a set of primitive transformations our method
generalizes well to unseen transformations such
as fog, JPEG compression, etc. Our results show
that our method can generate UAPs up to 23%
more robust than state-of-the-art baselines.

Practically feasible adversarial perturbations. In this
work, we consider a more practical adversary to reveal realworld vulnerabilities of state-of-the-art DNNs. We assume
that the attacker (i) does not know the DNN inputs in advance, (ii) can only transmit additive adversarial perturbations, and (iii) their transmitted perturbations are susceptible
to modification due to real-world effects. Examples of attacks in our threat model include adding stickers to the
cameras for fooling image classifiers (Li et al., 2019b) or
transmitting perturbations over the air for deceiving audio
classifiers (Li et al., 2019a). Note that our threat model is
distinct from directly generating adversarial examples (i.e.
creating physical adversarial objects (Athalye et al., 2018))
which require access to the original input. In Appendix
A, we further discuss how our threat model compares to
simultaneously transforming the input.
The first two requirements in our threat model can be
fulfilled by generating Universal Adversarial Perturbations
(UAPs) (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017). Here the attacker
can train a single adversarial perturbation that has a high
probability of being adversarial on all inputs in the training
distribution. However, as our experimental results show,
the generated UAPs need to be combined with the DNN
inputs precisely, otherwise they fail to remain adversarial.
In practice, changes to UAPs are likely due to real-world
effects. For example, a sticker applied to a camera can
undergo changes in contrast due to weather conditions or a
transmitted perturbation in audio can change due to noise in
the transmission channel. This non-robustness reduces the
efficacy of attacks created with existing methods (MoosaviDezfooli et al., 2017; Shafahi et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019b;a).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
results in many application domains such as natural language processing (Abdel-Hamid et al., 2014; Brown et al.,
2020), medicine (Esteva et al., 2017; 2019), and computer vision (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014; Szegedy et al., 2016).
Despite their performance, they can be fragile in the face
of adversarial perturbations: small imperceptible changes
added to a correctly classified input that make a DNN mis1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA 2 VMWare, California,
USA. Correspondence to: Changming Xu <cxu23@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

