On the Recoverability of Causal Relations from
Temporally Aggregated I.I.D. Data

Shunxing Fan 1 Mingming Gong 2 1 Kun Zhang 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Causal discovery methods, which aim to uncover causal
relationships from observational data, have been extensively
researched and utilized across multiple disciplines including
computer science, economics, and social sciences (Pearl,
2009; Spirtes et al., 2000). These methods can be broadly
categorized into two types based on whether they explicitly
utilize temporal information of the data. The first type is
temporal causal discovery, which is specifically designed
for analyzing time series data. Examples of this type include the Granger causality test (Granger, 1969) and its
variants. The second type is non-temporal causal discovery referring to methods that do not explicitly utilize time
index information, which is applicable to independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) data. This category encompasses various approaches such as constraint-based, scorebased, and functional causal model (FCM)-based methods
like PC (Spirtes et al., 2000), GES (Chickering, 2002), and
LiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2006).

We consider the effect of temporal aggregation
on instantaneous (non-temporal) causal discovery in general setting. This is motivated by the
observation that the true causal time lag is often
considerably shorter than the observational interval. This discrepancy leads to high aggregation,
causing time-delay causality to vanish and instantaneous dependence to manifest. Although we
expect such instantaneous dependence has consistency with the true causal relation in certain
sense to make the discovery results meaningful, it
remains unclear what type of consistency we need
and when will such consistency be satisfied. We
proposed functional consistency and conditional
independence consistency in formal way correspond functional causal model-based methods and
conditional independence-based methods respectively and provide the conditions under which
these consistencies will hold. We show theoretically and experimentally that causal discovery
results may be seriously distorted by aggregation
especially in complete nonlinear case and we also
find causal relationship still recoverable from aggregated data if we have partial linearity or appropriate prior. Our findings suggest community
should take a cautious and meticulous approach
when interpreting causal discovery results from
such data and show why and when aggregation
will distort the performance of causal discovery
methods.

Temporal causal discovery often relies on the assumption
that the causal frequency aligns with the observation frequency, but in real-world scenarios the causal frequency
is often unknown, which means that the available observations may have a lower resolution than the underlying causal
process. An instance of this is annual income, which is an
aggregate of monthly or quarterly incomes (Drost & Nijman,
1993). Moreover, it is widely believed that causal interactions occur at high frequencies in fields such as economics
(Ghysels et al., 2016) and neuroscience (Zhou et al., 2014).
Some research has been conducted to explore the effects
of temporal aggregation on time series modeling (Ghysels
et al., 2016; Marcellino, 1999; Silvestrini & Veredas, 2008;
Granger & Lee, 1999; Rajaguru & Abeysinghe, 2008; Gong
et al., 2017). These works typically consider small aggregation factor k and still treat the temporal aggregation from
causal processes as a time series 1 .

1
Department of Machine Learning, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 3 Department of Philosophy,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Correspondence to: Kun Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.

However, in many real-world scenarios, the temporal aggregation factor can be quite large (we only consider aggrega1
The ”aggregation factor k” refers to the number of data points
from the underlying causal process that are combined to form
each observed data point. It is also called the aggregation level or
aggregation period.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

