Promises and Pitfalls of Generative Masked Language Modeling:
Theoretical Framework and Practical Guidelines
Yuchen Li 1 2 Alexandre Kirchmeyer * 1 Aashay Mehta * 1 Yilong Qin * 1
Boris Dadachev * 2 Kishore Papineni * 2 Sanjiv Kumar 2 Andrej Risteski 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Autoregressive language models are the currently
dominant paradigm for text generation, but they
have some fundamental limitations that cannot
be remedied by scale—for example inherently
sequential and unidirectional generation. While
alternate classes of models have been explored,
we have limited mathematical understanding of
their fundamental power and limitations. In this
paper we focus on Generative Masked Language
Models (GMLMs), a non-autoregressive paradigm
in which we train a model to fit conditional probabilities of the data distribution via masking, which
are subsequently used as inputs to a Markov Chain
to draw samples from the model. These models
empirically strike a promising speed-quality tradeoff as each step can be typically parallelized by
decoding the entire sequence in parallel. We develop a mathematical framework for analyzing
and improving such models which sheds light
on questions of sample complexity and inference
speed and quality. Empirically, we adapt the T5
model for iteratively-refined parallel decoding,
achieving 2-3x speedup in machine translation
with minimal sacrifice in quality compared with
autoregressive models. We run careful ablation
experiments to give recommendations on key design choices, and make fine-grained observations
on the common error modes in connection with
our theory. Our mathematical analyses and empirical observations characterize both potentials and
limitations of this approach, and can be applied
to future works on improving understanding and
performance of GMLMs.
*

The current dominant approach to language modeling is
autoregressive (AR): to generate a sequence of tokens, the
language model starts by predicting the leftmost token, and
then proceeds from left to right, each step predicting the
next token based on everything on its left (Raffel et al., 2020;
Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023). AR models are
not without limitations:
1. Lack of parallelism: To generate a sequence of N
tokens, AR language models need N sequential decoding steps. Each step consists of a forward pass of the
decoder component. When N is large, N sequential
decoding steps incur high latency.
2. Quality: When predicting each token, the model cannot
access its right hand side context, and has no natural
way to revise earlier predictions on the left. This intuitive limitation was more formally explored in prior
theoretical works (Li & Risteski, 2021; Lin et al., 2021;
Bachmann & Nagarajan, 2024).
One promising alternative is based on Generative Masked
Language Models (GMLMs). They are trained to fit conditional probabilities for parts of the sequence (by applying a
mask), conditioned on the rest. To produce samples, these
conditionals are used as oracles for running Markov Chain,
e.g. a Gibbs sampler (Wang & Cho, 2019; Goyal et al.,
2022). Alternatively, we can think of these steps as an iterative refinement process, typically starting with pure noise
(i.e. all tokens are masked or randomized). One can even
fit conditional probabilities for noised versions of the input
distribution, and use them as inputs to a denoiser to get certain types of discrete diffusion models (Austin et al., 2021).
In GMLMs, typically one step of the Markov Chain is operationalized by a Transformer that generates the sequence in
parallel (i.e. parallel decoding (Ghazvininejad et al., 2019;
Gu & Kong, 2021; Savinov et al., 2022) ). Hence, if the
total number of steps is small, the latency is low. 1

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Yuchen Li <yuchenl4@cs.cmu.edu>, and
Boris Dadachev <dadachev@google.com>, and Andrej Risteski
<aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Our codes are released at https://github.com/
google-research/google-research/tree/
master/padir

