Energy-Efficient Gaussian Processes Using Low-Precision Arithmetic

Nicolas Alder 1 Ralf Herbrich 1

Abstract

previous research (Maddox et al., 2022) has investigated the
use of half-precision representations to fit large data sets,
our focus is on implementing arbitrary precisions for typical
library users that collectively contribute to power consumption. Our evaluation therefore concentrates on small-sized
datasets that make up the large amount of daily workloads
that these libraries perform. Adapting libraries to our approach can lead to significant efficiency gains and power
reduction. Our low-precision approach can be directly utilized by many processors and GPUs that have inherent abilities to use smaller floating-point representations through
SIMD or other native hardware implementations without
the need for special hardware. For CPU-based implementations, high-level libraries like scikit-learn use LAPACK and
BLAS for efficient, hardware-specific operations written in
Fortran. These implementations, optimized for processors,
support basic linear algebra and higher-level operations (e.g.,
Cholesky decomposition) and can be adapted or extended
with a similar effort as current traditional methods. GPUbased libraries benefit from various native low-precision
formats, making CUDA implementations straightforward.
FPGAs can accommodate any arbitrary format in implementations. Finally, this work encourages chip designers to
recognize that numerous applications benefit from adaptable
numerical formats. However, low-precision floating-point
representations can accumulate large round-off errors. Determining the appropriate low-precision representation is a
non-trivial task, as the algorithm implementation, the chosen
kernel, the specific data set, and the desired model performance interact with a specific numerical representation. It
is not known what precision to use for reasonable model
performance. Existing work from numerical linear algebra provides theory-guided upper error bounds of specific
arithmetic operations and even subtasks in Gaussian process regression. However, the complexity of what precision
delivers a reasonable model performance in an end-to-end
perspective for Gaussian process regression with real data
is only feasible through an empirical evaluation.

The widespread use of artificial intelligence requires finding energy-efficient paradigms for the
field. We propose to reduce the energy consumption of Gaussian process regression using lowprecision floating-point representations. We explore how low-precision representations impact
the results of Gaussian process regression and
how data set properties, implementation approach,
model performance, and energy consumption interact. Our findings show that a well-conditioned
kernel matrix allows reducing the energy consumption by up to 89.01% for 98.08% of arithmetic operations with little to no impact on model
performance. Our findings are relevant whenever
one needs to invert a symmetric full-rank matrix.

1. Introduction
To keep up with the massive increase in AI-related workload, it is essential to make improvements related to power
consumption (Debus et al., 2023). In this study, we suggest
using low-precision Gaussian process regression (GPR) as
a means of decreasing the power consumption of this AI
method. GPR is typically used for small data sets where the
prediction of uncertainty is of key importance. Enhancing
the efficiency of these routine tasks has the potential to generate significant overall power savings. We investigate the
connection between Gaussian process regression, arbitrary
low-precision utilization, and power consumption.
Gaussian process regression is a mature model and a powerful tool for regression. The model (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006) has been widely adopted, as evidenced by its reception in the academic community and its inclusion in many
libraries for industry use.
We propose low-precision Gaussian processes to reduce the
power consumption of Gaussian process regression. While

For Gaussian process regression using Cholesky decomposition, we achieved a power reduction of up to 88.94%
for 83.27% to 87.43% of all operations compared to using
double-precision floating-point representations. When using conjugate gradients, we achieved a decrease of up to
89.01% in energy consumption for 96.96% to 98.08% of

1

Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany. Correspondence to: Nicolas Alder <nicolas.alder@hpi.de>, Ralf Herbrich
<ralf.herbrich@hpi.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

