Prospector Heads: Generalized Feature Attribution for Large Models & Data

Gautam Machiraju 1 Alexander Derry 1 Arjun Desai 2 Neel Guha 3 Amir-Hossein Karimi 4 James Zou 1
Russ B. Altman 1 Christopher Ré 3 * Parag Mallick 5 *

Abstract
Feature attribution, the ability to localize regions
of the input data that are relevant for classification, is an important capability for ML models
in scientific and biomedical domains. Current
methods for feature attribution, which rely on “explaining” the predictions of end-to-end classifiers,
suffer from imprecise feature localization and are
inadequate for use with small sample sizes and
high-dimensional datasets due to computational
challenges. We introduce prospector heads, an efficient and interpretable alternative to explanationbased attribution methods that can be applied to
any encoder and any data modality. Prospector
heads generalize across modalities through experiments on sequences (text), images (pathology),
and graphs (protein structures), outperforming
baseline attribution methods by up to 26.3 points
in mean localization AUPRC. We also demonstrate how prospector heads enable improved interpretation and discovery of class-specific patterns in input data. Through their high performance, flexibility, and generalizability, prospectors provide a framework for improving trust and
transparency for ML models in complex domains.

1

Figure 1: Explanation-based attribution can be conceptualized as
a “wrapper function” for trained classifiers using internals, forward
or backward passes, or input perturbations. Prospector heads are
instead encoder-equippable like classifier heads and adapt token
embeddings with data- and time-efficiency. Flame icon indicates
trainable parameters.

sponsible for that datum’s class membership (e.g., pixels
or patches of an image, often represented as a heatmap).
Feature attribution is especially important for scientific and
biomedical applications. For example, for a model to assist
a pathologist in making a cancer diagnosis, it ideally should
not only accurately classify which images contain tumors,
but also precisely locate the tumors in each image (Song
et al., 2023; Niazi et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, modern ML systems can struggle to perform
feature attribution. Most existing attribution techniques attempt to provide “explanations” for trained classifiers (Figure 1) — descriptions of how model weights interact with
different input features (e.g., gradients (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), attention (Jetley et al., 2018)) or of how each
feature contributes to prediction (e.g., SHAP (Lundberg &
Lee, 2017), LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016)). Explanation-based
attribution methods are inherently (a) data-inefficient as they
require ample labeled training data to train underlying classifiers. Additionally, methods producing explanations can
themselves be (b) computationally inefficient (Ancona et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2023) and thus may not actually improve
tractability relative to annotation by domain experts, particularly for large inputs. Finally, (c) the attributed features are
often found to be inaccurate and irrelevant to target classes
(Arun et al., 2020; Zech et al., 2018; Jain & Wallace, 2019;
Zhou et al., 2021b; Bilodeau et al., 2022).

Introduction

Most ML models are optimized solely for predictive performance, but many applications also necessitate models that
provide insight into features of the data that are unique to a
particular class. This capability is known as feature attribution, which in unstructured data (e.g., text, images, graphs)
consists of identifying subsets of the input datum most re∗
Joint senior authorship 1 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University 2 Cartesia AI 3 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University 4 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo 5 Department of Radiology, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Gautam Machiraju
<gmachi@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

