Rich-Observation Reinforcement Learning with Continuous Latent Dynamics

Yuda Song 1 Lili Wu 2 Dylan J. Foster 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2

Abstract

earities, and (ii) learn continuous representations that respect
the structure of the latent dynamics, ideally in tandem with
exploration. In spite of extensive empirical investigation into
modeling and algorithm design (Laskin et al., 2020; Yarats
et al., 2021a; Hafner et al., 2023), sample-efficiency and
reliability remain major challenges (Dean et al., 2020), and
our understanding of fundamental algorithmic principles for
representation learning and exploration is still in its infancy.

Sample-efficiency and reliability remain major
bottlenecks toward wide adoption of reinforcement learning algorithms in continuous settings
with high-dimensional perceptual inputs. Toward
addressing these challenges, we introduce a
new theoretical framework, RichCLD (“RichObservation RL with Continuous Latent Dynamics”), where the agent performs control based on
high-dimensional observations, but the environment is governed by low-dimensional latent states
and Lipschitz continuous dynamics. Our main
contribution is an algorithm for RichCLD that is
provably statistically and computationally efficient. The core of our algorithm is a new representation learning objective; we show that prior representation learning schemes tailored to discrete
dynamics do not naturally extend to the continuous setting. Our objective is amenable to practical
implementation, and empirically, it compares
favorably to prior schemes in a standard evaluation protocol. We further provide several insights
into the statistical complexity of the RichCLD
framework, in particular proving that certain notions of Lipschitzness that admit sample-efficient
learning in the absence of rich observations are
insufficient in the rich-observation setting.

Toward understanding algorithmic principles and fundamental limits for reinforcement learning and control with
high-dimensional observations, a recent line of theoretical
research adopts the framework of rich-observation reinforcement learning (c.f., Du et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2020;
Mhammedi et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Mhammedi
et al., 2023b). This line of work has led to new provably
efficient algorithms, but, to date, has focused on systems
with discrete (“tabular”) or linear latent dynamics, which
is unsuitable for most real-world control applications.
The RichCLD framework. We initiate the study of
theoretically-sound algorithms for reinforcement learning
with continuous latent dynamics by introducing a new
framework, the RichCLD (“Rich-Observation RL with
Continuous Latent Dynamics”) framework. In the RichCLD
framework, the agent performs control based on highdimensional observations (e.g., images from a camera), but
the underlying state obeys Lipschitz continuous dynamics.
Lipschitz continuous dynamics have been studied extensively in the absence of rich observations (Kakade et al.,
2003; Shah & Xie, 2018; Henaff, 2019; Ni et al., 2019; Song
& Sun, 2019; Cao & Krishnamurthy, 2020; Sinclair et al.,
2023) and are versatile enough to capture applications ranging from robotic control (Tedrake, 2023) to online resource
allocation (Sinclair et al., 2023). Our framework addresses
these applications in a more realistic setting where the agent
perceives the system through high-dimensional feedback.

1. Introduction
It is becoming increasingly common to deploy algorithms
for reinforcement learning and control in systems where the
underlying (“latent”) dynamics are nonlinear, continuous,
and low-dimensional, yet the agent perceives the environment through high-dimensional (“rich”) observations such
as images from a camera (Wahlström et al., 2015; Levine
et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2021; Nair et al., 2023; Baker et al.,
2022; Brohan et al., 2022). These domains demand that
agents (i) efficiently explore in the face of complex nonlin-

The central challenge in rich-observation RL—the RichCLD
framework included—is that representation learning and
exploration must be interleaved. Agents need to learn a
good representation to guide exploration, but doing so
requires gathering data from throughout the space, and is
difficult unless the agent already knows how to explore.
Since exploration under Lipschitz dynamics in the absence
of rich observations is relatively well-understood, the main

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Yuda Song <yudas@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

