FedCal: Achieving Local and Global Calibration in Federated Learning via
Aggregated Parameterized Scaler

Hongyi Peng 1 Han Yu 1 Xiaoli Tang 1 Xiaoxiao Li 2 3

Abstract

can adversely affect the accuracy and convergence of FL
models. In response, extensive research efforts on personalized federated learning (PFL) (Tan et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2020b; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Reddi
et al., 2020) have been directed towards mitigating this issue.

Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative machine learning across distributed data owners.
However, this approach poses a significant challenge for model calibration due to data heterogeneity. While prior work focused on improving accuracy for non-iid data, calibration remains
under-explored. This study reveals existing FL
aggregation approaches lead to sub-optimal calibration, and theoretical analysis shows despite
constraining variance in clients’ label distributions, global calibration error is still asymptotically lower bounded. To address this, we propose a novel Federated Calibration (FedCal) approach, emphasizing both local and global calibration. It leverages client-specific scalers for
local calibration to effectively correct output misalignment without sacrificing prediction accuracy.
These scalers are then aggregated via weight averaging to generate a global scaler, minimizing
the global calibration error. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FedCal significantly outperforms the best-performing baseline, reducing
global calibration error by 47.66% on average.

However, an aspect that has been largely overlooked in the
current PFL literature is reliability (Lu & Kalpathy-Cramer,
2021; Plassier et al., 2023). As FL systems become increasingly embedded in high-stake decision-making processes,
the importance of reliability, especially in mission-critical
applications such as healthcare (Rieke et al., 2020; Dayan
et al., 2021; Sheller et al., 2020), finance (Long et al., 2020;
Dash et al., 2022) and autonomous driving systems (Li et al.,
2021; Du et al., 2020), cannot be overstated.
Besides prediction accuracy, the reliability of an FL model
also hinges on accurate uncertainty estimation, commonly
referred to as confidence (Ovadia et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2022;
Guo et al., 2017a). Consider a model for cancer diagnosis. It
predicts that a patient has cancer with a confidence level of
0.1. This confidence score carries significant implications.
For instance, a patient predicted with a 0.1 confidence might
receive a more cautious treatment recommendation. In a
well-calibrated model, if 10 patients are assigned a confidence of 0.1 for having cancer, approximately one of them
should genuinely be diagnosed correctly with the disease.
This process of aligning the model prediction confidence
with the actual observed frequency of an event is referred to
as model calibration (Guo et al., 2017b).

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2024) has emerged as a novel distributed machine learning
paradigm, enabling clients to train models collaboratively. A
fundamental challenge in this domain is the data distribution
heterogeneity among FL clients (i.e., the data non-IIDness
issue). Numerous studies (Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2020b; Zhao et al., 2018) have demonstrated that this issue

Model calibration is of critical importance to producing reliable machine learning models. While the topic has been
extensively examined under centralized learning settings,
it has been largely overlooked under FL settings. As highlighted in Figure 1, the prevailing FedAvg-based (McMahan
et al., 2017) FL model aggregation approaches produce
poorly calibrated models in the presence of data heterogeneity. Recognizing this gap, we delve into the unique
challenges posed by FL, and contend that existing centralized calibration techniques are not directly applicable in the
face of the distributed and data heterogeneous nature of FL.

1

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. 3 Vector Institute, Canada. Correspondence to: Han Yu <
han.yu@ntu.edu.sg>.

Model calibration in FL settings faces two major challenges:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

