Score identity Distillation: Exponentially Fast Distillation of
Pretrained Diffusion Models for One-Step Generation

Mingyuan Zhou 1 2 Huangjie Zheng 1 Zhendong Wang 1 Mingzhang Yin 3 Hai Huang 2

Abstract

Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020). These models are
appreciated for their training simplicity and stability, their
robustness against mode collapse during generation, and
their ability to produce high-resolution, diverse, and photorealistic images (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2022;
Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022; Peebles & Xie, 2023; Zheng et al., 2023c).

We introduce Score identity Distillation (SiD),
an innovative data-free method that distills the
generative capabilities of pretrained diffusion
models into a single-step generator. SiD not
only facilitates an exponentially fast reduction
in Fréchet inception distance (FID) during distillation but also approaches or even exceeds the
FID performance of the original teacher diffusion models. By reformulating forward diffusion processes as semi-implicit distributions, we
leverage three score-related identities to create
an innovative loss mechanism. This mechanism
achieves rapid FID reduction by training the generator using its own synthesized images, eliminating the need for real data or reverse-diffusionbased generation, all accomplished within significantly shortened generation time. Upon evaluation across four benchmark datasets, the SiD
algorithm demonstrates high iteration efficiency
during distillation and surpasses competing distillation approaches, whether they are one-step
or few-step, data-free, or dependent on training
data, in terms of generation quality. This achievement not only redefines the benchmarks for efficiency and effectiveness in diffusion distillation
but also in the broader field of diffusion-based
generation. The PyTorch implementation is available at https://github.com/mingyuanzhou/SiD.

However, the process of generating data with diffusion models involves iterative refinement-based reverse diffusion, necessitating multiple iterations through the same generative
network. This multi-step generation process, initially requiring hundreds or even thousands of steps, stands in contrast
to the single-step generation capabilities of previous deep
generative models such as variational auto encoders (VAEs)
(Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Karras et al., 2020), which only require forwarding the noise
through the generation network once. Diffusion models necessitate multi-step generation, making them much more
expensive at inference time. A wide variety of methods have
been introduced to reduce the number of sampling steps during reverse diffusion, but they often still require quite a
few number of function evaluations (NFE), such as 35 NFE
for CIFAR-10 32x32 and 511 NFE for ImageNet 64x64 in
EDM (Karras et al., 2022), to achieve good performance.
In this study, we aim to introduce a single-step generator designed to distill the knowledge on training data embedded in
the score-estimation network of a pretrained diffusion model.
To achieve this goal, we propose training the generator by
minimizing a model-based score-matching loss between the
scores of the diffused real data and the diffused generatorsynthesized fake data distributions at various noise levels.
However, estimating this model-based score-matching loss,
which is a form of Fisher divergence, at any given noise
level proves to be intractable. To overcome this challenge,
we offer a fresh perspective by viewing the forward diffusion processes of diffusion models through the lens of
semi-implicit distributions. We introduce three corresponding score-related identities and illustrate their integration to
formulate an innovative loss mechanism. This mechanism
involves both score estimation and Monte Carlo estimation
techniques to handle intractable expectations. Our method,

1. Introduction
Diffusion models, also known as score-based generative
models, have emerged as the leading approach for generating high-dimensional data (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 Google 3 The University of Florida.
Correspondence to: Mingyuan Zhou
<mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

