On Statistical Learning Theory for Distributional Inputs

Christian Fiedler 1 Pierre-François Massiani 1 Friedrich Solowjow 1 Sebastian Trimpe 1

Abstract

a patient from several clinical measurements (Szabó et al.,
2015), which we recall now. Let S be the set of outcomes
of some diagnosis tools (e.g., electrocardiogram characteristics, or the blood serum concentration of some substance).
Since these measurements will vary even when coming
from the same patient, it is reasonable to assume that an
individual patient with a specific health status has a certain
distribution Q on S that generates the measurements and
that can be a predictor for some health indicator y ∈ Y (e.g.,
healthy or not). However, during training, Q is not directly
accessible, but rather through independent and identically
i.i.d.
distributed (i.i.d.) samples S1 , . . . , SM ∼ Q. For example, this could correspond to daily blood measurements of a
patient during a week-long hospital stay, assuming the patient’s distribution Q has not changed during the week (e.g.,
when the health status has not changed). The training data
consists of such data from N different patients, so the data
set is not of the form D̄ = ((Qn , yn ))n=1,...,N , but rather

Kernel-based statistical learning on distributional
inputs appears in many relevant applications, from
medical diagnostics to causal inference, and poses
intriguing theoretical questions. While this learning scenario received considerable attention from
the machine learning community recently, many
gaps in the theory remain. In particular, most
works consider only the distributional regression
setting, and focus on the regularized least-squares
algorithm for this problem. In this work, we start
to fill these gaps. We prove two oracle inequalities
for kernel machines in general distributional learning scenarios, as well as a generalization result
based on algorithmic stability. Our main results
are formulated in great generality, utilizing general Hilbertian embeddings, which makes them
applicable to a wide array of approaches to distributional learning. Additionally, we specialize our
results to the cases of kernel mean embeddings
and of the recently introduced Hilbertian embeddings based on sliced Wasserstein distances, providing concrete instances of the general setup.
Our results considerably enlarge the scope of theoretically grounded distributional learning, and
provide many interesting avenues for future work.

(n)

(n) i.i.d.

D = ((S (n) , yn ))n=1,...,N , where S1 , . . . , SMn ∼ Qn .
The goal is to learn a map fD from distributions Q over
S to outcomes Y (e.g., from distributions over diagnostic
measurements to health status).
Among such learning problems, the focus of previous theoretical investigations has been on distributional regression.
In this setting, one is interested in predicting a real-valued
quantity from a distributional input, so Y = R. While
the early work (Póczos et al., 2013) relied on density estimation, starting with Szabó et al. (2015), kernel mean
embeddings (KMEs) together with kernel ridge regression
(KRR) have been used. For concreteness, let us review this
latter approach. Consider a data set D as introduced above.
A single input item S (n) is first
PMninterpreted as an empirical measure µ̂[S (n) ] = M1n m=1
δS (n) , where δs is the
m
Dirac measure with atom on s, which is then embedded into
a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) Hκ using the
KME, µ̂[S (n) ] 7→ Πκ µ̂[S (n) ]. Assuming access to a (second) kernel k on the RKHS Hκ , one then performs KRR on
the transformed data set DΠ̂κ = ((Πκ µ̂[S (n) ], yn ))n=1,...,N .
The resulting learned function fDΠ̂κ can then be used for
prediction by composing it with the KME map. A distribution Q on S would therefore lead to prediction fDΠ̂κ (Πκ Q).
This approach has been thoroughly analyzed (Szabó et al.,
2015; 2016; Fang et al., 2020). All of these investigations
rely on the seminal analysis (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007)

1. Introduction
Supervised statistical learning with distributional inputs has
received significant attention lately, cf. (Szabó et al., 2016;
Fang et al., 2020; Meunier et al., 2022), both from practical
and theoretical perspectives. The goal is to learn a relation
between inputs and outputs from data, where the inputs are
probability distributions on some measurable space. Furthermore, the inputs (probability distributions) are not directly
accessible, but the data contains only samples thereof. A
classic example is the prediction of some health indicator of
1

Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering (DSME),
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Christian Fiedler <fiedler@dsme.rwth-aachen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

