Stochastic Weakly Convex Optimization beyond Lipschitz Continuity

Wenzhi Gao 1

Qi Deng 2

Abstract

2019; Davis et al., 2018b; Deng and Gao, 2021; Davis et al.,
2019; Mai and Johansson, 2020). In particular, under the
global Lipschitz continuity assumption, Davis and Drusvyatskiy (2019) develop a model-based approach and analyze
the convergence of several stochastic algorithms under a
unified framework.

This paper considers stochastic weakly convex
optimization without the standard Lipschitz continuity assumption. Based on new robust regularization (stepsize) strategies, we show that a
wide class of stochastic algorithms, including
the stochastic
subgradient method, preserve the
√
O(1/ K) convergence rate with constant failure rate. Our analyses rest on rather weak assumptions: the Lipschitz parameter can be either
bounded by a general growth function of ∥x∥
or locally estimated through independent random samples. Numerical experiments demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of our proposed stepsize policies.

While this global Lipschitz assumption is valid for many
problems, such as piece-wise linear functions, it can be
overly restrictive. To illustrate, consider the weakly convex
function ψ(x) = |ex + e−x − 3| whose subgradient ψ ′ (x)
explodes exponentially as ∥x∥ grows (Figure 1). Hence,
treating the Lipschitz constant as any fixed constant in algorithm design can lead to highly unstable iterations and,
potentially, to the algorithm divergence.
y
1.5

1. Introduction

1

This paper studies the stochastic optimization problem
0.5

minn ψ(x) := f (x) + ω(x),

x∈R

(1)
x
−1.5

where f (x) := Eξ∼Ξ [f (x, ξ)]. Here, f (x, ξ) is a continuous function in x, with ξ being a random sample drawn
from a particular distribution Ξ. The function ω(x) is
lower-semicontinuous, and its proximal mapping is easy to
evaluate. We assume both f (x, ξ) and ω(x) are weakly
convex functions. A function g is defined as λ-weakly convex if g + λ2 ∥ · ∥2 is convex, for some λ ≥ 0. When λ
is unspecified, g is called weakly convex. Weak convexity has found many important applications, including phase
retrieval, robust PCA, reinforcement learning, and many
others (Duchi and Ruan, 2019; Charisopoulos et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2023). And recent years witnessed a surge in
interest regarding weakly convex optimization, leading to
a substantial body of work on efficient algorithms with finite time complexity guarantees (Davis and Drusvyatskiy,

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

Figure 1: Exponential growth of ψ(x) = |ex + e−x − 3|
To address this issue, a straightforward strategy is to impose an explicit convex compact set constraint, such as
{x : ∥x∥ ≤ B} to address this issue. However, this introduces extra parameter tuning and may lead to a significantly overestimated Lipschitz constant. The latter phenomenon is evident in the toy example, where the Lipschitz
constant grows exponentially with the domain set’s diameter. One research direction to deal with non-globally Lipschitz settings is shifting from standard Euclidean geometry
to Bregman divergence. Lu (2019) shows that when convex
non-Lipschitz functions exhibit “relative” Lipschitz continuity under a carefully chosen divergence kernel, mirror
descent still obtains the desired sublinear rate of convergence to optimality defined in the sense of Bregman divergence. However, there are trade-offs to consider. Compared to SGD, a mirror descent update is more expensive,
often involving a nontrivial root-finding procedure. Additionally, choosing the right kernel is a nuanced and critical
task, heavily reliant on an in-depth understanding of the

1
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering,
Stanford University 2 Antai College of Economics and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Wenzhi Gao <gwz@stanford.edu>, Qi Deng <qdeng24@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

