Physics and Lie symmetry informed Gaussian processes

David Dalton 1 Dirk Husmeier 1 Hao Gao 1

Abstract

PIML refers to a set of methods which embed physical laws
and constraints into machine learning algorithms, through
the use of inductive, learning or observational biases (Karniadakis et al., 2021). PIML approaches can alleviate some of
the problems of traditional solvers, and have been deployed
in the context of forward, inverse, design and optimisation
problems (Hao et al., 2022).

Physics-informed machine learning (PIML) has
established itself as a new scientific paradigm
which enables the seamless integration of observational data with partial differential equation
(PDE) based physics models. A powerful tool
for the analysis, reduction and solution of PDEs
is the Lie symmetry method. Nevertheless, only
recently has the integration of such symmetries
into PIML frameworks begun to be explored. The
present work adds to this growing literature by
introducing an approach for incorporating a Lie
symmetry into a physics-informed Gaussian process (GP) model. The symmetry is introduced as
a constraint on the GP; either in a soft manner via
virtual observations of an induced PDE called the
invariant surface condition, or explicitly through
the design of the kernel. Experimental results
demonstrate that the use of symmetry constraints
improves the performance of the GP for both forward and inverse problems, and that our approach
offers competitive performance with neural networks in the low-data environment.

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al.,
2019) constitute the most widely used class of PIML model,
where the idea is to represent the unknown PDE solution
as a neural network. In the original formulation, training
is performed in a multitask manner against a loss function
which includes both PDE and data fit terms, where automatic
differentiation is used to apply the PDE operator to the
neural network. The range of applications for which PINNs
have been deployed is vast (Pateras et al., 2023), while
numerous extensions of the original PINN framework have
been proposed, for example (Nguyen-Thanh et al., 2020;
Meng et al., 2020; Kharazmi et al., 2021).
PIML models for PDE and ordinary differential equation
(ODE) systems based on Gaussian processes (GPs) have
also been proposed, which leverage the closure of GPs under
linear operators (Adler, 2010). For instance, the gradient
matching technique fits a GP to (noisy) observational data,
and then estimates the unknown parameters of the differential operator by minimising the mismatch between the
ODEs and the derivative process induced by the fitted GP
(Calderhead et al., 2008; Dondelinger et al., 2013). However, this approach does not define a proper probabilistic
generative model (Barber & Wang, 2014), and performance
is critically dependent on the way in which the tradeoff
between the GP fit and ODE mismatch terms is managed
(Macdonald et al., 2015). Latent force models are a related
approach to inference in PDE systems (Alvarez et al., 2013).
This approach does define a generative model, however it
is limited to the case of linear PDEs for which the Green’s
function is available. For these reasons, in the present work
we adopt the philosophy of physics-informed GPs for linear
PDE modelling (Raissi et al., 2017). Here, the idea is to
represent the unknown solution function with a Gaussian
process (GP). This implies that the linear PDE itself also
follows a GP, allowing for joint inference to be performed
using data from both solution space and PDE space. PIGPs
have been deployed in a range of application contexts (Tar-

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) have become ubiquitous across science and engineering for describing the
dynamics of a wide variety of physical, chemical and biological processes. Simulation of PDE based models has
traditionally been the domain of numerical solvers such
as the finite difference method or finite element method
(Li et al., 2017). Such methods can have drawbacks, however, including for instance excessive computational costs
and difficulty in incorporating experimental data. For this
reason, there has been an explosion of interest in the past
half decade in an alternative paradigm for modelling PDE
systems called physics-informed machine learning (PIML).
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: David Dalton
<david.dalton@glasgow.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

