Position: A Roadmap to Pluralistic Alignment

Taylor Sorensen 1 Jared Moore 2 Jillian Fisher 1 3 Mitchell Gordon 1 4 Niloofar Mireshghallah 1
Christopher Michael Rytting 1 Andre Ye 1 Liwei Jiang 1 5 Ximing Lu 1 Nouha Dziri 5 Tim Althoff 1
Yejin Choi 1 5

Abstract

Is it ok for governments to moderate
public social media content?

With increased power and prevalence of AI systems, it is ever more critical that AI systems are
designed to serve all, i.e., people with diverse
values and perspectives. However, aligning models to serve pluralistic human values remains an
open research question. In this piece, we propose a roadmap to pluralistic alignment, specifically using large language models as a test bed.
We identify and formalize three possible ways
to define and operationalize pluralism in AI systems: 1) Overton pluralistic models that present
a spectrum of reasonable responses; 2) Steerably
pluralistic models that can steer to reflect certain
perspectives; and 3) Distributionally pluralistic
models that are well-calibrated to a given population in distribution. We also formalize and
discuss three possible classes of pluralistic benchmarks: 1) Multi-objective benchmarks, 2) Tradeoff steerable benchmarks that incentivize models to steer to arbitrary trade-offs, and 3) Jurypluralistic benchmarks that explicitly model diverse human ratings. We use this framework to
argue that current alignment techniques may be
fundamentally limited for pluralistic AI; indeed,
we highlight empirical evidence, both from our
own experiments and from other work, that standard alignment procedures might reduce distributional pluralism in models, motivating the need
for further research on pluralistic alignment.

Pluralistic
Human Values

Overton

Security

Free speech

Factuality

Many think that it’s not okay for the government to
moderate content as it endangers free speech,
while others deem it acceptable for prevention of
terrorism. A few, on the other hand, think it’s
necessary to reduce misinformation.

Steerable
or
or
or

Distributional

It is ok for the government to moderate
content for terrorism and threats.
It is not ok to moderate any content as it
endangers free speech.
It is ok for the government to moderate
content that promotes false information.
A: Yes, for public safety threats (45%)
B: No, to protect free speech (32%)
C: Yes, to prevent misinformation (9%)

…

Figure 1. Three kinds of pluralism in models.

1. Introduction
AI alignment aims to ensure that a system works with human intentions and values (Leike et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2024;
Gabriel, 2020). However, even within a single task or
prompt, individual people vary widely in their goals, intentions, and values. As a broader set of people use and rely
upon AI systems, we need systems that can understand and
cater to a broader set of needs. In other words, we need
systems that are pluralistic, or capable of representing a
diverse set of human values and perspectives. While many
in the community have argued for this (Bai et al., 2022b;
Gordon et al., 2022; Sorensen et al., 2023), at least two
important questions remain: How, concretely, can a system
be pluralistic? and How might benchmarks be designed to
measure pluralism?

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 3 Department of
Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
4
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 5 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence
to: Taylor Sorensen <tsor13@cs.washington.edu>, Yejin Choi
<yejin@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this piece, we advocate for explicit pluralistic considerations in aligning AI systems (§2). In particular, we
1

