Latent variable model for high-dimensional point process
with structured missingness

Maksim Sinelnikov 1 Manuel Haussmann 1 2 Harri Lähdesmäki 1

Abstract

biomedical datasets, such as electronic health records.
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have become a popular approach to model high-dimensional data (Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014). However, a notable limitation
of standard VAEs is their assumption that the latent variables factorize across samples, hence ignoring correlations
between observations and making the models inappropriate
for temporal and longitudinal datasets. Several recent works
(Casale et al., 2018; Fortuin et al., 2020; Ramchandran et al.,
2021) have addressed this issue by incorporating Gaussian
process (GP) priors for these latent variables, creating a
probabilistic model that is capable of modelling arbitrary
correlations between latent encodings.

Longitudinal data are important in numerous
fields, such as healthcare, sociology, and seismology, but real-world datasets present notable
challenges for practitioners because they can be
high-dimensional, contain structured missingness
patterns, and measurement time points can be governed by an unknown stochastic process. While
various solutions have been suggested, the majority of them have been designed to account for
only one of these challenges. In this work, we propose a flexible and efficient latent-variable model
that is capable of addressing all these limitations.
Our approach utilizes Gaussian processes to capture temporal correlations between samples and
their associated missingness masks as well as to
model the underlying point process. We construct
our model as a variational autoencoder together
with deep neural network parameterised encoder
and decoder models and develop a scalable amortised variational inference approach for efficient
model training. We demonstrate competitive performance using both simulated and real datasets.

The simplest form of missingness is missing completely at
random (MCAR), i.e., the missingness pattern is independent of the observed and unobserved data. While it is generally feasible to handle MCAR in most latent-variable models, more complex patterns of structured missingness (Rubin, 1976; Mitra et al., 2023) require additional modeling
capacities. Extending VAEs to be able to model various
structured missingness patterns has recently become the focus of several papers (Collier et al., 2020; Ipsen et al., 2021;
Ghalebikesabi et al., 2021). However, these methods still
lack the ability to model correlations among observations
or missingness masks, thus limiting their applicability to
temporal data.

1. Introduction

While VAEs have been applied to various biomedical
datasets, the existing methods cannot consider observation
time points as random variables. Instead, they have to treat
time as a deterministic covariate and, therefore, loose useful
information embedded in its stochastic nature. A separate
line of research has proposed methods to model unknown
temporal point processes primarily using GP-based methods (Lloyd et al., 2015; Liu & Hauskrecht, 2019). Overall,
the field lacks versatile modeling methods that would allow
modeling high-dimensional, marked point-processes that
may be corrupted by structured missingness.

Longitudinal data arise in many domains such as healthcare,
sociology and seismology (Liu, 2015). These datasets consist of repeated measurements of unique instances, e.g. patients, collected over time. However, real-world applications
pose several challenges for practitioners: measurements are
typically high-dimensional and contain non-trivial missingness patterns, and time points of the observations are not
deterministic but rather arise from an unknown stochastic
process. These challenges are characteristic of many real
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo,
Finland 2 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. Correspondence
to: Maksim Sinelnikov <maksim.sinelnikov@aalto.fi>.

Contributions. In this work, we propose a novel deep
latent variable model (DLVM), that is specifically designed
to capture structured missingness and uses temporal point
processes to model time. We construct the model by intro-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

