FlowMM: Generating Materials with Riemannian Flow Matching

Benjamin Kurt Miller 1 2 Ricky T. Q. Chen 2 Anuroop Sriram 2 Brandon M. Wood 2

Abstract
Unit Cell

Crystalline materials are a fundamental component in next-generation technologies, yet modeling their distribution presents unique computational challenges. Of the plausible arrangements
of atoms in a periodic lattice only a vanishingly
small percentage are thermodynamically stable,
which is a key indicator of the materials that can
be experimentally realized. Two fundamental
tasks in this area are to (a) predict the stable crystal structure of a known composition of elements
and (b) propose novel compositions along with
their stable structures. We present FlowMM, a
pair of generative models that achieve state-of-theart performance on both tasks while being more
efficient and more flexible than competing methods. We generalize Riemannian Flow Matching
to suit the symmetries inherent to crystals: translation, rotation, permutation, and periodic boundary
conditions. Our framework enables the freedom
to choose the flow base distributions, drastically
simplifying the problem of learning crystal structures compared with diffusion models. In addition
to standard benchmarks, we validate FlowMM’s
generated structures with quantum chemistry calculations, demonstrating that it is ∼3x more efficient, in terms of integration steps, at finding stable materials compared to previous open methods.

Coordinates

Quantize
Atom Types

Figure 1. A conceptual representation of the evolution from base
distribution to target distribution, according the vector field learned
by our model. We model a joint distribution over lattice parameters,
periodic fractional coordinates, and a binary representation of atom
type. The highlights include symmetry-aware geodesic paths and a
base distribution that directly produces plausible lattices. Note that
coordinates and atom types are merely depicted in 2d for clarity.

of atoms and elements under consideration, resulting in an
intractable number of potential structures. Of these, only a
vanishing small percentage will be experimentally realizable.
These factors have motivated computational exploration of
the materials design space, which has accelerated discovery
campaigns, but typically relies on random structure search
(Potyrailo et al., 2011) and expensive quantum mechanical
computations. Generative modeling has shown promise for
navigating large design spaces for scientific research, but
the application to materials is still relatively novel.
The specific task we will focus on in this paper is the generation of periodic crystals. We’re interested in two cases:
Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP), which we define as the
setting where the user provides the number of constituent
atoms and their elemental types, i.e. their composition, and
De Novo Generation (DNG) when the generative model
is tasked to produce the composition alongside its crystal
structure. An additional complexity is that we want to generate crystals that are stable. Naively, stability is determined
by a thermodynamic competition between a structure and
competing alternatives. The known stable structures define
a convex hull of stable compositions over the energy landscape. We use the heuristic that the stability of a material
is determined by its energetic distance to the convex hull,
denoted Ehull . Structures with Ehull ≤ 0.0 eV/atom are
considered stable. Otherwise, the structure is unfavorable
and will decompose into a stable neighboring composition.

1. Introduction
Materials discovery has played a critical role in key technological developments across history (Appl, 1982). The huge
number of plausible materials offers the potential to advance
key areas such as energy storage (Ling, 2022), carbon capture (Hu et al., 2023), and microprocessing (Choubisa et al.,
2023). With the promise comes a challenge: The search
space of crystal structures is combinatorial in the number
Research done while BKM was an intern at FAIR, Meta AI.
University of Amsterdam 2 FAIR, Meta AI. Correspondence to:
BKM <b.k.miller@uva.nl>, BW <bmwood@meta.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

