A Mechanistic Understanding of Alignment Algorithms:
A Case Study on DPO and Toxicity

Andrew Lee 1 Xiaoyan Bai 1 Itamar Pres 1 Martin Wattenberg 2 Jonathan K. Kummerfeld 3 Rada Mihalcea 1

Abstract

signals directly from pairwise preference data.

While alignment algorithms are commonly used
to tune pre-trained language models towards user
preferences, we lack explanations for the underlying mechanisms in which models become
“aligned”, thus making it difficult to explain phenomena like jailbreaks. In this work we study a
popular algorithm, direct preference optimization
(DPO), and the mechanisms by which it reduces
toxicity. Namely, we first study how toxicity is
represented and elicited in pre-trained language
models (GPT2-medium, Llama2-7b). We then apply DPO with a carefully crafted pairwise dataset
to reduce toxicity. We examine how the resulting
models avert toxic outputs, and find that capabilities learned from pre-training are not removed,
but rather bypassed. We use this insight to demonstrate a simple method to un-align the models,
reverting them back to their toxic behavior.

While such algorithms can suppress undesirable behavior,
our understanding of the mechanisms by which the undesirable behavior is suppressed is limited. Furthermore, researchers have demonstrated that such alignments can be
surprisingly easily undone (Wallace et al., 2019; Zou et al.,
2023b; Wei et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2023). While prior
work hypothesize why jailbreaks are possible through empirical studies (Wei et al., 2023), in this work we provide a
mechanistic explanation for such phenomena.
Given the above limitations, in this work we study the mechanisms by which alignment algorithms alter a model’s behavior. Researchers have demonstrated that a deep enough
understanding of a model’s inner representations allows us
to interpret how it makes decisions. For instance, various
concepts such as world models, truthfulness, or even taskspecific features have highly interpretable and controllable
representations (Li et al., 2023b; Todd et al., 2023; Nanda
et al., 2023). Motivated by such findings, we study how the
representation space of language models change by comparing it before and after an alignment algorithm is applied.
Our work relates to that of Jain et al. (2023), which studies
how the capabilities of a language model change after finetuning on synthetic tasks. Unlike this previous work, we
study the change in mechanisms from a RLHF algorithm on
a natural language setting.

1. Introduction
Large language models learn surprising capabilities from
pre-training on large datasets (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). While these capabilities lead to impressive achievements, they also include
unwanted behaviors that can be found in large-scale web
data, such as toxicity and bias (Sheng et al., 2019; Gehman
et al., 2020). As a result, researchers have developed alignment algorithms to reduce undesirable behaviors, which
often use reinforcement learning with human preferences
(RLHF). For instance, proximal policy optimization (PPO,
Schulman et al. 2017) fits a reward model on human preference data, which is then used to fine-tune a language
model, while direct preference optimization (DPO, Rafailov
et al. 2023) by-passes the reward model and derives reward

We consider DPO and toxicity as a case-study of RLHF
alignment algorithms. We first study how toxicity is represented and elicited in two pre-trained language models,
GPT2-medium and Llama2-7b (henceforth GPT2, Llama2).
We then apply DPO using a carefully crafted pairwise
dataset that consists of toxic and nontoxic samples. Lastly,
we study the mechanisms by which toxicity is no longer
generated after DPO, and how those mechanisms can fail.
Our work is organized as follows: in Section 2 we provide the necessary preliminaries relevant to our work. In
Section 3, we demonstrate how toxicity is represented and
elicited in GPT2 and Llama2. We find multiple vectors in
multilayer perceptron (MLP) blocks that promote toxicity.
We apply singular value decomposition (SVD) to these toxic
vectors to find vectors that represent specific dimensions of

1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, U.S.A. 2 Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 3 University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia. Correspondence to: Andrew Lee <ajyl@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

