Neural Tangent Kernels Motivate Cross-Covariance Graphs in Neural Networks

Shervin Khalafi 1 Saurabh Sihag 1 Alejandro Ribeiro 1

Abstract

deep learning models. Multi-layer neural networks have
been analyzed extensively in the mean-field regime (Mei
et al., 2018; 2019; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2020). The
random features model has also been studied to capture the
effects of the regime of parameterization and study phenomenon such as generalization, and “double descent” (see
e.g., (Mei & Montanari, 2022; Lin & Dobriban, 2021; Adlam & Pennington, 2020)). Among such approaches, the
NTK, first introduced in (Jacot et al., 2018), has commonly
been used to study the behavior of over-parameterized neural networks (Cao et al., 2021); (Bietti & Mairal, 2019); and
is informally defined next.

Neural tangent kernels (NTKs) provide a theoretical regime to analyze the learning and generalization behavior of over-parametrized neural
networks. For a supervised learning task, the association between the eigenvectors of the NTK
and given data (a concept referred to as alignment
in this paper) can govern the rate of convergence
of gradient descent, as well as generalization to
unseen data. Building upon this concept and leveraging the structure of NTKs for graph neural networks (GNNs), we theoretically investigate NTKs
and alignment, where our analysis reveals that optimizing the alignment translates to optimizing the
graph representation or the graph shift operator
(GSO) in a GNN. Our results further establish theoretical guarantees on the optimality of the alignment for a two-layer GNN and these guarantees
are characterized by the graph shift operator being
a function of the cross-covariance between the input and the output data. The theoretical insights
drawn from the analysis of NTKs are validated
by our experiments focused on a multi-variate
time series prediction task for a publicly available dataset. Specifically, they demonstrate that
GNN-based learning models that operate on the
cross-covariance matrix indeed outperform those
that operate on the covariance matrix estimated
from only the input data.

Neural Tangent Kernel. For any given predictor f (x; w) :
Rn×1 × Rp → R the NTK is the kernel matrix Θ defined by
the gradient of the predictor output, f (x; w), with respect
to its learnable parameters, w, as
Θ(xi ,xj ) (w) := ⟨∇w f (xi ; w), ∇w f (xj ; w)⟩ ,

(1)

where f (x; w) represents the predictor output for input data
point x ∈ Rn×1 with the learnable parameters represented
by w ∈ Rp . The typical setting to study NTKs is that of
neural networks in the asymptote of infinite width, where
the NTK is constant with respect to the learnable parameters
during training, in contrast to the finite-width scenario (Jacot et al., 2018). This constancy of the NTK is a result of
certain neural networks transitioning to linearity as their
width goes to infinity (Liu et al., 2020). NTKs have been
leveraged to gain theoretical insights on the behavior of neural networks such as over-parameterized neural networks
achieving zero training loss over a non-convex loss landscape (Du et al., 2018), the spectral bias of neural networks
(Cao et al., 2021) and the inductive biases of different neural
network architectures (Bietti & Mairal, 2019).

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep learning frameworks for
numerous inference tasks is well established (LeCun et al.,
2015). Motivated by the practical implications of the gaps
between the empirical observations and theoretical foundations of deep learning, many recent works have explored
various approaches to rigorously understand the theory of

In particular, the eigenspectrum of the NTK kernel has been
linked with the convergence rate of gradient descent for an
over-parameterized deep learning model (Liu et al., 2022;
Arora et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022a). For instance, gradient descent can achieve faster convergence for a supervised
learning problem if the vector of output labels, y, aligns
well with the dominant eigenvectors of the NTK matrix Θ
(Arora et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022a). For the regression
problem pertaining to predicting y from x, our analysis in

1

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Correspondence to: Shervin
Khalafi <shervink@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

