MF-CLR: Multi-Frequency Contrastive Learning Representation for Time
Series
Jufang Duan 1 Wei Zheng 1 Yangzhou Du 1 Wenfa Wu 1 Haipeng Jiang 1 Hongsheng Qi 1

Abstract

Shankar, 2022) and health care (Qin et al., 2023; Saveliev
& van der Schaar, 2023). How to extract usable information
from time series data and use them for the downstream task
is a long run interest in the artificial intelligence community.
As what is illustrated by previous works, the performance of
AI methods depends heavily on data representations (Bengio
et al., 2013). Inspired by the success in domains like computer vision (CV) (Chen et al., 2020) and natural language
processing (NLP) (Gao et al., 2021), contrastive representation learning becomes more and more well-studied in time
series realm. Approaches evolve from the naı̈ve inspirations by experiences in CV or NLP domains (Franceschi
et al., 2019; Eldele et al., 2021) to the ones that are more
capable of depicting temporal dependencies (Woo et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2022). However, unlike NLP domains
(which have discrete signal space to build tokenized dictionaries) and CV domains (which have strong inductive
bias such as cropping invariance) where researchers pursue
a universal solution, representation learning in time series
domains are more problem-oriented with enlightenment of
domain knowledge (Mohsenvand et al., 2020; Tonekaboni
et al., 2021; Sarkar & Etemad, 2022) or expert features
(Nonnenmacher et al., 2022).

Learning a decent representation from unlabeled
time series is a challenging task, especially when
the time series data is derived from diverse channels at different sampling rates. Our motivation
stems from the financial domain, where sparsely
labeled covariates are commonly collected at different frequencies, e.g., daily stock market index,
monthly unemployment rate and quarterly net revenue of a certain listed corporation. This paper
presents Multi-Frequency Contrastive Learning
Representation (MF-CLR), aimed at learning
a good representation of multi-frequency time
series in a self-supervised paradigm by leveraging the ability of contrastive learning. MFCLR introduces a hierarchical mechanism that
spans across different frequencies along the feature dimension. Within each contrastive block,
two groups of subseries with adjacent frequencies are embedded based on our proposed crossfrequency consistency. To validate the effectiveness of MF-CLR, we conduct extensive experiments on five downstream tasks, including longterm and short-term forecasting, classification,
anomaly detection and imputation. Experimental evidence shows that MF-CLR delivers a leading performance in all the downstream tasks and
keeps consistent performance across different target dataset scales in the transfer learning scenario. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/duanjufang/MF-CLR.

The motivation of our work is derived from real-world problems in the financial realm, where the ability to learn a
decent representation from sparsely labeled data is crucial.
Aside from the historical observations and covariates, many
publicly available data can be collected to compensate for
the shortage of input features. These include macroeconomic indicators, financial reports, and stock market trading
information. Normally, the aforementioned data covers a
much longer horizon 1 than the historical observations do.
Under this circumstance, a self-supervised representation
learning model can be trained on the unlabeled part of these
fetched external data, and then the learned knowledge representation can be applied to the specific downstream task.
However, different sources of external data may be sampled at different frequencies (we use the term frequency
to refer to the sampling rate in the rest of this paper), e.g.,
the GDP that is revealed monthly while the net income of
a listed company that is revealed quarterly. Addressing

1. Introduction
Time series data plays an increasingly significant role in
various industries, e.g., finance (Houssein et al., 2022; Zhao
et al., 2023), supply chain (Punia et al., 2020; Punia &
1
Lenovo Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jufang
Duan <duanjf2@lenovo.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

For example, 13 datasets of fiscal data dating back before
2000 can be found in https://fiscaldata.treasury.gov/datasets/

1

