Position: On the Societal Impact of Open Foundation Models

Sayash Kapoor * 1 Rishi Bommasani * 2
Kevin Klyman Shayne Longpre 3 Ashwin Ramaswami 4 Peter Cihon 5 Aspen Hopkins 3
Kevin Bankston 6 4 Stella Biderman 7 Miranda Bogen 6 Rumman Chowdhury 8 Alex Engler 9
Peter Henderson 1 Yacine Jernite 10 Seth Lazar 11 Stefano Maffulli 12 Alondra Nelson 13 Joelle Pineau 14
Aviya Skowron 7 Dawn Song 15 Victor Storchan 16 Daniel Zhang 2
Daniel E. Ho 2 Percy Liang 2 Arvind Narayanan 1
2

Abstract

outlining what research is needed to empirically
validate their theoretical benefits and risks.

Foundation models are powerful technologies:
how they are released publicly directly shapes
their societal impact. In this position paper, we
focus on open foundation models, defined here as
those with broadly available model weights (e.g.
Llama 3, Stable Diffusion XL). We identify five
distinctive properties of open foundation models
(e.g. greater customizability, poor monitoring)
that mediate their benefits and risks. Open foundation models present significant benefits, with
some caveats, that span innovation, competition,
the distribution of decision-making power, and
transparency. To understand their risks of misuse,
we design a risk assessment framework for analyzing their marginal risk. Across several misuse
vectors (e.g. cyberattacks, bioweapons), we find
that current research is insufficient to effectively
characterize the marginal risk of open foundation
models relative to pre-existing technologies. The
framework helps explain why the marginal risk is
low in some cases, clarifies disagreements about
misuse risks by revealing that past work has focused on different subsets of the framework with
different assumptions, and articulates a way forward for more constructive debate. Overall, our
work supports a more grounded assessment of
the societal impact of open foundation models by

1. Introduction
Foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) are the centerpiece of the modern AI ecosystem, catalyzing a frenetic pace
of technological development, deployment, and adoption
that brings with it controversy, scrutiny, and public attention. Open foundation models1 like BERT, CLIP, Whisper,
BLOOM, Pythia, Llama 2, Falcon, Stable Diffusion, Mistral,
OLMo, Aya, Gemma, and Phi-3 play an important role in
this ecosystem. These models allow greater customization
and deeper inspection of how they operate, giving developers greater choice in selecting foundation models. However,
they may also increase risk, especially given broader adoption, which has prompted pushback, especially around risks
relating to biosecurity, cybersecurity, and disinformation.
How to release foundation models is a central debate today,
often described as open vs. closed.
Simultaneously, policymakers are confronting how to govern open foundation models. In the United States, the recent
Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence mandates that the
Department of Commerce prepare a report for the President on the benefits and risks of open foundation models
(Executive Office of the President, 2023). In the European
Union, open foundation models are partially exempt from
obligations under the recently-negotiated AI Act. And consideration of widely available model weights is a stated
priority of the UK’s AI Safety Institute (UK AISI, 2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 Princeton University 2 Stanford University 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Georgetown University 5 GitHub 6 Center for Democracy and Technology 7 Eleuther
AI 8 Humane Intelligence 9 Brookings Institution 10 Hugging
Face 11 Australian National University 12 Open Source Initiative 13 Institute for Advanced Study 14 Meta 15 University of California, Berkeley 16 Mozilla AI. Correspondence to: Sayash
Kapoor <sayashk@princeton.edu>, Rishi Bommasani <nlprishi@stanford.edu>.

Given disagreement within the AI community and uncertainty on appropriate AI policy (§2), in this paper, we
clarify the benefits and risks of open foundation models.
1
We define open foundation models as foundation models with
widely available model weights (see Executive Office of the President, 2023; National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 2024).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

