Prompt-guided Precise Audio Editing with Diffusion Models

Manjie Xu 1 2 Chenxing Li 2 Duzhen Zhang 2 Dan Su 2 Wei Liang 1 Dong Yu 3

Abstract
Audio editing involves the arbitrary manipulation
of audio content through precise control. Although text-guided diffusion models have made
significant advancements in text-to-audio generation, they still face challenges in finding a
flexible and precise way to modify target events
within an audio track. We present a novel approach, referred to as Prompt-guided Precise Audio Editing (PPAE), which serves as a general
module for diffusion models and enables precise
audio editing. The editing is based on the input textual prompt only and is entirely trainingfree. We exploit the cross-attention maps of diffusion models to facilitate accurate local editing
and employ a hierarchical local-global pipeline
to ensure a smoother editing process. Experimental results highlight the effectiveness of our
method in various editing tasks.

(a) Source Audio: A dog barking

(b) Precise Editing: Replace dog barking to gun shooting

(c) Traditional Editing: Replace dog barking to gun shooting

Figure 1: Precise audio editing. Such editing requires
modifying the target events while preserving the unrelated
events and keeping the overall structure unchanged.

As illustrated in fig. 1, precise editing (fig. 1b) replaces
”dog barking” with ”gun shooting” in the original place.
In contrast, traditional editing often overemphasizes the
replacement of the content itself, leveraging regeneration
steps to ensure the emergence of gun shooting, while often
changing the overall structure of the original audio (fig. 1c).

1. Introduction
Recent progress in image synthesis (Ramesh et al., 2021;
Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022) has inspired
the application of text-guided diffusion models in text-toaudio (TTA) generation, known for their realism and diversity (Huang et al., 2023b; Ghosal et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023a;b; Huang et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2023a). Thanks
to large-scale training data and prompt-enhanced methods,
these diffusion models have demonstrated great potential
in modeling long continuous signal data, and have successfully learned to produce sounds based on given text.

The key to precise editing lies in the ability to accurately
differentiate between targeted sections for editing and unrelated parts, ensuring that manipulations are strictly confined to the intended areas. Image editing methods often
achieve this by providing spatial localization masks, which
can be time-consuming and labor-intensive. Furthermore,
such methods cannot be easily generalized to audio editing, as target events mixed in an audio piece are often difficult to identify and separate manually. More recently, researchers mainly utilize pre-trained TTA generation models
or concentrate on end-to-end training with human-provided
instructions (Wang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Huang
et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2023c), while these methods
do not guarantee precision in the process of regeneration.
They can also be resource-intensive during the end-to-end
training process, as they require a large number of editing
demonstration pairs as training data.

However, these generative models still face challenges in
editing tasks, particularly in precise editing. Precise audio
editing involves modifying the target events within an audio track while preserving the unrelated part unchanged.
Work done while Manjie Xu and Duzhen Zhang were interns at Tencent. 1 Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Tencent
AI Lab Beijing 3 Tencent AI Lab Seattle. Correspondence to:
Chenxing Li <lichenxing007@gmail.com>, Wei Liang <liangwei@bit.edu.cn>, Dong Yu <dongyu@ieee.org>.

In this work, we propose Prompt-guided Precise Audio
Editing (PPAE), a training-free approach for precise audio editing. Building on the success of image editing techniques that rely on attention map manipulation (Hertz et al.,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

