BAGEL: Bootstrapping Agents by Guiding Exploration with Language

Shikhar Murty⋆ 1 Christopher D. Manning 1 Peter Shaw 2 Mandar Joshi 2 Kenton Lee 2

Abstract

1. Exploration Stage
Instruction

Following natural language instructions by executing actions in digital environments (e.g. webbrowsers and REST APIs) is a challenging task
for language model (LM) agents. Unfortunately,
LM agents often fail to generalize to new environments without human demonstrations. This work
presents BAGEL, a method for bootstrapping
LM agents without human supervision. BAGEL
converts a seed set of randomly explored trajectories or synthetic instructions, into demonstrations,
via round-trips between two noisy LM components: an LM labeler which converts a trajectory
into a synthetic instruction, and a zero-shot LM
agent which maps the synthetic instruction into
a refined trajectory. By performing these roundtrips iteratively, BAGEL quickly converts the initial distribution of trajectories towards those that
are well-described by natural language. We use
BAGEL demonstrations to adapt a zero shot LM
agent at test time via in-context learning over retrieved demonstrations, and find improvements of
over 2-13% absolute on ToolQA and MiniWob++,
with up to 13× reduction in execution failures.

Trajectory

…

Go to a
Month in
October

Environment

LM-agent

LM-labeler
Instruction

BAGEL

Trajectory

…

Change
Month to
August

…

…

2. Instruction-following Stage

Instruction
Trajectory

Select Sept 25th and submit.

Environment

LM-agent

…

Figure 1. (Top) Given a seed set of explored trajectories, BAGEL
constructs synthetic demonstrations via an iterative round-trip
procedure between two LM components: a zero-shot LM agent that
generates trajectories and an LM labeler that generates instructions
for these trajectories. (Bottom) Given an instruction at test time,
we retrieve synthetic demonstrations with similar instructions, to
use as in-context exemplars to adapt the base agent.

One common way to provide such knowledge to LM agents
is via expert demonstrations that provide information about
mapping instructions to action sequences, recovering from
errors, and reasoning traces (Yao et al., 2022; Sun et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2023; Sodhi et al., 2023). Of course, collecting human demonstrations for every new environment is
laborious and requires knowing possible user instructions
a priori. Moreover, as agents scale to complex tasks with
hundreds of actions, human supervision will become increasingly infeasible to obtain. Instead of relying on human
demonstrations for training LM agents, could we instead
use exploration and environment feedback to automatically
collect a large number of synthetic demonstrations?

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have shown
strong performance on a broad range of language understanding tasks, making them powerful tools for controlling
policies in digital environments such as web browsers (Yao
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023). Such grounded language
understanding tasks are fundamentally challenging for LMs
in environments with ambiguous dynamics. For instance,
even inputting a date into a text box could require either simply typing or a complex interaction using a drop-down date
picker. An LM cannot know this a-priori without in-depth
knowledge about the website.
*

Work done at Google Deepmind. 1 Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University 2 Google Deepmind. Correspondence
to: Shikhar Murty <smurty@cs.stanford.edu>.

Prior work has shown the effectiveness of collecting synthetic demonstrations by retroactively labeling trajectories
from embodied agents (Sumers et al., 2023). In this scenario,
the environments dynamics are assumed to be well understood by the agent; the synthetic demonstrations only serve
to connect agent behavior with human language. However,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

