SignSGD with Federated Defense:
Harnessing Adversarial Attacks through Gradient Sign Decoding

Chanho Park 1 Namyoon Lee 2

Abstract

tion challenges involving data parallelism (Bottou, 2010;
Dean et al., 2012). Theoretically, synchronous distributed
SGD has the potential to significantly boost the training
speed of high-dimensional models in proportion to the number of workers. Nonetheless, the practical implementation
of such distributed SGD encounters hurdles, notably the substantial communication costs associated with exchanging
gradient information between a central server and individual
workers. This communication expense scales linearly with
the number of workers. For instance, the cutting-edge large
language models (Zhao et al., 2023), using a few billion
parameters, necessitate an exchange of tens of Giga bytes
of information per iteration for both each worker and the
central server. This renders it impractical for distributed
training, particularly in the environments with limited communication networks. To resolve this communication bottleneck issue, it becomes imperative to devise communicationefficient distributed learning algorithms that can mitigate
communication costs while upholding high learning performance.

Distributed learning is an effective approach to accelerate model training by using parallel computing power of multiple workers. However, substantial communication delays arise between workers and a parameter server due to the massive
costs associated with communicating gradients.
SignSGD with majority voting (signSGD-MV)
is a simple yet effective optimizer that reduces
communication costs through sign quantization,
but its convergence rate significantly decreases
when adversarial workers arbitrarily manipulate
datasets or local gradient updates. In this paper,
we consider a distributed learning problem where
the workforce comprises a mixture of honest and
adversarial workers. In this setting, we show that
the convergence rate can remain invariant as long
as the number of honest workers providing trustworthy local updates to the parameter server exceeds the number of adversarial workers. The
key idea behind this counter-intuitive result is our
novel aggregation method, signSGD with federated defense (signSGD-FD). Unlike traditional
approaches, signSGD-FD utilizes the gradient information sent by adversarial workers with appropriate weights, obtained through gradient sign
decoding. Experimental results demonstrate that
signSGD-FD achieves superior convergence rates
compared to traditional algorithms in various adversarial attack scenarios.

In recent years, various techniques have been proposed
with the goal of effectively reducing the communication
load in distributed learning (Kairouz et al., 2021). The
primary approach to cost reduction involves edge devices
performing lossy compression on locally computed gradient, which are then transmitted to the parameter server. One
simple yet effective algorithm is signSGD with majority voting (signSGD-MV) (Bernstein et al., 2018), in which each
worker quantizes the locally computed stochastic gradient
with only sign information and sends it to the server. Then,
the server aggregates the one-bit gradient information using
the MV principle and shares the aggregated one with the
workers for performing the model update.

1. Introduction

Adversarial attacks aim to interfere with the training models
in distributed machine learning systems, introducing security vulnerabilities in their predictive outcomes (Lyu et al.,
2020; Baruch et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; Blanchard et al.,
2017; Alistarh et al., 2018). For instance, malevolent workers seek to compromise the model by introducing inaccurate
data or manipulating the model’s parameters or gradients.
SignSGD-MV has also shown to effective to optimize the
model against adversarial attack thanks to the majority vot-

Distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) stands as a
widely adopted technique for tackling large-scale optimiza1
Department of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang,
South Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University,
Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Namyoon Lee <namyoon@korea.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

