Stochastic positional embeddings improve masked image modeling

Amir Bar 1 2 3 Florian Bordes 3 Assaf Shocher 2 Mahmoud Assran 3 Pascal Vincent 3 Nicolas Ballas 3
Trevor Darrell 2 Amir Globerson 1 4 Yann LeCun 3 5

Abstract
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) is a promising self-supervised learning approach that enables learning from unlabeled images. Despite
its recent success, learning good representations
through MIM remains challenging because it requires predicting the right semantic content in
accurate locations. For example, given an incomplete picture of a dog, we can guess that there is
a tail, but we cannot determine its exact location.
In this work, we propose to incorporate location
uncertainty into MIM by using stochastic positional embeddings (StoP). Specifically, we condition the model on stochastic masked token positions drawn from a Gaussian distribution. StoP
reduces overfitting to location features and guides
the model toward learning features that are more
robust to location uncertainties. Quantitatively,
StoP improves downstream MIM performance on
a variety of downstream tasks, including +1.7%
on ImageNet linear probing using ViT-B, and
+2.5% for ViT-H using 1% of the data.1

Figure 1: Given a partial image of a dog, can you precisely determine the location of its tail? Existing Masked Image Modeling
(MIM) models like MAE (He et al., 2021) and I-JEPA (Assran
et al., 2023) predict tokens deterministically and do not model
location uncertainties (a), we propose to predict the target (masked
tokens) in stochastic positions (StoP) which prevents overfitting to
locations features. StoP leads to improved MIM performance on
downstream tasks, including linear probing on ImageNet (b).

tions, namely, it does not require heavy use of hand-crafted
augmentations (Xiao et al.; He et al., 2021), mini-batch
statistics, or a uniform cluster prior (Assran et al., 2022).
Despite the recent success of MIM, we argue that learning
good representations using MIM remains challenging due to
location uncertainties because it requires predicting the right
semantic content in accurate locations. For example, given
an incomplete picture of a dog (see Figure 1a), we might
guess there’s a tail, but we can’t be sure exactly where it is,
as it could realistically be in several different places. Without explicitly modeling this location uncertainty, existing
MIM models like MAE and I-JEPA might overfit on semantic content in arbitrary locations (e.g, the tail location).

1. Introduction
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) enables learning from unlabeled images by reconstructing masked parts of the image
given the rest of the image as context. In recently years, new
MIM methods have emerged (Xie et al., 2021; Bao et al.,
2021; He et al., 2021; Assran et al., 2023). Masked AutoEncoders (MAE) (He et al., 2021) are trained to minimize
a reconstruction error in pixel space, and I-JEPA (Assran
et al., 2023) reconstructs image features. MIM is appealing compared to invariance-based self-supervised learning
methods like DINO (Caron et al., 2021) and iBOT (Zhou
et al., 2021) as MIM do not suffer from the same limita-

In this work, we propose to address location uncertainty
in MIM by turning existing MIM models into stochastic
ones. Instead of training the model to make predictions in
exact locations, we use Stochastic Positional embeddings
(StoP) to introduce noise to the masked token’s positions,
implicitly forcing the model to make stochastic predictions.
StoP guides the model towards learning features that are
more resilient to location uncertainties, such as the fact that
a tail exists in a general area rather than a specific point,
which improves downstream performance (Figure 1b).

1
Tel Aviv University 2 UC Berkeley 3 Meta AI (FAIR) 4 Now
also at Google Research 5 New York University. Correspondence
to: Amir Bar <amir.bar@cs.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
See https://github.com/amirbar/StoP for code.

Specifically, we model the position of every masked token
1

