Augmenting Decision with Hypothesis in Reinforcement Learning

Nguyen Minh Quang 1 Hady W. Lauw 1
Weak-model-based learning

Abstract

Interaction records

Value-based reinforcement learning is the current State-Of-The-Art due to high sampling efficiency. However, our theoretical and empirical studies show evidence that it suffers from
low exploitation in early training period and bias
sensitiveness. To address these issues, we propose to augment the decision-making process
with hypothesis, a weak form of environment
description. Our approach relies on prompting
the learning agent with accurate hypotheses, and
designing a ready-to-adapt policy through incremental learning. We propose the ALH algorithm,
showing detailed analyses on a typical learning
scheme and a diverse set of Mujoco benchmarks.
Our algorithm produces a significant improvement over value-based learning algorithms and
other strong baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/nbtpj/ALH.

Critic
Replay buffer 𝓓𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏

Augmentor 𝑴
Environment
description 𝒉

Motivation
Actor

State records

Adaptive rollout

ALH solutions

State

Actor

Augmentor𝑴
Reward

𝒉

Environment
Action

: network

Figure 1. We introduce to augment learners with hypothesis representation, and propose two key hypothesis-based solutions: weakmodel-based learning and employing adaptation in rollout.

1. Introduction

Among RL approaches, value-based RL shows higher sampling efficiency in comparison with policy-based optimization (e.g., Schulman et al. (2017)), and lower computational
complexity than model-based RL (e.g. Janner et al. (2019)).
Value-based RL refers to RL algorithms which mainly rely
on future advantage estimation to optimize the policy. A
typical value-based learning can be defined by the combination of two optimization processes in Q-learning, whose Q
value is the motivation for a action given a certain state:

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a branch of artificial intelligence that studies how agents can learn to make optimal decisions in complex and dynamic environments,
based on their own actions and environment return signal (Sutton & Barto, 2018). In this study, we consider
RL in a deterministic Markov Decision Process (MDP)
defined by (S, A, T , R, γ) where S is the state space, A
is the action space, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor.
The environment is characterized by 2 attributions: transition function T : S × A → S; and reward function
R : S × A → R. The output of reinforcement learning
is a policy πP: S → A, which maximizes RL objective
∞
J(π) := E[ t=0 γ t rt |at = π(st )], where E denotes the
expectation.

θ∗ = arg min Es,a,s′ ,r,d ||Qθ (s, a) − Qtarget (s, a)||2 (1)
θ

ω ∗ = arg max Es Qθ (s, πω (s))
ω

(2)

where Qtarget (s, a) = R(s, a) + γ(1 − d) maxa′ Q(s′ , a′ )
is the Bellman optimal Q value, s, a, s′ , r, d are respectively
state, action, next state, immediate reward, is-s-terminal
values in replay buffer; ||.||2 is L2 norm. The target of
the training process includes: attaining high-quality value
estimators, then exploiting these estimators by a policy. Currently, this approach achieves State-Of-The-Art (SOTA)
results on a large diverse task set, with algorithms such as
DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018).

1
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, 80 Stamford Road, Singapore 178902. Correspondence to: Nguyen Minh Quang
<mq.nguyen.2023@phdcs.smu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

