EMC2 : Efficient MCMC Negative Sampling for Contrastive Learning with
Global Convergence

Chung-Yiu Yau 1 Hoi-To Wai 1 Parameswaran Raman 2 Soumajyoti Sarkar 2 Mingyi Hong 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Contrastive representation learning has been instrumental
in self-supervised learning for large-scale pre-training of
foundation models (Radford et al., 2021; Cherti et al., 2023)
as well as in the fine-tuning stage on downstream tasks
(Xiong et al., 2020; Lindgren et al., 2021). It helps encode
real-world data into low-dimensional feature vectors that
abstract the important attributes about the data, and generalize well outside of the training distribution. More recently,
contrastive learning with multi-modal data has helped embed different data modalities into the same feature space
(Li et al., 2023), such as the studies with visual-language
models (Radford et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022; Cherti
et al., 2023) and document understanding (Xu et al., 2020;
Lee et al., 2023).

A key challenge in contrastive learning is to generate negative samples from a large sample set
to contrast with positive samples, for learning
better encoding of the data. These negative samples often follow a softmax distribution which
are dynamically updated during the training process. However, sampling from this distribution
is non-trivial due to the high computational costs
in computing the partition function. In this paper,
we propose an Efficient Markov Chain Monte
Carlo negative sampling method for Contrastive
learning (EMC2 ). We follow the global contrastive learning loss as introduced in (Yuan et al.,
2022), and propose EMC2 which utilizes an adaptive Metropolis-Hastings subroutine to generate
hardness-aware negative samples in an online
fashion during the optimization.
We prove that
√
EMC2 finds an O(1/ T )-stationary point of the
global contrastive loss in T iterations. Compared
to prior works, EMC2 is the first algorithm that exhibits global convergence (to stationarity) regardless of the choice of batch size while exhibiting
low computation and memory cost. Numerical
experiments validate that EMC2 is effective with
small batch training and achieves comparable or
better performance than baseline algorithms. We
report the results for pre-training image encoders
on STL-10 and Imagenet-100.

Contrastive learning uses pairwise comparison of representations in the training objective, with the goal of learning
representations of data where positive pairs are drawn closer
while negative pairs move apart in the representation space.
It is well known that generating a large dataset of pairwise
samples such as image-text pairs of the same semantics costs
much lower than manual labeling, e.g., the WebImageText
dataset used for training CLIP originates from Wikipedia
articles (Radford et al., 2021). While there have been many
studies about training objectives for contrastive learning,
optimizing the contrastive loss efficiently remains an openproblem as current optimization methods critically rely on
a large batch size to maintain the quality of the negative
sample distribution.
Formally, we aim to train models ϕ : X → Rd and ψ : Y →
Rd that are parameterized by θ ∈ Rp . These models encode
data from the input space X , Y of potentially two modalities
into a vector space. Given DX ⊆ X , DY ⊆ Y, we define a
distribution of positive pairs Dpos such that supp(Dpos ) ⊆
DX × DY and a negative set Dneg (x) ⊆ DY for every data
point x ∈ DX . We denote the dataset constructed in this
manner by the tuple (Dpos , Dneg (·)).

1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR of
China. The work of C.-Y. Yau was done while interning at Amazon
Web Services. 2 Amazon Web Services, USA. 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, USA.
M. Hong holds concurrent appointments as an Amazon Scholar
and as a faculty at University of Minnesota. This paper describes
his work performed at Amazon. Correspondence to: Chung-Yiu
Yau <cyyau@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.

With the dataset (Dpos , Dneg (·)), let β > 0 be the inverse
temperature, this paper aims to minimize the following
global contrastive loss proposed in (Lindgren et al., 2021;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

