LASER: Linear Compression in Wireless Distributed Optimization

Ashok Vardhan Makkuva * 1 Marco Bondaschi * 1 Thijs Vogels 1 Martin Jaggi 1 Hyeji Kim 2 Michael Gastpar 1

Abstract

of communication-efficient distributed algorithms is thus a
must for reaping the full benefits of distributed optimization
(Xu et al., 2020).

Data-parallel SGD is the de facto algorithm for
distributed optimization, especially for large scale
machine learning. Despite its merits, communication bottleneck is one of its persistent issues.
Most compression schemes to alleviate this either
assume noiseless communication links, or fail
to achieve good performance on practical tasks.
In this paper, we close this gap and introduce
LASER: LineAr CompreSsion in WirEless
DistRibuted Optimization. LASER capitalizes
on the inherent low-rank structure of gradients and
transmits them efficiently over the noisy channels.
Whilst enjoying theoretical guarantees similar to
those of the classical SGD, LASER shows consistent gains over baselines on a variety of practical
benchmarks.
In particular, it outperforms
the state-of-the-art compression schemes on
challenging computer vision and GPT language
modeling tasks. On the latter, we obtain 50-64%
improvement in perplexity over our baselines
for noisy channels. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Bond1995/LASER.

Existing approaches to reduce the communication cost can
be broadly classified into two themes: (i) compressing the
gradients before transmission; or (ii) utilizing the communication link for native ‘over-the-air’ aggregation (averaging)
across workers. Along (i), a number of gradient compression schemes have been designed such as quantization (Bernstein et al., 2018; Vargaftik et al., 2022), sparsification (Aji
& Heafield, 2017; Isik et al., 2022), hybrid methods (Jiang
et al., 2018; Basu et al., 2019), and low-rank compression
(Wang et al., 2018; Vogels et al., 2019). These methods
show gains over the full-precision SGD in various settings
(Xu et al. (2020) is a detailed survey). Notwithstanding the
merits, their key shortcoming is that they assume a noiseless
communication link between the clients and the server. In
settings such as federated learning with differential privacy
or wireless communication, these links are noisy. Making them noiseless requires error-correcting codes which
exacerbates the latency, as the server needs to wait till it
receives the gradient from each worker before aggregating
(Guo et al., 2020).
Under theme (ii), communication cost is reduced by harnessing the physical layer aspects of (noisy) communication.
In particular, the superposition nature of wireless channels
is exploited to perform over-the-air averaging of gradients
across workers, which reduces the latency, see e.g. (Shi
et al., 2020) and the references therein. Notable works include A-DSGD (Amiri & Gündüz, 2020b), analog-gradientaggregation (Guo et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2019), channel
aware quantization (Chang & Tandon, 2020), etc. However, to the best of our knowledge, the majority of these
approaches are restricted to synthetic datasets and shallow
neural networks (often single layer) and do not scale well
to the practical neural network models (which we verify in
Sec. 4). This leads to a natural question:

1. Introduction
Distributed optimization is one of the most widely used
frameworks for training large scale deep learning models
(Bottou et al., 2018; Dean et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2020).
In particular, data-parallel SGD is the workhorse algorithm
for this task. Underpinning this approach is the communication of large gradient vectors between the workers and
the central server which performs their aggregation. While
these methods harness the inherent parallelism to reduce the
overall training time, their communication cost is a major
bottleneck that limits scalability to large models. Design
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UT Austin, Austin,
TX, USA. Correspondence to: Ashok Vardhan Makkuva
<ashok.makkuva@epfl.ch>.

Can we design efficient and practical gradient compression
schemes for noisy communication channels?
In this work, we precisely address this and propose LASER,
a principled gradient compression scheme for distributed
training over wireless noisy channels. Specifically, we make
the following contributions:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

