On the Maximal Local Disparity of Fairness-Aware Classifiers

Jinqiu Jin 1 Haoxuan Li 2 Fuli Feng 1

Abstract

learning algorithms (Wan et al., 2023; Han et al., 2024).

Fairness has become a crucial aspect in the development of trustworthy machine learning algorithms. Current fairness metrics to measure
the violation of demographic parity have the following drawbacks: (i) the average difference of
model predictions on two groups cannot reflect
their distribution disparity, and (ii) the overall calculation along all possible predictions conceals
the extreme local disparity at or around certain
predictions. In this work, we propose a novel
fairness metric called Maximal Cumulative ratio
Disparity along varying Predictions’ neighborhood (MCDP), for measuring the maximal local
disparity of the fairness-aware classifiers. To accurately and efficiently calculate the MCDP, we
develop a provably exact and an approximate calculation algorithm that greatly reduces the computational complexity with low estimation error.
We further propose a bi-level optimization algorithm using a differentiable approximation of the
MCDP for improving the algorithmic fairness.
Extensive experiments on both tabular and image
datasets validate that our fair training algorithm
can achieve superior fairness-accuracy trade-offs.

Existing group fairness notions require algorithms to treat
different groups equally, and the degree of fairness violation is usually measured via the dissimilarity of model
predictions. For example, Demographic Parity (DP) requires model predictions to be independent of sensitive attributes (Dwork et al., 2012; Kamishima et al., 2012; Jiang
et al., 2020). To measure the violation of DP, most of existing works adopt ∆DP metric, which calculates the difference in average predictions between the two demographic
groups (Zemel et al., 2013; Chuang & Mroueh, 2021; Li
et al., 2023b). However, since having the same values in
average predictions between the two groups cannot ensure
that the distributions are also the same, we argue that the
widely used ∆DP may fail to detect the violation of demographic parity. Figure 1a illustrates a toy example where the
red and green curves represent the Cumulative Distribution
Function (CDF) for the male and female groups, respectively. Despite the small ∆DP, it is clear that the prediction
distribution is not independent of gender as a sensitive attribute, with males more likely to be assigned extremely
small and large predictive probabilities, while females are
more concentrated in the middle-sized probabilities. To
show the limitation of ∆DP, we further calculate the Area
Between CDF Curves (ABCC) to measure the total variation between CDFs (Han et al., 2023a), which demonstrates
significantly greater differences between groups.

1. Introduction

Moreover, as most of the existing metrics measure the overall disparity along all possible predictions, they fail to capture the local disparity at or around certain predictions. As
a matter of fact, different metric values do not imply the relative magnitude of extreme local disparities. For example,
although both ∆DP and ABCC values of predictions in
Figure 1b is better than those in Figure 1c, its CDF disparity
along predictions is less uniform, resulting in much more
serious maximal disparity (0.2399 > 0.1362). Generally,
a pre-defined threshold is used to make a binary decision
based on model predictions, where varying thresholds lead
to changing proportions of positive decisions of different
groups (Chen & Wu, 2020). If the decision threshold takes
the value where the maximal CDF disparity is achieved, the
group unfairness would be seriously exacerbated (e.g., the
difference of group positive proportion in Figure 1b will be
up to nearly 24%). Therefore, it’s important to capture and

Nowadays, machine learning algorithms have been widelyused in high-stake applications such as loan management
(Mukerjee et al., 2002), job-hiring (Faliagka et al., 2012),
and recidivism prediction (Berk et al., 2021). Nonetheless,
these algorithms are prone to exhibit discrimination against
particular groups, leading to unfair decision-making results
(Tolan et al., 2019; Raghavan et al., 2020; Mehrabi et al.,
2021). To address this issue, growing attentions have been
paid to developing comprehensive fairness criterions (Jacobs & Wallach, 2021; Han et al., 2023a) and effective fair
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Peking University. Correspondence to: Haoxuan Li <hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

