Multi-Sender Persuasion: A Computational Perspective

Safwan Hossain * 1 Tonghan Wang * 1 Tao Lin * 1 Yiling Chen 1 David C. Parkes 1 Haifeng Xu 2

Abstract

sender’s goal is to maximize their utility by designing a
signaling policy that nudges the receiver toward decisions
preferred by the sender. This information design problem
has found widespread applicability in a myriad of domains
including recommendation systems (Mansour et al., 2015;
2016), auctions and advertising (Bro Miltersen & Sheffet,
2012; Emek et al., 2014; Badanidiyuru et al., 2018), social
networks (Candogan & Drakopoulos, 2020; Acemoglu et al.,
2021), and reinforcement learning (Castiglioni et al., 2020;
Wu et al., 2022).

We consider multiple senders with informational
advantage signaling to convince a single selfinterested actor to take certain actions. Generalizing the seminal Bayesian Persuasion framework, such settings are ubiquitous in computational economics, multi-agent learning, and machine learning with multiple objectives. The core
solution concept here is the Nash equilibrium of
senders’ signaling policies. Theoretically, we
prove that finding an equilibrium in general is
PPAD-Hard; in fact, even computing a sender’s
best response is NP-Hard. Given these intrinsic
difficulties, we turn to finding local Nash equilibria. We propose a novel differentiable neural
network to approximate this game’s non-linear
and discontinuous utilities. Complementing this
with the extra-gradient algorithm, we discover local equilibria that Pareto dominates full-revelation
equilibria and those found by existing neural networks. Broadly, our theoretical and empirical
contributions are of interest to a large class of
economic problems.

The standard BP model is however significantly constrained
by a strong assumption: the presence of only one sender. In
the applications mentioned above and indeed more broadly
in settings like multi-agent learning (Balduzzi et al., 2018)
and machine learning with multiple objectives (Pfau &
Vinyals, 2016; Jaderberg et al., 2017), it is natural to have
multiple parties who wish to influence the receiver toward
their respective, possibly conflicting goals. As a demonstrative example, consider two ride-sharing firms, Uber and
Lyft, and a dual-registered driver. While the driver is unaware of real-time demand patterns, both firms have access
to and can strategically signal this to the driver and influence them toward certain pick-ups. The platforms’ goals
however are not aligned, with each wishing to direct the
driver to their respective optimal pick-ups. The driver is
also self-interested and may prefer pick-ups that are on
the way home. Our work aims to study this tension induced by multiple informed parties attempting to influence
a self-interested receiver’s decision-making, within the BP
paradigm. Crucially, while the sender-receiver relation still
outlines a sequential game, the interaction among the multiple senders in our setting forms a simultaneous game, with
the resulting Nash Equilibrium (NE) being of core interest.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Persuasion (BP) (Kamenica & Gentzkow, 2011)
has emerged as a seminal concept in economics and decision theory. At its heart, it is a principal-agent problem that
models an informed sender strategically revealing some information to affect the decisions of a self-interested receiver.
Both parties are assumed to be Bayesian and have distinct
utilities that depend on some realized state of nature, and the
action taken by the receiver. The sender privately observes
the state and can commit to selectively disclosing this information through a randomized signaling policy. The receiver
updates their posterior belief based on the realized signal
and best responds with an optimal action for this belief. The

While this setup has been modeled in economic literature
Gentzkow & Kamenica (2017b); Ravindran & Cui (2022),
the multi-sender persuasion problem has not been formally
studied from a computational perspective and presents distinct challenges. In standard single-sender BP, the optimal
signaling policy for the sender can be computed efficiently
by a linear program (Dughmi & Xu, 2016), which no longer
holds in the multi-sender case where we need to compute
a sender’s best-responding signaling policy given others’
policies. We give a non-convex optimization program for
the best response problem (Proposition 2) and through an

*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard University 2 University of
Chicago. Correspondence to: Safwan Hossain, Tonghan Wang,
Tao Lin <{shossain, twang1, tlin}@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

