More Benefits of Being Distributional:
Second-Order Bounds for Reinforcement Learning

Kaiwen Wang 1 Owen Oertell 1 Alekh Agarwal 2 Nathan Kallus 1 Wen Sun 1

Abstract

as the negative log-likelihood or the pinball loss (Dabney
et al., 2018a). This paradigm is aptly called Distributional
RL (DistRL) and has since been empirically validated in
numerous real-world tasks (Bellemare et al., 2020; Bodnar
et al., 2020; Fawzi et al., 2022; Dabney et al., 2018b), as
well as in benchmarks for both online (Yang et al., 2019)
and offline RL (Ma et al., 2021). However, there is a lack of
understanding for why DistRL often attains stronger performance and sample efficiency (Lyle et al., 2019).

In this paper, we prove that Distributional Reinforcement Learning (DistRL), which learns
the return distribution, can obtain second-order
bounds in both online and offline RL in general
settings with function approximation. Secondorder bounds are instance-dependent bounds that
scale with the variance of return, which we prove
are tighter than the previously known small-loss
bounds of distributional RL. To the best of our
knowledge, our results are the first second-order
bounds for low-rank MDPs and for offline RL.
When specializing to contextual bandits (one-step
RL problem), we show that a distributional learning based optimism algorithm achieves a secondorder worst-case regret bound, and a second-order
gap dependent bound, simultaneously. We also
empirically demonstrate the benefit of DistRL in
contextual bandits on real-world datasets. We
highlight that our analysis with DistRL is relatively simple, follows the general framework of
optimism in the face of uncertainty and does not
require weighted regression. Our results suggest
that DistRL is a promising framework for obtaining second-order bounds in general RL settings,
thus further reinforcing the benefits of DistRL.

This raises a natural theoretical question: when and why
is DistRL better than standard RL? Wang et al. (2023b) recently proved that DistRL based on maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) results in small-loss bounds, which are
instance-dependent bounds that scale with the minimum possible expected cumulative cost V ⋆ for the task at hand. If the
optimal policy makes few blunders on average, i.e., V ⋆ ≈ 0,
then small-loss bounds converge at the fast O(1/N
√ ) rate,
while standard RL bounds converge at a O(1/ N ) rate
which is worst-case in nature.
In this paper, we refine the analyses of Wang et al. (2023b)
and prove that DistRL actually attains tighter second-order
bounds in both online and offline settings. Instead of scaling
with V ⋆ as in small-loss bounds, our second-order bounds
scale with the variance of the policy’s cumulative cost. In offline RL, it is the optimal policy’s variance, whilst in online
RL, it is the variance of policies played by the algorithm. In
both cases, our second-order result is strictly tighter than
the previously known small-loss bounds (a.k.a. first-order
bounds), i.e., second-order implies first-order bounds. In
particular, our second-order bounds yield fast O(1/N ) rates
in near-deterministic tasks where V ⋆ may still be far from
zero. Our theory applies at the same generality as Wang
et al. (2023b). Moreover, in contextual bandits (one-step
RL), we prove a novel first and second-order gap-dependent
bound that incorporates V ⋆ and variance into the gap definition. Finally, in contextual bandits, we empirically show
that our distributionally optimistic algorithm is efficiently
implementable with neural networks via width computation
(Feng et al., 2021) and outperforms the same optimistic
algorithm with squared loss (Foster et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
The aim of reinforcement learning (RL) is to learn a policy that minimizes the expected cumulative cost along its
trajectory. Typically, squared loss is used in standard RL
algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018) for
learning the value function, the expected cost-to-go from
a given state. As an alternative to squared loss, Bellemare
et al. (2017) proposed to learn the whole conditional distribution of cost-to-go with distributional loss functions such
1
Cornell University 2 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Kaiwen Wang <https://kaiwenw.github.io>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

