ReLU to the Rescue: Improve Your On-Policy Actor-Critic with Positive
Advantages

Andrew Jesson 1 Chris Lu 2 Gunshi Gupta 1 Nicolas Beltran-Velez 3 Angelos Filos 1 Jakob N. Foerster 2
Yarin Gal 1

Abstract

2015; Silver et al., 2017; Arulkumaran et al., 2019), and
human-computer interaction (Ziegler et al., 2019). DRL
algorithms achieve state-of-the-art performance on many
challenging benchmarks (Young & Tian, 2019; Lange, 2022;
Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al., 2016). However, their
use in real-world applications depends on their capacity to
execute tasks while making policy updates in the face of
finite observations of a changing world. On-policy algorithms, such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) or Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic
(A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016), update differentiable policies
based on recent interactions with the environment. This
recency bias and the capacity to actively sample informative
observations make on-policy approaches compelling candidates for applications in dynamic real-world environments.

This paper proposes a step toward approximate
Bayesian inference in on-policy actor-critic deep
reinforcement learning. It is implemented through
three changes to the Asynchronous Advantage
Actor-Critic (A3C) algorithm: (1) applying a
ReLU function to advantage estimates, (2) spectral normalization of actor-critic weights, and (3)
incorporating dropout as a Bayesian approximation. We prove under standard assumptions that
restricting policy updates to positive advantages
optimizes for value by maximizing a lower bound
on the value function plus an additive term. We
show that the additive term is bounded proportional to the Lipschitz constant of the value function, which offers theoretical grounding for spectral normalization of critic weights. Finally, our
application of dropout corresponds to approximate Bayesian inference over both the actor and
critic parameters, which enables adaptive stateaware exploration around the modes of the actor
via Thompson sampling. We demonstrate significant improvements for median and interquartile
mean metrics over A3C, PPO, SAC, and TD3 on
the MuJoCo continuous control benchmark and
improvement over PPO in the challenging ProcGen generalization benchmark.

Exploration is a component of active sampling. Onpolicy actor-critic methods typically incorporate exploration
through entropy regularization or by learning a homogeneous variance parameter for continuous action spaces
(Schulman et al., 2015a; Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al.,
2017). While effective, these exploration methods are
state-agnostic, promoting exploration equally regardless
of the novelty or familiarity of a given state. Alternatively,
the paradigm of maximum entropy reinforcement learning
(Ziebart et al., 2008; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Levine, 2018)
promotes state-aware exploration through the inclusion of
an actor entropy term in the optimization objective. However, this term is not adaptive in that it promotes higher
actor entropy (more exploration) regardless of the number
of state visits, and thus may be agnostic to the knowledge
already gained about the system.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) finds approximate
solutions to complex sequential decision-making problems
in domains such as robotics (Ibarz et al., 2021), autonomous
driving (Kiran et al., 2021), strategy games (Mnih et al.,

This work incorporates adaptive state-aware exploration into
the on-policy actor-critic framework to improve the performance and efficiency of on-policy actor-critic algorithms.
Approximate Bayesian inference over actor weights would
satisfy this goal, but its implementation is not straightforward due to the policy-gradient objective for optimizing
the actor, as we will show. Thus, we ask, “What is the
minimal step we can take toward approximate Bayesian
inference?” and answer with VSOP (standing for Variational [b]ayes, Spectral-normalized, On-Policy reinforce-

1

OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 FLAIR, Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY. Correspondence to:
Andrew Jesson <andrew.jesson@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

