Position: Data Authenticity, Consent, & Provenance for AI are all broken:
what will it take to fix them?
Shayne Longpre 1 Robert Mahari 1 Naana Obeng-Marnu 1 2 William Brannon 1 2 Tobin South 1 Katy Gero 3
Sandy Pentland 1 Jad Kabbara 1 2

Abstract

nologies, some with over 100 million weekly users (Malik,
2023), have already begun to catalyze innovation (Brynjolfsson et al., 2018) and scientific inquiry while starting
to affect wide swaths of the economy and many everyday consumers (Bommasani et al., 2021). These models
are trained on diverse compilations of text, image, and audio data scraped from the web, synthetically generated, or
hand-curated. The resulting race to scrape, secure, and massproduce massive collections of loosely structured data has
come with consequences.

New capabilities in foundation models are owed
in large part to massive, widely-sourced, and
under-documented training data collections. Existing practices in data collection have led to challenges in tracing authenticity, verifying consent,
preserving privacy, addressing representation and
bias, respecting copyright, and overall developing ethical and trustworthy foundation models. In
response, regulation is emphasizing the need for
training data transparency to understand foundation models’ limitations. Based on a large-scale
analysis of the foundation model training data
landscape and existing solutions, we identify the
missing infrastructure to facilitate responsible
foundation model development practices. We examine the current shortcomings of common tools
for tracing data authenticity, consent, and documentation, and outline how policymakers, developers, and data creators can facilitate responsible
foundation model development by adopting universal data provenance standards.

Current practices include widely sourcing and bundling data
without tracking or vetting their original sources (Longpre
et al., 2023a), creator intentions (Chayka, 2023), copyright
and licensing status (Bandy & Vincent, 2021), or even basic
composition and properties (Dodge et al., 2021). The lack
of transparency on this metadata and public infrastructure
available to track it has led developers into ethical and legal
challenges.
Data that is used for training without significant due diligence has resulted in numerous recent, real-world problems.
For instance, the LAION-5B dataset was among the most
widely used text-to-image datasets on HuggingFace, before
being removed after thousands of Child Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM) images were reported (Internet Watch Foundation, 2023; David, 2023a). The use of certain data sources
has triggered intellectual property disputes, culminating in
lawsuits against Stability AI, Midjourney, and OpenAI (see
e.g., Tremblay v. OpenAI and The New York Time v. Microsoft Corporation). Additionally, there is evidence that
foundation models can leak personally identifiable information (PII) (Carlini et al., 2021; Nasr et al., 2023), generate
non-consensual intimate imagery (NCII), create misinformation or deepfakes (Rawte et al., 2023; Westerlund, 2019),
and proliferate biases or discrimination (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). Methods to retract, or ‘unlearn’, data from a
model after training is complete are currently of limited
reliability (Villaronga et al., 2018). Machine unlearning
methods often fail to fully remove the intended information,
or can harm other aspects of a production model, disincentivizing their use (Xu et al., 2023; Shaik et al., 2024). As
a result, early choices around training data have long-term

1. The Need for Data Provenance
In the last decade, data from across the web, such as news,
social media, and encyclopedias, has become a vital resource in general-purpose, generative AI consumer technologies1 like GPT-4, Midjourney, and Whisper. These tech1
Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 2 MIT Center for Constructive Communication, Cambridge, USA 3 Harvard University, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Shayne Longpre <slongpre@media.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
This work is scoped specifically to AI technologies often
called foundation models that are (a) generative, meaning they
can create potentially inauthentic text, images or other content,
and (b) are typically general-purpose, and therefore tend to scrape
vast, diverse distribution of web data, that are under-documented,
curated, and checked for consenting use.

1

