Single-Trajectory Distributionally Robust Reinforcement Learning

Zhipeng Liang * 1 Xiaoteng Ma * 2 Jose Blanchet 3 Jun Yang 2 Jiheng Zhang 1 4 Zhengyuan Zhou 5 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a machine learning
paradigm for studying sequential decision problems. Despite considerable progress in recent years (Silver et al.,
2016; Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2019), RL algorithms often encounter a discrepancy between training and
test environments. This discrepancy is widespread since
test environments may be too complex to be perfectly represented in training, or the test environments may inherently
shift from the training ones, especially in certain application scenarios, such as financial markets and robotic control.
Overlooking the mismatch could impede the application
of RL algorithms in real-world settings, given the known
sensitivity of the optimal policy of the Markov Decision
Process (MDP) to the model (Mannor et al., 2004; Iyengar,
2005).

To mitigate the limitation that the classical reinforcement learning (RL) framework heavily relies
on identical training and test environments, Distributionally Robust RL (DRRL) has been proposed
to enhance performance across a range of environments, possibly including unknown test environments. As a price for robustness gain, DRRL
involves optimizing over a set of distributions,
which is inherently more challenging than optimizing over a fixed distribution in the non-robust
case. Existing DRRL algorithms are either modelbased or fail to learn from a single sample trajectory. In this paper, we design a first fully modelfree DRRL algorithm, called distributionally robust Q-learning with single trajectory (DRQ). We
delicately design a multi-timescale framework to
fully utilize each incrementally arriving sample
and directly learn the optimal distributionally robust policy without modeling the environment,
thus the algorithm can be trained along a single
trajectory in a model-free fashion. Despite the
algorithm’s complexity, we provide asymptotic
convergence guarantees by generalizing classical
stochastic approximation tools. Comprehensive
experimental results demonstrate the superior robustness and sample complexity of our proposed
algorithm, compared to non-robust methods and
other robust RL algorithms.

To address this concern, Distributionally Robust RL (DRRL)
(Zhou et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Shi & Chi; Panaganti
& Kalathil, 2022; Panaganti et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022;
Yang, 2018; Abdullah et al., 2019; Neufeld & Sester, 2022)
formulates the decision problem under the assumption that
the test environment varies but remains close to the training
environment. The objective is to design algorithms optimizing the worst-case expected return over an ambiguity
set encompassing all possible test distributions. Evaluating
a DRRL policy necessitates deeper insight into the transition dynamics than evaluating a non-robust one, as it entails
searching for the worst-case performance across all distributions within the ambiguity set. Therefore, most prior
solutions are model-based, require the maintenance of an
estimator for the entire transition model and the ambiguity
set. Such requirements may render these algorithms less
practical in scenarios with large state-action spaces or where
adequate modeling of the real environment is unfeasible.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Decision Analytics, Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford
University 4 Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology 5 Stern School of Business, New York
University 6 Arena Technologies. Correspondence to: Zhengyuan
Zhou <zhengyuanzhou24@gmail.com>.

Prompted by this issue, we study a fully model-free DRRL
algorithm in this paper, which learns the optimal DR policy
without explicit environmental modeling. The algorithm’s
distinctive feature is its capacity to learn from a single sample trajectory, representing the least demanding requirement
for data collection. This feature results from our innovative
algorithmic framework, comprising incrementally updated
estimators and a delicate approximation scheme. While
most model-free non-robust RL algorithms support training

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

