Quantum Implicit Neural Representations

Jiaming Zhao 1 Wenbo Qiao 1 Peng Zhang 2 Hui Gao 2

Abstract
Implicit neural representations have emerged as
a powerful paradigm to represent signals such as
images and sounds. This approach aims to utilize neural networks to parameterize the implicit
function of the signal. However, when representing implicit functions, traditional neural networks
such as ReLU-based multilayer perceptrons face
challenges in accurately modeling high-frequency
components of signals. Recent research has begun to explore the use of Fourier Neural Networks
(FNNs) to overcome this limitation. In this paper, we propose Quantum Implicit Representation
Network (QIREN), a novel quantum generalization of FNNs. Furthermore, through theoretical
analysis, we demonstrate that QIREN possesses a
quantum advantage over classical FNNs. Lastly,
we conducted experiments in signal representation, image superresolution, and image generation
tasks to show the superior performance of QIREN
compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. Our
work not only incorporates quantum advantages
into implicit neural representations but also uncovers a promising application direction for Quantum Neural Networks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/GGorMM1/QIREN.

Figure 1. The different frequency components of a real image (top)
and the image fitted by a ReLU-based MLP (bottom).

memory efficiency and overcoming resolution limitations
(Dupont et al., 2021a). Most of early research on INRs is
built on ReLU-based multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) (Park
et al., 2019; Sitzmann et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Genova
et al., 2019). However, there exists a frequency principle
(Xu et al., 2019; Rahaman et al., 2019) that the spectrum
of ReLU-based MLPs rapidly decays with increasing frequency, which leads to the limited capability of ReLU-based
MLPs in modeling high-frequency components of signals,
as illustrated in Figure 1.
On one hand, recent studies (Mildenhall et al., 2021; Sitzmann et al., 2020; Tancik et al., 2020) have discovered that
employing Fourier Neural Networks can partially address
this issue. Specifically, by mapping the input using trigonometric functions or replacing the ReLU activation function
with trigonometric functions, the capacity of the network to
represent high-frequency components of the signal can be
significantly enhanced. However, faced with increasingly
complex fitting tasks in real-world applications, the classical
Fourier Neural Network also requires a growing number of
training parameters, which increases the demand for computing resources. It is crucial for the field of INRs and even
machine learning to explore new solutions that can reduce
these parameters and alleviate computational consumption.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INRs) are a novel research
field where traditional discrete grid-sampled signal representations (e.g., images as discrete grids of pixels) are replaced
by continuous functions. These continuous functions are
typically implicitly defined, and INRs approximate them
with deep neural networks which take low-dimensional coordinates as inputs and output numerical values, such as color,
amplitude, and density, at corresponding positions. INRs
are not coupled to spatial resolution, thus offering improved
1

On the other hand, quantum machine learning has recently
been given heavy prominence in accelerating computing
and saving parameters. Among them, Quantum Neural Networks (Farhi & Neven, 2018), also known as variational
circuits (McClean et al., 2016), or quantum circuit learning
(Mitarai et al., 2018), have demonstrated quantum advan-

School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University,
China 2 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
China. Correspondence to: Peng Zhang <pzhang@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

