Near-Optimal Regret in Linear MDPs with Aggregate Bandit Feedback

Asaf Cassel * 1 Haipeng Luo 2 3 Aviv Rosenberg * 4 Dmitry Sotnikov 3

Abstract

gregate Bandit Feedback (ABF) model in which the agent
only observes the sum of rewards at the end of an episode
as feedback, instead of each reward individually. Yet, they
all focused on tabular MDPs where the number of states is
assumed to be finite and small. Although ABF is challenging even in the tabular setting, in all practical applications
the state space is huge and RL algorithms use function approximation to approximate the value function efficiently.

In many real-world applications, it is hard to provide a reward signal in each step of a Reinforcement Learning (RL) process and more natural to
give feedback when an episode ends. To this end,
we study the recently proposed model of RL with
Aggregate Bandit Feedback (RL-ABF), where the
agent only observes the sum of rewards at the end
of an episode instead of each reward individually.
Prior work studied RL-ABF only in tabular settings, where the number of states is assumed to
be small. In this paper, we extend ABF to linear
function approximation and develop two efficient
algorithms with near-optimal regret guarantees: a
value-based optimistic algorithm built on a new
randomization technique with a Q-functions ensemble, and a policy optimization algorithm that
uses a novel hedging scheme over the ensemble.

In this paper, we tackle aggregate feedback in the presence of function approximation. Specifically, we consider
ABF in Linear MDPs (Jin et al., 2020b), developing two
efficient algorithms
√ with near-optimal regret guarantees,
i.e., Õ(poly(dH) K) regret where K is the number of
episodes, d is the dimension of the linear MDP, and H is the
horizon. Our first algorithm, called Randomized Ensemble
Least Squares Value Iteration (RE-LSVI), is an optimistic
LSVI algorithm where the optimism is achieved via a new
randomization technique. This algorithm is simple and gives
our tightest regret bound. Our second algorithm, called Randomized Ensemble Policy Optimization (REPO), is based
on policy optimization (PO) methods that have become
extremely popular in recent years (Schulman et al., 2015;
2017) and especially in training LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022).
This is the first PO algorithm for aggregate feedback, which
does not exist even in the tabular MDP setting. Theoretically, ABF is substantially more challenging under function
approximation since it can no longer be formulated as a
linear bandits problem (Efroni et al., 2021) (doing so would
lead to a regret bound that scales with the number of states).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable empirical success in recent years (Mnih et al., 2015;
Haarnoja et al., 2018; Ouyang et al., 2022), leading to increasing interest in understanding its theoretical guarantees.
The standard model for RL is the Markov Decision Process
(MDP) in which an agent interacts with an environment
over multiple steps. In every step, the agent takes an action
based on its observation of the current state and immediately
gets reward feedback before transitioning to the next state.
However, in many applications, it is either hard to provide
accurate reward or the reward naturally arrives only at the
end of an episode, e.g., in robotics (Jain et al., 2013) or
Large Language Models (LLMs; Stiennon et al. (2020)).

Our main technical contribution is the ensemble randomization technique. We use independently sampled Gaussian
noise to compute multiple Q-functions from the same data,
allowing for an optimistic estimate of the optimal value with
controlled variance. In addition, we introduce a loose truncation mechanism to keep our estimates bounded without
creating biases in the random walks induced by the added
noise. While Efroni et al. (2021) already leveraged randomization to solve ABF in the tabular setting, they use a
complex Thompson Sampling (TS) based analysis (Agrawal
& Goyal, 2013). In contrast, our novel use of the ensemble
unlocks a very simple regret analysis based on optimism. A
concurrent work (Wu & Sun, 2023) uses randomization to
solve Preference-based RL in linear MDPs, which is closely
related to ABF (Chen et al., 2022). Applying their algo-

To address this issue, several works (Efroni et al., 2021;
Cohen et al., 2021; Chatterji et al., 2021) studied the Ag*
Work partially done while at Amazon Science. 1 Blavatnik
School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University 2 University of
Southern California 3 Amazon Science 4 Google Research. Correspondence to: Asaf Cassel <acassel@mail.tau.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

