Federated Self-Explaining GNNs with Anti-shortcut Augmentations

Linan Yue

1

Qi Liu*

12

Weibo Gao

1

Ye Liu

1

Kai Zhang

1

Yichao Du

1

Li Wang

(a)

Abstract

3

Fangzhou Yao
(c)

Server

...
House

Client

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in graph classification tasks. However, ensuring the explainability of their predictions remains a challenge. To
address this, graph rationalization methods have
been introduced to generate concise subsets of the
original graph, known as rationales, which serve
to explain the predictions made by GNNs. Existing rationalizations often rely on shortcuts in data
for prediction and rationale composition. In response, de-shortcut rationalization methods have
been proposed, which commonly leverage counterfactual augmentation to enhance data diversity
for mitigating the shortcut problem. Nevertheless,
these methods have predominantly focused on
centralized datasets and have not been extensively
explored in the Federated Learning (FL) scenarios.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a Federated
Graph Rationalization (FedGR) with anti-shortcut
augmentations to achieve self-explaining GNNs,
which involves two data augmenters. These augmenters are employed to produce client-specific
shortcut conflicted samples at each client, which
contributes to mitigating the shortcut problem under the FL scenarios. Experiments on real-world
benchmarks and synthetic datasets validate the
effectiveness of FedGR under the FL scenarios.
Code is available at https://github.com/
yuelinan/Codes-of-FedGR.

...

1

Wheel

Cycle

Tree

aggregate

...

distribute

?

(b)

aggregate

distribute

Client

...

...

House

Tree

Cycle

Wheel

Figure 1. An example of the motif type prediction under the Federated Learning scenarios, where the House and Cycle are motif
labels, and Tree and Wheel are base subgraphs. (a) and (b) illustrate the distribution of training data among distinct clients, each
employing client-specific shortcuts to make predictions. For instance, Client C1 considers the co-occurrence of House with Wheel
as shortcuts, while Client Ck exhibits a greater co-occurrence of
House with Tree. These divergent shortcuts utilized by different
clients pose a challenge for the aggregated model to acquire an
appropriate representation required for accurate classification.

mance (Hu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Yehudai et al.,
2021). Despite their success, GNNs applied to graph classification tasks still face challenges regarding the explainability of their prediction results. Consequently, researchers
have actively explored methods to provide explanations for
GNNs. Among these methods, graph rationalization (Wu
et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022; Sui et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022b)
methods have garnered increasing attention. These methods aim to generate task results while identifying a concise
subset of the original graph (i.e., the subgraph), referred to
as the rationale. This rationale typically consists of significant nodes or edges that contribute to the prediction results.
By extracting and presenting this rationale, it can serve as
an explanation for the GNNs’ prediction results, achieving
self-explaining GNNs.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become ubiquitous in
graph classification tasks, demonstrating remarkable perfor1

While rationalization methods have achieved promising results, (Chang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022) highlight certain
limitations associated with these approaches. They emphasize that rationalization methods often rely on shortcuts
in the data to make predictions and construct rationales.
These shortcuts exhibit a correlation with the task results,
but lack any real causal relationship. Therefore, this correlation is commonly referred to as a spurious correlation

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of
2
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center,
3
Hefei, China. ByteDance, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Qi Liu <qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn>.
st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

