Benchmarking Deletion Metrics with the Principled Explanations

Yipei Wang 1 Xiaoqian Wang 1

Abstract

applications where understanding the decision-making process is crucial. To address this opacity, the field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has emerged and developed
rapidly, with various explanation methods introduced (Arrieta et al., 2020). Among these, attribution methods stand
out and are widely used due to their straightforwardness
and intuitive visualizations (Adebayo et al., 2018; Leavitt &
Morcos, 2020). Given an input of d features, such as pixels,
tokens, or patches, attribution methods assign an attribution
value to each feature, illustrating its “importance” to the
output. Such an approach offers a clear insight into feature
relevance and allows humans to directly comprehend it as it
aligns well with the principles of linear models.

Insertion/deletion metrics and their variants have
been extensively applied to evaluate attributionbased explanation methods. Such metrics measure the significance of features by observing
changes in model predictions as features are incrementally inserted or deleted. Given the direct connection between the attribution values and model
predictions that insertion/deletion metrics enable,
they are commonly used as the decisive metrics
for novel attribution methods. Such influential
metrics for explanation methods should be handled with great scrutiny. However, contemporary
research on insertion/deletion metrics falls short
of a comprehensive analysis. To address this, we
propose the TRAjectory importanCE (TRACE)
framework, which achieves the best score in the
insertion/deletion metric. Our contribution includes two aspects: 1) TRACE stands as the
principled explanation for explaining the influence of feature deletion on model predictions. We
demonstrate that TRACE is guaranteed to achieve
almost optimal results both theoretically and empirically. 2) Using TRACE, we benchmark insertion/deletion metrics across all possible settings
and study critical problems such as the out-ofdistribution (OOD) issue and provide practical
guidance on applying these metrics in practice.
The implementation of TRACE is available as
open source at GitHub.

While attribution methods often take similar forms, they
can originate from various methodologies and objectives.
Given the same input data and the same black-box prediction model, different attribution methods can produce vastly
different explanations. This variability presents a challenge
for both end-users and researchers in selecting the most
appropriate explanation method (Kaur et al., 2020; Krishna
et al., 2022). To address this issue, evaluation metrics for
attribution methods have been introduced to evaluate different explanations and identify the most suitable explanation
approach. These metrics generally fall into two main categories: alignment and performance. Alignment metrics,
such as the pointing game (Zhang et al., 2018), inspect
how explanations align with the prior knowledge of the
data. It has been critiqued that such metrics are actually
evaluating the plausibility to humans rather than reflecting
actual model behaviors (Jacovi & Goldberg, 2020; Wang
& Wang, 2022b). In contrast, performance metrics such as
insertion/deletion emphasize the model performance, where
input features are perturbed (deleted/inserted, etc.) progressively according to their attribution values. Then the AUCs
of the resulting curve, which contrasts model predictions
against the proportion of perturbed features, serve as the
evaluation criterion for the attribution method. For instance,
when the most relevant features are deleted first (denoted as
MoRF), a low AUC is anticipated. Conversely, when the
least relevant features are deleted First (LeRF), a high AUC
is then expected. Deletion metrics characterize important
features as those who affect the model prediction the most
when progressively deleted. The metric’s widespread use
suggests that such property is valued in the XAI community.

1. Introduction & Background
With the rapid increase in computational power, deep neural
networks have achieved remarkable success in many domains. Despite their impressive performance, DNNs are often criticized for their black-box nature, especially in critical
1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Xiaoqian
Wang <joywang@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

