DPN: Decoupling Partition and Navigation for Neural Solvers
of Min-max Vehicle Routing Problems

Zhi Zheng * 1 Shunyu Yao * 2 3 Zhenkun Wang 3 Xialiang Tong 4 Mingxuan Yuan 4 Ke Tang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The vehicle routing problem (VRP) aims to determine a set
of routes that satisfies the demand of all customers by minimizing a distance-based objective function (Toth & Vigo,
2002; 2014). As a variant of VRP, the min-max vehicle
routing problem (min-max VRP), instead of minimizing the
total length of all routes (i.e., min-sum), seeks to reduce
the length of the longest one among all the routes (i.e., minmax). Many real-world applications, such as transportation
planning (Delgado Serna & Pacheco Bonrostro, 2001), disaster management (Cheikhrouhou & Khoufi, 2021), and
robotics (Faigl et al., 2016; David & Rögnvaldsson, 2021)
are more consistent with the min-max VRP due to their
operational requirements. Although the min-max VRP is
of great significance and has attracted widespread attention,
solving it is still very challenging (Kumar & Panneerselvam,
2012). The min-max VRP emphasizes balancing the lengths
between different routes, thereby it considers not only the
order of customers within each route but also the partition
of customers (França et al., 1995). Efficient solvers should
simultaneously address both a customer partition task and
a navigation task for customers assigned to each route (i.e.,
partition and navigation tasks) (Arkin et al., 2006; Carlsson
et al., 2009; Narasimha et al., 2013; Vandermeulen et al.,
2019).

The min-max vehicle routing problem (min-max
VRP) traverses all given customers by assigning
several routes and aims to minimize the length of
the longest route. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL)-based sequential planning methods have
exhibited advantages in solving efficiency and optimality. However, these methods fail to exploit
the problem-specific properties in learning representations, resulting in less effective features
for decoding optimal routes. This paper considers
the sequential planning process of min-max VRPs
as two coupled optimization tasks: customer partition for different routes and customer navigation in each route (i.e., partition and navigation).
To effectively process min-max VRP instances,
we present a novel attention-based Partition-andNavigation encoder (P&N Encoder) that learns
distinct embeddings for partition and navigation.
Furthermore, we utilize an inherent symmetry in
decoding routes and develop an effective agentpermutation-symmetric (APS) loss function. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
Decoupling-Partition-Navigation (DPN) method
significantly surpasses existing learning-based
methods in both single-depot and multi-depot minmax VRPs. Our code is available at 1 .

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL)-based neural solvers
have been successfully applied to classical min-sum VRPs
such as the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (Bello et al.,
2017) and the capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP)
(Nazari et al., 2018). These solvers show competitive performances in efficiency and accuracy compared to traditional heuristic methods (?Gao et al., 2023a). Meanwhile,
some learning-based methods have emerged to handle some
min-max VRP variants. These methods include two-stage
methods (Kaempfer & Wolf, 2018; Hu et al., 2020; Liang
et al., 2023), learning improvement heuristics (Kim et al.,
2022a), parallel planning methods (Cao et al., 2021; Park
et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023b), and sequential planning
methods (Son et al., 2024). Two-stage methods and learning
improvement heuristics highly rely on handcrafted heuristic
algorithms (Liang et al., 2023). Parallel planning methods
employ multiple decentralized models to construct the set

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen, China 2 Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR. 3 School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 4 China Huawei Noah’s
Ark Lab, Shenzhen, China.. Correspondence to: Zhenkun Wang
<wangzhenkun90@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/CIAM-Group/
NCO_code/tree/main/single_objective/
DPN-minmaxVRP-master

1

