Log Neural Controlled Differential Equations:
The Lie Brackets Make a Difference
Benjamin Walker 1 Andrew D. McLeod 1 Tiexin Qin 2 Yichuan Cheng 2 Haoliang Li 2 Terry Lyons 1

Abstract

This paper demonstrates that, on a range of multivariate
time series benchmarks, NCDEs can outperform current
state-of-the-art approaches by utilising a tool from the study
of rough paths, the Log-ODE method. We refer to this new
approach as Log-NCDEs1 .

The vector field of a controlled differential equation (CDE) describes the relationship between a
control path and the evolution of a solution path.
Neural CDEs (NCDEs) treat time series data as
observations from a control path, parameterise a
CDE’s vector field using a neural network, and
use the solution path as a continuously evolving
hidden state. As their formulation makes them
robust to irregular sampling rates, NCDEs are a
powerful approach for modelling real-world data.
Building on neural rough differential equations
(NRDEs), we introduce Log-NCDEs, a novel, effective, and efficient method for training NCDEs.
The core component of Log-NCDEs is the LogODE method, a tool from the study of rough paths
for approximating a CDE’s solution. Log-NCDEs
are shown to outperform NCDEs, NRDEs, the linear recurrent unit, S5, and MAMBA on a range of
multivariate time series datasets with up to 50,000
observations.

1.2. Neural Controlled Differential Equations
Let {(ti , xi )}ni=0 denote a set of observations from a multivariate time series, where xi ∈ Rv−1 . Let X : [t0 , tn ] →
Rv be a continuous interpolation, such that Xti = (ti , xi ),
where subscript on time-dependent variables denotes evaluation. Let ht ∈ Ru and zt ∈ Rw be the NCDE’s hidden state
and output at time t respectively. Let ξϕ : Rv → Ru and
fθ : Ru → Ru×v be neural networks, and lψ : Ru → Rw
be a linear map, where ϕ, θ, and ψ represent the learnable
parameters. A NCDE is defined by
ht0 = ξϕ (t0 , x0 ),
Z t
ht = ht0 +
fθ (hs )dXs ,

(1)

t0

zt = lψ (ht ),
for t ∈ [t0 , tn ], where fθ (hs )dXs is matrix-vector multiplication (Kidger et al., 2020). Details on the regularity
required for existence and uniqueness of the solution to
(1) can be found in Appendix A.1. By an extension of the
Picard-Lindelöf Theorem, a sufficient condition is X being of bounded variation and fθ being Lipschitz continuous
(Lyons et al., 2007, Theorem 1.3).

1. Introduction
1.1. Multivariate Time Series Modelling
Neural controlled differential equations (NCDEs) offer a
number of advantages for modelling real-world multivariate
time series. These include being robust to irregular sampling
rates and decoupling the number of forward passes through
their neural network from the number of observations in
the time series. However, there exists a gap in performance
between NCDEs and current state-of-the-art approaches for
time series modelling, such as S5, the linear recurrent unit
(LRU), and MAMBA (Smith et al., 2023; Orvieto et al.,
2023; Gu & Dao, 2023).

NCDEs are an attractive option for modelling multivariate
time series. They are universal approximators of continuous real-valued functions on time series data (Kidger, 2022,
Theorem 3.9). Additionally, since they interact with time
series data through X, NCDEs are unaware of when the
time series was observed. This makes them robust to irregular sampling rates. Furthermore, the number of forward
passes through fθ when evaluating (1) is controlled by the
differential equation solver. This is opposed to recurrent
models, where it is controlled by the number of observations
n. By decoupling the number of forward passes through

1
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong
Kong. Correspondence to: Benjamin Walker <mlbenjamin
walker@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
https://github.com/Benjamin-Walker/
Log-Neural-CDEs

1

