Generating Chain-of-Thoughts with a Pairwise-Comparison Approach to
Searching for the Most Promising Intermediate Thought

Zhen-Yu Zhang 1 Siwei Han 2 Huaxiu Yao 2 Gang Niu 1 Masashi Sugiyama 1 3

Abstract

cently demonstrated remarkable capabilities in a variety of
real-world tasks. However, current LLMs still face limitations when dealing with complex tasks, especially those
involving multi-step reasoning, such as mathematical or reasoning problems (Rae et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022). To
deal with such implicit complexity, chain-of-thoughts (CoT)
approaches were proposed (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Yao et al., 2023). These approaches were proposed
to use an incorporation of intermediate steps of reasoning
(intermediate “thought”), enabling the LLM to reason progressively, first generating intermediate solutions for simpler
problems to incrementally improve its capacity to handle
complicated tasks. Therefore, the key challenge is to design
an effective CoT generation algorithm that guides the LLM
towards desired solutions through step-by-step reasoning.

To improve the ability of the large language
model (LLMs) to tackle complex reasoning problems, chain-of-thoughts (CoT) methods were proposed to guide LLMs to reason step-by-step, enabling problem solving from simple to complex.
State-of-the-art methods for generating such a
chain involve interactive collaboration, where the
learner generates candidate intermediate thoughts,
evaluated by the LLM, guiding the generation
of subsequent thoughts. However, a widespread
yet understudied problem is that the evaluation
from the LLM is typically noisy and unreliable,
potentially misleading the generation process in
selecting promising intermediate thoughts. In this
paper, motivated by Vapnik’s principle, we use
pairwise-comparison evaluation instead of pointwise scoring to search for promising intermediate
thoughts with the noisy feedback from the LLM.
In each round, we randomly pair intermediate
thoughts and directly prompt the LLM to select the
more promising one from each pair, allowing us to
identify the most promising thoughts through an
iterative process. To further alleviate the noise in
the comparison, we incorporate techniques from
ensemble learning and dueling bandits, proposing two variants of the algorithm. Experiments
on three real-world tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm and verify the
rationale of the pairwise comparison mechanism.

There is a fruitful line of work that considers the CoT generation problem. The pioneering work uses manual design
prompts to let the LLM generate a CoT by itself (Wei et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2022). This line of research was recently
extended by the score-based tree-of-thoughts (S-ToT) approaches (Yao et al., 2023; Long, 2023), where the CoT
generation is framed as an interactive process with the algorithm and the LLM. These approaches generate a set of candidate intermediate thoughts each round and ask the LLM
to score them and select the most promising ones. The next
thoughts are then generated based on these selected ones,
creating a tree-like data structure. A search algorithm, such
as deep-first search, is used to identify the most promising
CoT in the tree (see the detailed illustration in Figure 2).
While these methods have shown remarkable empirical success, they rely on an accurate score evaluation of each intermediate thought by the LLM. However, it is important
to notice that: LLM scores are often noisy. For example,
the LLM may give different responses to different prompts,
even though these prompts convey the same meaning (Lu
et al., 2022). The noisy nature of LLM feedback introduces
new problems in the selection of the most promising intermediate thoughts and the subsequent generation of the tree
structure. Therefore, it is crucial to make the CoT generation
algorithms robust to the noisy feedback from LLMs.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as the GPT (Brown
et al., 2020) and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023), have re1
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN 2 University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 3 Graduate School of Frontier
Sciences, The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Masashi
Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Several preliminary approaches have been proposed to mitigate such noise in the LLM feedback, including estimating
1

