VideoPrism: A Foundational Visual Encoder for Video Understanding

Long Zhao * Nitesh B. Gundavarapu * Liangzhe Yuan * Hao Zhou * Shen Yan † Jennifer J. Sun †
Luke Friedman † Rui Qian † Tobias Weyand Yue Zhao § Rachel Hornung Florian Schroff Ming-Hsuan Yang
David A. Ross Huisheng Wang Hartwig Adam Mikhail Sirotenko ‡ Ting Liu ‡ Boqing Gong ‡
Google

Abstract

motion-centric reasoning, falling behind task-specialized
models across many benchmarks (Yuan et al., 2023).

We introduce VideoPrism, a general-purpose
video encoder that tackles diverse video understanding tasks with a single frozen model. We
pretrain VideoPrism on a heterogeneous corpus
containing 36M high-quality video-caption pairs
and 582M video clips with noisy parallel text
(e.g., ASR transcripts). The pretraining approach
improves upon masked autoencoding by globallocal distillation of semantic video embeddings
and a token shuffling scheme, enabling VideoPrism to focus primarily on the video modality
while leveraging the invaluable text associated
with videos. We extensively test VideoPrism on
four broad groups of video understanding tasks,
from web video question answering to CV for science, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
31 out of 33 video understanding benchmarks.

We introduce VideoPrism, a general-purpose video encoder
designed to tackle a wide spectrum of video understanding tasks, including classification, localization, retrieval,
captioning, and question answering (QA) (Figure 1). Evaluated extensively on computer vision (CV) datasets and CV
for science domains like neuroscience and ecology, VideoPrism achieves state-of-the-art performance with minimal
adaptation, using a single frozen model. We emphasize
this frozen-encoder setting following prior work (Radford
et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023a) and for its practical utility given the otherwise high
computational and memory cost of finetuning video models.
The design philosophy behind VideoPrism is as follows.
Pretraining data is fundamental to foundation models
(FMs) (Bommasani et al., 2021), and the ideal pretraining data for ViFMs would be a representative sample of all
videos in the world. Most videos from this sample will have
no (or very noisy) parallel text describing the content; however, when such text exists, it provides priceless semantic
clues about the video space. Accordingly, our pretraining
strategy should focus primarily on the video modality and
yet take full advantage of any available video-text pairs.

1. Introduction
Videos are a rich and dynamic archive of real-world perceptual experience, spanning diverse domains from everyday
life to scientific observations. Video foundation models
(ViFMs) hold enormous potential to unlock new insights
within this vast corpus. While prior work has made great
progress towards general video understanding (Xu et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2022c; Yan et al., 2022; Tong et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023c), building a truly foundational video model is still an elusive goal. Existing models often struggle to balance appearance-heavy tasks with

On the data side, we approximate the desired pretraining
corpus by assembling 36M high-quality video-caption pairs
and 582M video clips with noisy parallel text (e.g., ASR
transcripts, generated captions, and retrieved text). On the
modeling side, we first contrastively learn semantic video
embeddings (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021) from all
our video-text pairs of various qualities. Subsequently, we
capitalize on the extensive video-only data by distilling the
semantic embeddings globally and token-wise, improving
upon masked video modeling (Tong et al., 2022; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023c) described below.

∗
Equal primary contribution. † Equal core technical contribution. ‡ Equal senior contribution, project leads. § This work was
done while the author was a student researcher at Google Research. Correspondence to: Long Zhao <longzh@google.com>,
Mikhail Sirotenko <msirotenko@google.com>, Ting Liu
<liuti@google.com>, Boqing Gong <bgong@google.com>.

Despite its success for natural language (Devlin et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; Anil et al., 2023), masked data modeling remains challenging for CV as raw visual signals lack
semantics. Existing works approach this challenge by bor-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

