Attribute Based Interpretable Evaluation Metrics for Generative Models

Dongkyun Kim * 1 2 Mingi Kwon * 1 Youngjung Uh 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The advancement of deep generative models, including
VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013), GANs (Karras et al.,
2019; 2020b; 2021; Sauer et al., 2021), and Diffusion Models (DMs) (Song et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021;
Rombach et al., 2022), has led to generated images that are
nearly indistinguishable from real ones. Evaluation metrics,
especially those assessing fidelity and diversity, play a pivotal role in this progress. One standout metric is Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), measuring
the disparity between training and generated image distributions in embedding space. Coupled with other metrics
like precision, recall, density, and coverage, the difference
between generated and real image distributions is effectively
gauged.

When the training dataset comprises a 1:1 proportion of dogs to cats, a generative model that
produces 1:1 dogs and cats better resembles the
training species distribution than another model
with 3:1 dogs and cats. Can we capture this phenomenon using existing metrics? Unfortunately,
we cannot, because these metrics do not provide any interpretability beyond “diversity". In
this context, we propose a new evaluation protocol that measures the divergence of a set of
generated images from the training set regarding
the distribution of attribute strengths as follows.
Single-attribute Divergence (SaD) reveals the attributes that are generated excessively or insufficiently by measuring the divergence of PDFs of
individual attributes. Paired-attribute Divergence
(PaD) reveals such pairs of attributes by measuring the divergence of joint PDFs of pairs of attributes. For measuring the attribute strengths of
an image, we propose Heterogeneous CLIPScore
(HCS) which measures the cosine similarity between image and text vectors with heterogeneous
initial points. With SaD and PaD, we reveal the
following about existing generative models. ProjectedGAN generates implausible attribute relationships such as baby with beard even though
it has competitive scores of existing metrics. Diffusion models struggle to capture diverse colors in
the datasets. The larger sampling timesteps of the
latent diffusion model generate the more minor objects including earrings and necklace. Stable Diffusion v1.5 better captures the attributes
than v2.1. Our metrics lay a foundation for explainable evaluations of generative models. Code:
github.com/notou10/sadpad .

Figure 1 illustrates the evaluation metrics for two models
with distinct properties. While Model 1’s generated images
align closely with the training dataset, Model 2 exhibits a
lack of diversity. Notably, in Figure 1a gray box, Model 1
consistently outperforms Model 2 across all metrics. Yet,
these metrics fall short in explicability; for example, they
don’t highlight the overrepresentation of long hair and
makeup in Model 2.
Addressing this gap, our paper proposes a methodology
to quantify discrepancies between generated and training
images, focusing on specific attributes. Figure 1b shows
the concept of our alternative approach that measures the
distribution of attribute strengths compared to the training
set: while Model 1 offers a balanced attribute distribution
akin to the training dataset, Model 2 overemphasizes long
hair and underrepresents beard.
To build metrics that quantify the difference between two image sets in an interpretable manner, we introduce Heterogeneous CLIPScore (HCS), an enhanced variant of CLIPScore
(Radford et al., 2021). Compared to CLIPScore, Heterogeneous CLIPScore captures the similarity between modalities—image and text—by establishing distinct origins for
text and image vectors.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 AI Lab, CTO Division,
LG Electronics, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to:
Youngjung Uh <yj.uh@yonsei.ac.kr>.

Utilizing HCS, we introduce new evaluation protocols to
assess the attribute distribution alignment between generated images and training data as follows. 1) Single-attribute
Divergence (SaD) measures how much a generative model

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

