When Will Gradient Regularization Be Harmful?

Yang Zhao 1 Hao Zhang 1 Xiuyuan Hu 1

Abstract
0.14

Gradient regularization (GR), which aims to penalize the gradient norm atop the loss function,
has shown promising results in training modern
over-parameterized deep neural networks. However, can we trust this powerful technique? This
paper reveals that GR can cause performance degeneration in adaptive optimization scenarios, particularly with learning rate warmup. Our empirical and theoretical analyses suggest this is due to
GR inducing instability and divergence in gradient statistics of adaptive optimizers at the initial
training stage. Inspired by the warmup heuristic,
we propose three GR warmup strategies, each relaxing the regularization effect to a certain extent
during the warmup course to ensure the accurate
and stable accumulation of gradients. With experiments on Vision Transformer family, we confirm
the three GR warmup strategies can effectively
circumvent these issues, thereby largely improving the model performance. Meanwhile, we note
that scalable models tend to rely more on the GR
warmup, where the performance can be improved
by up to 3% on Cifar10 compared to baseline GR.
Code is available at https://github.com/zhaoyang0204/gnp.

0.12

0.10

260

280

300

Figure 1. Comparison of test error rates (lower values are preferable) of the ViT-B model on the Cifar10 dataset under Base training, GR, and our three proposed GR warmup strategies. All the
training instances have also applied the LR warmup. Notably, the
performance with LR warmup and normal GR (red line) can be
worse compared to training with only LR warmup (blue line).

works (Srivastava et al., 2014; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Ba
et al., 2016; Foret et al., 2021).
Recent studies highlight the gradient regularization (GR) as
an effective regularization strategy (Barrett & Dherin, 2020;
Smith et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022b; Karakida et al., 2023;
Reizinger & Huszár, 2023). By imposing an additional
penalty concerning gradient norm atop the loss function,
this technique deliberately biases the optimization process
towards the attainment of flat minima, fostering better generalization. Meanwhile, it has been revealed that a strong
association exists between GR and Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) family (Foret et al., 2021), which posits
SAM as a special parameter configuration in the first-order
solution of GR (Zhao et al., 2022b; Karakida et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Advancements in computational hardware have catalyzed
the design of modern deep neural networks such as the
Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Vaswani et al.,
2017b; Brown et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Touvron et al.,
2021), characterized by an extraordinarily vast number of
parameters, far exceeding their predecessors. In this context,
regularization techniques emerge as a more pivotal role to
resist overfitting in training these over-parameterized net-

However, despite its practical utility, the scope and limitations of GR are yet to be fully understood, particularly in
terms of establishing when it can be beneficial or safe to
apply this technique. We find that GR can lead to serious
performance degeneration (see Figure 1) in the specific scenarios of adaptive optimization such as Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2015) and RMSProp (Hinton et al., 2012). With both
our empirical observations and theoretical analysis, we find
that the biased estimation introduced in GR can induce the

1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Hao Zhang <haozhang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Yang Zhao <zhao-yang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

