Learning to Explore for Stochastic Gradient MCMC

SeungHyun Kim * 1 Seohyeon Jung * 2 Seonghyeon Kim 1 Juho Lee 1 3

Abstract

critical domains like autonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and finance, where the accurate modeling of prediction uncertainty often takes precedence over the predictions
themselves. The integration of Bayesian modeling with
(deep) neural networks, often referred to as Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs), introduces exciting prospects for the
development of secure and trustworthy decision-making
systems.

Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) with highdimensional parameters pose a challenge for posterior inference due to the multi-modality of
the posterior distributions. Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) with
cyclical learning rate scheduling is a promising
solution, but it requires a large number of sampling steps to explore high-dimensional multimodal posteriors, making it computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose a metalearning strategy to build SGMCMC which can
efficiently explore the multi-modal target distributions. Our algorithm allows the learned SGM CMC to quickly explore the high-density region
of the posterior landscape. Also, we show that
this exploration property is transferrable to various tasks, even for the ones unseen during a
meta-training stage. Using popular image classification benchmarks and a variety of downstream tasks, we demonstrate that our method
significantly improves the sampling efficiency,
achieving better performance than vanilla SGM CMC without incurring significant computational
overhead.

However, there are significant problems for the successful application of BNNs in real-world scenarios. Bayesian
inference in high-dimensional parameter space, especially
for deep and large models employed for the applications
mentioned above, is notoriously computationally expensive
and often intractable due to the complexity of the posterior
distribution. Moreover, posterior landscapes of BNNs frequently display multi-modality, where multiple high density regions exist, posing a significant challenge to efficient
exploration and sampling. Due to this difficulty, the methods that are reported to work well for relatively small models, for instance, variational inference (Blei & McAuliffe,
2017) or Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal et al.,
2011), can severly fail for deep neural networks trained
with large amount of data, when applied without care.
Recently, Stochastic Gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(SGMCMC) methods (Welling & Teh, 2011; Chen et al.,
2014; Ma et al., 2015) have emerged as powerful tools for
enhancing the scalability of approximate Bayesian inference. This advancement has opened up the possibilities of
applying Bayesian methods to large-scale machine learning tasks. SGMCMC offers a versatile array of methods for
constructing Markov chains that converge towards the target posterior distributions. The simulation of these chains
primarily relies on stochastic gradients, making them particularly suitable for BNNs trained on large-scale datasets.
However, despite the notable successes of SGMCMC in
some BNN applications (Welling & Teh, 2011; Chen et al.,
2014; Ma et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2020), there remains
a notable challenge. Achieving optimal performance often
demands extensive engineering efforts and hyperparameter
tuning. This fine-tuning process typically involves human
trial and error or resource-intensive cross-validation procedures. Furthermore, it’s worth noting that even with the use
of SGMCMC methods, there remains room for improvement
in efficiently exploring multi-modal posterior distributions.

1. Introduction
Bayesian methods have received a lot of attention as powerful tools for improving the reliability of machine learning
models. Bayesian methods are gaining prominence due to
their ability to offer probability distributions over model
parameters, thereby enabling the quantification of uncertainty in predictions. They find primary utility in safety*

Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of
AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea 2 Nexon Korea, Seongnam,
South Korea(This work was conducted while the author was
in KAIST.) 3 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: SeungHyun Kim <s.h.kim@kaist.ac.kr>, Seohyeon Jung
<heon2203@nexon.co.kr>, Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

