Estimating the Permanent by Nesting Importance Sampling

Juha Harviainen 1 Mikko Koivisto 1

Abstract

exhibit self-reducible nature. Essentially, the search space
can be partitioned in a way that allows solving the original
instance by solving smaller instances of the same problem. Correspondingly, sequential importance sampling
(SIS) uses a proposal distribution where some randomized
choices are made, after which the sample is completed by
drawing the rest of the sample from the smaller instance.

Sequential importance sampling (SIS) is one
of the prominent methods for estimating highdimensional integrals. For example, it is empirically the most efficient method known for estimating the permanent of nonnegative matrices, a
notorious problem with numerous applications in
computer science, statistics, and other fields. Unfortunately, SIS typically fails to provide accuracy
guarantees due to difficulties in bounding the variance of the importance weights; for estimating
the permanent with accuracy guarantees, the most
efficient practical methods known are based on rejection sampling. Taking the best of both worlds,
we give a variant of SIS, in which sampling is
proportional to the upper bound used in rejection
sampling. We show that this method is provably
more efficient than its rejection sampling counterpart, particularly in high accuracy regimes. On
estimating the permanent, we empirically obtain
up to two orders-of-magnitude speedups over a
state-of-the-art rejection sampling method.

In numerical integration, accuracy guarantees are desirable. Formally, we want an approximation scheme that
computes an (ϵ, δ)-approximation (see, e.g., Ermon et al.,
2013; Chakraborty et al., 2014) for any given ϵ, δ > 0: an
estimate that has a relative error at most ϵ with probability
at least 1 − δ. The scheme thus needs a stopping rule describing the requirements for the given ϵ and δ that must be
satisfied until the algorithm can stop drawing new samples.
A weak stopping rule leads to drawing unnecessary samples whereas finding an optimal one can be difficult. The
main challenge with importance sampling is that no good
stopping rules for it are known in general.
As a special case, asymptotically optimal stopping rules are
known for random variables distributed in [0, 1] (Dagum
et al., 2000; Huber, 2006; Mnih et al., 2008). However,
applying these rules for SIS requires bounding the importance weights of the samples. Again, this is often hard as
one needs both a proposal distribution with small importance weights and a good upper bound for them that is either
obtained analytically or efficiently computable.

1. Introduction
Importance sampling is a popular Monte Carlo method
for approximating high-dimensional integrals (Robert &
Casella, 2004, Ch. 3.3, 14). There, we draw samples from
a proposal distribution and reweight them to have the expected value match the value of the integral. The variance
of the estimator depends on the quality of the proposal distribution: the closer it is to being proportional to the weights
(unnormalized probability masses or densities), the smaller
the variance.

On the other hand, rejection sampling is an exact sampling
method that is usable for integration with accuracy guarantees. It is based on upper bounds for the weights of subsets
of the sample space and has optimal stopping rules (Dagum
et al., 2000; Huber, 2017). The method repeatedly draws
samples and either accepts or rejects them to ensure that the
accepted samples come proportionally to their weights. The
algorithm stops after a certain number of accepted samples
is drawn.

Many problems—like counting the number of linear extensions of a given partial order (Jensen & Beichl, 2020) or
graphs with a given degree sequence (Bayati et al., 2010)—

Of particular interest to us is the #P-hard problem of computing the permanent of a matrix (Valiant, 1979), which
has numerous applications in, for example, probability and
statistics (Bapat, 1990), multi-target tracking (Uhlmann,
2004; Kuck et al., 2019), physics (Beichl & Sullivan, 1999;
Aaronson & Arkhipov, 2011), and constraint satisfaction
problems (Bianco et al., 2019). Until now, the most ef-

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.
Correspondence to: Juha Harviainen
<juha.harviainen@helsinki.fi>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

