DéjàVu: KV-cache Streaming for Fast, Fault-tolerant Generative LLM Serving

Foteini Strati 1 2 Sara McAllister 1 3 Amar Phanishayee 4 Jakub Tarnawski 4 Ana Klimovic 2

1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

OPT-13B
OPT-66B
BLOOM-176B

Total GPU memory
used (GB)

Abstract
Distributed LLM serving is costly and often underutilizes hardware accelerators due to three key
challenges: bubbles in pipeline-parallel deployments caused by the bimodal latency of prompt
and token processing, GPU memory overprovisioning, and long recovery times in case of failures. DéjàVu addresses all these challenges using a versatile and efficient KV cache streaming
library (DéjàVuLib). Using DéjàVuLib, we propose and implement efficient prompt-token disaggregation to reduce pipeline bubbles, microbatch
swapping for efficient GPU memory management,
and state replication for fault-tolerance. We highlight the efficacy of these solutions on a range of
large models across cloud deployments.

1

2

4

8
16
Batch size

32

64

128

Figure 1. Memory footprint of serving various LLMs with 2K sequence length (input + generated tokens) and half precision (fp16).

Given these trends, we identify three key challenges in stateful, distributed LLM serving. First, we observe a substantial
latency discrepancy (up to 2 orders of magnitude) between
two phases of LLM serving, which leads to expensive GPU
underutilization. Prompt processing, also called the prefill
phase (Zhong et al., 2024), depends on the input size and is
compute bound. Meanwhile, token generation, also called
the decode phase, is memory bandwidth-bound and the time
to generate a token is nearly constant when using the KV
cache. Processing both prompts and tokens in the same
pipeline introduces pipeline bubbles, where GPUs idle.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020) are widely used in chatbots, code generation, and
text summarization. Two key trends in generative LLM
inference have changed the landscape of ML model serving. First, large model sizes, input sequence lengths, and
consequently large intermediate inference state lead to high
memory footprint for LLM inference. Figure 1 shows the
GPU memory required to serve various generative LLMs
with a 2K sequence length; their memory footprint greatly
exceeds the capacity of a single GPU, mandating parallelization across many high-end GPUs (including tensor-model
and pipeline parallel execution). Second, for low latency
serving, these LLMs use a Key-Value Cache to store prior
computations as individual tokens are generated for each request (Yan et al., 2021; Pope et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2023;
Sheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). While ML inference
has been traditionally stateless, the use of KV cache makes
generative LLM inference stateful.

Second, state-of-the-art LLM serving systems like FasterTransformer vastly overprovision the KV cache in pipeline
parallel configurations by allocating GPU memory for all
microbatches upfront (NVIDIA, 2023b). Since the KV
cache is only used by one microbatch at a time, there is an
opportunity to allocate GPU memory more efficiently.
Third, existing LLM serving systems do not efficiently handle failures or preemptions, which often occur in large-scale
GPU deployments (Eisenman et al., 2022). Upon a failure, the LLM serving system crashes and stalls all in-flight
requests. When KV cache state is lost, current systems process requests from scratch. These redundant computations
severely increase end-to-end request latency.

1

MSR Project Fiddle Intern 2 ETH Zurich 3 Carnegie Mellon
University 4 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Foteini Strati
<foteini.strati@inf.ethz.ch>.

To address the above challenges for pipeline-parallel distributed inference, we propose DéjàVu, an efficient and faulttolerant LLM serving system based on KV cache streaming.
First, DéjàVu disaggregates prompt processing from token
generation and optimizes the number of machines for each

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

