Using Uncertainty Quantification to Characterize and Improve
Out-of-Domain Learning for PDEs

S. Chandra Mouli 1 Danielle C. Maddix 2 Shima Alizadeh 2 Gaurav Gupta 2 Andrew Stuart 3 4
Michael W. Mahoney 5 Yuyang Wang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

A promising approach to scientific machine learning
(SciML) involves so-called Neural Operators (NOs) (Lu
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a; Kovachki et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2020b; Gupta et al., 2021; Boullé & Townsend, 2023)
(as well as other operator learning methods such as DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019)). These data-driven methods use neural networks (NNs) to try to learn a mapping from the input
data, e.g., initial conditions, boundary conditions, and partial
differential equation (PDE) coefficients, to the PDE solution.
Advantages of NOs are that, if properly designed, they are
discretization-invariant and can learn a mapping usable on
different underlying discrete meshes. Furthermore, NOs can
be orders of magnitude faster at inference than conventional
numerical solvers, especially for moderate accuracy levels.
Once trained, they can solve a PDE for different values of
the physical PDE parameters efficiently. For instance, consider the 1-d heat equation, ∂u/∂t = k · ∂ 2 u/∂x2 , where
u(x, t) denotes the solution as a function of space x and
time t, and where k denotes the diffusivity. A NO can be
trained to learn the parameter mapping between the diffusivity parameter k (input) and the solution u(x, t) (output)
for fixed initial and boundary conditions.

Existing work in scientific machine learning
(SciML) has shown that data-driven learning of
solution operators can provide a fast approximate
alternative to classical numerical partial differential equation (PDE) solvers. Of these, Neural Operators (NOs) have emerged as particularly promising. We observe that several uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods for NOs fail
for test inputs that are even moderately out-ofdomain (OOD), even when the model approximates the solution well for in-domain tasks.
To address this limitation, we show that ensembling several NOs can identify high-error regions
and provide good uncertainty estimates that are
well-correlated with prediction errors. Based on
this, we propose a cost-effective alternative, D I VERSE NO, that mimics the properties of the ensemble by encouraging diverse predictions from
its multiple heads in the last feed-forward layer.
We then introduce O PERATOR -P ROB C ONSERV,
a method that uses these well-calibrated UQ estimates within the P ROB C ONSERV framework to
update the model. Our empirical results show
that O PERATOR -P ROB C ONSERV enhances OOD
model performance for a variety of challenging
PDE problems and satisfies physical constraints
such as conservation laws.

NOs have been shown to approximate the ground truth solution operator well for in-domain tasks (Lu et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2020a; Saad et al., 2023; Alesiani et al., 2022).
However, to be useful, they also need to be robust for outof-domain (OOD) applications. The robustness of OOD
predictions is necessary in practical applications, as the
test-time PDE parameters are typically not known during
training. Figure 1 shows the sharp moving (discontinuous)
shock solution to the “hard” Stefan problem, where the PDE
parameter u∗ denotes the solution value at the shock point.
We see that while a NO model trained to map the input PDE
parameter u∗ to the solution of the Stefan problem accurately captures the sharp dynamics for in-domain values of
u∗ , it fails for OOD values of u∗ , i.e., those values of u∗
that are outside the range covered by the training data. This
failure shows that NOs are not robust in OOD scenarios
and thus may not effectively capture the “true” underlying
operator map in practical applications. It is important when

1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA (Work done during an internship at AWS AI
Labs.) 2 AWS AI Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA 3 Department of
Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Caltech, Pasadena, CA,
USA 4 Amazon Search, Pasadena, CA, USA 5 Amazon Supply
Chain Optimization Technologies, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Danielle C. Maddix <dmmaddix@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

