Individual Fairness in Graph Decomposition

Kamesh Munagala * 1 Govind S. Sankar * 1

Abstract

1.1. Motivation for Individual Fairness
As motivation, consider the clustering problem of opening
schools or libraries and assigning users to these locations.
In such assignments, it is desirable to preserve communities
in the sense that nearby users should be assigned to the same
cluster. For instance, in Congressional redistricting (Altman,
1998; Cohen-Addad et al., 2018), it is preferable to keep
communities from being fractured (Brubach et al., 2020).
Similarly, when assigning students to schools, students who
live close to each other prefer to be assigned to the same
school. This is termed community-cohesion (Ashlagi & Shi,
2014). Of course, no deterministic solution can guarantee
community cohesion for all user pairs since some close-by
user pairs will be deterministically split. In view of this
impossibility, we take the approach of Brubach et al. (2020);
Harris et al. (2019) and consider solutions that are a distribution over clusterings. In such a distribution, different pairs
of users are separated with different probabilities, and this
probability will typically increase with the distance between
the pair. This naturally leads to the notion of pairwise envyfreeness – pairs of users with comparable distance should be
separated with comparable probability. This ensures no pair
of users envies a comparable pair in terms of how cohesive
the pair is in the decomposition.

In this paper, we consider classic randomized
low diameter decomposition procedures for planar graphs that obtain connected clusters which
are cohesive in that close-by pairs of nodes are
assigned to the same cluster with high probability. We require the additional aspect of individual
fairness – pairs of nodes at comparable distances
should be separated with comparable probability.
We show that classic decomposition procedures
do not satisfy this property. We present novel algorithms that achieve various trade-offs between
this property and additional desiderata of connectivity of the clusters and optimality in the number
of clusters. We show that our individual fairness
bounds may be difficult to improve by tying the
improvement to resolving a major open question
in metric embeddings. We finally show the efficacy of our algorithms on real planar networks
modeling congressional redistricting.

1. Introduction

As another motivation, in Congressional redistricting, one
pertinent question is to generate a random sample of representative maps to audit a given map for unfair gerrymandering (DeFord et al., 2021). Ideally, in this random sampling
distribution, the marginal probabilities of separation of pairs
of precincts of comparable distance should be comparable.
This means the probability that any pair of precincts is separated should be both lower and upper bounded by a value
that depends on the distance between them.

In this paper, we study a clustering problem of partitioning
users located in a metric space into components, each of
diameter O(R) for some input parameter R. Such partitioning has been widely studied as low diameter decomposition
(LDD) and has myriad applications. In addition to being
a stand-alone clustering procedure, they are, for example,
used as a subroutine in metric embeddings (Bartal, 1996;
Fakcharoenphol et al., 2004).
In this paper, we consider the question of fairness in how
different pairs of nodes are separated in the decomposition.
In keeping with terminology in the fairness literature, we
term this “individual fairness” of the decomposition.

We term this notion of fairness as individual fairness due
to its connection to a corresponding notion in fair machine
learning (Dwork et al., 2012). The main goal of our paper
is to study the existence and computation of LDDs that are
individually fair.

1
Computer Science Department, Duke University, Durham
NC 27708-0129, USA. Correspondence to:
Kamesh
Munagala <kamesh@cs.duke.edu>, Govind S. Sankar
<govind.subash.sankar@duke.edu>.

1.2. Randomized LDD in Planar Graphs
Before proceeding further, we present a formal model for
randomized LDD. We consider the canonical case where
the users (resp. neighborhoods or other entities) are nodes

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

