Human vs. Generative AI in Content Creation Competition:
Symbiosis or Conflict?

Fan Yao 1 Chuanhao Li 2 Denis Nekipelov 1 3 Hongning Wang 4 Haifeng Xu 5

Abstract

and videos (Ho et al., 2020), through user-friendly tools
like Midjourney and DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2022). These
advancements signify a new era of content creation competition between humans and generative AI (GenAI). GenAI
tools can quickly produce large volumes of tailored content,
challenging human content creators in terms of speed and
cost-efficiency. This potential threat not only revolutionizes
the online content-sharing industry but also impacts our
lives and society as a whole. Specifically, GenAI lowers
the entry barrier for individuals lacking technical skills or
resources to produce high-quality content, potentially giving
them a competitive edge in the market. This shift has led
to a surge in content creation and sharing, fostering new
dynamics in online content ecosystems (Epstein et al., 2023;
Wahid et al., 2023).

The advent of generative AI (GenAI) technology produces a transformative impact on the content creation landscape, offering alternative approaches to produce diverse, good-quality content
across media, thereby reshaping online ecosystems but also raising concerns about market oversaturation and the potential marginalization of
human creativity. Our work introduces a competition model generalized from the Tullock contest to
analyze the tension between human creators and
GenAI. Our theory and simulations suggest that
despite challenges, a stable equilibrium between
human and AI-generated content is possible. Our
work contributes to understanding the competitive dynamics in the content creation industry,
offering insights into the future interplay between
human creativity and technological advancements
in GenAI.

However, this AI-driven transformation also brings significant challenges and concerns (Wach et al., 2023). The ease
of generating content with AI can potentially lead to an oversaturated market, making it harder for individual creators
to stand out or leaving truly creative human creators under
appreciated (Doshi & Hauser, 2023). A most recent event is
that Universal Music Group pulls songs from TikTok and
accuses the platform of being “flooded with AI-generated
recordings” that diluted the royalty pool for real, human
musicians (Sisario, 2024). This echos the Gresham’s Law
that “bad money drives out good” (Selgin, 2020).

1. Introduction
Humanity is facing increasing competition from AI in various domains of content creation. Recently, Large Language
Models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT (Brown et al., 2020) and
Llama (Touvron et al., 2023) have been extensively used to
create social media posts (TikTok, 2023; Meta, 2024). In
January 2024, a novel fully generated by ChatGPT, “The
Tokyo Tower of Sympathy”, won Japan’s prestigious Akutagawa Prize (Choi & Annio, 2024). Besides their impressive
text generation capabilities, LLMs also facilitate the creation of high-quality multimedia content, including images

On the other hand, GenAI models are not omniscient. A
key limitation—or perhaps a defining characteristic—of
these models is their dependency on extensive and diverse
datasets of high-quality, human-generated content for training (Bertrand et al., 2023; Briesch et al., 2023). Should
GenAIs inadvertently marginalize productive, high-quality
human content creators, the resultant decline in the quality of model-generated content is inevitable. Drawing an
analogy to biological interactions, the dynamics between
GenAI-based creators and human creators could evolve into
either symbiosis, leading to a mutually beneficial equilibrium, or antagonistic conflict, perpetuating rivalry and potentially destabilizing the market. Therefore, an urgent and
scientifically interesting question to ask is, whether human
creators will be driven out of the market when competing
against AI-generated content, or is there a path toward a

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, USA 3 Department of Economics, University of Virginia, USA 4 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 5 Department of Computer Science,
University of Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Fan Yao
<fy4bc@virginia.edu>, Hongning Wang <hw5x@virginia.edu>,
Haifeng Xu <haifengxu@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

