Position: Reinforcement Learning in Dynamic Treatment Regimes Needs
Critical Reexamination
Zhiyao Luo 1 Yangchen Pan 1 Peter Watkinson 2 Tingting Zhu 1

Abstract

nozhukov et al., 2018; Myszczynska et al., 2020). Among
various machine learning techniques, reinforcement learning (RL) has steadily gained recognition as a transformative tool in healthcare (Coronato et al., 2020; Yu et al.,
2021), particularly within dynamic treatment regimes
(DTRs)(Chakraborty & Murphy, 2014). The core strength
of RL-DTRs is their ability to learn from patient responses
to treatments and adapt treatment plans accordingly, leading
to better patient outcomes. This adaptability is especially
valuable in healthcare, where patient conditions and treatment responses are often diverse and can change over time.

In the rapidly changing healthcare landscape, the
implementation of offline reinforcement learning (RL) in dynamic treatment regimes (DTRs)
presents a mix of unprecedented opportunities and
challenges. This position paper offers a critical
examination of the current status of offline RL in
the context of DTRs. We argue for a reassessment
of applying RL in DTRs, citing concerns such as
inconsistent and potentially inconclusive evaluation metrics, the absence of naive and supervised
learning baselines, and the diverse choice of RL
formulation in existing research. Through a case
study with more than 17,000 evaluation experiments using a publicly available Sepsis dataset,
we demonstrate that the performance of RL algorithms can significantly vary with changes in
evaluation metrics and Markov Decision Process
(MDP) formulations. Surprisingly, it is observed
that in some instances, RL algorithms can be
surpassed by random baselines subjected to policy evaluation methods and reward design. This
calls for more careful policy evaluation and algorithm development in future DTR works. Additionally, we discussed potential enhancements
toward more reliable development of RL-based
dynamic treatment regimes and invited further discussion within the community. Code is available
at https://github.com/GilesLuo/ReassessDTR.

Recent advancements in RL applied to DTRs, especially in
offline RL(Agarwal et al., 2020), have demonstrated promising potential to guide future treatment decisions without
direct environment interaction. For instance, Wu et al. introduced a weighted dueling double deep Q-network with
embedded human expertise (WD3QNE), addressing domain
knowledge embedding. Luckett et al. explored V-learning
to estimate optimal DTRs in mobile health, addressing the
challenges of indefinite time horizons and high-frequency
decision-making. These studies highlight the diverse applications of offline RL in healthcare, from improving personalized treatment in chronic diseases to optimizing real-time
interventions in mobile platforms.
The application of RL in DTRs is not without its criticisms
(Jeter et al., 2019) (Gottesman et al., 2018), prompting a
thorough reassessment of its utility and necessity in this
field. One major issue is the lack of standardized evaluation
metrics. For example, Komorowski et al. use weighted
importance sampling; Raghu et al.; Raghu et al.; Peng et al.
use different variants of doubly robust off-policy evaluation
methods (Jiang & Li, 2016). Another approach involves
using direct methods (Mannor et al., 2007), yet this, too,
lacks uniformity across studies. The diversity of evaluation
techniques underscores the need for a consensus on benchmark metrics to facilitate meaningful comparisons in this
field. Furthermore, the diverse formulations of Markov decision processes (MDPs) and the lack of established baselines
make it challenging to gauge the treatment improvement
offered by RL approaches over traditional methods. Regarding the state space, Komorowski et al. converted continuous
variables into discrete clusters, in contrast to Liu et al.;
Wang et al., who used continuous variables directly. In ac-

1. Introduction
The advent of machine learning in the medical field has
opened new avenues for treatment optimization (Cher1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PJ, United Kingdom 2 Nuffield Department of Population Health (NDPH), University of Oxford,
Richard Doll Building, Old Road Campus, Headington, Oxford
OX3 7LF, United Kingdom . Correspondence to: Zhiyao Luo
<zhiyao.luo@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

