RL-VLM-F: Reinforcement Learning
from Vision Language Foundation Model Feedback

Yufei Wang * 1 Zhanyi Sun * 1 Jesse Zhang 2 Zhou Xian 1 Erdem Bıyık 2 David Held † 1 Zackory Erickson † 1

Abstract

as reward engineering, demands considerable human effort
and trial-and-error iterations, but is often required for good
results (Laud, 2004; Silver et al., 2016; OpenAI et al., 2019;
Gupta et al., 2022). In this work, we aim to develop a fully
automated system that can generate a reward function and
use it to teach agents to perform a task with RL by using only
a language description of the task, eliminating the extensive
human effort required to craft reward functions manually.

Reward engineering has long been a challenge
in Reinforcement Learning (RL) research, as it
often requires extensive human effort and iterative processes of trial-and-error to design effective
reward functions. In this paper, we propose RLVLM-F, a method that automatically generates
reward functions for agents to learn new tasks,
using only a text description of the task goal
and the agent’s visual observations, by leveraging feedbacks from vision language foundation
models (VLMs). The key to our approach is
to query these models to give preferences over
pairs of the agent’s image observations based on
the text description of the task goal, and then
learn a reward function from the preference labels, rather than directly prompting these models to output a raw reward score, which can be
noisy and inconsistent. We demonstrate that RLVLM-F successfully produces effective rewards
and policies across various domains — including
classic control, as well as manipulation of rigid,
articulated, and deformable objects — without
the need for human supervision, outperforming
prior methods that use large pretrained models
for reward generation under the same assumptions. Videos can be found on our project website:
https://rlvlmf2024.github.io/.

Prior work has studied replacing human supervision by
prompting large language models (LLMs) to write codebased reward functions (Xie et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023b;
Wang et al., 2023). However, these methods usually assume access to the environment code, rely on the low-level
ground-truth state information for reward generation, and
face challenges with scaling up to high-dimensional environments and observations, such as manipulating complex deformable objects. Others (Klissarov et al., 2023; Chu et al.,
2023) extract an intrinsic reward and combine it with the
task reward using preference labels generated by an LLM
comparing text descriptions of two agent states. However,
text descriptions of the states can be non-trivial for certain
tasks, such as manipulating deformable objects, as the exact
states are hard to describe accurately using language. Further, these works rely on the ground-truth low-level state
information to generate the text descriptions of the states,
which may not be easily accessible.
Another related line of work obtains rewards from visual
observations by using contrastively trained vision language
models, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), to align image
or video observations with task descriptions in a learned latent space (Cui et al., 2022b; Mahmoudieh et al., 2022; Ma
et al., 2023a; Sontakke et al., 2023; Adeniji et al., 2023;
Rocamonde et al., 2023). However, the reward signals
produced in these works are often of high variance and
noisy (Sontakke et al., 2023; Mahmoudieh et al., 2022). As
a result, prior work often has to fine-tune these CLIP-style
models for their specific tasks at hand (Ma et al., 2023a;
Mahmoudieh et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
One of the key challenges of applying reinforcement learning (RL) is designing an appropriate reward function that
will lead to the desired behavior. This procedure, known
*
Equal contribution. † Equal advising. 1 Robotics Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Yufei Wang
<yufeiw2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

To this end, we present RL-VLM-F, a method that automatically generates reward functions for agents to learn new
task. RL-VLM-F (Figure 1) requires only a single text description of the task goal and the agent’s visual observations,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

