Get More with LESS: Synthesizing Recurrence with
KV Cache Compression for Efficient LLM Inference

Harry Dong 1 Xinyu Yang 1 Zhenyu Zhang 2 Zhangyang Wang 2 Yuejie Chi 1 Beidi Chen 1 3

Abstract
Many computational factors limit broader deployment of large language models. In this paper,
we focus on a memory bottleneck imposed by
the key-value (KV) cache, a computational shortcut that requires storing previous KV pairs during decoding. While existing KV cache methods approach this problem by pruning or evicting large swaths of relatively less important KV
pairs to dramatically reduce the memory footprint of the cache, they can have limited success
in tasks that require recollecting a majority of
previous tokens. To alleviate this issue, we propose LESS, a simple integration of a (nearly free)
constant sized cache with eviction-based cache
methods, such that all tokens can be queried at
later decoding steps. Its ability to retain information throughout time shows merit on a variety of tasks where we demonstrate LESS can
help reduce the performance gap from caching
everything, sometimes even matching it, all while
being efficient. Relevant code can be found at
https://github.com/hdong920/LESS.

Figure 1. Toy (top row) and Llama 2 7B (bottom row) example
decoder attention maps with H2 O as the underlying sparse policy.
In the top row, red/pink and grey squares are positive and zero
attention probabilities, respectively. In the bottom row, darker
colors indicate larger attention probabilities. Sparse attention policies zero out many positive attention probabilities. Our method,
LESS, ensures all previous tokens will have some contribution to
the attention layer output to better retain information.

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, USA 3 Meta
AI (FAIR), USA. Correspondence to: Harry Dong <harryd@andrew.cmu.edu>.

the model, data, and context lengths to extraordinary levels.
This has been remarkably useful for complex tasks such as
chatbots, long document tasks, and biological sequences.
However, during deployment, these tasks require generating
long sequences or inputting large batch sizes, which places
an immense computational burden on the key-value (KV)
cache (Pope et al., 2023), the storage of all previous keys and
values at each layer to bypass recomputing them at future decoding steps. While this significantly saves computation, the
tradeoff is an explosion of memory consumption. In such
scenarios, the KV cache size often eclipses the model size.
For instance, the Llama 2 7B model (Touvron et al., 2023)
occupies about 26 GB of memory, but the KV cache for an
input of batch size 64 and sequence length 1024 occupies
64 GB of memory, nearly 2.5 times the model size. Hence,
addressing this accessibility issue is imperative as LLMs
continue to scale and break tight deployment constraints.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Thankfully, there have been initiatives to reduce the KV
cache size. A line of work, in which we refer to as sparse
policies or algorithms, explores the selection of the best

1. Introduction
Throughout its lifetime, the transformer architecture
(Vaswani et al., 2017) has made strides in natural language
processing (Lin et al., 2022), computer vision (Khan et al.,
2022), healthcare (Nerella et al., 2023), and many other domains. Large language models (LLMs) (Zhang et al., 2022;
Scao et al., 2022; Fedus et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Jiang
et al., 2024) take transformers to the extreme by scaling
1

1

