Adaptive Accompaniment with ReaLchords

Yusong Wu 1 2 Tim Cooijmans 2 Kyle Kastner 3 Adam Roberts 1 Ian Simon 1 Alexander Scarlatos 1 4
Chris Donahue 1 5 Cassie Tarakajian 1 Shayegan Omidshafiei 6 7 Aaron Courville 2 8 Pablo Samuel Castro 1 2
Natasha Jaques 1 9 Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang 1 2 8

Abstract

erate exploration. We focus on music in particular, which is
inherently interactive and dynamic and revolves around anticipatory collaboration in ensemble settings. Most existing
models in this space, while capable of creating expressive
compositions or accompaniments, are not suited for simultaneous creation, where adaptation to and alignment with
the ongoing musical structure are crucial.

Jamming requires coordination, anticipation, and
collaborative creativity between musicians. Current generative models of music produce expressive output but are not able to generate in an online manner, meaning simultaneously with other
musicians (human or otherwise). We propose
ReaLchords, an online generative model for
improvising chord accompaniment to user melody.
We start with an online model pretrained by maximum likelihood, and use reinforcement learning
to finetune the model for online use. The finetuning objective leverages both a novel reward model
that provides feedback on both harmonic and temporal coherency between melody and chord, and
a divergence term that implements a novel type of
distillation from a teacher model that can see the
future melody. Through quantitative experiments
and listening tests, we demonstrate that the resulting model adapts well to unfamiliar input and
produce fitting accompaniment. ReaLchords
opens the door to live jamming, as well as simultaneous co-creation in other modalities.

This paper introduces ReaLchords, a generative model
tailored for online adaptive musical accompaniment.
Emulating the spontaneity of live music jamming,
ReaLchords generates chord accompaniments in response to a stream of monophonic melody notes, adapting on-the-fly to the unfolding musical narrative. Each
chord must be generated without knowing in advance which
melody note it will accompany. This simultaneous interaction imposes a conditional independence assumption on
the joint generative process, that an online model must respect. Moreover, a model must be able to gracefully handle
unfamiliar situations and unexpected changes. Likelihood
models, however, suffer from exposure bias due to being
trained entirely on ground truth data, and transfer poorly to
the online settings where mistakes, imperfections and stylistic differences are common (see Figure 1 for an example).
To address this, we use RL finetuning to improve the model
with respect to reward models that consider musical coherence (§3.2). These reward models see the entire composition
and evaluate its musical coherence from various perspectives (§3.3). Our setup bears similarities to RLHF (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Jaques et al., 2019) and RLAIF (Bai et al.,
2022; Lee et al., 2023), however our reward models are
trained through self-supervision rather than human labeling.
Finally, we combine RL finetuning with knowledge distillation (Agarwal et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023) in a novel
way, distilling from a teacher that can see the future into a
student that cannot, hence forcing anticipation (§3.4).

1. Introduction
Deep generative models produce realistic, high-quality content, and are seeing increasing integration into the creative
processes of artists. However, such models tend not to be designed for the demands of live scenarios such as interactive
improvisation, which requires anticipation of others’ intentions and adaptation to mistakes, stylistic choices and delib1
Google DeepMind 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Université de Montréal 3 Google 4 University of Massachusetts Amherst
5
Carnegie Mellon University 6 Work done while at Google 7 Field
AI 8 Canada CIFAR AI Chair 9 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Yusong Wu <wu.yusong@mila.quebec>, ChengZhi Anna Huang <anna.huang@mila.quebec>.

We develop key algorithmic components (Figure 2) needed
to produce an online adaptive accompaniment model that is
amenable to interactive use. Our contributions and findings
are as follows: 1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Listen to audio examples here: https://storage.
googleapis.com/realchords/index.html.

1

