ArtWhisperer: A Dataset for Characterizing Human-AI Interactions in Artistic
Creations
Kailas Vodrahalli 1 James Zou 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

In this work, we investigate how people use textto-image models to generate desired target images.
To study this interaction, we created ArtWhisperer, an online game where users are given a
target image and are tasked with iteratively finding a prompt that creates a similar-looking image
as the target. Through this game, we recorded
over 50,000 human-AI interactions; each interaction corresponds to one text prompt created by a
user and the corresponding generated image. The
majority of these are repeated interactions where a
user iterates to find the best prompt for their target
image, making this a unique sequential dataset for
studying human-AI collaborations. In an initial
analysis of this dataset, we identify several characteristics of prompt interactions and user strategies.
People submit diverse prompts and are able to
discover a variety of text descriptions that generate similar images. Interestingly, prompt diversity
does not decrease as users find better prompts.
We further propose a new metric to quantify AI
model steerability using our dataset. We define
steerability as the expected number of interactions
required to adequately complete a task. We estimate this value by fitting a Markov chain for each
target task and calculating the expected time to
reach an adequate score. We quantify and compare AI steerability across different types of target
images and two different models, finding that images of cities and nature are more steerable than
artistic and fantasy images. We also evaluate popular vision-language models to assess their image
understanding and ability to incorporate feedback.
These findings provide insights into human-AI
interaction behavior, present a concrete method
of assessing AI steerability, and demonstrate the
general utility of the ArtWhisperer dataset.

Direct human interaction with AI models has become
widespread following a number of technical innovations
improving the quality of text-to-text (Brown et al., 2020;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023) and text-to-image
models (Rombach et al., 2022a; Ramesh et al., 2022), enabling the public release of high-quality AI-based services
like ChatGPT (chatGPT), Bard (Bard), and Midjourney
(Midjourney). These models have seen rapid interest and
adoption largely due to the ability of the general public to
interact with and steer the AI in diverse contexts including
engineering, creative writing, art, education, medicine, and
law (Dakhel et al., 2023; Nguyen & Nadi, 2022; Ippolito
et al., 2022; Cetinic & She, 2022; Qadir, 2023; Cascella
et al., 2023; Sloan, 2023).
A key challenge in developing these models is aligning their
output to human inputs. This is made challenging by the
broad domain of use cases as well as the diverse prompting
styles of different users. Many approaches can be categorized as “prompt engineering,” where specific strategies for
prompting are used to steer a model (Oppenlaender, 2022;
Liu & Chilton, 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b; Wei et al., 2022;
White et al., 2023). Great success has also been found by
fine-tuning models using relatively small datasets to follow human instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022), respond in
a specific style (Hu et al., 2021), or behave differently to
specified prompts (Zhou et al., 2022a; Gal et al., 2022).

1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Kailas Vodrahalli
<kailasv@stanford.edu>, James Zou <jamesz@stanford.edu>.

In this work, we take interest in the fact that human interaction with these models is often an iterative process. We
develop a dataset to study this interaction. The dataset is
collected through an interactive game we created where
players try to find an optimal prompt for a given task (see
Figure 1). In particular, we focus on text-to-image models
and ask the player to generate a similar image (AI Image)
to a given target image. The player is allowed to iterate on
their prompt, using the previously generated image(s) as
feedback to help them adjust their prompt. A score is also
provided as feedback to help the user calibrate how “close”
they are to a similar image.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Using this setup, we collected data on 51,026 interactions
from 2,250 players across 191 unique target images. The target images were selected from a diverse set of AI-generated
1

