Privacy-Preserving Instructions for Aligning Large Language Models

Da Yu† Peter Kairouz‡ Sewoong Oh‡ Zheng Xu‡

Abstract
Service providers of large language model (LLM)
applications collect user instructions in the wild
and use them in further aligning LLMs with users’
intentions. These instructions, which potentially
contain sensitive information, are annotated by
human workers in the process. This poses a new
privacy risk not addressed by the typical private
optimization. To this end, we propose using synthetic instructions to replace real instructions in
data annotation and model fine-tuning. Formal
differential privacy is guaranteed by generating
those synthetic instructions using privately finetuned generators. Crucial in achieving the desired
utility is our novel filtering algorithm that matches
the distribution of the synthetic instructions to that
of the real ones. In both supervised fine-tuning
and reinforcement learning from human feedback,
our extensive experiments demonstrate the high
utility of the final set of synthetic instructions by
showing comparable results to real instructions.
In supervised fine-tuning, models trained with
private synthetic instructions outperform leading
open-source models such as Vicuna.

Users

Collected
Instructions

LLM Applications

Human
Annotation

Model
Alignment

SSN:...
Email: …
Tel: …

Annotated
Training Data

Privacy Risk I: Annotators
Review Sensitive Instructions

Privacy Risk II: Aligned Models
Leak Memorized Instructions

Figure 1. Privacy concerns of collecting and training with user
instructions in LLM applications.

sensitive since users may disclose personal information to
elicit accurate responses. To illustrate this, we conducted a
quantitative analysis on approximately twelve thousand realworld user instructions collected from the Chatbot Arena
(Zheng et al., 2023b). This analysis begins with an LLMbased detection, followed by human verification, as detailed
in Appendix B. Our analysis finds at least thousand of sensitive text pieces. A few examples of sensitive instructions
are shown in Figure 2.

1. Introduction
Training models to follow instructions is fundamental to the
development of large language model (LLM) applications
(Wei et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022).
Instructions in the form of prompts provided by users during
interactions with LLM applications are used to refine the
backbone models (OpenAI, 2023). These instructions are
often reviewed and annotated by human annotators to create
the training data for this refinement process (Tan & Cabato,
2023). However, user-provided instructions can be highly

Given the sensitive nature of user instructions, we identify
the following privacy risks in the pipeline of aligning LLMs
with instructions, as illustrated in Figure 1. During the
data collection stage, potentially sensitive instructions are
collected and presented to human annotators. In the subsequent training and deployment stages, trained models may
memorize training data, including sensitive instructions, and
inadvertently leak this memorized data during deployment.
While the privacy risk of model memorization has been discussed in previous studies (Carlini et al., 2021; 2023; Nasr
et al., 2023a; Wu et al., 2024a), to the best of our knowledge,
this work is the first to discuss the privacy risks associated
with the annotation process.

†

Sun Yat-sen University, the work was done when Da Yu was an
intern at Google Research. yuda3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn.
‡
Google Research, alphabetical order.
{kairouz,sewoongo,xuzheng}@google.com.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

One common approach to mitigate privacy concerns is to
1

