Incorporating probabilistic domain knowledge into deep multiple instance
learning

Ghadi S. Al Hajj 1 Aliaksandr Hubin 2 3 Chakravarthi Kanduri 1 Milena Pavlovic 1 Knut Rand 1
Michael Widrich 4 Anne Solberg 1 Victor Greiff 5 Johan Pensar 3 Günter Klambauer 6 Geir Kjetil Sandve 1

Abstract

repertoire classification (Widrich et al., 2020). The welldefined problem structure of MIL also makes it well-suited
to define modularized deep learning (DL) models (Ilse et al.,
2018). However, deep learning methods, including deep
multiple instance learning methods, have been criticized
for their limited ability to incorporate domain knowledge
(Marcus, 2018), which could improve model generalization
and data efficiency.

Deep learning methods, including deep multiple instance learning methods, have been criticized for their limited ability to incorporate domain knowledge. A reason that knowledge incorporation is challenging in deep learning is that
the models usually lack a mapping between their
model components and the entities of the domain,
making it a non-trivial task to incorporate probabilistic prior information. In this work, we show
that such a mapping between domain entities and
model components can be defined for a multiple
instance learning setting and propose a framework
DeeMILIP that encompasses multiple strategies
to exploit this mapping for prior knowledge incorporation. We motivate and formalize these
strategies from a probabilistic perspective. Experiments on an immune-based diagnostics case
show that our proposed strategies allow to learn
generalizable models even in settings with weak
signals, limited dataset size, and limited compute.

Several aspects of modern DL can be seen as incorporating
general assumptions about the world like temporal dependency (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) or translational
invariance (LeCun et al., 1989; Kayhan & Gemert, 2020)
informing particular model architectures, transformational
invariance inspiring data augmentation techniques (Shorten
& Khoshgoftaar, 2019), and assumptions on shared representational spaces inspiring multi-task learning formulations
(Caruana, 1997). Moreover, geometric deep learning is used
to incorporate geometric properties into the models by leveraging properties inherent in graph-structured data in order to
learn to capture and utilize the spatial relationships and connectivity within the data (Bronstein et al., 2017; Cao et al.,
2020), while physics-informed models embed physical principles into DL models (Karniadakis et al., 2021; Cuomo
et al., 2022). The knowledge entailed by these approaches
is, however, usually highly generic, and its incorporation
is conceptual. There is markedly less work on incorporating specific, quantitative knowledge from a domain into
DL. For the MIL setting, the few relevant examples include
the use of image annotation at low level to improve the
classification performance at the image level, either by preannotating images (Yan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Seung
Yeon Shin et al., 2019) or annotating as part of an active
learning approach (Melendez et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Multiple instance learning (MIL) (Dietterich et al., 1997;
Maron & Lozano-Pérez, 1997; Carbonneau et al., 2018)
provides a very useful framework for approaching important
problems in a variety of domains such as medical image
analysis (Yao et al., 2020), video analysis (Quellec et al.,
2017), image segmentation (Kraus et al., 2016) and immune
1
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway 3 Department of
Mathematics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 4 Freenome, San
Francisco, CA, USA 5 Department of Immunology, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway 6 LIT AI Lab Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to:
Ghadi S. Al Hajj <ghadia@uio.no>.
2

A primary reason why it is generally non-trivial to incorporate quantitative domain knowledge into a DL model is
that the learned representational transformations of a neural
network lead to parameter values and DL layer outputs that
typically lack any a priori association with tangible entities or high-level abstractions from the application domain.
Although these values collectively contribute to constructing the desired mapping function for the DL model, and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

