Stay on topic with Classifier-Free Guidance

Guillaume V. Sanchez * 1 2 Alexander Spangher * 3 Honglu Fan * 4 2 Elad Levi 5 Stella Biderman 2
“Today in France, citizens were celebrating
Bastille Day”

Abstract

γ=1.5

Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) has recently
emerged in as a lightweight technique to encourage prompt-adherence in generations, yet has not
yet been successfully applied to language modeling. In this work, we demonstrate across a
wide array of benchmarks that CFG can be used
broadly as an inference-time technique in pure language modeling. We show that CFG (1) improves
the performance of Pythia, GPT-2 and LLaMAfamily models across a broad set of Q&A, reasoning and code generation tasks, achieving SOTA
on LAMBADA with LLaMA-7B over PaLM540B; (2) brings improvements equivalent to a
model with twice the parameter-count; (3) can
stack alongside other inference-time methods like
Chain-of-Thought and Self-Consistency, yielding
further improvements in difficult tasks; (4) can be
used to increase the faithfulness and coherence of
assistants in challenging form-driven and contentdriven prompts: in human evaluations we show a
75% preference for using CFG over baseline.

x1

γ=1

“Today in France, citizens were
celebrating Christmas”

γ=0.5

“Today in France, citizens were
celebrating Thanksgiving”

γ=0

“
, and chickens
lay eggs”
Today in France

x0
Figure 1: An illustration in latent space showing how increasing the guidance weight γ increases the importance of
the prompt “Today in France,”.

may not be accessible to all researchers.
Meanwhile, similar degenerative problems have been observed in text-to-image-generation: models can ignore parts
of the prompt or introduce extra objects (Nichol et al., 2022).
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) has emerged as an elegant training-free approach to address this (Ho & Salimans,
2021). In CFG, the generative model itself is used sans
modifications during inference to encourage desirata.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have exhibited strong capabilities on a diverse array of tasks (Devlin
et al., 2019b; Brown et al., 2020; Scao et al., 2022). However, they continue struggle with issues such as hallucination (Manakul et al., 2023), degradation (Holtzman et al.,
2019) and meandering (Spangher et al., 2023). Various approaches have been proposed to address this, like instructionfinetuning (Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2021) and reinforcement learning (Ouyang et al., 2022a; Askell et al., 2021),
however, these techniques require large amounts of data and

While CFG might be a lightweight solution to promptmisadherence in LLMs, it has not previously been applied in
the autoregressive text-generation setting. There are many
reasons to hypothesize CFG might not transfer: in text-toimage generation, the prompts are simple descriptions and
outputs are fixed-size (Lin et al., 2023). In language modeling, prompts can be highly complex and multipart, and
outputs are autoregressive and unbounded.
In this paper, we apply CFG to LLMs to increase the model
alignment to prompts. We perform modifications to CFG:
while text-to-image models (which primarily utilize diffusion models) need to be specifically trained with conditioning dropout (Ho & Salimans, 2021) to utilize CFG,
we find that in text generation, CFG can work out-of-thebox, at lower γ values (we discuss more in Section 6).
CFG improves alignment on an exhaustive array of benchmarks covering, we show, many widely used prompting

*

Equal contribution 1 LightOn, France (work done while
working at Hexaglobe) 2 EleutherAI 3 Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California 4 University of Geneva
5
Sightful. Correspondence to: Guillaume V. Sanchez <guillaume.sanchez@lighton.ai>, Honglu Fan <honglu.fan@unige.ch>,
Alexander Spangher <spangher@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

