Preventing Model Collapse in Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models

Ying Li * 1 Zhidi Lin * 2 Feng Yin 2 Michael Minyi Zhang 1

Abstract
Gaussian process latent variable models
(GPLVMs) are a versatile family of unsupervised learning models commonly used for
dimensionality reduction. However, common
challenges in modeling data with GPLVMs
include inadequate kernel flexibility and improper
selection of the projection noise, leading to a
type of model collapse characterized by vague
latent representations that do not reflect the
underlying data structure. This paper addresses
these issues by, first, theoretically examining the
impact of projection variance on model collapse
through the lens of a linear GPLVM. Second, we
tackle model collapse due to inadequate kernel
flexibility by integrating the spectral mixture
(SM) kernel and a differentiable random Fourier
feature (RFF) kernel approximation, which
ensures computational scalability and efficiency
through off-the-shelf automatic differentiation
tools for learning the kernel hyperparameters,
projection variance, and latent representations
within the variational inference framework. The
proposed GPLVM, named advised RFLVM, is
evaluated across diverse datasets and consistently
outperforms various salient competing models,
including state-of-the-art variational autoencoders
(VAEs) and other GPLVM variants, in terms of
informative latent representations and missing
data imputation.

1. Introduction
A latent variable model (LVM) represents each observed
datum yi ∈ RM using a low-dimensional latent variable
*
Equal contribution. The authors are ordered alphabetically.
Department of Statistics & Actuarial Science, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 School of Science & Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Feng Yin <yinfeng@cuhk.edu.cn>, Michael Minyi
Zhang <mzhang18@hku.hk>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

xi ∈ RQ , where Q ≪ M . As a classic tool in statistical
analysis, LVMs unveil hidden structures within the data,
providing valuable insights into intricate systems across
various domains (Bishop, 2006), such as signal processing
(Zarzoso et al., 2010) and economics (Aigner et al., 1984).
One of the critical aspects of LVM is the choice of mapping
function from the latent variables to the observed variables.
A series of early works assumed that the mapping is linear,
as seen in factor analysis (Kim & Mueller, 1978), principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901; Tipping &
Bishop, 1999), and canonical correlation analysis (CCA)
(Hotelling, 1936), among others. However, the linearity
assumption limits the capacity of these models to capture
complex, nonlinear patterns in the data, rendering them incapable of providing an optimal latent representation for complex data sets. To tackle this issue, more advanced methods
like the variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling,
2019; 2013) utilizes neural networks, while the Gaussian
process latent variable model (GPLVM) (Lawrence, 2005;
Titsias & Lawrence, 2010) employs the Gaussian process
(GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006), as the nonlinear mapping modules in LVM, providing enhanced capacity in capturing nonlinear relationships.
GPLVMs benefit from the incorporation of the GP, which
offers enhanced interpretability through explicit uncertainty
calibration and the interpretable kernel functions (Theodoridis, 2020; Cheng et al., 2022). Additionally, the implicit
regularization imposed by the GP prior prevents GPLVMs
from severe overfitting (Lotfi et al., 2022; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020). Consequently, GPLVMs often achieve superior performance in practice, even with small sample sizes.
Due to these favorable and unique properties, GPLVM has
been applied to various applications, such as intrusion detection (Abolhasanzadeh, 2015), image recognition (Eleftheriadis et al., 2013; Li et al., 2017), human pose estimation (Ek
et al., 2008), and image-text retrieval (Song et al., 2015).
Despite the popularity of GPLVM and the recent efforts
dedicated to enhancing its learning and inference capabilities (Titsias & Lawrence, 2010; Gundersen et al., 2021;
Ramchandran et al., 2021; de Souza et al., 2021; Lalchand
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), the existing work still
lacks an in-depth understanding of how to optimally learn
a compact and informative latent representation using the

