Fast Adversarial Attacks on Language Models In One GPU Minute

Vinu Sankar Sadasivan 1 Shoumik Saha * 1 Gaurang Sriramanan * 1
Priyatham Kattakinda 2 Atoosa Chegini 1 Soheil Feizi 1
Warning: This paper contains model outputs that might be harmful and offensive.

1. Introduction

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel class of fast,
beam search-based adversarial attack (BEAST)
for Language Models (LMs). BEAST employs
interpretable parameters, enabling attackers to balance between attack speed, success rate, and the
readability of adversarial prompts. The computational efficiency of BEAST facilitates us to investigate its applications on LMs for jailbreaking, eliciting hallucinations, and privacy attacks.
Our gradient-free targeted attack can jailbreak
aligned LMs with high attack success rates within
one minute. For instance, BEAST can jailbreak
Vicuna-7B-v1.5 under one minute with a success
rate of 89% when compared to a gradient-based
baseline that takes over an hour to achieve 70%
success rate using a single Nvidia RTX A6000
48GB GPU. BEAST can also generate adversarial
suffixes for successful jailbreaks that can transfer
to unseen prompts and unseen models such as
GPT-4-Turbo. Additionally, we discover a unique
outcome wherein our untargeted attack induces
hallucinations in LM chatbots. Through human
evaluations, we find that our untargeted attack
causes Vicuna-7B-v1.5 to produce ∼15% more
incorrect outputs when compared to LM outputs
in the absence of our attack. We also learn that
22% of the time, BEAST causes Vicuna to generate outputs that are not relevant to the original
prompt. Further, we use BEAST to generate adversarial prompts in a few seconds that can boost
the performance of existing membership inference attacks for LMs. We believe that our fast
attack, BEAST, has the potential to accelerate
research in LM security and privacy.

Language Models (LMs) have become popular due to their
applications in various tasks such as question answering and
automated code generation (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023). Several works have developed various finetuning techniques to align LMs with human values to make
them safe and effective (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang
et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023). However,
a pertinent question arises: can these LMs be manipulated
such that they become unsafe and ineffective?
Over the years, adversarial machine learning research has
shown that neural networks can be easily attacked by perturbing inputs to achieve a target output behavior (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Biggio et al., 2013). While adversarial attacks
in the image space have been extensively studied (Papernot
et al., 2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2016), attacks on LMs are
relatively less explored (Jia & Liang, 2017; Ebrahimi et al.,
2017; Jones et al., 2023). A recent line of works discovered that these aligned LMs are not perfectly aligned and
that they can be attacked to generate harmful content (Wei
et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2023). This behavior in LMs is
known as jailbreaking. Manually crafted prompts (Perez
& Ribeiro, 2022; DAN) require humans to write prompts
that jailbreak aligned LMs. Recently, Zou et al. (2023) introduced a gradient-based attack for automated jailbreaking,
though the generated adversarial tokens are gibberish. Zhu
et al. (2023) developed a gradient-based, greedy attack that
produces readable adversarial prompts with high jailbreak
success. Liu et al. (2023b) and Chao et al. (2023) proposed
gradient-free attacks for jailbreaks that require access to
powerful models such as GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) for
their success. Although jailbreaks induce unsafe behavior
in LMs, prior works have shown that such efforts can also
help with privacy attacks. Liu et al. (2023c) shows that
manual jailbreaking efforts can leak potentially proprietary
system prompts from aligned LMs. Zhu et al. (2023) uses
their jailbreak attack to automate this privacy attack. Whilst
existing works show that training data (Carlini et al., 2020;
Nasr et al., 2023) and membership information (Mattern

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering. Correspondence to: Vinu Sankar Sadasivan <vinu@cs.umd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our codebase is released on https://github.com/
vinusankars/BEAST

1

