SqueezeLLM: Dense-and-Sparse Quantization

Sehoon Kim * 1 Coleman Hooper * 1 Amir Gholami * 1 2 Zhen Dong 1 Xiuyu Li 1 Sheng Shen 1
Michael W. Mahoney 1 2 3 Kurt Keutzer 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) trained
on massive text corpora, with up to hundreds of billions
of parameters, have showcased their remarkable problemsolving capabilities across various domains (Brown et al.,
2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Du et al., 2022; Hoffmann
et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020; Scao et al., 2022; Smith
et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a;
Zhang et al., 2022). However, deploying these models for
inference has been a significant challenge due to their demanding resource requirements. For instance, the LLaMA65B model requires at least 130GB of RAM to deploy in
FP16, which exceeds current GPU capacity. Even storing
such large-sized models has become costly and complex.

Generative Large Language Models (LLMs) have
demonstrated remarkable results for a wide range
of tasks. However, deploying these models for
inference has been a significant challenge due to
their unprecedented resource requirements. This
has forced existing deployment frameworks to use
multi-GPU inference pipelines, which are often
complex and costly, or to use smaller and less
performant models. In this work, we demonstrate
that the main bottleneck for generative inference
with LLMs is memory bandwidth, rather than
compute, specifically for single batch inference.
While quantization has emerged as a promising
solution by representing weights with reduced
precision, previous efforts have often resulted in
notable performance degradation. To address this,
we introduce SqueezeLLM, a post-training quantization framework that not only enables lossless
compression to ultra-low precisions of up to 3-bit,
but also achieves higher quantization performance
under the same memory constraint. Our framework incorporates two novel ideas: (i) sensitivitybased non-uniform quantization, which searches
for the optimal bit precision assignment based
on second-order information; and (ii) the Denseand-Sparse decomposition that stores outliers and
sensitive weight values in an efficient sparse format. When applied to the LLaMA models, our
3-bit quantization significantly reduces the perplexity gap from the FP16 baseline by up to
2.1× as compared to the state-of-the-art methods with the same memory requirement. Furthermore, when deployed on an A6000 GPU, our
quantized models achieve up to 2.3× speedup
compared to the baseline. Our code is available at
https://github.com/SqueezeAILab/SqueezeLLM.

As will be discussed in Sec. 3, the main performance bottleneck in LLM inference for generative tasks is memory
bandwidth rather than compute. This means that the speed
at which we can load and store parameters becomes the
primary latency bottleneck for memory-bound problems,
rather than arithmetic computations. However, recent advancements in memory bandwidth technology have been
significantly slow, compared to the improvements in computes, leading to the phenomenon known as the Memory
Wall (Gholami et al., 2024; Patterson, 2004). Consequently,
researchers have turned their attention to exploring algorithmic methods to overcome this challenge.
One promising approach is quantization, where model parameters are stored at lower precision, instead of the typical 16 or 32-bit precision used for training. For instance,
it has been demonstrated that LLM models can be stored
in 8-bit precision without performance degradation (Yao
et al., 2022), where 8-bit quantization not only improves
the storage requirements by half but also has the potential
to improve inference latency and throughput. As a result,
there has been significant research interest in quantizing
models to even lower precisions. A pioneering approach is
GPTQ (Frantar et al., 2022) which uses a training-free quantization technique that achieves near-lossless 4-bit quantization for LLM models with over tens of billions of parameters.
However, achieving high quantization performance remains
challenging, particularly with lower bit precision and for
relatively smaller models (e.g., < 50B parameters).

*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 ICSI 3 LBNL. Correspondence to: Amir Gholami <amirgh@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

