Out-of-Domain Generalization in Dynamical Systems Reconstruction

Niclas Göring 1 2 Florian Hess 1 2 Manuel Brenner 1 2 Zahra Monfared 1 Daniel Durstewitz 1 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

In science we are interested in finding the governing equations, the dynamical rules, underlying
empirical phenomena. While traditionally scientific models are derived through cycles of human
insight and experimentation, recently deep learning (DL) techniques have been advanced to reconstruct dynamical systems (DS) directly from time
series data. State-of-the-art dynamical systems
reconstruction (DSR) methods show promise in
capturing invariant and long-term properties of
observed DS, but their ability to generalize to
unobserved domains remains an open challenge.
Yet, this is a crucial property we would expect
from any viable scientific theory. In this work, we
provide a formal framework that addresses generalization in DSR. We explain why and how out-ofdomain (OOD) generalization (OODG) in DSR
profoundly differs from OODG considered elsewhere in machine learning. We introduce mathematical notions based on topological concepts
and ergodic theory to formalize the idea of learnability of a DSR model. We formally prove that
black-box DL techniques, without adequate structural priors, generally will not be able to learn
a generalizing DSR model. We also show this
empirically, considering major classes of DSR algorithms proposed so far, and illustrate where and
why they fail to generalize across the whole state
space. Our study provides the first comprehensive
mathematical treatment of OODG in DSR, and
gives a deeper conceptual understanding of where
the fundamental problems in OODG lie and how
they could possibly be addressed in practice.

The majority of complex systems we encounter in physics,
biology, the social sciences, and beyond, can mathematically
be described as systems of differential equations, whose behavior is the subject of dynamical systems theory (DST).
Deriving accurate mathematical models of natural (or engineered) systems from observations for mechanistic insight,
scientific understanding, and prediction, is the core of any
scientific discipline. Recent years have seen a plethora of
advances in the field of DS reconstruction (DSR) mostly
based on deep learning (DL) approaches for inferring DS
models directly from time series data and thus partly automatizing the scientific model building process (Brunton et al.,
2016; Raissi et al., 2018; Vlachas et al., 2018; Platt et al.,
2021; Brenner et al., 2022; Vlachas et al., 2022; Hess et al.,
2023). Like any good scientific theory, a proper DS model
inferred from data should be able to generalize to novel
domains (dynamical regimes) not observed during training.
Here we develop a principled mathematical framework for
out-of-domain (OOD) generalization (OODG) in DSR. We
mathematically and numerically demonstrate that current
data-driven SOTA methods for DSR hit fundamental limits
regarding OODG, and provide some directions of how these
could potentially be addressed.
Current state of DSR Current DSR models attempt to either approximate the underlying system’s vector field (Brunton et al., 2016), or try to directly learn the flow (solution)
operator of the data-generating DS (Lu et al., 2019; Vlachas
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Brenner et al., 2022; Hess et al.,
2023; Chen & Wu, 2023). More specifically, DSR methods
have been developed based on symbolic regression (Brunton
et al., 2016; d’Ascoli et al., 2023), on various forms of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) equipped with special training
algorithms (Vlachas et al., 2018; Brenner et al., 2022; Hess
et al., 2023), on ordinary or partial differential equation
(ODE/PDE)-based DL models such as Neural ODEs (NODE; Chen et al. (2018); Ko et al. (2023)), on operator theory (Lu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Chen & Wu, 2023) or on
reservoir computing (RC; Pathak et al. (2017); Verzelli et al.
(2021); Platt et al. (2022; 2023)). State-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods (Brenner et al., 2022; Platt et al., 2023; Hess et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2023) can generalize beyond the observed
time horizon and capture an underlying system’s dynamical

1
Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany 2 Faculty of Physics
and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence to:
Niclas Göring <niclas.goering@gmail.com>, Daniel Durstewitz
<Daniel.Durstewitz@zi-mannheim.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

