On Interpolating Experts and Multi-Armed Bandits

Houshuang Chen 1 Yuchen He 1 Chihao Zhang 2

Abstract

expected regret achievable by any algorithm against the
worst loss sequence.

Learning with expert advice and multi-armed
bandit are two classic online decision problems
which differ on how the information is observed
in each round of the game. We study a family
of problems interpolating the two. For a vector
m = (m1 , . . . , mK ) ∈ NK , an instance of mMAB indicates that the arms are partitioned into
K groups and the i-th group contains mi arms.
Once an arm is pulled, the losses of all arms in the
same group are observed. We prove tight minimax
regret bounds for m-MAB and design an optimal
PAC algorithm for its pure exploration version, mBAI, where the goal is to identify the arm with
minimum loss with as few rounds as possible.
Weshow that the minimax 
regret of m-MAB is
q P
K
Θ
T k=1 log(mk + 1) and the minimum

There are variants of the problem according to amount of
information the player can observe in each round. In the
problem of multi-armed bandit (MAB), the player can only
observe
√the loss
 of the arm just pulled. The minimax regret
is Θ
N T (Audibert & Bubeck, 2009). Another important problem is when the player can observe the losses of all
arms in each round, often refered to √
as learning with expert
advice. The minimax regret is Θ T log N (Freund &
Schapire, 1997; Haussler et al., 1995). Bandit with graph
feedback generalizes and interpolates both models. In this
model, a directed graph G, called the feedback graph, is
given. The vertex set of G is the set of arms and a directed
edge from i to j indicates that pulling the arm i can observe
the loss of arm j. As a result, the MAB corresponds to when
G consists of singletons with self-loop, and learning with
expert advice corresponds to when G is a clique. A number
of recent works devote to understanding how the structure
of G affects the minimax regret (Alon et al., 2015; Chen
et al., 2021; He & Zhang, 2023; Eldowa et al., 2024; Kocák
& Carpentier, 2023; Rouyer et al., 2022; Dann et al., 2023).

number of pullsfor an (ε, 0.05)-PAC algorithm

PK
of m-BAI is Θ ε12 · k=1 log(mk + 1) . Both
our upper bounds and lower bounds for m-MAB
can be extended to a more general setting, namely
the bandit with graph feedback, in terms of the
clique cover and related graph parameters. As
consequences, we obtained tight minimax regret
bounds for several families of feedback graphs.

In this paper, we consider a natural interpolation between
learning with expert advice and multi-armed bandit. Let
m = (m1 , m2 , . . . , mK ) ∈ NK be a vector with each
mi ≥ 1. An instance of m-MAB is that the all N arms
are partitioned into K groups and the pull of each arm can
observe the losses of all arms in the same group. In the language of bandit with graph feedback, the feedback graph G
is the disjoint union of K cliques with size m1 , m2 , . . . , mk
respectively.
We show that the minimax
regret for m-MAB
q P

is Θ
T · k∈[K] log(mk + 1) . As a result, this generalizes the optimal regret bounds for both MAB and learning
with expert advice.

1. Introduction
A typical family of online decision problems is as follows:
In each round of the game, the player chooses one of N arms
to pull. At the same time, the player will incur a loss of the
pulled arm. The objective is to minimize the expected regret
defined as the difference between the cumulative losses of
the player and that of the single best arm over T rounds. The
minimax regret, denoted as R∗ (T ), represents the minimum

A closely related problem is the so-called “pure exploration”
version of bandit, often referred to as the best arm identification (BAI) problem where the loss of each arm follows
some (unknown) distribution. The goal of the problem is
to identify the arm with minimum mean loss with as few
rounds as possible. Similarly, we introduced the problem
of m-BAI with the same feedback pattern as m-MAB. We
design an (ε, 0.05)-PAC algorithm for m-BAI which ter-

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 John Hopcroft Center
for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Chihao Zhang <chihao@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

