CoLoRA: Continuous Low-Rank Adaptation for Reduced Implicit Neural
Modeling of Parameterized Partial Differential Equations

Jules Berman 1 Benjamin Peherstorfer 1

Abstract

The Kolmogorov barrier Reduced models exploit structure in PDE problems to more efficiently approximate solution fields. The conventional structure that is leveraged
is low rankness in the sense of the classical principal component analysis. Reduced models based on such low-rank
approximations can achieve exponentially fast error decays
e−cn with the rank n for a wide range of (mostly nicely
behaved elliptic) problems (Maday et al., 2002; Cohen &
DeVore, 2016). However, linear low-rank approximations
are affected by the so-called Kolmogorov barrier, which
states that there are classes of PDEs for which√linear approximations have an error decay rate of at best 1/ n (Ohlberger
& Rave, 2016; Greif & Urban, 2019). Examples of PDE
classes that are affected by the Kolmogorov barrier are often
describing transport-dominated phenomena such as strongly
advecting flows and wave-like behavior; see (Peherstorfer,
2022) for a survey.

This work introduces reduced models based on
Continuous Low Rank Adaptation (CoLoRA) that
pre-train neural networks for a given partial differential equation and then continuously adapt
low-rank weights in time to rapidly predict the
evolution of solution fields at new physics parameters and new initial conditions. The adaptation can be either purely data-driven or via
an equation-driven variational approach that provides Galerkin-optimal approximations. Because
CoLoRA approximates solution fields locally in
time, the rank of the weights can be kept small,
which means that only few training trajectories
are required offline so that CoLoRA is well suited
for data-scarce regimes. Predictions with CoLoRA are orders of magnitude faster than with
classical methods and their accuracy and parameter efficiency is higher compared to other neural
network approaches.

Our contribution: nonlinear reduced modeling with continuous low-rank adaptation (CoLoRA) In this work,
we build on LoRA (Low Rank Adaptation) for developing parameterizations for reduced models (Hu et al., 2022).
LoRA has been developed for fine-tuning large language
models and leverages the observation that fine-tuning objectives can be efficiently optimized on low-dimensional parameter spaces (Li et al., 2018; Aghajanyan et al., 2021; Hu
et al., 2022). This has been observed not only for large language models but also when approximating solution fields
of physical phenomena (Bachmayr et al., 2017; Grasedyck
et al., 2013; Berman & Peherstorfer, 2023). We build on
the pre-training/fine-tuning paradigm of LoRA but modify
it to Continuous LoRA (CoLoRA) that reflects our PDE
setting by allowing continuous-in-time adaptation (“finetuning”) of parts of the low-rank components as the solution
fields of the PDEs evolve; see Figure 1. This inductive
bias is in agreement with how typically physical phenomena
evolve over time, namely smoothly and along a latent lowdimensional structure. By composing multiple CoLoRA
layers in a deep network, we obtain a nonlinear parameterization that can circumvent the Kolmogorov barrier while
having a pre-training/fine-tuning decomposition with an inductive bias that reflects the special meaning of the time
variable t in PDE problems; see Figure 2.

1. Introduction
Many phenomena of interest in science and engineering
depend on physics parameters µ that influence the temporal
and spatial evolution of the system such as the Reynolds
number in fluid mechanics and conductivity coefficients in
heat transfer. Rapidly simulating physical phenomena for
a large sample M ≫ 1 of physics parameters µ1 , . . . , µM
is paramount in science and engineering, e.g., for finding
optimal designs, inverse problems, data assimilation, uncertainty quantification, and control. Numerically solving
the underlying parameterized partial differential equations
(PDEs) with standard numerical methods (Hughes, 2012;
LeVeque, 2002) for large numbers of different physics parameters is prohibitively expensive in many applications and
thus one often resorts to reduced modeling.
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY 10012, USA. Correspondence to: Jules
Berman <jmb1174@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

