Language-guided Skill Learning with Temporal Variational Inference

Haotian Fu 1 Pratyusha Sharma 2 Elias Stengel-Eskin 3 George Konidaris 1 Nicolas Le Roux 4 5
Marc-Alexandre Côté * 5 Xingdi Yuan * 5

Abstract
We present an algorithm for skill discovery from
expert demonstrations. The algorithm first utilizes
Large Language Models (LLMs) to propose an
initial segmentation of the trajectories. Following
that, a hierarchical variational inference framework incorporates the LLM-generated segmentation information to discover reusable skills by
merging trajectory segments. To further control
the trade-off between compression and reusability,
we introduce a novel auxiliary objective based on
the Minimum Description Length principle that
helps guide this skill discovery process. Our results demonstrate that agents equipped with our
method are able to discover skills that help accelerate learning and outperform baseline skill
learning approaches on new long-horizon tasks in
BabyAI, a grid world navigation environment, as
well as ALFRED, a household simulation environment.1

LLM Generated Initial Segmentation

Segment 1

2

3

Segment 4 Segment 5

6

Segment 7

Temporal Variational Inference

Skill 1

Skill 2

Skill 3

Figure 1. The trajectory segmentation and merging procedure.

of extracted skills/options (Pertsch et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2023). Skills are temporally-extended
policies (Sutton et al., 1999); each skill is executed for
a certain number of steps until switching to another skill.
While the observation that pre-specifying the set of skills
enables effective generalization to longer-horizon tasks, an
effective algorithm to autonomously discover the set of
domain-specific skills to enable long-horizon planning remains challenging. Our goal is to enable the discovery
of reusable skills from a dataset of expert demonstrations
(i.e., trajectories) of an agent performing various complex
tasks, and use these skills to solve new complex tasks more
efficiently.

1. Introduction

Many recent approaches learn skills from expert demonstrations by first slicing the trajectories into segments and merging them with a latent skill representation, and then reconstruct the trajectories from these latent variables (Shankar &
Gupta, 2020; Shankar et al., 2020; Kipf et al., 2019). Such
methods in practice often fall into two categories of “local
optima”: 1. every single step in one trajectory is segmented
as one skill and the learned skill space is like a continuous
resemblance of the original action space. 2. the agent directly marks the whole trajectory as one skill and does not
do any segmentation. In the first case, it is hard to accelerate
learning on new tasks as the skills are basically the original
actions. For the second case, the learned skills may perfectly
reconstruct the training trajectories but cannot generalize on
a new task as long as it is different from the training ones.

A major issue that makes Reinforcement Learning (RL)
hard to use for long-horizon interaction tasks is its sample
inefficiency. Conventional Deep RL algorithms explore and
learn task-specific policies from scratch, which can require
over 10M samples to train just one Atari game (Mnih et al.,
2015; Hessel et al., 2018). In contrast, humans can play well
after just 20 episodes. Humans have a strong set of priors
that helps us efficiently adapt to new tasks. Some recent
work has made attempts to introduce such priors for embodied agents as well, like constructing world-models (Hafner
et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2023), a goal/reward-conditioned
policy (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022), or a toolbox
* Equal Advising 1 Brown University 2 MIT 3 University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill 4 Mila 5 Microsoft Research. Correspondence
to: Haotian Fu <hfu7@cs.brown.edu>.

Why is it hard to balance between compression and reusability when learning from long trajectories? We believe that
this is because the search space for trajectory segmentation
is too large especially when the task horizon is long. The
number of ways to segment a sequence grows exponentially

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code and videos can be found at https://
language-skill-discovery.github.io/.

1

