Simple linear attention language models balance the recall-throughput tradeoff

Simran Arora * 1 Sabri Eyuboglu * 1 Michael Zhang * 1 Aman Timalsina 2 Silas Alberti 1 James Zou 1
Atri Rudra 2 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The choice of sequence mixer (e.g. attention, convolution) in a language model affects both its quality and efficiency (Arora et al., 2023a; Vaswani et al., 2017). Prior
work shows that attention excels at recall, the ability to
ground generations in previously seen tokens (Olsson et al.,
2022; Arora et al., 2023a). On the other hand, the throughput
of attention-based models is bottle-necked during training
by quadratic compute complexity and during inference by
aggressive memory consumption. The natural question is:
can we improve the real-world speed and memory-use of
language models without comprising on quality?

Recent work has shown that attention-based language models excel at recall, the ability to ground
generations in tokens previously seen in context.
However, the efficiency of attention-based models is bottle-necked during inference by the KVcache’s aggressive memory consumption. In this
work, we explore whether we can improve language model efficiency (e.g. by reducing memory consumption) without compromising on recall. By applying experiments and theory to a
broad set of architectures, we identify a key tradeoff between a model’s state size and recall ability. We show that efficient alternatives to attention (e.g. H3, Mamba, RWKV) maintain a fixedsize recurrent state, but struggle at recall. We
propose BASED a simple architecture combining
linear and sliding window attention. By varying BASED window size and linear attention feature dimension, we can dial the state size and
traverse the Pareto frontier of the recall-memory
tradeoff curve, recovering the full quality of attention on one end and the small state size of
attention-alternatives on the other. We train language models up to 1.3b parameters and show that
BASED matches the strongest sub-quadratic models (e.g. Mamba) in perplexity and outperforms
them on real-world recall-intensive tasks by 10.36
accuracy points. We further develop IO-aware
algorithms that enable BASED to provide 24×
higher throughput on language generation than
FlashAttention-2, when generating 1024 tokens
using 1.3b parameter models. Overall, BASED expands the Pareto frontier of the throughput-recall
tradeoff space beyond prior architectures.

Recently, a number of architectures have been proposed
that enable substantially higher throughput while competing
with attention in perplexity (Wang et al., 2022; Gu and Dao,
2023; Yang et al., 2023; Poli et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023).
However, coarse metrics like overall perplexity can obscure
important differences in model quality. For example, recent
work shows that a specific class of architectures, gatedconvolutions, despite complexity scaling sub-quadratically
in sequence length, are asymptotically less efficient than
attention at performing recall (Arora et al., 2023a). Building
on this analysis, we evaluate a broader class of architectures
across real-world recall-intensive tasks and show attention
improves over a currently-popular attention-free alternative,
Mamba, by 32.2 accuracy points (Table 1). 1
Motivated by these observations, we explore the Pareto frontier of the tradeoff between high-recall and high-throughput
models. We evaluate a range of architectures on a popular synthetic associative recall task (Arora et al., 2023a;
Fu et al., 2023a; Olsson et al., 2022). Since generation
throughput is bottle-necked by memory consumption, we
vary hyperparameters (e.g. model dimension) that affect the
size of the recurrent state during generation and demonstrate
a fundamental recall-memory tradeoff that holds across architecture classes (Figure 2). Attention performs associative
recall perfectly, but the recurrent state (i.e. the KV-cache)
grows linearly with the sequence length. Sliding window

*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University 2 University of Buffalo.
Correspondence to: Simran Arora <simarora@stanford.edu>,
Sabri Eyuboglu <eyuboglu@stanford.edu>, Michael Zhang
<mzhang20@stanford.edu>.

1
Examples of recall-intensive tasks include information extraction, reading comprehension, summarization and code generation.
These require using in context information (contrasting memorized
information) during generation.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

