A Computational Framework for Solving Wasserstein Lagrangian Flows

Kirill Neklyudov * 1 2 Rob Brekelmans * 3 Alexander Tong 1 2 Lazar Atanackovic 3 4
Qiang Liu 5 Alireza Makhzani 3 4

Abstract

high resolution, allowing high-throughput observation over
tens of thousands of genes (Macosko et al., 2015). However,
since the measurement process ultimately leads to cell death,
we can only observe temporal changes of the marginal or
population distributions of cells as they undergo treatment,
differentiation, or developmental processes of interest. To
understand these processes and make future predictions,
we are interested in both (i) interpolating the evolution of
marginal cell distributions between observed timepoints and
(ii) modeling the full trajectories at the individual cell level.

The dynamical formulation of the optimal transport can be extended through various choices of
the underlying geometry (kinetic energy), and
the regularization of density paths (potential energy). These combinations yield different variational problems (Lagrangians), encompassing
many variations of the optimal transport problem
such as the Schrödinger bridge, unbalanced optimal transport, and optimal transport with physical constraints, among others. In general, the
optimal density path is unknown, and solving
these variational problems can be computationally
challenging. We propose a novel deep learning
based framework approaching all of these problems from a unified perspective. Leveraging the
dual formulation of the Lagrangians, our method
does not require simulating or backpropagating
through the trajectories of the learned dynamics,
and does not need access to optimal couplings.
We showcase the versatility of the proposed framework by outperforming previous approaches for
the single-cell trajectory inference, where incorporating prior knowledge into the dynamics is
crucial for correct predictions.

However, when inferring trajectories over cell distributions,
there exist multiple cell dynamics that yield the same population marginals. This presents an ill-posed problem, which
highlights the need for trajectory inference methods that can
flexibly incorporate different types of prior information on
the cell dynamics. Commonly, such prior information is
specified via posing a variational problem on the space of
marginal distributions, where previous works on measurevalued splines (Chen et al., 2018; Benamou et al., 2019;
Chewi et al., 2021; Clancy & Suarez, 2022; Chen et al.,
2023) are examples which seek to minimize the acceleration
of particles.
We propose a general framework for using deep neural
networks to infer dynamics and solve marginal interpolation
problems, using Lagrangian action functionals on manifolds
of probability densities that can flexibly incorporate various
types of prior information. We consider Lagrangians of the
form L[ρt , ρ̇t , t] = K[ρt , ρ̇t ] − U[ρt , t], referring to the first
term as a kinetic energy and the second as a potential energy.
Our methods can solve a diverse set of problems defined by
the choice of these energies and constraints on the evolution
of ρt . More explicitly, we specify

1. Introduction
The problem of trajectory inference, or recovering the population dynamics of a system from samples of its temporal marginal distributions, is a challenging problem arising
throughout the natural sciences (Hashimoto et al., 2016;
Lavenant et al., 2021). A particularly important application
is analysis of single-cell RNA-sequencing data (Schiebinger
et al., 2019; Schiebinger, 2021; Saelens et al., 2019), which
provides a heterogeneous snapshot of a cell population at a

• A kinetic energy which, in the primary examples considered in this paper, corresponds to a geometry on
the space of probability measures. We primarily consider the Riemannian structures corresponding to the
Wasserstein-2 and Wasserstein Fisher-Rao metrics.
• A potential energy which is a functional of the density,
such as the expectation of a physical potential that encodes prior knowledge, or even a nonlinear functional.

*
Joint first authorship 1 Université de Montréal 2 Mila - Quebec
AI Institute 3 Vector Institute 4 University of Toronto 5 University
of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: k.necludov@gmail.com ,
{rob.brekelmans, makhzani}@vectorinstitute.ai .

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• A collection of marginal constraints which are inspired
by the availability of data in the problem of interest.
1

