HarmBench: A Standardized Evaluation Framework for
Automated Red Teaming and Robust Refusal

Mantas Mazeika 1 Long Phan 2 Xuwang Yin 2 Andy Zou 3 2 Zifan Wang 2 Norman Mu 4 Elham Sakhaee 5
Nathaniel Li 4 2 Steven Basart 2 Bo Li 6 1 David Forsyth 1 Dan Hendrycks 2

Abstract

have shown preliminary abilities in writing malware (Bhatt
et al., 2023), social engineering (Hazell, 2023), and even
designing chemical and biological weapons (Gopal et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2024). As LLMs become more capable and
widespread, limiting the potential for their malicious use
will become increasingly important. To this end, an important research problem is ensuring that LLMs never engage
in specified harmful behaviors.

Automated red teaming holds substantial promise
for uncovering and mitigating the risks associated with the malicious use of large language
models (LLMs), yet the field lacks a standardized evaluation framework to rigorously assess
new methods. To address this issue, we introduce HarmBench, a standardized evaluation
framework for automated red teaming. We identify several desirable properties previously unaccounted for in red teaming evaluations and systematically design HarmBench to meet these criteria. Using HarmBench, we conduct a largescale comparison of 18 red teaming methods
and 33 target LLMs and defenses, yielding
novel insights. We also introduce a highly efficient adversarial training method that greatly
enhances LLM robustness across a wide range
of attacks, demonstrating how HarmBench enables codevelopment of attacks and defenses. We
open source HarmBench at https://github.
com/centerforaisafety/HarmBench.

A variety of best practices and defenses have been adopted
by leading LLM developers to address malicious use, including red teaming, filters, and refusal mechanisms (Ganguli
et al., 2022; Markov et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Red teaming is a key component of these,
as it allows companies to discover and fix vulnerabilities
in their defenses before deployment. However, companies
currently rely on manual red teaming, which suffers from
poor scalability. Given the vast scope of LLMs, manual red
teaming simply cannot explore the full range of adversarial
or long-tail scenarios an AI might encounter. Thus, there
has been considerable interest in developing automated red
teaming methods to evaluate and harden defenses.
Recent papers on automated red teaming have reported
promising results. However, these papers use disparate
evaluations, rendering them hard to compare and hampering
future progress. Moreover, we find that prior evaluations
lack important desirable properties for accurately evaluating
automated red teaming. To address these issues, we introduce HarmBench, a new benchmark for red teaming attacks
and defenses. We identify three desirable properties for red
teaming evaluations—breadth, comparability, and robust
metrics—and we systematically design HarmBench to satisfy them. HarmBench contains far more unique behaviors
than previous evaluations as well as entirely new categories
of behaviors unexplored in prior work.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have driven rapid advances
in the performance and generality of AI systems. This has
enabled many beneficial applications in recent years, ranging from AI tutors to coding assistants (Chen et al., 2021;
Achiam et al., 2023). However, there has been growing
concern from researchers, regulators, and industry leaders
over the risk of malicious use posed by current and future
AI systems (Brundage et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2023;
Executive Office of the President, 2023). Current LLMs

We release HarmBench with large-scale initial evaluations,
including 18 red teaming methods and 33 LLMs. These experiments reveal previously unknown properties that could
help inform future work on attacks and defenses, including that no current attack or defense is uniformly effective,
and that robustness is independent of model size. Overall,
our results demonstrate the vital importance of large-scale

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Center for AI
Safety 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 UC Berkeley 5 Microsoft
6
University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Mantas Mazeika
<mantas3@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

