When Do Skills Help Reinforcement Learning?
A Theoretical Analysis of Temporal Abstractions

Zhening Li 1 Gabriel Poesia 2 Armando Solar-Lezama 1

Abstract

2022; Li et al., 2022). Incorporating skills into the agent’s
action space (hierarchical RL) allows it to act at a higher
level and reach goals in fewer steps, which may improve
exploration and thus RL performance.

Skills are temporal abstractions that are intended
to improve reinforcement learning (RL) performance through hierarchical RL. Despite our intuition about the properties of an environment that
make skills useful, a precise characterization has
been absent. We provide the first such characterization, focusing on the utility of deterministic
skills in deterministic sparse-reward environments
with finite action spaces. We show theoretically
and empirically that RL performance gain from
skills is worse in environments where solutions to
states are less compressible. Additional theoretical results suggest that skills benefit exploration
more than they benefit learning from existing experience, and that using unexpressive skills such
as macroactions may worsen RL performance.
We hope our findings can guide research on automatic skill discovery and help RL practitioners
better decide when and how to use skills.

Despite their appeal, skills have not seen widespread use. In
fact, they were not involved in most major breakthroughs
and applications of RL, such as surpassing human-level
performance in all Atari games (Badia et al., 2020), RLHF
for aligning LLMs with human preferences (Ouyang et al.,
2022), AlphaTensor for faster matrix multiplication (Fawzi
et al., 2022), and AlphaDev for faster sorting (Mankowitz
et al., 2023). A reason skills have not been widely adopted is
that they sometimes do not improve RL performance and it
is unclear how to determine beforehand whether they would.
While several methods have been developed to automatically discover skills, most of them require the practitioner
to decide whether to use skills at all. To our knowledge,
LEMMA (Li et al., 2022) is the only algorithm that automatically decides whether skills are useful by learning the optimal number of skills — zero would mean that skills do not
help. However, this is accomplished by optimizing a heuristic objective that does not necessarily reflect the benefits to
RL. Other skill discovery algorithms such as Option-Critic
(Bacon et al., 2017), eigenoptions (Machado et al., 2017),
deep skill chaining (Bagaria & Konidaris, 2019), LOVE
(Jiang et al., 2022) and COPlanLearn (Nayyar et al., 2023)
determine the number of skills using a hyperparameter. A
better understanding of how exactly skills benefit RL may
guide research in automatically determining whether skills
would be useful in an environment and the optimal number
to learn if they are. Such an understanding can also provide
insight into why skills do not work in certain environments
as well as help practitioners better decide whether to use
skills for a given RL task.

1. Introduction
In most real-world sequential decision making problems,
agents are only given sparse rewards for their actions. This
makes reinforcement learning (RL) challenging, as agents
can only recognize good behavior after long sequences of
good decisions. This issue can be mitigated by leveraging temporal abstractions (Sutton et al., 1999), also known
as skills. A skill is a high-level action — such as a fixed
sequence of actions (macroaction) or a sub-policy with a termination condition (option) — that is expected to be useful
in a large number of states. Skills can be hand-engineered to
perform subtasks (Pedersen et al., 2016; He et al., 2011) or
learned from experience (Machado et al., 2017; Bacon et al.,
2017; Barreto et al., 2019; Kipf et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,

Our work provides a theoretical analysis of when and how
skills and hierarchical RL benefit RL performance in deterministic sparse-reward environments. We hope our insights
will serve to guide research in automatic skill discovery
including the automatic determination of whether to use
skills, and allow practitioners to better understand the kinds
of environments where skills are helpful. In summary, we
make the following contributions:

1

MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Zhening Li
<zli11010@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

