Look Ahead or Look Around?
A Theoretical Comparison Between Autoregressive and Masked Pretraining

Qi Zhang * 1 Tianqi Du * 1 Haotian Huang 2 Yifei Wang 3 Yisen Wang 1 4

Abstract

Autoregressive
SSL

In recent years, the rise of generative selfsupervised learning (SSL) paradigms has exhibited impressive performance across visual, language, and multi-modal domains. While the varied designs of generative SSL objectives lead to
distinct properties in downstream tasks, a theoretical understanding of these differences remains
largely unexplored. In this paper, we establish the
first theoretical comparisons between two leading generative SSL paradigms: autoregressive
SSL and masked SSL. Through establishing theoretical frameworks, we elucidate the strengths
and limitations of autoregressive and masked SSL
within the primary evaluation tasks of classification and content generation. Our findings demonstrate that in classification tasks, the flexibility
of targeted tokens in masked SSL fosters more
inter-sample connections compared to the fixed
position of target tokens in autoregressive SSL,
which yields superior clustering performance. In
content generation tasks, the misalignment between the flexible lengths of test samples and the
fixed length of unmasked texts in masked SSL
(vs. flexible lengths of conditional texts in autoregressive SSL) hinders its generation performance. To leverage each other’s strengths and mitigate weaknesses, we propose diversity-enhanced
autoregressive and variable-length masked objectives, which substantially improve the classification performance of autoregressive SSL
and the generation performance of masked SSL.
Code is available at https://github.com/
PKU-ML/LookAheadLookAround.

Masked
SSL

Euphoria means joy happiness and excitement

Unmasked
Texts

Euphoria

joy

excitement

Masked
Texts

means

happiness

and

Figure 1. Illustration of two primary paradigms in generative SSL:
autoregressive SSL and masked SSL.

1. Introduction

Equal contribution 1 National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking
University, China 2 Sun Yat-Sen University, China 3 MIT CSAIL,
USA 4 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China.
Correspondence to: Yisen Wang <yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigms have
emerged to be promising in a wide variety of domains (He
et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2021). Generative SSL, characterized by its
ability to reconstruct target tokens from conditional tokens
within the same sequence, stands out for its distinct advantages in fine-tuning (He et al., 2022), zero-shot learning
(Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021), and many other
downstream tasks. In general, generative SSL can be divided into two categories: autoregressive SSL (represented
by GPT (Radford et al., 2018)) and masked SSL (represented by BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)). As shown in Figure
1, the key difference between them lies in the choice of target
tokens. Taking the language models as an example, autoregressive SSL predicts the next word in a sentence based
on preceding words, while masked SSL predicts randomly
masked words in a sentence based on bidirectional words.
As a result, these two generative SSL models demonstrate
significant differences in many aspects. For example, on
two primary evaluation tasks of pretrained models, i.e., classification and content generation tasks, masked SSL tends
to perform better in classification tasks, whereas autoregressive SSL shows superior performance in content generation
tasks (Table 1). Despite empirical evidence supporting their
differing efficacies, the underlying reasons explaining the
distinct properties of autoregressive and masked SSL remain
unclear.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose the first theoretical comparison
between autoregressive and masked SSL, with a focus on
classification and content generation tasks as widely con-

*

1

