On the Hardness of Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Learning

Jaron Maene 1 Vincent Derkinderen 1 Luc De Raedt 1 2

Abstract

compute the exact probabilities. We therefore investigate
the approximation of gradients for probabilistic inference in
its own right and prove several positive and negative results.

The limitations of purely neural learning have
sparked an interest in probabilistic neurosymbolic models, which combine neural networks
with probabilistic logical reasoning. As these neurosymbolic models are trained with gradient descent, we study the complexity of differentiating
probabilistic reasoning. We prove that although
approximating these gradients is intractable in
general, it becomes tractable during training. Furthermore, we introduce WeightME, an unbiased
gradient estimator based on model sampling. Under mild assumptions, WeightME approximates
the gradient with probabilistic guarantees using
a logarithmic number of calls to a SAT solver.
Lastly, we evaluate the necessity of these guarantees on the gradient. Our experiments indicate
that the existing biased approximations indeed
struggle to optimize even when exact solving is
still feasible.

In Section 3, we show that the intractability of probabilistic
inference also implies that it is impossible to approximate
gradients with probabilistic guarantees in polynomial time
(unless RP = NP, where RP is randomized polynomial time).
However, in Section 4, we prove that the gradient approximation problem becomes tractable during training when the
neural network outputs converge to binary values. On the
negative side, we find that this tractable region can become
unreachable for large problems.
In Section 5, we investigate more general-purpose gradient
estimators with strong guarantees by allowing access to a
SAT oracle. We introduce the Weighted Model Estimator
(WeightME), a novel gradient estimator for probabilistic
inference which relies on weighted model sampling. As opposed to existing approximations for neurosymbolic learning (Huang et al., 2021; Manhaeve et al., 2021; Ahmed et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022; van Krieken et al., 2023; Verreet et al.,
2023), WeightME is unbiased and probably approximately
correct under mild assumptions. Furthermore, WeightME
only needs a logarithmic number of SAT invocations in the
number of variables.

1. Introduction
Neurosymbolic artificial intelligence aims to combine the
strengths of neural and symbolic methods into a single unified framework (Garcez et al., 2019; Hitzler, 2022; Marra
et al., 2024). One prominent strain of neurosymbolic models combines neural networks with probabilistic reasoning (Manhaeve et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018; Yang et al.,
2021; Ahmed et al., 2023). These models are state-of-the-art
but suffer from scalability issues due to the #P-hard nature of
probabilistic inference. Probabilistic inference has been extensively studied on probabilistic graphical models (Koller
& Friedman, 2009) and model counting (Chakraborty et al.,
2021). However, neurosymbolic learning deviates from regular probabilistic inference due to its learning aspect: the
goal is to efficiently obtain useful gradients rather than to

Finally, Sections 6 and 7 provide a comprehensive overview
and evaluation of existing approximation techniques. Our
results indicate that they have difficulties optimizing benchmarks that can still easily be solved exactly. This suggests
that principled methods are warranted if we want to apply
probabilistic neurosymbolic optimization to more complex
reasoning tasks.

2. Weighted Model Counting
Probabilistic inference can be reduced to weighted model
counting (WMC). WMC has been called “an assembly
language for probabilistic reasoning” (Belle et al., 2015)
as a wide range of probabilistic models can be cast into
WMC (Chavira & Darwiche, 2008; Domshlak & Hoffmann,
2007; Suciu et al., 2011; Holtzen et al., 2020; Derkinderen
et al., 2024). Bayesian networks are a notable example
where WMC solvers are state-of-the-art for exact inference (Chavira & Darwiche, 2008). Importantly, WMC also

1
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, Leuven, Belgium. 2 Örebro University, Centre for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems, Örebro, Sweden. Correspondence to: Jaron Maene
<jaron.maene@kuleuven.be>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

