Reinforcement Learning from Reachability Specifications:
PAC Guarantees with Expected Conditional Distance

Jakub Svoboda 1 Suguman Bansal 2 Krishnendu Chatterjee 1

Abstract

Recent years have seen an emergence of RL from temporal
logical specifications (Aksaray et al., 2016; Brafman et al.,
2018; De Giacomo et al., 2019; Hasanbeig et al., 2018;
Littman et al., 2017b; Hasanbeig et al., 2019; Yuan et al.,
2019; Hahn et al., 2019; Xu & Topcu, 2019; Jiang et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2017; Icarte et al., 2018; Jothimurugan et al.,
2021). In this approach, the desired task is expressed in
the form of high-level temporal logical specifications rather
than low-level rewards. Logic specifications have found a
place in the plethora of RL algorithms because of (a) the
relative ease to express complex non-Markovian tasks compared to rewards and (b) the impressive ability of RL from
logical specification algorithms to efficiently scale learning
to long-horizon tasks. Potential applications include learning policies for long-horizon tasks such as navigation and
manipulation in robotics and cyber-physical systems.

Reinforcement Learning (RL) from temporal logical specifications is a fundamental problem in
sequential decision-making. One of the basic
and core specification is the reachability specification that requires a target set to be eventually
visited. Despite strong empirical results for RL
from such specifications, the theoretical guarantees are bleak, including the impossibility of Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) guarantee for
reachability specifications. Given the impossibility result, in this work we consider the problem
of RL from reachability specifications along with
the information of expected conditional distance
(ECD). We present (a) lower bound results which
establish the necessity of ECD information for
PAC guarantees and (b) an algorithm that establishes PAC-guarantees given the ECD information. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first RL from reachability specifications that does
not make any assumptions about the underlying
environment to learn policies with guarantees.

Despite potential applications, their utility in safety-critical
applications has been limited since existing theoretical guarantees of RL from logical specifications have been bleak.
Probably approximately correct (PAC) learning (Valiant,
1984) is a framework for formalizing guarantees of a learning algorithm: Given an approximation parameter ε > 0 and
a confidence parameter δ > 0, a learning algorithm is said to
be PAC if it returns a solution that is ε-close to optimal with
probability at least 1−δ within a finite (bounded) number of
samples. In RL, PAC learning algorithms are known to exist
for reward-based specifications (Brafman & Tennenholtz,
2002; Kakade, 2003). However, PAC guarantees from logical specifications have been proven to be impossible (Alur
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2021). The impossibility already
appears for reachability specifications that require a target
state set in the environment to be eventually visited. The
PAC impossibility hinges on the inherent non-robustness of
infinite-horizon logical specifications due to which small
perturbations in the environment do not preserve optimal
or near-optimal policies (Littman et al., 2017a). As a result, obtaining an optimal or near-optimal policy on a close
approximation of the environment does not guarantee a nearoptimal policy in the true environment.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is
a promising approach to learn policies for challenging
tasks such as walking (Collins et al., 2005) and grasping (Andrychowicz et al., 2020), control of multi-agent
systems (Inala et al., 2021; Jothimurugan et al., 2022; Lowe
et al., 2017), and control from visual inputs (Levine et al.,
2016). A key benefit of RL is that it learns optimal policies
for tasks in an unknown environment, making it ideal for
practical applications with unavailable, noisy, or hard-tomodel environments.
1
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria 2 Georgia
Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Jakub
Svoboda <jakub.svoboda@ist.ac.at>, Suguman Bansal <suguman@gatech.edu>.

In light of PAC impossibility for reachability, our central
result is a PAC learning algorithm for reachability specifications using a novel parameter called the Expected Condi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

