Probabilistic Conceptual Explainers:
Trustworthy Conceptual Explanations for Vision Foundation Models

Hengyi Wang * 1 Shiwei Tan * 1 Hao Wang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and
their variants (Liu et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Radford
et al., 2021) have emerged as pivotal models in computer vision, leveraging stacked self-attention blocks to encode raw
inputs and produce patch-wise embeddings as contextual
representations. Given their increasing application in highrisk domains such as autonomous driving, explainability has
become a critical concern.

Vision transformers (ViTs) have emerged as a
significant area of focus, particularly for their capacity to be jointly trained with large language
models and to serve as robust vision foundation
models. Yet, the development of trustworthy explanation methods for ViTs has lagged, particularly in the context of post-hoc interpretations
of ViT predictions. Existing sub-image selection
approaches, such as feature-attribution and conceptual models, fall short in this regard. This paper proposes five desiderata for explaining ViTs –
faithfulness, stability, sparsity, multi-level structure, and parsimony – and demonstrates the inadequacy of current methods in meeting these
criteria comprehensively. We introduce a variational Bayesian explanation framework, dubbed
ProbAbilistic Concept Explainers (PACE), which
models the distributions of patch embeddings to
provide trustworthy post-hoc conceptual explanations. Our qualitative analysis reveals the distributions of patch-level concepts, elucidating the
effectiveness of ViTs by modeling the joint distribution of patch embeddings and ViT’s predictions.
Moreover, these patch-level explanations bridge
the gap between image-level and dataset-level explanations, thus completing the multi-level structure of PACE. Through extensive experiments on
both synthetic and real-world datasets, we demonstrate that PACE surpasses state-of-the-art methods in terms of the defined desiderata1 .

To date, post-hoc explanations in computer vision often
involve attributing predictions to specific image regions.
However, we identify two primary limitations in current
methods: (1) Existing conceptual explanation methods (Fel
et al., 2023a;b; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2020; Novello et al.; Chen et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2021a; Wang et al., 2023) are not fully compatible with
transformer-based models like vision transformers (ViTs),
and they also fall short in offering a cohesive structure for
dataset-image-patch analysis of input images. (2) Current
state-of-the-art methods (Li et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2021;
Agarwal et al., 2022; Colin et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022; Fel et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023) evaluate visual concepts through subjective human utility scores
or limited quantitative analysis, lacking a fair and consistent
comparison framework. To address this, we propose a comprehensive set of desiderata for post-hoc conceptual explanations for ViTs, namely (see formal definitions in Sec. 3.2):
• Faithfulness: The explanation should be faithful to the
explained ViT and able to recover its prediction.
• Stability: The explanation should be stable for different
perturbed versions of the same image.
• Sparsity: For each prediction’s explanation, only a
small subset of concepts are relevant.
• Multi-Level Structure: There should be dataset-level,
image-level, and patch-level explanations.
• Parsimony: There are a small number of concepts in
total (see Appendix B for more details).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers
University, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Hengyi Wang
<hengyi.wang@rutgers.edu>.

While previous research (Kim et al., 2018; Fel et al., 2023b;
Oikarinen et al., 2023; Gilpin et al., 2018; Murdoch et al.,
2019) has proposed and met different dimensions of the
learned concepts, these studies often lack a comprehensive

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code will soon be available at https://github.com/Wang-MLLab/interpretable-foundation-models

1

