LLaGA: Large Language and Graph Assistant

Runjin Chen 1 Tong Zhao 2 Ajay Jaiswal 1 Neil Shah 2 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

et al., 2017), embedded with message passing and aggregation techniques, are powerful algorithmic tools on handling
complex graph structures.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have empowered the advance in graph-structured data analysis. Recently, the rise of Large Language Models
(LLMs) like GPT-4 has heralded a new era in deep
learning. However, their application to graph data
poses distinct challenges due to the inherent difficulty of translating graph structures to language.
To this end, we introduce the Large Language
and Graph Assistant (LLaGA), an innovative
model that effectively integrates LLM capabilities to handle the complexities of graph-structured
data. LLaGA retains the general-purpose nature
of LLMs while adapting graph data into a format
compatible with LLM input. LLaGA achieves
this by reorganizing graph nodes to structureaware sequences and then mapping these into
the token embedding space through a versatile
projector. LLaGA excels in versatility, generalizability and interpretability, allowing it to perform consistently well across different datasets
and tasks, extend its ability to unseen datasets
or tasks, and provide explanations for graphs.
Our extensive experiments across popular graph
benchmarks show that LLaGA delivers outstanding performance across four datasets and three
tasks using one single model, surpassing state-ofthe-art graph models in both supervised and zeroshot scenarios. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/LLaGA

Recently, the advent of large language models (LLMs) that
have massive context-aware knowledge and semantic comprehension capabilities (e.g., LLaMa (Touvron et al., 2023),
GPTs (Achiam et al., 2023), Claude (Perez et al., 2022))
marks a significant advancement in AI research. A key advantage of LLMs is their ability to solve various tasks with
a single model, showcasing strong language skills and the
capacity to explain provided answers. These models have
demonstrated remarkable proficiency not only in languagerelated tasks but also in understanding and generating visual
content (Liu et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023). However,
the direct application of such models presents challenges
over graph-structured data, which inherently contains rich
relational and structural information.
Researchers (Fatemi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a) explored ways to translate graph structures into natural language suitable for consumption by language models. Yet,
describing graphs in plain texts tends to be verbose and fails
to directly represent the intrinsic characteristics of graphs,
often leading to repetitive and unintuitive descriptions of
nodes and edge relationships. Consequently, LLMs would
perform poorly on basic graph tasks without specific adaptations (Chen et al., 2023a). InstructGLM (Ye et al., 2023)
describes graphs in language and attempts to enhance LLMs’
graph-task performance by task-specific fine-tuning. However, this specialization constrains the model’s versatility,
potentially limiting its effectiveness in other graph tasks or
non-graph-related domains. GraphGPT (Tang et al., 2023)
combines text descriptions with a self-supervised graph
transformer to incorporate graph data into LLMs. However,
the pre-trained graph transformer might not distill all relevant structural information for specific downstream tasks,
leading to less satisfactory performances. Motivated by
these issues, this work poses an important question: How
to develop a framework that effectively encodes structural
information for graphs across various tasks and domains,
enabling its comprehension by LLMs, while maintaining
LLMs’ general-purpose ?

1. Introduction
Graphs are omnipresent, representing a myriad of real-world
data from social networks, biological networks and recommendation systems, etc. Graph neural networks (GNNs)
(Kipf & Welling, 2017; Defferrard et al., 2016; Veličković
1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 Snap Inc. Correspondence
to: Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>, Runjin Chen
<chenrunjin@utexas.edu>.

In response, we introduce the Large Language and Graph
Assistant (LLaGA), a novel framework that seamlessly in-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

