Quantum Positional Encodings for Graph Neural Networks

Slimane Thabet 1 2 Mehdi Djellabi 1 Igor O. Sokolov 1 Sachin Kasture 1 Louis-Paul Henry 1 Loı̈c Henriet 1

Abstract

Gilmer et al., 2017) is the first and most common approach
to build GNNs. This method exhibits several recognized
limitations (Zhu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Topping
et al., 2021), that the research community is actively exploring in order to find solutions. The key idea is to expand
aggregation beyond neighbouring nodes by incorporating
information related to the entire graph or a more extensive
portion of it. Graph Transformers were created according
to these requirements, showing success on standard benchmarks (Ying et al., 2021; Rampášek et al., 2022). Among
the myriad of proposed architectures, the Graph Inductive
Bias Transformer (GRIT) (Ma et al., 2023) stands out for its
impressive generalization capacity. Similarly to their counterparts in natural language processing, graph transformers
compute positional encodings (PE) that are concatenated
to node features. The most commonly used PEs are the
eigenvectors of the laplacian matrix (Rampášek et al., 2022;
Kreuzer et al., 2021) and the random walk probabilities (Ma
et al., 2023; He et al., 2023; Dwivedi et al., 2022).

In this work, we propose novel families of positional encodings tailored to graph neural networks
obtained with quantum computers. These encodings leverage the long-range correlations inherent
in quantum systems that arise from mapping the
topology of a graph onto interactions between
qubits in a quantum computer. Our inspiration
stems from the recent advancements in quantum
processing units, which offer computational capabilities beyond the reach of classical hardware.
We prove that some of these quantum features are
theoretically more expressive for certain graphs
than the commonly used relative random walk
probabilities. Empirically, we show that the performance of state-of-the-art models can be improved on standard benchmarks and large-scale
datasets by computing tractable versions of quantum features. Our findings highlight the potential
of leveraging quantum computing capabilities to
enhance the performance of transformers in handling graph data.

The goal of this work is to leverage new types of structural
features as positional encodings emerging from quantum
physics that can be obtained using quantum computers. The
rapid development of quantum computers during the previous years indeed provides the opportunity to compute
features that would be otherwise intractable. These features
contain complex topological characteristics of the graph,
and their inclusion has the potential to enhance the model’s
quality, reduce training or inference time, and decrease energy consumption. The idea of using quantum states containing topological features about the graphs has already
been explored theoretically in (Verdon et al., 2019; Schuld
et al., 2020; Henry et al., 2021; Thabet et al., 2022), and
experimentally implemented in (Albrecht et al., 2023). Most
of these works rely on the idea to prepare a parameterized
quantum state by evolving a hamiltonian which encodes the
topology of the graph. Measurements on this quantum state
are used as graph features in a classical algorithm like Support Vector Machine. The majority of these works propose a
method where most of the computation is done on a quantum
processing unit. In contrast, (Thabet et al., 2022) proposes a
hybrid algorithm where the attention matrix in conventional
graph transformers is replaced by the the correlation matrix of the quantum state. The advantage of this method is
to better leverage the capabilities of classical graph neural

1. Introduction
Graph machine learning (GML) is an expanding field of research with applications in chemistry (Gilmer et al., 2017),
biology (Zitnik et al., 2018), drug design (Konaklieva, 2014),
social networks (Scott, 2011), computer vision (Harchaoui
& Bach, 2007) and science (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020;
Xu et al., 2018). In the past few years, significant effort
has been put into the design of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Hamilton). The objective is to learn suitable representations that enable efficient solutions to the original
problem.
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNN) (Kipf &
Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2018; Veličković et al., 2018;
1

Pasqal, Massy, France 2 Sorbonne University, Paris,
France.
Correspondence to:
Slimane Thabet <slimane.thabet@pasqal.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

