Ranking-based Client Imitation Selection for Efficient Federated Learning

Chunlin Tian * 1 Zhan Shi * 2 Xinpeng Qin 3 Li Li 1 Chengzhong Xu 1
Device Pool

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) enables multiple devices
to collaboratively train a shared model while ensuring data privacy. The selection of participating devices in each training round critically affects both the model performance and training
efficiency, especially given the vast heterogeneity
in training capabilities and data distribution across
devices. To deal with these challenges, we introduce a novel device selection solution called FedRank, which is based on an end-to-end, rankingbased model that is pre-trained by imitation learning against state-of-the-art analytical approaches.
It not only considers data and system heterogeneity at runtime but also adaptively and efficiently
chooses the most suitable clients for model training. Specifically, FedRank views client selection
in FL as a ranking problem and employs a pairwise training strategy for the smart selection process. Additionally, an imitation learning-based
approach is designed to counteract the cold-start
issues often seen in state-of-the-art learning-based
approaches. Experimental results reveal that FedRank boosts model accuracy by 5.2% to 56.9%,
accelerates the training convergence up to 2.01×
and saves the energy consumption up to 40.1%.

(1) Deadline Filter [FedCS]
(2) Tier -based Latency [TiFL]

Reward
States
Actions

(3) Loss + Latency [Oor t]

......

Agent

(a)

Cold Start！
Hard to Converge！

Human

Participants SubSet

SOTA Selection
Heuristic-based
Learning-based

Ranking
Imitation Learning

Subjective!
Not Comprehensive! (b)
Optimal
Participants
SubSet

Agent

Comprehensive! Generalizable! Efficient！

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of FedRank. (a) Learning-based approaches:
tackle device selection with data-driven processes that holistically trade-off demands. (b) Heuristic-based approaches: handdeveloped heuristics perform well in the specific, straightforward
deployment configurations they were designed for. (c) FedRank:
utilizes imitation learning and a ranking approach to optimize device selection.

put is often restricted by these low-end clients, leading to
significant delays in the overall training process. Second, the
data heterogeneity can influence the convergence and overall
performance of the global model. In addition, computingintensive local training and round-to-round communication
with the central server can lead to substantial energy consumption, thereby affecting the battery lifespan of mobile
devices.

1. Introduction

To surmount the aforementioned barriers, strategic selection of devices for each training round becomes pivotal to
both training efficiency and model performance, as depicted
in Figure 1. While these heuristics excel in the specific,
straightforward deployment scenarios they are designed for,
they only cater to a limited subset of all potential deployment situations. As a result, their performance can be suboptimal on devices subjected to larger-scale deployments
with greater diversity and complexity. Adapting to unfamiliar and intricate scenarios frequently necessitates profound
domain expertise and extensive tuning. Conversely, certain
studies (Zhan et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a; Zhang et al.,
2022; Tian et al., 2023) explore the use of reinforcement
learning (RL) techniques to address the device selection
problem in a manner that holistically balances requirements
using data-driven methods. Yet, real-world deployment sce-

Federated learning (FL) is a new learning paradigm that enables multiple devices to collectively train a global machine
learning model while preserving data privacy (McMahan
et al., 2017). However, the practical deployment of FL on
diverse and resource-limited mobile devices poses several
challenges, as illustrated in Figure 2. First, the disparity in
training and communication capabilities of these devices,
coupled with their unpredictable runtime variations, can result in stragglers. Consequently, the overall training through*

Equal contribution 1 University of Macau 2 University of Texas
at Austin 3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China. Correspondence to: Li Li <llili@um.edu.mo>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

