MC-GTA: Metric-Constrained Model-Based Clustering using Goodness-of-fit
Tests with Autocorrelations
Zhangyu Wang 1 Gengchen Mai 2 3 Krzysztof Janowicz 4 1 Ni Lao 5

Abstract

1. Introduction

A wide range of (multivariate) temporal (1D) and
spatial (2D) data analysis tasks, such as grouping
vehicle sensor trajectories, can be formulated as
clustering with given metric constraints. Existing
metric-constrained clustering algorithms overlook
the rich correlation between feature similarity and
metric distance, i.e., metric autocorrelation. The
model-based variations of these clustering algorithms (e.g. TICC and STICC) achieve SOTA performance, yet suffer from computational instability and complexity by using a metric-constrained
Expectation-Maximization procedure. In order
to address these two problems, we propose a
novel clustering algorithm, MC-GTA (Modelbased Clustering via Goodness-of-fit Tests with
Autocorrelations). Its objective is only composed
of pairwise weighted sums of feature similarity
terms (square Wasserstein-2 distance) and metric
autocorrelation terms (a novel multivariate generalization of classic semivariogram). We show
that MC-GTA is effectively minimizing the total
hinge loss for intra-cluster observation pairs not
passing goodness-of-fit tests, i.e., statistically not
originating from the same distribution. Experiments on 1D/2D synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate that MC-GTA successfully incorporates metric autocorrelation. It outperforms strong
baselines by large margins (up to 14.3% in ARI
and 32.1% in NMI) with faster and stabler optimization (>10x speedup).

Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in unsupervised learning, which deals with the data partitioning
when ground-truth labels are unknown (Xu & Tian, 2015).
Most existing clustering algorithms only consider the similarity among observations in the feature (attribute) space.
However, in real-world applications, additional metric constraints (e.g., temporal continuity and geospatial proximity)
often matter, especially in temporal and spatial data mining (Birant & Kut, 2007a; Hu et al., 2015; Mai et al., 2018;
Belhadi et al., 2020). In other words, observations have
both features and positions in a metric space. Hence, observations that are put in the same cluster should be similar
in terms of features and their positions in the metric space
(e.g., timestamps or geographic locations) should also satisfy some constraints. Metric constraints can be generalized
to even higher dimensions as long as a meaningful distance
measure is defined. This kind of problems is commonly
known as metric-constrained clustering (Veldt et al., 2019).
It is not a trivial task to design a larger composite space
from these two spaces because they may have completely
different metrics. For example, concatenating word embedding with geo-coordinates makes learning good similarity
functions difficult because the former uses cosine distance
while the latter uses Euclidean/geodesic distance, whose
values can not be directly compared.
The current state-of-the-art metric-constrained clustering
algorithms, namely TICC (Hallac et al., 2017) (for temporal clustering) and STICC (Kang et al., 2022) (for spatial clustering), consider both spaces by combining modelbased clustering (Gormley eth al., 2022) with a soft metw
PK w
P
ric penalty arg minΘ,C k=1 wλ ◦ θCk w1 + Xi ∈Ck −
i
ll(Xi , θCk ) + β 1{X̃i ∈
/ Ck } . Here K is the total number
of clusters. Xi is one observation we need to assign to a
cluster, and X̃i is the nearest neighbor of Xi in the metric
space. θCk are the estimated model parameters for cluster k,
Ck is the set of observations of cluster k, −ll(Xi , θCk ) is
the negative log-likelihood of observation Xi belonging to
cluster Ck given model parameter θCk , and β 1{X̃i ∈
/ Ck }
is the soft metric penalty. λ is an L-1 normalization hyperparameter to prevent overfitting. The advantage of this

1
Department of Geography, University of California Santa
Barbara, CA, USA 2 Department of Geography, University of
Georgia, GA, USA 3 SEAI Lab, Department of Geography and
the Environment, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA
4
Faculty of Geosciences, Geography and Astronomy, University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 5 Google, Mountain View, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Zhangyu Wang <zhangyuwang@ucsb.edu>,
Gengchen Mai <gengchen.mai@austin.utexas.edu>, Krzysztof
Janowicz
<krzysztof.janowicz@univie.ac.at>,
Ni
Lao
<noon99@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

