Online Learning with Bounded Recall

Jon Schneider * 1 Kiran Vodrahalli * 1

Abstract

Another natural setting for learning is to restrict the learner
so that they can only use information they received from the
past M rounds of play. This is a restriction that is known
in the game theoretic literature as bounded recall, and was
introduced by Aumann & Sorin (1989) in an attempt to
design a model of repeated play that could lead to altruistic
equilibria. However, there are multiple other reasons why
bounded recall is interesting to study from a learning angle,
including:

We study the problem of full-information online
learning in the “bounded recall” setting popular
in the study of repeated games. An online learning algorithm A is M -bounded-recall if its output at time t can be written as a function of the
M previous rewards (and not e.g. any other internal state of A). We first demonstrate that a
natural approach to constructing bounded-recall
algorithms from mean-based no-regret learning
algorithms (e.g., running Hedge over the last M
rounds) fails, and that any such algorithm incurs
constant regret per round. We then construct a
stationary bounded-recall algorithm
that achieves
√
a per-round regret of Θ(1/ M ), which we complement with a tight lower bound. Finally, we
show that unlike the perfect recall setting, any
low regret bound bounded-recall algorithm must
be aware of the ordering of the past M losses –
any bounded-recall algorithm which plays a symmetric function of the past M losses must incur
constant regret per round.

• Recency bias and modelling human behavior: It is
increasingly common in the economics and social sciences literature to model rational agents as low-regret
learners (e.g. Blum & Mansour (2007b); Nekipelov
et al. (2015); Braverman et al. (2018)). However, the
extent to which standard low-regret algorithms actually model human behavior (especially over longer
timescales) is unclear. Indeed, “recency bias” is a wellknown psychological phenomenon in human decisionmaking indicating that people do, in general, prioritize
more recent information. Bounded recall dynamics
could be a more accurate model of human behavior
than general no-regret dynamics.
• Designing adaptive learning algorithms: On the flip
side, one may wish to design learning algorithms that
do prioritize information from more recent rounds.
While there exist learning paradigms that accomplish
this without imposing the bounded-recall constraint
(notably, algorithms that minimize adaptive / dynamic
regret: see Bousquet & Warmuth (2002); Zhang et al.
(2018); Zheng et al. (2019)), it is also valuable to understand the black box procedure of running an arbitrary
learning algorithm over a sliding window.

1. Introduction
Online learning is the study of online decision making, and
is one of the cornerstones of modern machine learning, with
numerous applications across computer science, machine
learning, and the sciences.
Traditionally, most online learning algorithms depend (either directly or indirectly) on the entire history of rewards
seen up to the present. For example, each round, the Multiplicative Weights Update method decides to play action
i with probability proportional to some exponential of the
cumulative reward of action i until the present (in fact, the
rewards of the first round have as much impact on the action
chosen at round t as the rewards of round t − 1).

• Sequence models: Decisions made by attention-based
sequence models (Vaswani et al., 2017), which are
popularly employed by modern large language models
(Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023), fall naturally
into the bounded recall paradigm: these models have a
fixed context window of past rounds (corresponding to
tokens) that they can observe, but the models can also
be used to operate on streams of tokens far exceeding
their context window. As decisions are increasingly
entrusted to sequence models, it is important to understand their theoretical capabilities as online learning

*

Equal contribution 1 Google. Correspondence to: Jon
Schneider <jschnei@google.com>, Kiran Vodrahalli <kirannv@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

