Disentangled Continual Graph Neural Architecture Search
with Invariant Modular Supernet

Zeyang Zhang 1 Xin Wang 1 Yijian Qin 1 Hong Chen 1 Ziwei Zhang 1 Xu Chu 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
The existing graph neural architecture search
(GNAS) methods assume that the graph tasks
are static during the search process, ignoring the
ubiquitous scenarios where sequential graph tasks
come in a continual fashion. Moreover, existing
GNAS works resort to entangled graph factors
during the architecture search process, resulting
in the catastrophic forgetting problems. In this
paper, we study the problem of continual GNAS
that is expected to continually search the architecture to learn new graph tasks without forgetting
the past, which remains largely unexplored in the
literature. However, this problem poses the challenge of architecture conflicts, i.e., the optimal
architecture for the new graph task may have performance deterioration and thus sub-optimal for
past tasks. To address the challenge, we propose
a novel Disentangled Continual Graph Neural Architecture Search with Invariant Modular Supernet (GASIM) method, which is able to continually search the optimal architectures without forgetting past knowledge. Specifically, we first design a modular graph architecture super-network
incorporating multiple modules to enable searching architecture with factor expertise. Second,
we propose a factor-based task-module router that
discovers the latent graph factors and routes the incoming task to the best suitable architecture module to alleviate the forgetting problem induced by
architecture conflicts. Finally, we propose an invariant architecture search mechanism to capture
the shared knowledge among tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance against baselines in
continual graph neural architecture search.

Graph neural architecture search (GNAS), aiming at automating the discovery of optimal architectures for Graph
neural networks (GNNs) when confronted with graphstructured data and specific tasks, has exhibited noteworthy
advancements, demonstrating its efficacy in enhancing predictive capabilities and alleviating the need for extensive
human involvement across a spectrum of graph applications (Zhang et al., 2021b). Most existing GNAS methods
treat the entire graph as a holistic entity and search the architectures via optimizing for a fixed task applied to the entire
graph, which is based on the underlying assumption that the
graph tasks remain static throughout the search process.
However, graph tasks come continually in many real-world
scenarios. For example, in citation networks, novel types
of papers and their corresponding citations may continually
surface, necessitating a continually updated classifier to distinguish documents belonging to newly emerging research
fields (Zhang et al., 2022d; Zhou & Cao, 2021). In the
domain of drug design, the encounter with new categories
or properties of molecules is a recurrent phenomenon, and
thus, the predictor should be consistently updated to assimilate knowledge regarding these new molecule categories
or properties (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). As the existing
GNAS methods assume the graph tasks are fixed, they will
inevitably fail in the ubiquitous settings where graph tasks
are continuously generated.
In this paper, we study the problem of continual graph neural architecture search that is expected to continually search
the graph architecture to learn new graph tasks without forgetting the past, which remains largely unexplored in the
literature. However, we discover the problem is highly nontrivial with the critical challenge of architecture conflicts,
i.e., graph tasks may have different optimal architectures,
while the optimal architecture for the new graph task may
perform worse on past tasks, and thus it could be challenging to search the architecture to learn the new graph task
without harming the performance on previous tasks. We
further utilize a mainstream class of differentiable GNAS
methods for an example, and demonstrate with theoretical
analyses that they fail to revolve the problem of architecture
conflicts due to their entangled search process, resulting the

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

