Autoformalizing Euclidean Geometry

Logan Murphy 1 * Kaiyu Yang 2 * Jialiang Sun 1 Zhaoyu Li 1 Anima Anandkumar 2 Xujie Si 1

Abstract

task, autoformalization: Can AI understand human-written
problems/solutions and translate them automatically into formal theorems/proofs? Specifically, we focus on the setting
where formal theorems/proofs can be verified by the Lean
proof assistant (de Moura & Ullrich, 2021). Lean provides
a language for writing formal proofs. It is popular among
mathematicians and has a growing ecosystem of integration
with large language models (LLMs), e.g., LeanDojo (Yang
et al., 2023) and Lean Copilot (Song et al., 2024).

Autoformalization involves automatically translating informal math into formal theorems and
proofs that are machine-verifiable. Euclidean geometry provides an interesting and controllable
domain for studying autoformalization. In this
paper, we introduce a neuro-symbolic framework
for autoformalizing Euclidean geometry, which
combines domain knowledge, SMT solvers, and
large language models (LLMs). One challenge in
Euclidean geometry is that informal proofs rely
on diagrams, leaving gaps in texts that are hard to
formalize. To address this issue, we use theorem
provers to fill in such diagrammatic information
automatically, so that the LLM only needs to autoformalize the explicit textual steps, making it
easier for the model. We also provide automatic
semantic evaluation for autoformalized theorem
statements. We construct LeanEuclid, an autoformalization benchmark consisting of problems
from Euclid’s Elements and the UniGeo dataset
formalized in the Lean proof assistant. Experiments with GPT-4 and GPT-4V show the capability and limitations of state-of-the-art LLMs on
autoformalizing geometry problems. The data
and code are available at https://github.
com/loganrjmurphy/LeanEuclid.

We demonstrate that Euclidean geometry provides an interesting and controllable domain for autoformalization. First,
an automatic evaluation of autoformalized theorems is difficult in general but feasible in Euclidean geometry. Second,
the logical gaps in informal proofs are well understood in
Euclidean geometry, making it easier to faithfully formalize
the proofs. Third, combining text-based and diagrammatic
reasoning makes Euclidean geometry a natural domain to
study multimodal reasoning models. Therefore, autoformalizing Euclidean geometry is an attractive target for AI.
Evaluating Autoformalized Theorem Statements. Despite the promise of machine learning and LLMs in autoformalizing theorems (Wu et al., 2022), a major roadblock is
the lack of reliable and automatic evaluation. Comparing
the model output verbatim with ground truth would be too
rigid since there are many valid ways to formalize a theorem.
Checking the logical equivalence between two theorems is
generally intractable. Researchers have resorted to proxy
metrics such as the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002).
However, LLMs can score high on such metrics without
generating correct formalization (Jiang et al., 2023b). Alternatively, human evaluation is widely used as a last resort,
but it is costly, especially if we want to use the results to
improve the method iteratively.

1. Introduction
Euclidean geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. It has served as a test of human intelligence for more
than two millennia and has recently been used to test AI.
Substantial work has focused on solving geometry problems
automatically (Wu, 2008), e.g., AlphaGeometry (Trinh et al.,
2023) can solve some of the IMO geometry problems. These
methods consume problems and produce solutions in structured formats. In this work, we address a complementary

Our Approach to Evaluating Autoformalization. To
overcome the evaluation bottleneck, we introduce a new
automatic approach for evaluating the semantics of autoformalized theorems. The key insight is that equivalence
checking can be made feasible in specific domains (such as
Euclidean geometry) by combining domain knowledge with
automated reasoning tools, such as satisfiability modulo
theories (SMT) solvers (Barrett & Tinelli, 2018).

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto 2 Caltech. Correspondence to: Logan Murphy <lmurphy@cs.toronto.edu>, Kaiyu
Yang <kaiyuy@caltech.edu>, Xujie Si <six@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To evaluate the autoformalized theorems, we develop a sym1

