Stability and Multigroup Fairness in Ranking with Uncertain Predictions

Siddartha Devic 1 Aleksandra Korolova 2 David Kempe 1 Vatsal Sharan 1

Abstract

making in settings with limited resources or attention span
(such as job candidate interview selections or ad delivery).
Rankings are often derived from predictions generated by
machine learning models designed and deployed on relevant classification tasks. For example, a job advertisement
platform may use a model which predicts an individual’s relevance score for each job they apply to; say, on a scale from
1 to 3 (corresponding to irrelevant, suitable, or extremely
relevant); this score is then factored into the platform’s ranking of job applicants shown to a company recruiter with a
limited time budget.

Rankings are ubiquitous across many applications,
from search engines to hiring committees. In practice, many rankings are derived from the output
of predictors. However, when predictors trained
for classification tasks have intrinsic uncertainty,
it is not obvious how this uncertainty should be
represented in the derived rankings. Our work
considers ranking functions: maps from individual predictions for a classification task to distributions over rankings. We focus on two aspects
of ranking functions: stability to perturbations in
predictions and fairness towards both individuals
and subgroups. Not only is stability an important
requirement for its own sake, but — as we show —
it composes harmoniously with individual fairness
in the sense of Dwork et al. (2012). While deterministic ranking functions cannot be stable aside
from trivial scenarios, we show that the recently
proposed uncertainty aware (UA) ranking functions of Singh et al. (2021) are stable. Our main
result is that UA rankings also achieve group fairness through successful composition with multiaccurate or multicalibrated predictors. Our work
demonstrates that UA rankings naturally interpolate between group and individual level fairness
guarantees, while simultaneously satisfying stability guarantees important whenever machinelearned predictions are used.

In practice, machine learning models often predict distributions over classes instead of a single class. This is because
predictions correspond to a belief about what the future may
possibly hold, but not a certainty about what the future will
look like. A plethora of recent research in model calibration
(Guo et al., 2017; Minderer et al., 2021; Gupta & Ramdas, 2022), conformal prediction (Bastani et al., 2022; Jung
et al., 2023), and uncertainty quantification (Angelopoulos
& Bates, 2021) has tackled the issue of ensuring that the
uncertainty estimates output by a model are meaningful,
rather than artifacts of any particular training regime.
With uncertainty inherent in predictions, we argue that it
is essential to revisit the question of how to meaningfully
convert predictions (made in the form of distributions over
classes) into rankings. Without any uncertainty — for example, if one had access to an oracle for the future — it would
usually be clear what a ranking should look like: meritocracy would suggest that one always places the more suitable
candidates higher in the ranking. However, when given
only predictions about suitability/merit with intrinsic uncertainty, the approach for generating a meaningful ranking is
less clear. After all, one must choose a ranking over candidates, e.g., in order to make an interview decision, before
witnessing the exact suitability of each candidate, which is
generally only observable after an individual works in the
job for months or even years. Since an uncertain prediction
can be considered a prior (and typically imperfect) belief
on the qualifications or performance of any given individual,
the fundamental task of designing a meaningful ranking
algorithm utilizing these predictions must be reexamined.

1. Introduction
Rankings underpin many modern systems: companies rank
job applications (TurboHire, 2023; Geyik et al., 2019), ad
marketplaces rank ads to serve to a user (Google, 2023),
and social media platforms and feeds rank content (Meta,
2023). Rankings are also used to partially automate decision
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California 2 Department of Computer Science and Public Affairs,
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Siddartha Devic <devic@usc.edu>.

For a meaningful derivation of rankings from predictors, we
consider the following two properties to be essential:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

