Structured Inverse-Free Natural Gradient Descent:
Memory-Efficient & Numerically-Stable KFAC

Wu Lin * 1 Felix Dangel * 1 Runa Eschenhagen 2 Kirill Neklyudov 1 Agustinus Kristiadi 1
Richard E. Turner 2 Alireza Makhzani 1 3

Abstract

Amari, 1998), leverage curvature information which has
many applications in DL: It is useful for improving training
dynamics (Martens & Grosse, 2015; Osawa et al., 2023),
pruning (Wang et al., 2019), understanding the influence of
training examples (Bae et al., 2022), and uncertainty estimation (Zhang et al., 2018; Immer et al., 2021; Daxberger et al.,
2021). One major obstacle why those methods are rarely
used is their higher memory consumption and iteration cost.

Second-order methods such as KFAC can be useful for neural net training. However, they are
often memory-inefficient since their preconditioning Kronecker factors are dense, and numerically
unstable in low precision as they require matrix
inversion or decomposition. These limitations render such methods unpopular for modern mixedprecision training. We address them by (i) formulating an inverse-free KFAC update and (ii)
imposing structures in the Kronecker factors, resulting in structured inverse-free natural gradient
descent (SINGD). On modern neural networks,
we show that SINGD is memory-efficient and numerically robust, in contrast to KFAC, and often
outperforms AdamW even in half precision. Our
work closes a gap between first- and second-order
methods in modern low-precision training.

The perhaps most common concept to scale second-order
methods for DL is Kronecker-factored approximate curvature (KFAC, Heskes, 2000; Martens & Grosse, 2015) which
approximates the Fisher’s block diagonals via Kronecker
products. The KFAC optimizer built on top of this curvature
approximation, and its variants such as George et al. (2018)
show promising results for medium-sized NNs (e.g. Osawa
et al., 2023), its usefulness is often limited by (i) memory
consumption, and (ii) the use of low-precision floating-point
(FP) training that renders matrix decompositions/inversions
required to pre-condition the gradient numerically unstable.
Recently, Lin et al. (2023) proposed an inverse-free
Kronecker-factored natural gradient descent (INGD) algorithm that replaces matrix inversion with subtraction in a
matrix logarithm space. Their update is purely based on
matrix multiplications and therefore numerically stable in
single-precision (FP-32); however, it is unclear whether this
extends to half-precision (BFP-16). Furthermore, INGD
has not been derived from the popular natural gradient approaches for DL. It is unclear if and how the method is connected to the predominant KFAC optimizer. Also, INGD
does not improve over KFAC’s memory complexity since
its Kronecker factors are dense matrices of the same size.
And lastly, INGD has only been tested on convolution-based
models and it is unclear whether it is useful for training modern transformer-based architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
The continuing success of deep learning (DL) is—to
a large extent—powered by scaling up computational
power (Thompson et al., 2020) to increase the number of
trainable neural network (NN) parameters. Contemporary
natural language processing (Radford et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) and computer vision
(Dehghani et al., 2023) models often consist of billions of
parameters, and will likely grow further in the future. To
compensate for increasing computational demands, many
training pipelines use lower precision data types (Micikevicius et al., 2018) and memory-efficient first-order optimizers
like SGD (Robbins & Monro, 1951) or Adam(W) (Kingma
& Ba, 2015; Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019).
Second-order methods, like natural gradient descent (NGD,
*

1

Here, we extend INGD to lower its computational cost and
theoretically resolve its connection to other approximate
NGD methods for DL (overview in Figure 2): First, we show
that a special case of INGD recovers the KFAC method.
This allows us to effectively perform KFAC updates in an
inverse-free fashion. We call this modification of INGD
inverse-free KFAC (IKFAC). Second, we exploit an alge-

2

Equal contribution Vector Institute University of Cambridge 3 University of Toronto. Correspondence to: Wu Lin
<yorker.lin@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

