Sparse Inducing Points in Deep Gaussian Processes:
Enhancing Modeling with Denoising Diffusion Variational Inference

Jian Xu 1 Delu Zeng 1 John Paisley 2

Abstract

abling the modeling of hierarchical structures and capturing
intricate dependencies within the data. A crucial aspect of
DGPs is the selection of inducing variables (Titsias, 2009;
Snelson & Gharahmani, 2005; Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005), which are sparse integration locations used
to approximate the posterior distribution of the model. By
leveraging these inducing points, DGPs can efficiently handle large datasets and reduce the computational burden.

Deep Gaussian processes (DGPs) provide a robust
paradigm for Bayesian deep learning. In DGPs, a
set of sparse integration locations called inducing
points are selected to approximate the posterior
distribution of the model. This is done to reduce
computational complexity and improve model efficiency. However, inferring the posterior distribution of inducing points is not straightforward.
Traditional variational inference approaches to
posterior approximation often lead to significant
bias. To address this issue, we propose an alternative method called Denoising Diffusion Variational Inference (DDVI) that uses a denoising
diffusion stochastic differential equation (SDE)
to generate posterior samples of inducing variables. We rely on score matching methods for
denoising diffusion model to approximate score
functions with a neural network. Furthermore, by
combining classical mathematical theory of SDEs
with the minimization of KL divergence between
the approximate and true processes, we propose
a novel explicit variational lower bound for the
marginal likelihood function of DGP. Through
experiments on various datasets and comparisons
with baseline methods, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of DDVI for posterior inference of inducing points for DGP models.

Variational inference methods (Blei et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2018) aim to approximate the true posterior distribution with
a parameterized variational distribution by minimizing their
KL divergence. In the context of DGPs, traditional variational methods include mean-field Gaussian variational
inference (DSVI) (Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017) and Implicit Posterior Variational Inference (IPVI) (Yu et al., 2019).
However, both of these methods have their limitations and
can introduce significant bias when learning the posterior
distribution of inducing points.
DSVI approximates the posterior distribution of inducing
points with a simple Gaussian distribution. Although this
approximation is analytically tractable, it often leads to substantial bias when dealing with nonlinear likelihood functions. The simplifying assumptions made in the mean-field
approximation can fail to capture the complex dependencies and correlations between the inducing points, resulting in suboptimal results. On the other hand, IPVI uses a
neural network to parameterize the posterior distribution
of inducing points. Posterior inference is formulated as a
Nash equilibrium (Awerbuch et al., 2008) similar to that
of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), requiring adversarial learning for the max-max
problem. However, optimizing this objective function can
be challenging, especially when dealing with non-convex
neural networks, and lead to instability during training and
contribute to significant bias in the posterior inference of
inducing points (Jenni & Favaro, 2019).

1. Introduction
Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) (Damianou & Lawrence,
2013) have emerged as a robust framework for Bayesian
deep learning (Fortuin, 2022) that allows for flexible modeling of complex functions. DGPs extend the idea of Gaussian
Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen, 2003) to multiple layers, en-

These limitations of traditional variational methods for inference of DGPs inspires the exploration of alternative approaches. Motivated by the success of denoising diffusion
models (Rombach et al., 2022) in deep learning, we propose
a Denoising Diffusion Variational Inference (DDVI) method
that utilizes the denoising diffusion SDE and incorporates

1

South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Delu
Zeng <dlzeng@scut.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

