Probability Distribution of Hypervolume Improvement in Bi-objective Bayesian
Optimization

Hao Wang 1 Kaifeng Yang 2 Michael Affenzeller 2

Abstract

Bayesian optimization (Emmerich et al., 2016; Yang et al.,
2019b; Daulton et al., 2020; Emmerich et al., 2020; Daulton
et al., 2020; 2021; Suzuki et al., 2020; Garrido-Merchán
et al., 2023; Zuluaga et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016; 2022).
In multi-objective Bayesian optimization, HV induces the
famous hypervolume improvement (HVI) function (Emmerich, 2005), which quantifies the benefit of appending
a new data point to the approximation set - the increment
of the HV value caused by the new point. HVI generalizes
the notion of “improvement” in the single-objective scenarios, and therefore, it serves as the base of many successful
multi-objective acquisition functions, e.g., the probability
of improvement (PoI) (Emmerich et al., 2006; Keane, 2006)
that measures the chance of realizing nonzero HVI, ε-PoI
that computes the probability of objective points having
least ε distance to the approximation set, and the expected
hypervolume improvement (EHVI) (Emmerich et al., 2006;
Yang et al., 2019b) that generalizes expected improvement
(EI) (Jones et al., 1998) from single-objective Bayesian
optimization.

Hypervolume improvement (HVI) is commonly
employed in multi-objective Bayesian optimization algorithms to define acquisition functions
due to its Pareto-compliant property. Rather than
focusing on specific statistical moments of HVI,
this work aims to provide the exact expression
of HVI’s probability distribution for bi-objective
problems. Considering a bi-variate Gaussian random variable resulting from Gaussian process
(GP) modeling, we derive the probability distribution of its hypervolume improvement via a
cell partition-based method. Our exact expression is superior in numerical accuracy and computation efficiency compared to the Monte Carlo
approximation of HVI’s distribution. Utilizing
this distribution, we propose a novel acquisition
function - ε-probability of hypervolume improvement (ε-PoHVI). Experimentally, we show that on
many widely-applied bi-objective test problems,
ε-PoHVI significantly outperforms other related
acquisition functions, e.g., ε-PoI, and expected
hypervolume improvement, when the GP model
exhibits a large the prediction uncertainty.

Motivation At an unknown decision point, the predictive/posterior distribution of its objective value follows a
multivariate normal distribution in Bayesian optimization.
Consequently, HVI defined on this predictive distribution
is a real-valued random variable. To the best of our knowledge, the existing multi-objective acquisition functions either only consider the first moment of HVI’s distribution,
e.g., EHVI for the mean, or completely disregard the distribution, e.g., ε-PoI, which is not related to the quantile
of HVI’s distribution (see Sec. 4). However, when HVI
shows a large dispersion (e.g., large variance), only relying
on the mean of HVI makes the acquisition function less
trustworthy/meaningful. In this sense, higher moments or
at least the quantiles can help quantify the risk/uncertainty
of the acquisition value (Mehlawat et al., 2021; Schonlau
et al., 1998), which is difficult to obtain without the exact
expression of HVI’s distribution.

1. Introduction
For solving black-box multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs), the hypervolume indicator (HV) (Zitzler &
Thiele, 1999) is extensively employed for assessing the quality of the Pareto front approximation or guiding the search
direction. HV is defined as the Lebesgue measure of the subset of Rm dominated by an approximation set to the Pareto
front. It is extensively applied in many multi-objective
optimization algorithms, e.g., indicator-based evolutionary algorithms (Beume et al., 2007; Deb et al., 2002) and
1

Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands 2 University of Applied Sciences, Hagenberg, Austria. Correspondence to: Kaifeng
Yang <kaifeng.yang@fh-hagenberg.at>.

Contributions To answer the issue we raise above, we
aim to provide the exact distribution function of HVI and
demonstrate its usefulness in Bayesian optimization for
speeding up empirical convergence. Our contributions are

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

