Parsimonious Learning-Augmented Approximations for Dense Instances of
N P-hard Problems
Evripidis Bampis * 1 Bruno Escoffier * 1 2 Michalis Xefteris * 1

Abstract

i.e., whose performance is close to the best possible performance that can be achieved when the prediction is perfect,
smooth, meaning that the quality of the solution produced
degrades smoothly with the error made in the prediction,
and robust. The robustness requires that the performance of
the algorithm remains close to the one of the best worst-case
algorithm even when the prediction is bad (see Section 2 for
formal definitions).

The classical work of (Arora et al., 1999) provides
a scheme that gives, for any ϵ > 0, a polynomial
time 1 − ϵ approximation algorithm for dense instances of a family of N P-hard problems, such
as M AX -CUT and M AX-k-SAT. In this paper we
extend and speed up this scheme using a logarithmic number of one-bit predictions. We propose
a learning augmented framework which aims at
finding fast algorithms which guarantees approximation consistency, smoothness and robustness
with respect to the prediction error. We provide
such algorithms, which moreover use predictions
parsimoniously, for dense instances of various
optimization problems.

This vein of work has produced various results for online algorithms, i.e., algorithms that are not aware of the
whole (future) input of the problem, including scheduling (Mitzenmacher, 2020; Purohit et al., 2018), metrical
task systems (Antoniadis et al., 2020), online facility location (Jiang et al., 2022) and online routing problems (Bampis
et al., 2022; 2023). More related to our work, in (Lattanzi
et al., 2023) they use predictions to speed up the BellmanFord algorithm for the shortest path problem. Furthermore,
in (Dinitz et al., 2021) they design a faster algorithm for
computing matchings utilizing warm-start predicted solutions, and in (Lu et al., 2021; Bai & Coester, 2023) they
speed up sorting using predictions. For clustering, Ergund
et al. present an algorithm that given a prediction with error rate upper bounded by α achieves an approximation
of 1 + O(α) in almost optimal running time (Ergun et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction
In an era marked by the widespread adoption of Machine
Learning technology, ML predictors, capable of learning to
predict the unknown based on (past) data, are employed to
solve numerous problems daily. Due to an effort to exploit
this development, there has been a trend in recent years that
tries to use ML predictions in order to overcome known
worst-case computational limitations. The goal is to provide algorithms that use a possibly erroneous predictor to
enhance their performance when the prediction is accurate,
while still providing worst case performance guarantees.

All the aforementioned works use the predictor without any
limitations. Recently, a new line of work, which uses a
small number of predictions to design learning-augmented
algorithms, has emerged. Im et al. proposed an algorithm
that uses a bounded number of predictions to solve the online caching problem (Im et al., 2022). In (Antoniadis et al.,
2023) they solved the paging problem utilizing a minimum
amount of predictions. Similar works that present algorithms which take into account the amount of predictions
used, penalizing each prediction request by some cost or
given a finite budget are the works of (Drygala et al., 2023)
and (Benomar & Perchet, 2023), respectively. In this paper,
we follow this line of work and use a logarithmic number of
one-bit predictions to solve dense instances for a family of
problems that includes M AX -CUT and MAX-k-SAT.

The formal framework for these learning-augmented algorithms (or algorithms with predictions) has been presented by Lykouris and Vassilvitskii in their seminal paper (Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021), in which they studied
the caching problem. In this framework, no assumption is
made about the quality of the predictor and the objective is
to design learning-augmented algorithms that are consistent,
*
Equal contribution 1 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6,
F-75005 Paris, France 2 Institut Universitaire de France,
Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Michalis Xefteris
<michail.xefteris@lip6.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Simultaneously and independently of our work, M AX C UT
with predictions was studied in two separate papers. Cohen1

