Unsupervised Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
via Functional Reward Encodings

Kevin Frans 1 Seohong Park 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Sergey Levine 1
1
University of California, Berkeley
kvfrans@berkeley.edu

Abstract

eralist agent from unlabeled offline data such that it can immediately solve new user-specified tasks in a without training. This has been referred to as the zero-shot reinforcement
learning (RL) problem (Touati et al., 2022). From this data,
the hard challenge is how to discover, without labels, a task
representation that is robust to downstream objectives – in
essence, bypassing the need for a human to specify wellshaped reward functions before training.

Can we pre-train a generalist agent from a large
amount of unlabeled offline trajectories such that
it can be immediately adapted to any new downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner? In this work,
we present a functional reward encoding (FRE)
as a general, scalable solution to this zero-shot
RL problem. Our main idea is to learn functional
representations of any arbitrary tasks by encoding
their state-reward samples using a transformerbased variational auto-encoder. This functional
encoding not only enables the pre-training of an
agent from a wide diversity of general unsupervised reward functions, but also provides a way
to solve any new downstream tasks in a zeroshot manner, given a small number of rewardannotated samples. We empirically show that
FRE agents trained on diverse random unsupervised reward functions can generalize to solve
novel tasks in a range of simulated robotic benchmarks, often outperforming previous zero-shot
RL and offline RL methods. Code for this project
is provided at: github.com/kvfrans/fre.

In this work, we aim to provide a simple, scalable approach
to the zero-shot RL problem. Our key insight is to directly
learn a latent representation that can represent any arbitrary
reward functions based on their samples of state-reward
pairs. We refer to this idea as Functional Reward Encoding (FRE). This is in contrast to previous works in zeroshot RL or multi-task RL that employ domain-specific task
representations (Barreto et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020a) or
highly restrictive linear reward structures (Borsa et al., 2018;
Touati & Ollivier, 2021; Touati et al., 2022). By directly
encoding reward functions into a latent space, we can pretrain a multi-task agent with a host of unsupervised reward
functions of arbitrary diversity, and quickly identify the representations corresponding to new test tasks given a small
number of reward-annotated samples.
Training an FRE requries utilizing a prior distribution over
reward functions. When no information about downstream
tasks is available, we must define a prior that broadly spans
possible objectives in a domain-agnostic manner. In our experiments, we show that a mixture of random unsupervised
reward functions, such as goal-reaching and random MLP rewards, are a reasonable choice for the reward prior. We optimize an FRE-conditioned policy towards all rewards within
this space. In this way, approximate solutions to many downstream tasks have already been learned, and the zero-shot
RL problem reduces to simply locating the FRE encoding
for the task, which the learned encoder accomplishes.

1. Introduction
A useful agent is one that can accomplish many objectives
in a domain. Household robots are more beneficial the more
chores they can complete; self-driving cars the more places
they can reach. Building upon this premise, we draw inspiration from the recent success of unsupervised learning in language (Brown et al., 2020) and vision (Kirillov et al., 2023),
which has shown that a single generalist model trained on
Internet-scale data can immediately solve a wide array of
tasks without further training or fine-tuning. Motivated by
these successes, we study an analogous way to train a gen-

Thus, our framework presents a simple yet scalable method
for training zero-shot RL agents in an unsupervised manner,
as shown in Figure 1. The main idea is to (1) train an FRE
network over random unsupervised reward functions, then
(2) optimize a generalist FRE-conditioned policy towards

1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Kevin
Frans <kvfrans@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

