Inferring Change Points in High-Dimensional Linear Regression via
Approximate Message Passing

Gabriel Arpino 1 Xiaoqi Liu 1 Ramji Venkataramanan 1

Abstract

and functionals (Madrid Padilla et al., 2022). Change point
models have found application in a range of fields including
genomics (Braun et al., 2000), neuroscience (Aston & Kirch,
2012), and economics (Andreou & Ghysels, 2002).

We consider the problem of localizing change
points in high-dimensional linear regression. We
propose an Approximate Message Passing (AMP)
algorithm for estimating both the signals and the
change point locations. Assuming Gaussian covariates, we give an exact asymptotic characterization of its estimation performance in the limit
where the number of samples grows proportionally to the signal dimension. Our algorithm can
be tailored to exploit any prior information on
the signal, noise, and change points. It also enables uncertainty quantification in the form of an
efficiently computable approximate posterior distribution, whose asymptotic form we characterize
exactly. We validate our theory via numerical
experiments, and demonstrate the favorable performance of our estimators on both synthetic data
and images.

In this paper, we consider high-dimensional linear regression with change points. We are given a sequence of data
(yi , Xi ) ∈ R × Rp , for i ∈ [n], from the model
yi = (Xi )⊤ β (i) + εi ,

i = 1, . . . , n.

(1)

Here, β (i) ∈ Rp is the unknown regression vector for the
ith sample, Xi ∈ Rp is the (known) covariate vector, and
εi is additive noise. We denote the unknown change points,
i.e., the sample indices where the regression vector changes,
by η1 , . . . , ηL∗ −1 . Specifically, we have
1 = η0 < η1 < · · · < ηL∗ = n,
∗

−1
with β (i) ̸= β (i−1) if and only if i ∈ {ηℓ }L
ℓ=1 . We note
∗
that L is the number of distinct signals in the sequence
{β (i) }ni=1 , and (L∗ −1) is the number of change points. The
number of change points is not known, but an upper bound
L on the value of L∗ is available. The goal is to estimate the
change point locations as well as the L∗ signals. We would
also like to quantify the uncertainty in these estimates, e.g.,
via confidence sets or a posterior distribution.

1. Introduction
Heterogeneity is a common feature of large, highdimensional datasets. When the data are ordered by time, a
simple form of heterogeneity is a change in the data generating mechanism at certain unknown instants of time. If these
‘change points’ were known, or estimated accurately, the
dataset could be partitioned into homogeneous subsets, each
amenable to analysis via standard statistical techniques (Fryzlewicz, 2014). Models with change points have been studied in a variety of statistical contexts, such as the detection of
changes in: signal means (Wang & Samworth, 2018; Wang
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023a); covariance
structures (Cho & Fryzlewicz, 2015; Wang et al., 2021b);
graphs (Londschien et al., 2023; Bhattacharjee et al., 2020;
Fan & Guan, 2018); dynamic networks (Wang et al., 2021a);

Linear regression with change points in the highdimensional regime (where the dimension p is comparable
to, or exceeds, the number of samples n) has been studied
in a number of recent works, e.g. (Lee et al., 2016; Leonardi
& Bühlmann, 2016; Kaul et al., 2019; Rinaldo et al., 2021;
Xu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b; Bai & Safikhani, 2023).
Most of these papers consider the setting where the signals
are sparse (the number of non-zero entries in β (i) ∈ Rp
is o(p)), and analyze procedures that combine the LASSO
estimator (or a variant) with a partitioning technique, e.g.,
dynamic programming. The recent work of Gao & Wang
(2022) assumes sparsity on the difference between signals
across a change point, and Cho et al. (2024) consider general
non-sparse signals. Although existing procedures for highdimensional change point regression incorporate sparsitybased constraints, they cannot be easily adapted to take advantage of other kinds of signal priors. Moreover, they are

1

University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Gabriel Arpino
<ga442@cam.ac.uk>, Xiaoqi Liu <xl394@cam.ac.uk>, Ramji
Venkataramanan <rv285@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

