Position: C ∗ -Algebraic Machine Learning — Moving in a New Direction

Yuka Hashimoto 1 2 Masahiro Ikeda 2 3 Hachem Kadri 4

Abstract

its rich mathematical and theoretical investigations, its main
application is limited to quantum mechanics. In the current
situation in machine learning, we believe that it is time to
apply these rich investigations to machine learning methods. Since C ∗ -algebras enable us to unify complex values,
matrices, functions, and linear operators, we expect that
the generalization of machine learning methods using C ∗ algebras allows us to unify existing methods and construct a
framework for more complicated data and models. Figure 1
shows an overview of the C ∗ -algebraic machine learning.

Machine learning has a long collaborative tradition with several fields of mathematics, such
as statistics, probability and linear algebra. We
propose a new direction for machine learning research: C ∗ -algebraic ML—a cross-fertilization
between C ∗ -algebra and machine learning. The
mathematical concept of C ∗ -algebra is a natural
generalization of the space of complex numbers.
It enables us to unify existing learning strategies,
and construct a new framework for more diverse
and information-rich data models. We explain
why and how to use C ∗ -algebras in machine learning, and provide technical considerations that go
into the design of C ∗ -algebraic learning models
in the contexts of kernel methods and neural networks. Furthermore, we discuss open questions
and challenges in C ∗ -algebraic ML and give our
thoughts for future development and applications.

In this paper, we mainly focus on two approaches: kernel methods and neural networks. For kernel methods, most of existing methods are realized using reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs) or vector-valued
RKHS (vvRKHS), which are constructed by positive definite kernels (Schölkopf & Smola, 2001; Saitoh & Sawano,
2016). The reproducing property enables us to evaluate the
value of a function at a point using the inner product, which
makes it easy for us to implement algorithms and analyze
them theoretically. Moreover, we can apply kernel methods to probabilistic and statistical settings by embedding
probability measures in an RKHS. This embedding is called
the kernel mean embedding. However, since RKHSs (resp.
vvRKHSs) are complex- (resp. vector-) valued function
spaces, the output of the models is usually complex- or
vector-valued. In addition, appropriate ways of the construction of positive definite kernels are not trivial. The generalization of RKHS by means of the C ∗ -algebra enables us
to output more general data, such as functions and operators (Hashimoto et al., 2021). Moreover, C ∗ -algebras give
us a method to construct C ∗ -algebra-valued positive definite
kernels for structured data (Hasimoto et al., 2023a). The
noncommutative product structure in C ∗ -algebras (ab ̸= ba
for elements a, b in the C ∗ -algebra) enables us to construct
an operation that goes beyond the multiplication and convolution.

1. Introduction
Machine learning problems and methods are currently becoming more and more complicated. We have many types
of structured data, such as time-series data, image data, and
graph data. In addition, not only are the models large, but
multiple models and tasks have to be considered in some
situations.
To address these situations, we propose C ∗ -algebraic machine learning: application of C ∗ -algebra to machine learning methods. Typical examples of C ∗ -algebras are the space
of continuous functions on a compact space and the space
of bounded linear operators on a Hilbert space. C ∗ -algebra
was first proposed in quantum mechanics to model physical
observables and has been investigated in pure mathematics,
mathematical physics, and quantum mechanics. Whereas

As for neural networks, the models are becoming larger
and more complicated. For example, in ensemble learning (Dong et al., 2020; Ganaie et al., 2022), multitask
learning (Zhang et al., 2014; Ruder et al., 2019), and metalearning (Ravi & Larochelle, 2017; Finn et al., 2017; Rusu
et al., 2019), we need to consider multiple tasks and models. In addition, large language models (LLMs) have large
numbers of learning parameters and need large numbers of

1

NTT corporation, Tokyo, Japan 2 Center for Advanced
Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan 3 Keio University, Yokohama, Japan 4 Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, LIS,
Marseille, France.
Correspondence to: Yuka Hashimoto
<yuka.hashimoto@ntt.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

