InfoNet: Neural Estimation of Mutual Information
without Test-Time Optimization

Zhengyang Hu 1 Song Kang 2 3 Qunsong Zeng 1 Kaibin Huang 1 Yanchao Yang 1 4

Abstract

Estimating mutual correlations between random
variables or data streams is essential for intelligent behavior and decision-making. As a fundamental quantity for measuring statistical relationships, mutual information has been extensively
studied and utilized for its generality and equitability. However, existing methods often lack
the efficiency needed for real-time applications,
such as test-time optimization of a neural network, or the differentiability required for end-toend learning, like histograms. We introduce a neural network called InfoNet, which directly outputs
mutual information estimations of data streams
by leveraging the attention mechanism and the
computational efficiency of deep learning infrastructures. By maximizing a dual formulation
of mutual information through large-scale simulated training, our approach circumvents timeconsuming test-time optimization and offers generalization ability. We evaluate the effectiveness
and generalization of our proposed mutual information estimation scheme on various families of
distributions and applications. Our results demonstrate that InfoNet and its training process provide
a graceful efficiency-accuracy trade-off and orderpreserving properties. Our code and models are
available as a comprehensive toolbox to facilitate studies in different fields requiring real-time
mutual information estimation.

Figure 1: Log-scale run time comparison of MINE (Belghazi et al., 2018a) and the proposed InfoNet, which consistently achieves better performance by magnitudes across
sequences of varying lengths through bypassing the costly
test-time optimization.

1. Introduction
We exist in a universe where various entities are interconnected. At the micro level, particles can exhibit entanglement, as described by quantum mechanics, while at the
macro level, celestial bodies are governed by gravity, characterized by general relativity. These interconnections ensure that our observations of the states of different entities
around us are intricately correlated rather than independently distributed. This interconnectedness enables us to
make informed reasoning and predictions.
Efficiently estimating correlations between scene entities
from environmental sensory signals is essential for the emergence of intelligent behavior. This is particularly relevant
for embodied agents that interact with the scene and receive
large volumes of streaming data, such as video, audio, and
touch, within seconds. Rapid correlation estimation helps
agents build informative representations of their surroundings and identify crucial elements for survival. Moreover,
vast amounts of data are generated every second across
the internet, including stock prices, social media messages,
e-commerce transactions, and Internet-of-Things devices.
Efficiently estimating mutual correlations between differ-

1
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, the University of Hong Kong 2 School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China 3 Work
done as an intern at HKU 4 Musketeers Foundation Institute of
Data Science, the University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to:
Yanchao Yang <yanchaoy@hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

