Directly Denoising Diffusion Models

Dan Zhang 1 * , Jingjing Wang 1 * , Feng Luo 1

Abstract

2022). However, a remarkable drawback is their relatively
slow sampling speed, which poses challenges for practical applications. For instance, the vanilla method of DMs
(DDPM Ho et al. (2020), Score based models (Song et al.,
2020b)) takes hundreds to thousands of steps in sampling,
which is very time-consuming compared with one-step generation such as GAN-style models (Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2020b), normalizing flow models (Kingma &
Dhariwal, 2018; Dinh et al., 2016), or consistency models
(Song et al., 2023; Song & Dhariwal, 2023). When directly
generating the image using DDPM, the accumulated distortion leads to poor performance.

In this paper, we present the Directly Denoising
Diffusion Model (DDDM): a simple and generic
approach for generating realistic images with fewstep sampling, while multistep sampling is still
preserved for better performance. DDDMs require no delicately designed samplers nor distillation on pre-trained distillation models. DDDMs
train the diffusion model conditioned on an estimated target that was generated from previous
training iterations of its own. To generate images, samples generated from the previous time
step are also taken into consideration, guiding the
generation process iteratively. We further propose Pseudo-LPIPS, a novel metric loss that is
more robust to various values of hyperparameter. Despite its simplicity, the proposed approach
can achieve strong performance in benchmark
datasets. Our model achieves FID scores of 2.57
and 2.33 on CIFAR-10 in one-step and two-step
sampling respectively, surpassing those obtained
from GANs and distillation-based models. By
extending the sampling to 1000 steps, we further reduce FID score to 1.79, aligning with
state-of-the-art methods in the literature. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
TheLuoFengLab/DDDM.

Many efforts to accelerate the sampling process of DM
have been proposed. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models
(DDIM, Song et al. (2020a)) modified the diffusion process
into a non-Markovian format with a smaller number of function evaluations (NFE) to generate samples. Meanwhile, by
viewing the sampling process through the lens of ordinary
differential equation (ODE), Song et al. (2020b) developed
faster numerical solvers to reduce the NFE required for generation rapidly, thus speeding up the process significantly
(Zhang & Chen, 2022; Lu et al., 2022). Although these
solvers can achieve comparable results as thousands-of-step
samplers, the performance for single-step generation is still
not good. Furthermore, knowledge distillation-based methods (Luhman & Luhman, 2021) compress the information
learned by the thousands-step sampler into a one-step model,
which enables the one-step generation of samples. However,
the distillation-based models add computational overhead to
the training process as they require another pretrained diffusion model (teacher model) and have potential architectural
constraints (Song & Dhariwal, 2023).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DM) recently have attracted significant
attention for their exceptional ability to generate realistic
samples in recent years, DMs achieved impressive performance in many fields, including image generation (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022a; Rombach et al., 2022), video generation (Ho et al., 2022), inpainting (Rombach et al., 2022)
and super-resolution (Saharia et al., 2022b; Rombach et al.,

In this paper, we propose Directly Denoising Diffusion
Model (DDDM) that combines the efficiency of single-step
generation with the benefits of iterative sampling for improved sample quality. DDDM employs a DDPM-style
noise scheduler and denoises under the probability flow
ODE framework. However, we solve the probability flow
ODE using a neural network only without using any ODE
solver. Our method enables the generation of data samples from random noise with high quality in just one step.
Moreover, DDDM can still allow multi-step sampling to
obtain better generation results. Furthermore, inspired by
Pseudo-Huber losses, we proposed pseudo Learned Percep-

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, Clemson University,
USA. Correspondence to: Feng Luo <luofeng@clemson.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

