Mitigating Oversmoothing Through Reverse Process of GNNs
for Heterophilic Graphs

MoonJeong Park 1 Jaeseung Heo 1 Dongwoo Kim 1 2

Abstract

are considered, the models based on the homophilic assumption (McPherson et al., 2001) often perform worse than the
naive neural network architectures without considering the
relationship between nodes (Zhu et al., 2020).

Graph Neural Network (GNN) resembles the diffusion process, leading to the over-smoothing
of learned representations when stacking many
layers. Hence, the reverse process of message
passing can produce the distinguishable node
representations by inverting the forward message propagation. The distinguishable representations can help us to better classify neighboring nodes with different labels, such as in heterophilic graphs. In this work, we apply the design principle of the reverse process to the three
variants of the GNNs. Through the experiments
on heterophilic graph data, where adjacent nodes
need to have different representations for successful classification, we show that the reverse
process significantly improves the prediction performance in many cases. Additional analysis reveals that the reverse mechanism can mitigate
the over-smoothing over hundreds of layers. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
ml-postech/reverse-gnn.

To learn the node representations of heterophilic graphs,
a GNN needs to capture long-range interactions between
nodes, leading to the stacking of multiple message-passing
layers (Li et al., 2022; Rusch et al., 2023). However, many
studies empirically and theoretically identify that GNN
tends to smooth the node representations over the layers, and
eventually, the learned representations are likely to be similar, known as the over-smoothing issue (Chen et al., 2020;
Rusch et al., 2023). Furthermore, GRAND (Chamberlain
et al., 2021) shows that GNN can be seen as a discretization
of a heat diffusion equation. The diffusion perspective implies that learning distinguishable node representation with
deep GNN is challenging since heat only diffuses to reach
equilibrium, where node representation becomes indistinguishable.
In this work, we claim not to forcefully correct the diffusive
nature of the GNNs. Instead, we propose to use the reverse
process of the aggregation. The aggregation process is
known to make the node representations similar; hence, its
reverse process can make the neighborhood representations
more distinguishable. Revisiting the diffusion perspective,
applying the reverse process means learning the states in
the past, which are further away from equilibrium and more
distinguishable.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as an important tool for learning relational data. Earlier attempts
aim to learn the node representations from graphs based
on a message-passing mechanism. The message-passing
neural network framework shows partial success with the
homophilic graphs, where the nodes with the same labels are
likely to be connected. When the heterophilic graphs, where
node labels significantly differ from those of their neighbors,

To illustrate our intuition, we showcase our experimental results on the Minesweeper dataset, a well-known heterophilic dataset (Platonov et al., 2023b), in Figure 1. In
Minesweeper, a board is a grid-structured graph where each
node is initialized with the number of mines in the adjacent
nodes X(0) , and the goal is to classify the location of mine
Y correctly. The top row visualizes the learned node representations with our approach, and the bottom row visualizes
the representations with the GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017).
With the forward-only method, such as GCN, the learned
representations often fail to obtain distinguishable representations for classification. However, when the reverse
process is applied to the initial features, we can obtain a
distinguishable representation from the backward process.

1
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea 2 Computer Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Dongwoo Kim <dongwoo.kim@postech.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

