GLoRe: When, Where, and How to Improve LLM Reasoning
via Global and Local Refinements
Alex Havrilla 1 2 Sharath Raparthy 1 Christoforos Nalmpantis 1 Jane Dwivedi-Yu 1 Maksym Zhuravynski 3
Eric Hambro 4 Roberta Raileanu 1

Abstract

science, or coding problems (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022). However, under close inspection, this refinement ability is quite brittle, often unable
to even identify when a solution needs refinement (Huang
et al., 2023). When LLMs do produce successful refinements on hard reasoning tasks this is often due to the incorporation of external forms of feedback, e.g. feedback
from humans or code, stronger models, or other tools (Zhou
et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2023). In this work, we carefully
examine and improve the self-refinement abilities of LLMs
on reasoning tasks without any external feedback other than
the ground truth answers of the training problems. Notably,
this means we make no use of data or feedback from humans or stronger models. To do so we start by heuristically
decomposing the refinement problem into three parts: firstly
deciding when to refine, then where to refine, and finally
how to refine.

State-of-the-art language models exhibit reasoning refinement capabilities on math, science and
coding tasks. However, recent work demonstrates
that even the best models struggle to identify when
and where to refine without access to external
feedback. In this paper, we propose Stepwise
ORMs (SORMs) which are trained, only on synthetic data, to approximate the expected future
reward of the optimal policy, or V ⋆ , as a form of
process-based reward modeling. Our experiments
show that SORMs can more accurately detect incorrect reasoning steps compared to ORMs, thus
enabling them to give precise step-level feedback
to refinement models. We then train global refinement models, which take only the question and
a draft solution as input and predict a corrected
solution, and local refinement models which also
take as input a critique indicating the location of
the first reasoning error. We generate training data
for both models synthetically by reusing data used
to train the SORM. By combining both global and
local refinements for the same question, via using
an ORM as a reranker, we significantly outperform either approach individually, as well as a
best of three baseline. With this strategy we can
improve the accuracy of a LLaMA 2-chat 13B
model (already fine-tuned with RL) on GSM8K
from 53% to 65% when greedily sampled.

Outcome Based Reward Models (ORMs) (Cobbe et al.,
2021), first introduced as an estimator of final answer correctness given a question to do solution reranking, are a
natural choice for addressing step one. For deciding where
to refine, we carefully examine the generalization of ORMs
to intermediate steps. We find the accuracy of the underlying
data generating policy π directly affects the ORM’s ability
to learn correctness of intermediate solutions steps. This
leads to the ORM often under-estimating the solvability
of a problem from an intermediate step Si . This underestimation leads to high false-negative rates when used to
classify steps with errors. Process Based Reward Models
(PRMs) instead are trained to directly estimate the correctness of each step. Yet these models require extensive human
labeling of model-generated solution steps as valid or invalid. In an effort to improve our ability to give intermediate
step feedback, we introduce the Stepwise ORMs (SORMs)
which explicitly predict labels at each step indicating the
presence of an error. We generate SORM training data by
sampling a student policy π many times at a step Si in solution S, labeling Si as valid if we successfully reach the final
answer. From an RL perspective, this can be interpreted
as learning (a lower bound of) the optimal value function
V ∗ of the reasoning task via approximation of the optimal
policy π ∗ with rejection sampling. The resulting SORM

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art large language models (LLMs) exhibit a
wide range of downstream capabilities after pre-training.
This includes the ability to refine their reasoning on math,
*

Equal contribution 1 Meta 2 Georgia Tech 3 StabilityAI
Anthropic.
Correspondence to:
Alex Havrilla
<ahavrilla3@gatech.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

