Forget Sharpness: Perturbed Forgetting of Model Biases Within SAM Dynamics

Ankit Vani 1 2 * Frederick Tung 2 Gabriel L. Oliveira 2 Hossein Sharifi-Noghabi 2

Abstract
Observed
features

Despite attaining high empirical generalization,
the sharpness of models trained with sharpnessaware minimization (SAM) do not always correlate with generalization error. Instead of viewing SAM as minimizing sharpness to improve
generalization, our paper considers a new perspective based on SAM’s training dynamics. We
propose that perturbations in SAM perform perturbed forgetting, where they discard undesirable
model biases to exhibit learning signals that generalize better. We relate our notion of forgetting
to the information bottleneck principle, use it to
explain observations like the better generalization
of smaller perturbation batches, and show that perturbed forgetting can exhibit a stronger correlation
with generalization than flatness. While standard
SAM targets model biases exposed by the steepest
ascent directions, we propose a new perturbation
that targets biases exposed through the model’s
outputs. Our output bias forgetting perturbations
outperform standard SAM, GSAM, and ASAM
on ImageNet, robustness benchmarks, and transfer to CIFAR-{10,100}, while sometimes converging to sharper regions. Our results suggest
that the benefits of SAM can be explained by alternative mechanistic principles that do not require
flatness of the loss surface.

Predicted
Likelihood

Grassy

0.3

Dewlap

0.6

Observed
features

0.2 Field
GD
Vanilla

Sandy

Predicted
Likelihood

0.1

0.7 Cow
(training
label)

0.1 Beach

Perturb to forget undesirable model biases
Grassy

0.4

Dewlap

0.4

0.3 Field
GD
SAM*

Sandy

Cow

0.6 (training

0.2
Desirable model biases

label)

0.1 Beach
Undesirable model biases
(spurious correlations)

Figure 1. A simplified illustration of our mechanistic perturbed
forgetting perspective of sharpness-aware minimization (SAM).
We treat perturbations in each step of SAM as an opportunity to
forget undesirable model biases. Here, the presence of ‘grassy’ or
‘sandy’ features spuriously contribute to the prediction of ‘cow.’
When gradient descent (GD) can strengthen these biases, leading to
overfitting, the perturbation of SAM takes an ascent step to ‘forget’
them to allow computing a less biased gradient. *Not illustrated:
this gradient is used to take a GD step at the unperturbed weights.

Work done during an internship at Borealis AI 1 Mila, Université de Montréal 2 Borealis AI. Correspondence to: Ankit Vani
<ankit.vani@umontreal.ca>.

As many models trained with SAM exhibit better generalization, research continues to explore the principles behind
it (Andriushchenko & Flammarion, 2022; Wen et al., 2022)
to improve training algorithms. However, certain questions
stand in the way of refining these techniques. First, the
sharpness metric induced by SAM does not necessarily correlate with generalization in modern deep learning architectures (Andriushchenko et al., 2023b; Kaur et al., 2023). Furthermore, practically necessary concepts like m-sharpness
are unsupported by the theory these methods are based on,
casting doubt on the potential of progress upon assumptions
that do not hold up empirically.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Instead of looking at these methods from the perspective of
reducing sharpness, we offer a novel view by considering
a mechanistic aspect of SAM’s training dynamics, which

1. Introduction
The belief that flatter minima of the loss surface generalize
better is commonplace in machine learning (Jiang et al.,
2019). Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) (Foret et al.,
2020) and its variants (Kwon et al., 2021; Zhuang et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2022) are motivated and presented as
methods to minimize sharpness to improve generalization.
*

1

