Position: Towards Unified Alignment Between Agents,
Humans, and Environment

Zonghan Yang * 1 An Liu * 1 Zijun Liu * 1 Kaiming Liu 1 Fangzhou Xiong 1 Yile Wang 2 Zeyuan Yang 1
Qingyuan Hu 1 Xinrui Chen 1 Zhenhe Zhang 1 Fuwen Luo 1 Zhicheng Guo 1 Peng Li 2 Yang Liu 1 2 3

Abstract
The rapid progress of foundation models has led
to the prosperity of autonomous agents, which
leverage the universal capabilities of foundation
models to conduct reasoning, decision-making,
and environmental interaction. However, the efficacy of agents remains limited when operating in intricate, realistic environments. In this
work, we introduce the principles of Unified
Alignment for Agents (UA2 ), which advocate for
the simultaneous alignment of agents with human intentions, environmental dynamics, and selfconstraints such as the limitation of monetary budgets. From the perspective of UA2 , we review the
current agent research and highlight the neglected
factors in existing agent benchmarks and method
candidates. We also conduct proof-of-concept
studies by introducing realistic features to WebShop (Yao et al., 2022a), including user profiles
to demonstrate intentions, personalized reranking
for complex environmental dynamics, and runtime cost statistics to reflect self-constraints. We
then follow the principles of UA2 to propose an
initial design of our agent and benchmark its performance with several candidate baselines in the
retrofitted WebShop. The extensive experimental
results further prove the importance of the principles of UA2 . Our research sheds light on the
next steps of autonomous agent research with improved general problem-solving abilities.

Humans

Environment

Align with human intentions

Align with env. dynamics

Ambiguity, safety, etc.

States, randomness, etc.
Agents

Align with self-constraints
Time / money budgets, etc.

Figure 1. A working system of agents that consists of three roles:
humans to be assisted, an environment to interact with, and the
agents themselves. The principles of Unified Alignment for Agents
(UA2 ) suggest that the agents should align with the three roles in
a unified manner by recognizing human intentions, adapting to
environmental dynamics, and adhering to self-constraints.

1. Introduction
Recent days have witnessed the rapid development of autonomous agents, which leverage the proficiency of Large
Language Models (LLMs) or Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Team et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2024) to interact with environments for
task execution. Several seminal works on foundation model
agents have exhibited promising results in both digital and
embodied scenarios, including but not limited to web task
automation (Deng et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023b; Zheng
et al., 2024), open-ended world exploration (Wang et al.,
2023a; Zhu et al., 2023), interactive coding (Chen et al.,
2023c; Qian et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023), and robotic
tasks (Ahn et al., 2022; Mirchandani et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2023b; Ma et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c).

*

1
Equal contribution
Dept.
of Comp.
Sci.
&
Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center
for Language Competence, Jiangsu, China. Correspondence
to: Peng Li <lipeng@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yang Liu <liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Aside from existing literature, the development of foundation model agents in realistic, complex scenarios is still in
its infancy. While different agent benchmarks have been
proposed (Liu et al., 2023c; Mialon et al., 2023; Ma et al.,
2024), the methodologies of agents are still being proposed
and evaluated in synthetic, simplified settings, which results
in the bottlenecked performance of agents in real-world deployment when attempting to satisfy the expectations of hu-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

