F LORA: Low-Rank Adapters Are Secretly Gradient Compressors

Yongchang Hao∗ 1 Yanshuai Cao 2 Lili Mou 1 3

Abstract

require an additional memory buffer equal to the model size
to store the information.

Despite large neural networks demonstrating remarkable abilities to complete different tasks, they
require excessive memory usage to store the optimization states for training. To alleviate this, the
low-rank adaptation (LoRA) is proposed to reduce
the optimization states by training fewer parameters. However, LoRA restricts overall weight update matrices to be low-rank, limiting the model
performance. In this work, we investigate the
dynamics of LoRA and identify that it can be approximated by a random projection. Based on
this observation, we propose F LORA, which is
able to achieve high-rank updates by resampling
the projection matrices while enjoying the sublinear space complexity of optimization states. We
conduct experiments across different tasks and
model architectures to verify the effectiveness of
our approach.

However, such a linear space complexity of optimization
states becomes problematic in modern deep learning. For
example, GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) are trained with Adam (Kingma
& Ba, 2015) where momentum is applied. For each scalar
in the parameter set, Adam maintains two additional variables (i.e., first- and second-moment estimates), tripling
the memory usage. The largest GPT-3, for example, has
175 billion parameters taking 700GB of memory. Adam requires an additional 1.4TB memory for optimization states.
This excessive amount of memory usage poses a scaling
challenge.
One line of research saves memory by training a subset of
parameters (Houlsby et al., 2019; Zaken et al., 2022), so
the optimizer only stores information about a small set of
trainable parameters. One notable example is the low-rank
adaptation (LoRA, Hu et al., 2022). LoRA updates parameter matrices by low-rank patches, which contain much fewer
trainable parameters. In this way, the momentum and gradient accumulation also have much smaller sizes. However,
LoRA restricts the weight update to be in the low-rank form,
limiting the optimization space of the model parameters.

1. Introduction
Gradient-based optimization powers the learning part of
deep neural networks. In the simplest form, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) updates the model parameters using noisy
estimation of the negative gradient. More advanced methods
track various gradient statistics to stabilize and accelerate
training (Duchi et al., 2011; Hinton et al., 2012). For example, the momentum technique tracks an exponential moving
average of gradients for variance reduction (Cutkosky &
Orabona, 2019) and damping (Goh, 2017). On the other
hand, gradient accumulation computes the average of gradients in the last few batches to simulate a larger effective
batch for variance reduction (Wang et al., 2013). Both cases

Another line of work designs new optimizers that use less
memory (Dettmers et al., 2021; Feinberg et al., 2023). For
instance, Adafactor (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) leverages the
closed-form solution of generalized Kullback–Leibler divergence (Finesso & Spreij, 2006) to reconstruct the secondmoment estimate in Adam. To optimize a matrix in Rn×m ,
Adafactor reduces the memory from O(nm) to O(n + m),
making the space complexity of second-moment estimation
sublinear in model size. However, Adafactor drops the momentum technique to achieve the sublinearity, sacrificing the
variance reduction and damping effect of momentum (Rae
et al., 2021). Moreover, it does not reduce the memory for
gradient accumulation.

∗

Project done during Mitacs internship at Borealis AI.
Department of Computing Science & Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta
2
Borealis AI 3 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence
to: Yongchang Hao <yongcha1@ualberta.ca>, Yanshuai
Cao <yanshuai.cao@borealisai.com>, Lili Mou <double
power.mou@gmail.com>.

1

In this work, we propose F LORA (from LoRA to high-rank
updates), which is a novel optimization technique that uses
sublinear memory for gradient accumulation and momentum calculation. Our intuition arises from investigating
LoRA and observing that a LoRA update is dominated by

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

