Fair Risk Control: A Generalized Framework for Calibrating Multi-group
Fairness Risks
Lujing Zhang 1 Aaron Roth 2 Linjun Zhang 3

Abstract

are derived for each of these settings, and they are generally
limited to one-dimensional predictors of various sorts.

This paper introduces a framework for postprocessing machine learning models so that their
predictions satisfy multi-group fairness guarantees. Based on the celebrated notion of multicalibration, we introduce (s, G, α)−GMC (Generalized Multi-Dimensional Multicalibration) for
multi-dimensional mappings s, constraint set G,
and a pre-specified threshold level α. We propose associated algorithms to achieve this notion
in general settings. This framework is then applied to diverse scenarios encompassing different
fairness concerns, including false negative rate
control in image segmentation, prediction set conditional uncertainty quantification in hierarchical
classification, and de-biased text generation in
language models. We conduct numerical studies
on several datasets and tasks.

In this work, we propose a unifying framework for fair risk
control in settings with multi-dimensional outputs, based
on multicalibration (Úrsula Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018).
This framework is developed as an extension of the work by
(Deng et al., 2023; Noarov & Roth, 2023), and addresses
the need for calibrating multi-dimensional output functions.
To illustrate the usefulness of this framework, we apply it
to a variety of settings, including false negative rate control
in image segmentation, prediction set conditional coverage
guarantees in hierarchical classification, and de-biased text
generation in language models. These applications make use
of the additional power granted by our multi-dimensional
extension of multicalibration.
1.1. Related Work
Multicalibration was introduced by (Úrsula Hébert-Johnson
et al., 2018) as a fairness motivated constraint that informally asks that a 1-dimensional predictor of a binary-valued
outcome be unbiased, conditional on both its own prediction and on membership of the input in some number of
pre-defined groups (see also a line of prior work that asks
for a similar set of guarantees under slightly different conditions (Dawid, 1985; Sandroni et al., 2003; Foster & Kakade,
2006)). Subsequently, multicalibration has been generalized in a number of ways. (Jung et al., 2021) generalizes
multicalibration to real-valued outcomes, and defines and
studies a variant of multicalibration that predicts variance
and higher moments rather than means. (Gupta et al., 2022)
extends the study of multicalibration of both means and
moments to the online setting, and defines a variant of mulicalibration for quantiles, with applications to uncertainty
estimation. (Bastani et al., 2022; Jung et al., 2022) gives
more practical variants of quantile multicalibration with
applications to conformal prediction, together with experimental evaluation. (Deng et al., 2023) gives an abstract
generalization of 1-dimensional multicalibration, and show
how to cast other algorithmic fairness desiderata like false
positive rate control in this framework. (Noarov & Roth,
2023) gives a characterization of the scope of 1-dimensional
multicalibration variants via a connection to property elici-

1. Introduction
A common theme across the fairness in machine learning
literature is that some measure of error or risk should be
equalized across sub-populations. Common measures evaluated across demographic groups include false positive and
false negative rates (Hardt et al., 2016) and calibration error (Kleinberg et al., 2016; Chouldechova, 2017). Initial
work in this line gave methods for equalizing different risk
measures on disjoint groups. A second generation of work
gave methods for equalizing measures of risk across groups
even when the groups could intersect – e.g. for false positive and negative rates (Kearns et al., 2018), calibration
error (Úrsula Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018), regret (Blum
& Lykouris, 2019; Rothblum & Yona, 2021), prediction
set coverage (Jung et al., 2021; 2022; Deng et al., 2023),
among other risk measures. In general, distinct algorithms
*

Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Rutgers, University of New Jersey. Correspondence to:
Linjun Zhang <linjun.zhang@rutgers.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

