Theoretical Analysis of Learned Database Operations under Distribution Shift
through Distribution Learnability

Sepanta Zeighami 1 Cyrus Shahabi 2

Abstract

However, an important caveat accompanying these results is
that, especially when data distribution changes, models’ performance may deteriorate after new insertions (Ding et al.,
2020; Negi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021), possibly to worse
than non-learned methods (Wongkham et al., 2022). This,
combined with the lack of a theoretical understanding of the
behavior of the learned models as datasets change, poses
a critical hurdle to their deployment in practice. It is theoretically unclear why and when learned models outperform
non-learned methods, and, until this paper, no theoretical
work shows any advantage in using the learned methods
in dynamic datasets and under distribution shift. The goal
of this paper is to theoretically understand the capabilities
of learned models for database operations, show why and
when they outperform non-learned alternatives and provide
theoretical guarantees on their performance.

Use of machine learning to perform database operations, such as indexing, cardinality estimation,
and sorting, is shown to provide substantial performance benefits. However, when datasets change
and data distribution shifts, empirical results also
show performance degradation for learned models, possibly to worse than non-learned alternatives. This, together with a lack of theoretical understanding of learned methods undermines their
practical applicability, since there are no guarantees on how well the models will perform after
deployment. In this paper, we present the first
known theoretical characterization of the performance of learned models in dynamic datasets,
for the aforementioned operations. Our results
show novel theoretical characteristics achievable
by learned models and provide bounds on the performance of the models that characterize their
advantages over non-learned methods, showing
why and when learned models can outperform the
alternatives. Our analysis develops the distribution learnability framework and novel theoretical
tools which build the foundation for the analysis
of learned database operations in the future.

We specifically study learned solutions for three fundamental database operations: indexing, cardinality estimation and
sorting. Our main focus is the study of learned indexing
and cardinality estimation in the presence of insertions from
a possibly changing data distribution, while we also study
learned sorting (in static scenario) to show the broader applicability of our developed theoretical tools. In all cases,
a learned model, fˆ(x; θ) is used to replace a specific data
operation, fD (x), that takes an input x and calculates a desired answer from the dataset D. For cardinality estimation,
fD (x) returns the number of points in the database D that
match the query x, and for indexing fD (x) returns the true
location of x in a sorted array. The model fˆ(x; θ) is trained
to approximate fD (x), and an accurate approximation leads
to efficiency gains when using the model (e.g., for learned
indexing, if fˆ(x; θ) gives an accurate estimate of location
of x in a sorted array, a local search around the estimated
location efficiently finds the exact location). In the presence
of insertions, the ground-truth fD (x) changes as the dataset
changes (e.g., the cardinality of some queries increase as
new points are inserted). Thus, as more points are inserted
(not only due to distribution shift, but exacerbated by it),
the accuracy of fˆ(x; θ) worsens. A common solution is to
periodically retrain fˆ to ensure consistent accuracy. This,
however, increases insertion cost when insertions trigger a
(computationally expensive) model retraining.

1. Introduction
Given a fixed dataset, learned database operations (machine
learning models learned to perform database operations such
as indexing, cardinality estimation and sorting) have been
shown to outperform non-learned methods, providing speedups and space savings both empirically (Kraska et al., 2018;
Kipf et al., 2018; Kristo et al., 2020) and, for the case of indexing, theoretically (Zeighami & Shahabi, 2023; Ferragina
et al., 2020). For dynamic datasets (e.g., when new points
can be inserted into the dataset), significant empirical benefits are also often observed when using learned methods.
1
University of California, Berkeley. Work done while at USC’s
Infolab 2 University of Southern California. Correspondence to:
Sepanta Zeighami <zeighami@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

