Probabilistic Routing for Graph-Based Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search

Kejing Lu 1 Chuan Xiao 1 2 Yoshiharu Ishikawa 1

Abstract

NNS (ANNS) for efficiency. While some approaches provide
theoretical guarantees for approximate answers – typically
through locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) (Charikar, 2002;
Datar et al., 2004; Andoni et al., 2015) – others prioritize
faster search speeds for a desired recall level by utilizing
quantization (Jégou et al., 2011; Ge et al., 2014) or graph
indexes (Malkov & Yashunin, 2020; Fu et al., 2019; 2022).

Approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) in
high-dimensional spaces is a pivotal challenge in
the field of machine learning. In recent years,
graph-based methods have emerged as the superior approach to ANNS, establishing a new state
of the art. Although various optimizations for
graph-based ANNS have been introduced, they
predominantly rely on heuristic methods that lack
formal theoretical backing. This paper aims to
enhance routing within graph-based ANNS by introducing a method that offers a probabilistic guarantee when exploring a node’s neighbors in the
graph. We formulate the problem as probabilistic routing and develop two baseline strategies by
incorporating locality-sensitive techniques. Subsequently, we introduce PEOs, a novel approach
that efficiently identifies which neighbors in the
graph should be considered for exact distance calculation, thus significantly improving efficiency in
practice. Our experiments demonstrate that equipping PEOs can increase throughput on commonly
utilized graph indexes (HNSW and NSSG) by a
factor of 1.6 to 2.5, and its efficiency consistently
outperforms the leading-edge routing technique
by 1.1 to 1.4 times. The code and datasets used for
our evaluations are publicly accessible at https:
//github.com/ICML2024-code/PEOs .

Graph-based ANNS, distinguished by its exceptional empirical performance, has become the leading method for
ANNS and is widely implemented in vector search tools and
databases. During the indexing phase, graph-based ANNS
constructs a proximity graph where nodes represent data vectors and edges connect closely located vectors. In the search
phase, it maintains a priority queue and a result list while
exploring the graph. Nodes are repeatedly popped from the
priority queue until it is empty, calculating the distance from
their neighbors to the query. Neighbors that are closer than
the furthest element in the result list are added to the queue,
and the results are accordingly updated.
To further improve the performance of graph-based ANNS,
practitioners have introduced various empirical optimization
techniques, including routing (Xu et al., 2021; Muñoz et al.,
2019; Baranchuk et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2023), edge selection (Fu et al., 2022; Subramanya et al., 2019), and quantization (Lu et al., 2021; Japan, 2023). The primary objective is to
minimize distance calculations during neighbor exploration.
However, most of these optimizations are heuristic, based on
empirical observations (e.g., over 80% of data vectors are less
relevant than the furthest element in the results list and thus
should be pruned before exact distance calculations (Chen
et al., 2023)), making them challenging to quantitatively
analyze. Although analyses elucidate the effectiveness of
graph-based ANNS (Prokhorenkova & Shekhovtsov, 2020;
Indyk & Xu, 2023), they concentrate on theoretical aspects
rather than empirical improvements.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor search (NNS) is the process of identifying the vector in a dataset that is closest to a given query
vector. This technique has found widespread application
in machine learning, with numerous solutions to NNS having been proposed. Given the challenge of finding exact
answers, practical efforts have shifted towards approximate

In this paper, we investigate routing in graph-based ANNS,
aiming to identify which neighbors should be evaluated for
distance to the query during the search phase efficiently. Our
objective is to bridge the theoretical and practical aspects of
ANNS by providing a theoretical guarantee. While achieving
an LSH-like guarantee for graph-based ANNS is challenging,
we demonstrate that it is feasible to establish a probabilistic
guarantee for exploring a node’s neighbors. Specifically, we

1
Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Japan
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
Osaka University, Japan. Correspondence to: Kejing Lu
<lu@db.is.i.nagoya-u.ac.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

