Scalable Pre-training of Large Autoregressive Image Models

Alaaeldin El-Nouby 1 Michal Klein 1 Shuangfei Zhai 1 Miguel Angel Bautista 1 Vaishaal Shankar 1
Alexander Toshev 1 Joshua M Susskind 1 Armand Joulin † 1
https://github.com/apple/ml-aim

78
A IM-3B
77
A IM-1B
76

A IM-0.6B

(15 benchmarks)

74.5
Top-1 accuracy

(15 benchmarks)

Top-1 accuracy

A IM-7B

74
73.5
73

0.3119 0.3084
0.3039
Pre-training validation loss (IN-1k)

0.2989

A IM-0.6B
1M

100M
2B
Number of unique images seen (log scale)

Figure 1: A IM scaling behavior (Left) As we scale the capacity of A IM, we observe improved performance for the pre-training objective
which directly correlates with stronger downstream performance. (Right) A IM exhibits stronger downstream performance when trained
using larger sets of uncurated web data [Gadre et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2023]. The downstream performance is the average attentive
probe top-1 accuracy over a diverse set of 15 image recognition benchmarks. All models are trained for the same number of updates.

1. Introduction

Abstract
This paper introduces A IM, a collection of vision models pre-trained with an autoregressive
objective. These models are inspired by their textual counterparts, i.e., Large Language Models
(LLMs), and exhibit similar scaling properties.
Specifically, we highlight two key findings: (1)
the performance of the visual features scale with
both the model capacity and the quantity of data,
(2) the value of the objective function correlates
with the performance of the model on downstream tasks. We illustrate the practical implication of these findings by pre-training a 7 billion
parameter A IM on 2 billion images, that achieves
84.0% on ImageNet-1k with a frozen trunk. Interestingly, even at this scale, we observe no
sign of saturation in performance, suggesting
that A IM potentially represents a new frontier
for training large-scale vision models. The pretraining of A IM is similar to the pre-training of
LLMs, and does not require any image-specific
strategy to stabilize the training at scale.

Pre-training task agnostic models has become the standard in Natural Language Processing with the recent revolution of large language models (LLMs) [Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023]. These
models can solve complex reasoning tasks from a few examples [Brown et al., 2020], follow instructions [Ouyang
et al., 2022], and now serve as the engine of widely used
AI assistants such as ChatGPT. A key factor contributing
to their success is the ability to consistently improve as the
capacity (i.e. number of parameters) or the amount of pretraining data [Radford et al., 2019] increases.
The scaling behavior of these models is remarkable for two
key reasons. First, even though these models are trained
with a simple objective – predicting the next word in a sentence given its past – they can learn intricate patterns over
long contexts. Second, the scalability of this autoregressive
objective is observed when used in conjunction with certain architectures, and in particular Transformers [Vaswani
et al., 2017], highlighting the potential synergy between autoregressive pre-training and this architecture.
These observations raise the question of whether the success of scaling Transformers with an autoregressive objective is exclusive to text. This is particularly significant considering that none of the aforementioned elements are inherently specific to language modeling. Autoregressive objectives take their roots in the data compression [Shannon,

Apple. † Work done while with Apple. Now at Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: <alaaeldin ali@apple.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

