ILILT: Implicit Learning of Inverse Lithography Technologies

Haoyu Yang 1 Haoxing Ren 1

Abstract
Lithography, transferring chip design masks to
the silicon wafer, is the most important phase in
modern semiconductor manufacturing flow. Due
to the limitations of lithography systems, Extensive design optimizations are required to tackle
the design and silicon mismatch. Inverse lithography technology (ILT) is one of the promising
solutions to perform pre-fabrication optimization,
termed mask optimization. Because of mask optimization problems’ constrained non-convexity,
numerical ILT solvers rely heavily on good initialization to avoid getting stuck on sub-optimal
solutions. Machine learning (ML) techniques are
hence proposed to generate mask initialization
for ILT solvers with one-shot inference, targeting
faster and better convergence during ILT. This
paper addresses the question of whether ML models can directly generate high-quality optimized
masks without engaging ILT solvers in the loop.
We propose an implicit learning ILT framework:
ILILT, which leverages the implicit layer learning method and lithography-conditioned inputs to
ground the model. Trained to understand the ILT
optimization procedure, ILILT can outperform the
state-of-the-art machine learning solutions, significantly improving efficiency and quality.

Figure 1. Limitations of lithography system requires design optimization to be correctly fabricated on the silicon wafer.

Inverse lithography technology (ILT), as a numerical solution, has shown great promise for mask optimization on
advanced-node lithography (Gao et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2021;
Braam et al., 2019; Pang et al., 2019). As shown in Figure 2(a), an ILT solver requires frequent calls of lithography
simulator, which mathematically approximate the lithography fabrication behavior. The forward path computes
the wafer image corresponding to the current mask and we
measure the error between the wafer image and the original design. In the backward path, the error will be passed
back through gradient method to update the mask. However,
the non-convexity of mask optimization problems poses a
great challenge to numerical ILT solvers, that they rely heavily on good mask initialization and can easily get stuck at
sub-optimal solutions.
Recent research into machine learning (ML) techniques for
lithography have made ILT solvers more efficient. As shown
in Figure 2(b), ML can provide better optimization starting points that significantly reduce ILT iterations and yield
better convergence (Yang et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020;
Jiang et al., 2020). GAN-OPC (Yang et al., 2018) is the earliest deep learning solution for inverse lithography, where
a conditional generative adversarial network is proposed
for initial mask generation with litho-guided pre-training.
DAMO (Chen et al., 2020) improves on this work by replacing the standard generator in GAN-OPC with nested
UNet and ResNet bottleneck layers (Zhou et al., 2019; Isola
et al., 2017; He et al., 2016), yielding a direct output of
high-resolution masks. Jiang et al. (Jiang et al., 2020) also
integrates the explicit gradient calculation of litho-guided
pre-training and achieves better training convergence and
mask quality. Very recently, Zhao et al. (Zhao et al., 2022)
develops the AdaOPC framework that is able to learn from

1. Introduction
Lithography is the most important phase in semiconductor
manufacturing flow, which transfers chip design patterns
onto the silicon wafer. However, due to the limitations of
lithography systems, there are usually fetal manufacturing
gaps between the design and the patterns on the wafer. Extensive prior fabrication design optimizations, termed mask
optimization, are required to compensate for the manufacturing loss (Figure 1).
1
Design Automation Research Group, NVIDIA, Austin, TX.
Correspondence to: Haoyu Yang <haoyuy@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

