Parameter Efficient Quasi-Orthogonal Fine-Tuning via Givens Rotation

Xinyu Ma 1 2 Xu Chu 1 2 3 Zhibang Yang 2 Yang Lin 1 2 Xin Gao 1 2 Junfeng Zhao 1 2

Abstract

downstream tasks or expertise domains. Thus, parameterefficient fine-tuning (PEFT) mechanisms have become an
urgent need for downstream adaptation and motivate a long
line of research (Lester et al., 2021; Li & Liang, 2021;
Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2021; Mao et al., 2022).
Amongst them, reparameterization tuning (Hu et al., 2021;
Edalati et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023) has been most widely
adopted, where the pretrained model remains frozen and
only the updates of partial modules are reparameterized with
low parameter budgets and fine-tuned.

With the increasingly powerful performances and
enormous scales of pretrained models, promoting
parameter efficiency in fine-tuning has become
a crucial need for effective and efficient adaptation to various downstream tasks. One representative line of fine-tuning methods is Orthogonal
Fine-tuning (OFT), which rigorously preserves
the angular distances within the parameter space
to preserve the pretrained knowledge. Despite the
empirical effectiveness, OFT still suffers low parameter efficiency at O(d2 ) and limited capability
of downstream adaptation. Inspired by Givens
rotation, in this paper, we proposed quasi-Givens
Orthogonal Fine-Tuning (qGOFT) to address the
problems. We first use O(d) Givens rotations
to accomplish arbitrary orthogonal transformation in SO(d) with provable equivalence, reducing parameter complexity from O(d2 ) to O(d).
Then we introduce flexible norm and relative angular adjustments under soft orthogonality regularization to enhance the adaptation capability of
downstream semantic deviations. Extensive experiments on various tasks and pretrained models
validate the effectiveness of our methods.

The practical principle of reparameterization tuning assumes
that the tuned model parameters should not drift too far from
the original model (e.g., zero initializations and small learning rates of LoRA-series methods (Hu et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2023)). We summarize the core
idea behind this manner is that most pretrained concepts and
measurements in the latent metric space should be preserved
after fine-tuning. This motivating insight thereby inspires
some research to consider an isometric mapping on the original parameters while preserving certain underlying distance
metrics to conduct adaptation. Among various metrics, angular distance metrics (e.g., cosine similarity) are commonly
applied in neural latent spaces (Wang et al., 2018b; Jin et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023a),
due to its outstanding capability of encoding semantic information (Liu et al., 2018; 2021a; Ma et al., 2023b). This
motivates a line of popular fine-tuning methods, dubbed
Orthogonal Fine-tuning (OFT) (Qiu et al., 2023), which
conducts angle-preserving mapping on the original linear
weights using orthogonal transformation. As the weight
vectors in pretrained models depict the way of projecting
latent semantics, this angular preserving property ensures
OFT with invariant relative semantic distances between concepts after the fine-tuned projection. With this merit, OFT
has demonstrated promising performances for fine-tuning
text-to-image diffusion models (Qiu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Pretrained foundation models like GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020), LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023) and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) have exhibited remarkable performances
across various NLP and vision tasks (Devlin et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2019; Zhai et al., 2019), which can be attributed
to the dramatic increase in model scales (Wei et al., 2022).
However, the explosive parameter growth poses an increasingly huge challenge when adapting these models to diverse

Despite the empirical success of OFT, there remain two
crucial problems to be solved. The first problem is that OFT
methods are essentially NOT parameter-efficient. Due to the
high dimensionality of linear layers in pretrained models,
the number of trainable parameters (i.e., the size of the
orthogonal matrix) in OFT can be as excessively large as
O(d2 ), where d is the hidden dimension of the linear layer.
To address the problem, Qiu et al. (2023) assumed a block

1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China 3 Center on Frontiers
of Computing Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xu Chu <chu xu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

