Monotone Individual Fairness
Yahav Bechavod 1

Abstract

ity of this body of work takes a statistical group fairness
approach, where a collection of groups in the population is
defined (often according to “protected attributes”), and the
aim is to then approximately equalize a chosen statistic of
the predictor (such as overall error rate, false positive rate,
etc.) across them. From the perspective of the individual,
however, group fairness notions fail to deliver meaningful
guarantees, as they are aggregate in nature, only binding
over averages over many people. This was also pointed out
by Dwork et al. (2012) original “catalog of evils”.

We revisit the problem of online learning with individual fairness, where an online learner strives
to maximize predictive accuracy while ensuring
that similar individuals are treated similarly. We
first extend the frameworks of Gillen et al. (2018);
Bechavod et al. (2020), which rely on feedback
from human auditors regarding fairness violations,
to allow for auditing schemes that can aggregate
feedback from any number of auditors, using a
rich class we term monotone aggregation functions, for which we also prove a useful characterization. Using our generalized framework, we
present an oracle-efficient algorithm guaranteeing
3
a bound of O(T 4 ) simultaneously for regret and
number of fairness violations. We then study an
online classification setting where label feedback
is available for positively-predicted individuals
only, and present an algorithm guaranteeing a
5
bound of O(T 6 ) simultaneously for regret and
number of fairness violations. In both settings,
our algorithms improve on the best known bounds
for oracle-efficient algorithms. Furthermore, our
algorithms offer significant improvements in computational efficiency, greatly reducing the number
of required calls to an (offline) optimization oracle, as opposed to previous algorithms which
required T such calls every round.

Furthermore, the majority of the work in algorithmic fairness follows statistical data generation assumptions, where
data points are assumed to arrive in i.i.d. fashion from a
distribution, in either a batch setting, an online setting, or
a bandit setting. Many domains where fairness is a concern, however, may not (and often do not) follow such assumptions, due to, for instance: (1) strategic effects (e.g.
individuals attempting to modify their features to “better
fit” a specific policy in hopes of receiving more favorable
outcomes, or individuals who decide whether to even apply
based on the policy which was deployed) (see, e.g., Dranove
et al. (2003); Dee et al. (2019); Gonzalez-Lira & Mobarak
(2019); Greenstone et al. (2020)), (2) distribution shifts over
time (e.g. the ability to repay a loan may be affected by
changes to the economy or recent events), (3) adaptivity to
previous decisions (e.g. if an individual receives a loan, that
may affect the ability to repay future loans by this individual
or her vicinity), (4) one-sided label feedback (a college can
only track the academic performance of students who have
been admitted in the first place).

1. Introduction

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Yahav Bechavod <yahav@seas.upenn.edu>.

The seminal work of Dwork et al. (2012) advocates for a
different view, approaching fairness from the perspective of
the individual. In the core of their formulation is the assertion that “similar individuals should be treated similarly”.
Formally, they require that a (randomized) predictor obey
a Lipschitz condition, where similar predictions are made
on individuals deemed similar, according to a task specific
metric. As Dwork et al. (2012) acknowledge, however, the
availability of such metrics is one of the most challenging
aspects in their framework. In many domains, it seems, it is
not clear how such metrics can be elicited or learned.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A recent line of work, starting with Gillen et al. (2018), suggests an elegant framework aiming at the above two issues
precisely, as they study an adversarial online learning prob-

As algorithms are increasingly ubiquitous in variety of domains where decisions are highly consequential to human
lives — including lending, hiring, education, and healthcare
— there is by now a vast body of research aimed at formalizing, exploring, and analyzing different notions of fairness,
and suggesting new algorithms capable of obtaining them
in conjunction with high predictive accuracy. The major1

1

