Recurrent Early Exits for Federated Learning with Heterogeneous Clients

Royson Lee 1 2 Javier Fernandez-Marques 3 Shell Xu Hu 1 Da Li 1 Stefanos Laskaridis 4 Łukasz Dudziak 1
Timothy Hospedales 1 5 Ferenc Huszár 2 Nicholas D. Lane 2 3

Abstract

exchanging raw data from clients’ edge devices. In many
practical scenarios, especially in the cross-device setting,
these devices often differ in computational resources and
may not have sufficient compute and/or memory resources
to participate in federated training. This may yield convergence and fairness issues, especially if the least capable
devices are consistently excluded from training. Hence, a
key challenge of FL is to divide the global model into heterogeneous sub-models to fit into a wide range of diverse
devices while maintaining high performance of the global
model. To this end, various existing works split the global
model by pruning its channels, also known as width-based
scaling (Diao et al., 2021; Horvath et al., 2021; Mei et al.,
2022; Hong et al., 2022), and/or utilizing early exits, also
known as depth-based scaling (Liu et al., 2022; Kim et al.,
2023; Ilhan et al., 2023; Kang et al., 2023).

Federated learning (FL) has enabled distributed
learning of a model across multiple clients in
a privacy-preserving manner. One of the main
challenges of FL is to accommodate clients with
varying hardware capacities; clients have differing compute and memory requirements. To
tackle this challenge, recent state-of-the-art approaches leverage the use of early exits. Nonetheless, these approaches fall short of mitigating the
challenges of joint learning multiple exit classifiers, often relying on hand-picked heuristic solutions for knowledge distillation among classifiers
and/or utilizing additional layers for weaker classifiers. In this work, instead of utilizing multiple
classifiers, we propose a recurrent early exit approach named ReeFL that fuses features from different sub-models into a single shared classifier.
Specifically, we use a transformer-based earlyexit module shared among sub-models to i) better exploit multi-layer feature representations for
task-specific prediction and ii) modulate the feature representation of the backbone model for
subsequent predictions. We additionally present
a per-client self-distillation approach where the
best sub-model is automatically selected as the
teacher of the other sub-models at each client.
Our experiments on standard image and speech
classification benchmarks across various emerging federated fine-tuning baselines demonstrate
ReeFL’s effectiveness over previous works.

Recently, approaches that use depth-based scaling, some
of which, in addition to width-based scaling, showed significantly better performance compared to approaches using width-based scaling solely. These depth-based works
split the global model based on depth and deploy additional
classifiers, allowing each sub-model to exit early. Having individual classifiers in a network, however, has been
previously observed to degrade performance due to the competing optimization criteria across sub-models, leading to
the accumulation of conflicting gradients from these classifiers (Huang et al., 2018; Song & Chai, 2018; Li et al., 2019;
Laskaridis et al., 2020). Another limitation of depth-based
scaling is that shallower sub-models are trained more often
than their deeper counterparts as these deep sub-models are
not trained with data from clients with lower resource budgets (Kim et al., 2023). In addition, training with more data
does not necessarily translate to performance gains as these
shallower sub-models might not have sufficient parameters
to learn good representations (Liu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has become an indispensable tool
to train machine learning models collaboratively without

To counteract these limitations, existing FL works use
knowledge distillation among either classifiers or layers
in the backbone model and/or add additional layers to improve the representation capacity of shallower sub-models
at a cost of additional resources. These approaches often
require manual selection of which layers to distill from/to,
e.g. the largest sub-model acts as a teacher for the other
sub-models. However, the optimal choice of which layers

1
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Flower Labs, Cambridge, UK 4 Brave
Software, London, UK 5 University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
Correspondence to: Royson Lee <dsrl2@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

