When Representations Align:
Universality in Representation Learning Dynamics

Loek van Rossem 1 Andrew M. Saxe 1 2

Abstract

requires one to significantly amend the analysis. A solution
to the learning dynamics of one architecture does not necessarily transfer to another architecture, a rather inconvenient
fact considering the large range of different models available. Moreover, state of the art models have a complexity
far exceeding what can be reasonably solved analytically.

Deep neural networks come in many sizes and
architectures. The choice of architecture, in conjunction with the dataset and learning algorithm,
is commonly understood to affect the learned neural representations. Yet, recent results have shown
that different architectures learn representations
with striking qualitative similarities. Here we derive an effective theory of representation learning
under the assumption that the encoding map from
input to hidden representation and the decoding
map from representation to output are arbitrary
smooth functions. This theory schematizes representation learning dynamics in the regime of
complex, large architectures, where hidden representations are not strongly constrained by the
parametrization. We show through experiments
that the effective theory describes aspects of representation learning dynamics across a range of
deep networks with different activation functions
and architectures, and exhibits phenomena similar to the “rich” and “lazy” regime. While many
network behaviors depend quantitatively on architecture, our findings point to certain behaviors that
are widely conserved once models are sufficiently
flexible.

Studies have shown that although the exact representation
between different neural networks may differ, some important aspects of the computational structure they learn are
universal (Maheswaranathan et al., 2019; McMahan et al.,
2021; Huang et al., 2021). Even for certain areas in the
brain, similarities in representational structure have been
found with deep neural networks trained on natural image
data (Yamins et al., 2014; Yamins & DiCarlo, 2016; Saxe
et al., 2021; Conwell et al., 2023; Bracci et al., 2023). The
data used in learning may play a larger role than the implementation details of the model, a fact which has been
empirically demonstrated in vision transformers and convolutional neural networks (Bouchacourt et al., 2021; Conwell
et al., 2023) and studied theoretically (Goldt et al., 2019).
Additionally, neural scaling laws describe a formal relationship between model or dataset size and performance that
appears to hold without making direct reference to architecture (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). More
recently, it has been found that an alternative architecture
performs roughly the same as the transformer, given a similar parameter count (Wang et al., 2022). These observations
together license universal theories: mathematical descriptions of learning that sidestep certain implementation details
in order to model behavior common among architectures.

1. Introduction
One of the major challenges currently faced in the theory of
deep learning is the issue of scalability. Although exact solutions to the learning dynamics have been found for some
simple networks (Saad & Solla, 1995; Saxe et al., 2014;
Mei et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019; Saxe et al., 2022), under
these analyses, any small change to the network architecture

Although a universal theory by necessity cannot completely
capture all details of any particular architecture, it has distinct advantages. Derived results may apply to many different learning systems. In particular, this could include highly
complicated machine learning models as well as the brain,
systems which are difficult to study theoretically otherwise.
Furthermore, such an abstract approach forces us to ignore
many details not essential to describing specific learning
behaviors. This may aid in deriving results, as it reduces the
mathematical complexity of the theory. It will also focus
our attention to only the most crucial concepts needed to understand learning dynamics, providing a better sense of how

1
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London 2 Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London.
Correspondence to: Loek van Rossem
<loek.rossem.22@ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

