Understanding Finetuning for Factual Knowledge Extraction

Gaurav Ghosal 1 Tatsunori Hashimoto 2 Aditi Raghunathan 1

Abstract

A natural avenue to improve factuality is via fine-tuning, as
studied in several recent works (Kazemi et al., 2023; Joshi
et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2023a; Yang
et al., 2023). Multiple works, however, have shown that language models answer questions incorrectly even when they
know the right answer, suggesting that current approaches
to fine-tuning may be suboptimal (Burns et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023b). In order to achieve better
fine-tuning or uncover the ceiling of such approaches, we
need to understand what factors determine the performance
of fine-tuning. What is the mechanism by which fine-tuning
improves factuality?

In this work, we study the impact of QA finetuning data on downstream factuality. We show
that fine-tuning on lesser-known facts that are
poorly stored during pretraining yields significantly worse factuality than fine-tuning on wellknown facts, even when all facts are seen during
pretraining. We prove this phenomenon theoretically, showing that training on lesser-known facts
can lead the model to ignore subject entity names
and instead output a generic plausible response
even when the relevant factual knowledge is encoded in the model. On three question answering benchmarks (PopQA, Entity Questions, and
MMLU) and two language models (Llama-2-7B
and Mistral-7B), we find that (i) finetuning on a
completely factual but lesser-known subset of the
data deteriorates downstream factuality (5-10%)
and (ii) finetuning on a subset of better-known examples matches or outperforms finetuning on the
entire dataset. Ultimately, our results shed light on
the interaction between pretrained knowledge and
finetuning data and demonstrate the importance
of taking into account how facts are stored in the
pretrained model when fine-tuning for knowledgeintensive tasks.

We can distill prior understanding of this question into three
factors. Joshi et al. (2023) posits that fine-tuning on truthful
data influences the model to adopt a credible persona. This
theory suggests that ensuring the factual accuracy of the
finetuning data is sufficient for downstream factuality. Another view from Kazemi et al. (2023) and Allen-Zhu & Li
(2023) is that fine-tuning familiarizes the pretrained model
with the QA format, which varies from the way that facts
are observed during pretraining. This implies that finetuning examples should cover question formats likely to be
seen during testing. Finally, Schulman (2023) and Yang
et al. (2023) hypothesize that fine-tuning examples must be
drawn from facts that the model sees during pretraining.
In this work, we find that the impact of fine-tuning examples
depends on how well they are stored in the model, beyond
simply their factuality or whether they are grounded in the
pretraining corpus. Concretely, fine-tuning on QA examples
about facts that the pretrained model knows well significantly improves factuality. Conversely, fine-tuning on QA
examples regarding less well-encoded facts actively harms
downstream factuality, causing the model to incorrectly respond to questions it could otherwise get right. We make
this finding in a synthetic setting, after ensuring that all
QA examples are factually accurate, representative of the
downstream task, and seen during pretraining.

1. Introduction
Large language models store large amounts of factual knowledge in their weights during pretraining (Jiang et al., 2020;
Petroni et al., 2019; Mallen et al., 2023). As a result, they
have shown promise on a variety of knowledge intensive
tasks, including factual question-answering (Roberts et al.,
2020; Radford et al., 2019). However, these abilities are unreliable and language models are prone to generate plausible,
but incorrect responses to queries (Huang et al., 2023).
1
Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Gaurav Ghosal
<gghosal@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Why does the encoding of facts seen in finetuning affect
factuality downstream? We propose the following intuitive
mechanism. When presented with a factual question, a
model can either respond using relevant memorized knowledge or leverage more general “shortcuts” that enable it to
propose a plausible, but incorrect response. For example,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

