Automated Statistical Model Discovery with Language Models

Michael Y. Li 1 Emily B. Fox 1 2 3 Noah D. Goodman 1 4

Abstract

model that remains interpretable to domain experts). Efficiently searching over the space requires extensive human
expertise: modelers need broad knowledge of different modeling approaches and must work closely with domain experts to adapt these approaches to a given problem domain.
As a concrete example, consider modeling blood-glucose
dynamics in Type 1 diabetes (T1D) patients; accurately
modeling these dynamics can enable better insulin regulation and reduce complications from the disease. To model
these dynamics, modelers need to understand biomedical
models that capture blood-glucose dynamics in idealized,
lab settings but they also need to understand techniques for
adapting these models to handle real data with noise and
missingness (Miller et al., 2020). Domain experts play a crucial role in this process: modelers must work closely with
clinicians to ensure that the model is consistent with human
physiology. As this example illustrates, model discovery can
require significant human expertise. Automating this process could accelerate and democratize scientific discovery.

Statistical model discovery is a challenging search
over a vast space of models subject to domainspecific constraints. Efficiently searching over
this space requires expertise in modeling and
the problem domain. Motivated by the domain
knowledge and programming capabilities of large
language models (LMs), we introduce a method
for language model driven automated statistical
model discovery. We cast our automated procedure within the principled framework of Box’s
Loop: the LM iterates between proposing statistical models represented as probabilistic programs,
acting as a modeler, and critiquing those models,
acting as a domain expert. By leveraging LMs,
we do not have to define a domain-specific language of models or design a handcrafted search
procedure, which are key restrictions of previous
systems. We evaluate our method in three settings in probabilistic modeling: searching within
a restricted space of models, searching over an
open-ended space, and improving expert models under natural language constraints (e.g., this
model should be interpretable to an ecologist).
Our method identifies models on par with human
expert designed models and extends classic models in interpretable ways. Our results highlight
the promise of LM-driven model discovery.

Automated model discovery is not a new ambition. Previous
systems have been successfully deployed for discovering
physical laws (Bongard & Lipson, 2007; McKinney et al.,
2006; Linka et al., 2023), reverse-engineering non-linear dynamical systems (Schmidt & Lipson, 2009), nonparametric
regression (Duvenaud et al., 2013) and unsupervised learning (Grosse, 2014). However, in these systems, a human
expert had to carefully design a domain specific language
(DSL) of models and specify a hand-crafted search procedure for composing models in that DSL. For example, in the
Automatic Statistician (Duvenaud et al., 2013; Lloyd et al.,
2014), a system for nonparametric regression and time series
modeling, human experts defined a DSL of Gaussian process kernels and a search procedure that composes kernels
via addition and multiplication. Defining the DSL and the
operators for composing models requires significant modeling expertise. These systems also compromised flexibility
for automation: rather than choosing a model class bestsuited for a problem, experts chose models that compose
conveniently. This breaks the core principle of separation
of modeling from inference (van de Meent et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Modeling, or generating a parsimonious but explanatory
representation of a complex system, is at the heart of scientific discovery. Model discovery is challenging because it
involves searching over a vast space of candidate models
subject to domain-specific constraints (e.g., find the best
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Statistics, Stanford University 3 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub – San Francisco 4 Department of Psychology, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Michael Y. Li <michaelyli@stanford.edu>.
2

As we saw above, there are two key roles in the model discovery pipeline: the domain expert and the modeler. We
hypothesize that LMs can supplement these roles and re-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

