Eluder-based Regret for Stochastic Contextual MDPs

Orin Levy * 1 Asaf Cassel * 1 Alon Cohen 2 3 Yishay Mansour * 1 3

Abstract

of interaction with the MDP. MDPs can be applied to a wide
range of real-life scenarios, including advertising, healthcare, games, robotics (see, e.g., Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Mannor et al., 2022).

We present the E-UC3 RL algorithm for regret
minimization in Stochastic Contextual Markov
Decision Processes (CMDPs). The algorithm
operates under the minimal assumptions of realizable function class and access to offline least
squares and log loss regression oracles. Our algorithm is efficient (assuming efficient offline regression
poracles) and enjoys a regret guarantee of
e
O(H 3 T |S||A|dE (P) log(|F||P|/δ))) , with T
being the number of episodes, S the state space,
A the action space, H the horizon, P and F are
finite function classes used to approximate the
context-dependent dynamics and rewards, respectively, and dE (P) is the Eluder dimension of P
w.r.t the Hellinger distance. To the best of our
knowledge, our algorithm is the first efficient and
rate-optimal regret minimization algorithm for
CMDPs that operates under the general offline
function approximation setting. In addition, we
extend the Eluder dimension to general bounded
metrics which may be of independent interest.

Many modern applications involve the presence of additional side information, or context, that impacts the environment. A naive approach to handling the context is to
extend the state space of the environment to include it. However, this method increases the complexity of learning and
policy representation. Contextual MDPs (CMDPs) offer a
more efficient solution by keeping the state space small and
treating the context as additional side-information that the
agent observes at the start of each episode. Furthermore,
there exists a mapping from each context to an MDP, and
the optimal policy for a given context is the optimal policy
of the corresponding MDP (Hallak et al., 2015). An example of a context is user information that remains constant
throughout the episode. Such information may include the
user’s age and interests, and can deeply impact decision
making. This feature makes CMDPs an excellent model for
recommendation systems.
As is common in recent works, the aforementioned mapping
from context to MDP is assumed to be taken from a known
function class, and access to the function class is provided
via an optimization oracle. A distinctive feature between
works is whether they assume access to online or offline
oracles. Intuitively, in both settings we have a function class
F = {f : X → Y }, a loss ℓ : Y × Y → R, and a dataset1
n
{(xi , yi )}i=1 . An offline oracle observes the entire data
Pn
and needs to find fˆ⋆ ∈ arg minf ∈F i=1 ℓ(f (xi ), yi ). An
online oracle makes a sequence of predictions f1 , . . . , fn
where fi can depend on data
Pn up to i−1, and its goal is to minimize regret, given by i=1 ℓ(fi (xi ), yi ) − ℓ(fˆ⋆ (xi ), yi ).
The offline problem can potentially be easier to solve than
the online problem. Moreover, practical deep RL applications typically work in the offline regime.
√
Previously, Modi & Tewari (2020) obtained e
O( T ) regret for a generalized
linear model (GLM). Foster et al.
√
(2021) obtain e
O( T ) regret for general function approximation and adversarially chosen contexts, assuming access to a much stronger online estimation oracle. However,
they noted the challenge of implementing their methodol-

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a field of machine learning
that pertains to sequential decision making under uncertainty. At the heart of RL is the Markov Decision Process
(MDP), a fundamental mathematical model that has been
studied extensively. An agent repeatedly interacts with an
MDP by observing its state s ∈ S and selecting an action
a ∈ A, which leads to a new state s′ and an instantaneous
reward that reflects the quality of the action taken. The
agent’s goal is to maximize her return during each episode
*

Equal contribution 1 Balavatnick school of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 2 School of Electrical
Engeneering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 3 Google Research, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Orin Levy <orinlevy@mail.tau.ac.il>, Asaf Cassel <acassel@mail.tau.ac.il>,
Alon Cohen <alonco@mail.tau.ac.il>, Yishay Mansour <mansour.yishay@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

We think of X as the context and Y as the MDP.

