Scaling Laws for the Value of Individual Data Points in Machine Learning

Ian Covert 1 * Wenlong Ji 1 * Tatsunori Hashimoto 1 James Zou 1

Abstract

using larger amounts of high-quality training data (Gadre
et al., 2023). Recent research has found that increasing the
amount of training data improves models at a predictable
rate, leading to scaling laws that describe the relationship
between error and dataset size (Kaplan et al., 2020). For
example, Hoffmann et al. (2022) introduced the following
scaling law to determine Chinchilla’s compute-optimal training budget,
a
b
error ≈ ϵ + γ + λ ,
(1)
p
n

Recent works have shown that machine learning
models improve at a predictable rate with the total
amount of training data, leading to scaling laws
that describe the relationship between error and
dataset size. These scaling laws can help design
a model’s training dataset, but they typically take
an aggregate view of the data by only considering
the dataset’s size. We introduce a new perspective
by investigating scaling behavior for the value of
individual data points: we find that a data point’s
contribution to model’s performance shrinks predictably with the size of the dataset in a log-linear
manner. Interestingly, there is significant variability in the scaling exponent among different data
points, indicating that certain points are more valuable in small datasets while others are relatively
more useful as a part of large datasets. We provide
learning theory to support our scaling law, and we
observe empirically that it holds across diverse
model classes. We further propose a maximum
likelihood estimator and an amortized estimator to
efficiently learn the individualized scaling behaviors from a small number of noisy observations
per data point. Using our estimators, we provide
insights into factors that influence the scaling behavior of different data points. Finally, we demonstrate applications of the individualized scaling
laws to data valuation and data subset selection.
Overall, our work represents a first step towards
understanding and utilizing scaling properties for
the value of individual data points.

where ϵ represents irreducible error, p is the number of
model parameters, n is the number of training examples,
and (a, b, ν, λ) are learned constants. These scaling laws
help inform how to trade off model and data size, but they
take an aggregate view of the dataset by not differentiating
between training examples; this is limiting because certain
data points are more useful than others, particularly for
noisy web-scraped datasets.
In the current era of datasets aggregated from heterogeneous
sources, it is important to understand how individual data
points or data sources affect the behavior of model training.
This can give practical guidance on what type of data to
prioritize, especially as the dataset grows. It also provides
more fundamental insights into how the impact of different
data scales with data size—e.g., which points are useful in
small datasets but whose value diminishes quickly as the
data size increases, and which points are relatively more
valuable in large datasets.
Our work aims to take initial steps in this direction: motivated by these questions, we propose individualized data
scaling laws, which describe how the impact of data scales
with the size of the dataset for each training example. Our
analysis focuses on a data point’s marginal contribution
to a trained model’s performance, which previous work
has noted shrinks with the size of the preceding dataset
(Kwon and Zou, 2021); we build on this by showing that
the marginal contribution shrinks at a reliable rate, and that
this rate varies between data points. The scaling behavior is
represented by a simple parametric form, which is inspired
by existing aggregate scaling laws (see Section 2). We find
support for this phenomenon in certain classical learning
settings (e.g., linear regression), and we show that it holds
empirically across several model types, including logistic regression, multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) and support vector

1. Introduction
Machine learning models for vision and language have improved dramatically in recent years (Radford et al., 2021;
Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Gemini Team et al.,
2023), in part due to increasing model sizes, but also due to
1
Stanford University.
<icovert@stanford.edu>.

Correspondence to:

Ian Covert

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

