Context-Guided Diffusion for
Out-of-Distribution Molecular and Protein Design

Leo Klarner 1 Tim G. J. Rudner 2 Garrett M. Morris 1 Charlotte M. Deane 1 Yee Whye Teh 1

Abstract
Generative models have the potential to accelerate
key steps in the discovery of novel molecular therapeutics and materials. Diffusion models have recently emerged as a powerful approach, excelling
at unconditional sample generation and, with datadriven guidance, conditional generation within
their training domain. Reliably sampling from
high-value regions beyond the training data, however, remains an open challenge—with current
methods predominantly focusing on modifying
the diffusion process itself. In this paper, we develop context-guided diffusion (CGD), a simple
plug-and-play method that leverages unlabeled
data and smoothness constraints to improve the
out-of-distribution generalization of guided diffusion models. We demonstrate that this approach
leads to substantial performance gains across various settings, including continuous, discrete, and
graph-structured diffusion processes with applications across drug discovery, materials science,
and protein design.

Figure 1: Guidance models that generalize poorly under distribution shifts can be a major performance bottleneck for
property-guided diffusion models. We introduce a guidance
model regularizer that improves generalization under distribution shifts and enables context-guided diffusion (CGD).
We show that CGD leads to conditional sampling processes
that consistently generate novel, high-value molecules (red).
Deep generative models have the potential to accelerate this
process by capturing and abstracting key structural properties of their input domain (Sanchez-Lengeling & AspuruGuzik, 2018; Bilodeau et al., 2022). In recent years, denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020; Karras et al., 2022) have
emerged as the method of choice, displaying impressive performance in conditional and unconditional image generation
tasks (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023), as well as applications
across chemistry (Jing et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2023) and
biology (Watson et al., 2023; Abramson et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
The central goal of molecular discovery is to identify novel
compounds with desirable functional properties. The immense size of the underlying search spaces—up to 1060 for
drug-like small molecules (Bohacek et al., 1996) and 20N
for N -length protein sequences (Maynard Smith, 1970)—
renders this a challenging combinatorial optimization problem. Considering the substantial cost of synthesizing and
validating candidate compounds experimentally, the question of how to efficiently navigate these search spaces to locate high-value subsets lies at the core of modern molecular
design (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Sanchez-Lengeling
& Aspuru-Guzik, 2018; Bilodeau et al., 2022).

While diffusion models excel at capturing complex, multimodal densities (Kadkhodaie et al., 2024), accurately modeling the training distribution is only the first step. To fully
leverage diffusion models for applied molecular optimization, we require carefully designed guidance functions that
steer the sample generation process toward compounds with
desirable properties (Weiss et al., 2023; Gruver et al., 2023;
Lee et al., 2023). However, when labeled data for training
these guidance functions is scarce and only available for a
biased and unrepresentative subset of the input domain, as
is often the case in practice, overconfident guidance signals
risk steering the generative process toward false-positive
regions of chemical or protein sequence space (Figure 1).

1

University of Oxford, UK 2 New York University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Leo Klarner
<leo.klarner@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

