Effects of Exponential Gaussian Distribution on
(Double Sampling) Randomized Smoothing

Youwei Shu 1 Xi Xiao 1 † Derui Wang 2 Yuxin Cao 1 Siji Chen 1 Minhui Xue 2 Linyi Li 3 4 Bo Li 3 5

Abstract
Randomized Smoothing (RS) is currently a scalable certified defense method providing robustness certification against adversarial examples.
Although significant progress has been achieved
in providing defenses against ℓp adversaries,
the interaction between the smoothing distribution and the robustness certification still remains
vague. In this work, we comprehensively study
the effect of two families of distributions, named
Exponential Standard Gaussian (ESG) and Exponential General Gaussian (EGG) distributions,
on Randomized Smoothing and Double Sampling
Randomized Smoothing (DSRS). We derive an
analytic formula for ESG’s certified radius, which
converges to the origin formula of RS as the dimension d increases. Additionally, we prove that
EGG can provide tighter
√ constant factors than
DSRS in providing Ω( d) lower bounds of ℓ2 certified radius, and thus further addresses the curse
of dimensionality in RS. Our experiments on realworld datasets confirm our theoretical analysis of
the ESG distributions, that they provide almost
the same certification under different exponents η
for both RS and DSRS. In addition, EGG brings a
significant improvement to the DSRS certification,
but the mechanism can be different when the classifier properties are different. Compared to the
primitive DSRS, the increase in certified accuracy
provided by EGG is prominent, up to 6.4% on ImageNet. Our code is available at https://gi
thub.com/tdano1/eg-on-smoothing.

†
Corresponding Author 1 Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University 2 CSIRO’s Data61 3 University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 Simon Fraser University
5
University of Chicago.
Correspondence to: Youwei
Shu <shuyw21@mails.tsinghua.edu.com>, Xi Xiao <xiaox@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in various applications. However, DNNs are susceptible to
adversarial perturbations in their inputs. To tackle the problem of adversarial attacks, a series of empirical defenses,
such as adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2017; Madry et al., 2018), have been proposed.
Nevertheless, this strategy quickly evolved into an arms
race because no matter how robust the DNNs are, wellcrafted adversarial examples are capable of bypassing the
defenses (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Athalye et al., 2018;
Uesato et al., 2018). Recently, researchers proposed and
developed certified defenses (Wong & Kolter, 2018; Wong
et al., 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2018), a series of methodologies that can output the bounds of perturbed inputs, and
provide provable robustness for classifiers. Aligned with
these exact certified defense methods, randomized smoothing (RS) (Lécuyer et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Cohen et al.,
2019) appears as a certifying tool based on probability, and
gains in popularity since it can provide scalable robustness
certifications for black-box functions. Cohen et al. (2019)
first introduced the Neyman-Pearson (NP) lemma into the
certification, which provided tight ℓ2 certified radii for linear
classifiers. Later, a series of attempts further extended the
certification process of RS using functional optimization
frameworks (Zhang et al., 2020; Dvijotham et al., 2020).
However, current research on the distributions for randomized smoothing is far from sufficient. After Zhang et al.
(2020), Yang et al. (2020) and Li et al. (2022), this branch
of study seems to be dormant. Intuitively, investigating the
interrelationship of distribution and the RS method is not
only beneficial for understanding and solving the limit of
RS, but also liable to excavate the mathematical rules hidden
deep in RS. In this work, we systematically study the ESG
and EGG distributions in the RS framework, providing a
detailed theoretical analysis for both the new distribution
families. In addition, we conduct extensive experiments on
real-world datasets, testify our theory on ESG, and complete the analysis for EGG. Overall, we conclude that the
ESG distributions share almost the same certification for
RS, and EGG’s certification can be significantly improved
using different exponents η, showing the better potential to

