Path-Guided Particle-based Sampling

Mingzhou Fan * 1 Ruida Zhou * 2 Chao Tian 1 Xiaoning Qian 1 3 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Bayesian learning is a powerful approach for distributionbased model predictions, naturally equipped with uncertainty quantification and calibration powers (Murphy, 2022).
The key of Bayesian learning – computing the posterior by
Bayes’ rule, however, is well-known to be challenging due
to the intractable partition function (a.k.a. the normalizing
constant) (Andrieu et al., 2003).

Particle-based Bayesian inference methods by
sampling from a partition-free target (posterior)
distribution, e.g., Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD), have attracted significant attention. We propose a path-guided particle-based
sampling (PGPS) method based on a novel Logweighted Shrinkage (LwS) density path linking
an initial distribution to the target distribution. We
propose to utilize a Neural network to learn a vector field motivated by the Fokker-Planck equation
of the designed density path. Particles, initiated
from the initial distribution, evolve according to
the ordinary differential equation defined by the
vector field. The distribution of these particles
is guided along a density path from the initial
distribution to the target distribution. The proposed LwS density path allows for an efficient
search of modes of the target distribution while
canonical methods fail. We theoretically analyze
the Wasserstein distance of the distribution of the
PGPS-generated samples and the target distribution due to approximation and discretization errors. Practically, the proposed PGPS-LwS method
demonstrates higher Bayesian inference accuracy
and better calibration ability in experiments conducted on both synthetic and real-world Bayesian
learning tasks, compared to baselines, such as
SVGD and Langevin dynamics, etc.

To circumvent this difficulty, approaches based on sampling
according to the (target) posterior distribution without computing the partition function have been considered; e.g.,
Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) sampling (Andrieu
et al., 2003) and its gradient-based variants (e.g., Langevin
dynamics) generate samples (or particles) that follow the
target distribution asymptotically using a partition-free function. Such particle-based Bayesian inference methods,
which essentially transform a set of initial samples/particles
along certain dynamics (e.g., an ordinary differential equation (ODE) or a stochastic differential equation (SDE)) governed by a vector field, have witnessed great successes (Liu,
2017). Most of these methods, e.g. Stein variational gradient
descent (SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016) and preconditioned
functional gradient flow (PFG) (Dong et al., 2022), fall
into the category of gradient-flow particle-based sampling,
where the vector field is a gradient function of the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence of the current distribution to the
target distribution, such that the dynamics would drive the
particles to the minimum of KL-divergence solution, i.e.,
the target distribution.
Although gradient-flow particle-based sampling methods
are shown to be flexible and efficient in some applications (Dong et al., 2022), they may not achieve the ideal
Bayesian inference performance due to not effectively capturing the posterior distribution. Specifically, as a realization
of the KL-Wasserstein gradient-flow method, Langevin Dynamic (LD) is known to suffer from slow mixing, and in
turn tends to result in mode missing or misplaced mode
weights (Song & Ermon, 2019). It is believed that the posterior for complicated models, especially Bayesian Neural
Networks (BNNs) (Goan & Fookes, 2020), contain multiple modes of different weights, and mode missing would
impact its generalization, uncertainty quantification, and
calibration abilities. More detailed discussions can be found

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical & Computer
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX, USA 4 Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National
Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Mingzhou Fan
<mzfan@tamu.edu>, Xiaoning Qian <xqian@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

