Piecewise Constant and Linear Regression Trees:
An Optimal Dynamic Programming Approach

Mim van den Bos * 1 Jacobus G. M. van der Linden * 1 Emir Demirović 1

Abstract

rectly related to the size of the tree (Piltaver et al., 2016),
we are interested in small trees with high performance, e.g.,
small mean squared error. Traditionally, heuristics, such
as CART (Breiman et al., 1984), dominate the decision
tree literature due to their scalability. Heuristics can learn
small trees but may yield a suboptimal representation of the
data. In contrast, optimal decision trees provably maximize
performance over training data for a given size limit. On
average, optimal trees also perform better in out-of-sample
tests (Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017; Bertsimas et al., 2017).

Regression trees are a human-comprehensible
machine-learning model that can represent complex relationships. They are typically trained using greedy heuristics because computing optimal
regression trees is NP-hard. Contrary to this standard practice, we consider optimal methods and
improve the scalability of optimal methods by
developing three new dynamic programming approaches. First, we improve the performance of
a piecewise constant regression tree method using a special algorithm for trees of depth two.
Second, we provide the first optimal dynamic programming method for piecewise multiple linear
regression. Third, we develop the first optimal
method for piecewise simple linear regression,
for which we also provide a special algorithm for
trees of depth two. The experimental results show
that our methods improve scalability by one or
more orders of magnitude over the state-of-the-art
optimal methods while performing similarly or
better in out-of-sample performance.

Since computing optimal decision trees is NP-hard (Hyafil
& Rivest, 1976), scalability (the ability to keep run time low
for larger data sets and larger tree sizes) remains a challenge.
For example, optimal approaches that use general-purpose
solvers such as Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP, Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017), constraint programming (CP, Verhaeghe et al., 2020), or maximum satisfiability (MaxSAT,
Hu et al., 2020), often even do not scale beyond small data
sets and depth limits as small as depth three.
Recent work shows significant scalability improvements
using dynamic programming (DP) approaches (Aglin et al.,
2020a; Lin et al., 2020; Demirović et al., 2022). DP directly
exploits the recursive tree structure by solving subtrees as
independent subproblems, caching results to subproblems,
and using branching and bounding to limit the search space.

1. Introduction
Regression trees generalize linear regression by splitting the
data before learning a regression model, as seen in Fig. 1.
This makes regression trees a powerful tool for regression
analysis, with wide applications ranging from ecology analysis (De’ath & Fabricius, 2000) to clinical psychology (King
& Resick, 2014). Because of their rule-based nature, they
satisfy the need for complex, nonlinear models that are
human-comprehensible (Loh, 2014; Freitas, 2014; Carrizosa et al., 2021; Rudin, 2019).

Most optimal decision tree methods consider only classification. Dunn (2018) and Verwer & Zhang (2017) show how
their MIP models can also be used for regression. Dunn
(2018) considers both piecewise constant regression trees
(with a constant predictor in each leaf node) and piecewise

LR for all points
LR for first cluster
LR for second cluster

Because human comprehensibility of decision trees is di*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Software Technology, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Jacobus G. M. van der Linden
<J.G.M.vanderLinden@tudelft.nl>.

Figure 1. The blue line represents standard linear regression (LR),
whereas orange and green show the advantage of adding one split
before linear regression.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

