Harmony in Diversity: Merging Neural Networks with
Canonical Correlation Analysis

Stefan Horoi 1 2 Albert Manuel Orozco Camacho 3 2 Eugene Belilovsky 3 2 Guy Wolf 1 2

Abstract

Common CCA rep. space

Combining the predictions of multiple trained
models through ensembling is generally a good
way to improve accuracy by leveraging the different learned features of the models, however
it comes with high computational and storage
costs. Model fusion, the act of merging multiple models into one by combining their parameters reduces these costs but doesn’t work as well
in practice. Indeed, neural network loss landscapes are high-dimensional and non-convex and
the minima found through learning are typically
separated by high loss barriers. Numerous recent
works have been focused on finding permutations
matching one network features to the features of a
second one, lowering the loss barrier on the linear
path between them in parameter space. However,
permutations are restrictive since they assume a
one-to-one mapping between the different models’
neurons exists. We propose a new model merging
algorithm, CCA Merge, which is based on Canonical Correlation Analysis and aims to maximize
the correlations between linear combinations of
the model features. We show that our alignment
method leads to better performances than past
methods when averaging models trained on the
same, or differing data splits. We also extend this
analysis into the harder setting where more than 2
models are merged, and we find that CCA Merge
works significantly better than past methods. 1

Model A rep. space

Model B rep. space

Figure 1: Visual representation of using CCA Merge to
align two models. Canonical Correlation Analysis is used
to find a common representation space where orthogonal
linear combinations of the features (neurons) from A and
B are maximally correlated. The linear transformation PA
(resp. PB ) and its inverse can be used to go from the representation space of model A (resp. model B) to this common
representation space and back. By applying PB first and
−1
then PA we can align the representations of model B
to those of model A. Applying the same transformation
directly to the parameters of model B effectively aligns the
two models, thus allowing their merging.
ple trained models simultaneously. Each model might learn
to extract different, complementary pieces of information
from the input data, and combining the models would take
advantage of this complementarity; thus benefiting the final
performance (Ho, 1995). One of the simplest ways to implement this idea is to use ensembles, where multiple models
are trained on a given task and their outputs are combined
through averaging or majority vote at inference (Ho, 1995;
Lobacheva et al., 2020). While this method yields good
results, it comes with the disadvantages of having to store
in memory the parameters of multiple models and having
to run each of them individually at inference time, resulting
in high storage and computational costs, particularly in the
case of neural networks (NNs). Another way of leveraging
multiple models to improve predictive performance is to
combine the different sets of parameters into a single model.
This is typically done through averaging or interpolation

1. Introduction
A classical idea for improving the predictive performance
and robustness of machine learning models is to use multi1
Université de Montréal 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute
Concordia University. Correspondence to: Stefan Horoi <stefan.horoi@umontreal.ca>, Guy Wolf <guy.wolf@umontreal.ca>,
Eugene Belilovsky <eugene.belilovsky@concordia.ca>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/
shoroi/align-n-merge

1

