Theoretical Guarantees for Variational Inference with Fixed-Variance Mixture
of Gaussians
Tom Huix 1 Anna Korba 2 Alain Durmus 1 Eric Moulines 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in computational statistics and machine learning is to compute integrals with respect to some
target probability distribution µ⋆ on Rd whose density is
known only up to a normalization constant. For instance
in Bayesian inference, µ⋆ is the posterior distribution over
the parameters of complex models. The general goal of
sampling methods is thus to provide an approximate distribution for which the integrals are easily computed. A large
number of methods have been developed to tackle this problem. The classical approach is to sample the posterior using
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, in which
a Markov chain designed to converge to µ⋆ is simulated for
a sufficiently long time (Roberts & Rosenthal, 2004). These
methods use the discrete measure over past iterates of the
algorithm as an approximation of the posterior to compute
integrals of interest. However, MCMC algorithms are generally computationally expensive, and it is an open problem to
diagnose their convergence in practice (Moins et al., 2023).
Variational inference (VI) (Blei et al., 2017) has emerged as
a powerful and versatile alternative in Bayesian inference.
By framing the problem as an optimization task, VI aims
to find an approximate candidate distribution within a parametric family of distributions C that minimizes the (reverse)
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the target:

Variational inference (VI) is a popular approach
in Bayesian inference, that looks for the best approximation of the posterior distribution within a
parametric family, minimizing a loss that is typically the (reverse) Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. Despite its empirical success, the theoretical properties of VI have only received attention
recently, and mostly when the parametric family is the one of Gaussians. This work aims to
contribute to the theoretical study of VI in the
non-Gaussian case by investigating the setting of
Mixture of Gaussians with fixed covariance and
constant weights. In this view, VI over this specific family can be casted as the minimization of a
Mollified relative entropy, i.e. the KL between the
convolution (with respect to a Gaussian kernel)
of an atomic measure supported on Diracs, and
the target distribution. The support of the atomic
measure corresponds to the localization of the
Gaussian components. Hence, solving variational
inference becomes equivalent to optimizing the
positions of the Diracs (the particles), which can
be done through gradient descent and takes the
form of an interacting particle system. We study
two sources of error of variational inference in
this context when optimizing the mollified relative entropy. The first one is an optimization result, that is a descent lemma establishing that the
algorithm decreases the objective at each iteration.
The second one is an approximation error, that
upper bounds the objective between an optimal
finite mixture and the target distribution.

ν̂ := argmin KL(µ|µ⋆ ),

(1)

µ∈C

R
where KL(µ|µ⋆ ) = log(dµ/dµ⋆ )dµ if µ is absolutely
continuous with respect to µ⋆ denoting dµ/dµ⋆ its RadonNikodym density, and +∞ else; and ν̂ is referred to as the
optimal approximation within the variational family.
While VI methods can only return an approximation of
the target, they are much more tractable in the large scale
setting, since they benefit from efficient optimization methods, e.g. parallelization or stochastic optimization (Zhang
et al., 2018). Hence, VI has proven effective in numerous applications and is a popular paradigm especially in
high-dimensional scenarios. Still, the understanding of its
theoretical properties remains a challenging and active area
of research. Fundamentally, there are two sources of errors
in VI: the approximation error that quantifies how far ν̂ is
from µ⋆ , and the optimization error that comes from the

1

CMAP, Ecole polytechnique 2 ENSAE, CREST, IP Paris.
Correspondence to: Tom Huix <tom.huix@polytechnique.edu>,
Anna Korba <anna.korba@ensae.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

