Q-Probe: A Lightweight Approach to
Reward Maximization for Language Models

Kenneth Li 1 2 Samy Jelassi 3 Hugh Zhang 1 2 Sham Kakade 1 2 Martin Wattenberg 1 David Brandfonbrener 2

Abstract

One approach to do this is finetuning, where the weights
of the model are adjusted to improve rewards. Exemplary
techniques include reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF, Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023)
and supervised finetuning on successful examples (Singh
et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023).

We present an approach called Q-probing to adapt
a pre-trained language model to maximize a taskspecific reward function. At a high level, Qprobing sits between heavier approaches such
as finetuning and lighter approaches such as few
shot prompting, but can also be combined with
either. The idea is to learn a simple linear function on a model’s embedding space that can be
used to reweight candidate completions. We theoretically show that this sampling procedure is
equivalent to a KL-constrained maximization of
the Q-probe as the number of samples increases.
To train the Q-probes we consider either reward
modeling or a class of novel direct policy learning
objectives based on importance-weighted policy
gradients. With this technique, we see gains in
domains with ground-truth rewards (code generation) as well as implicit rewards defined by
preference data, even outperforming finetuning in
data-limited regimes. Moreover, a Q-probe can be
trained on top of an API since it only assumes access to sampling and embeddings. Code: https:
//github.com/likenneth/q_probe.

On the other hand, there is evidence that the capabilities required for these downstream tasks have already been learned
during pre-training, and the task of adaptation is merely to
extract them from the wide spectrum of pre-trained capabilities. For example, Zaken et al. (2021) propose that
extremely parameter-efficient finetuning is evidence that the
finetuning process is mostly about “exposing knowledge induced by language-modeling training”, while Saunders et al.
(2022) find that pre-trained language models are usually
better at discriminating than generating answers.
Motivated by this line of thought, we present a lightweight
approach to reward maximization. For each downstream
task, we keep the whole pre-trained model frozen and only
train a small probe which is the same dimension as the
residual stream (Alain and Bengio, 2016). We call our
method Q-probe as it “probes” the expected utility of a
completion (action) given a certain prompt (state).
To leverage the Q-probe at inference to generate samples,
we perform a sort of rejection sampling. Specifically, we
first draw k sampled completions from the LLM given the
input prompt and also store the embedding of each promptcompletion pair. The Q-probe then predicts a value for
each embedding, which determines the logits for the k-way
softmax distribution that we use to sample the chosen completion. In theory, we show that this procedure maximizes
the KL-constrained value of the probe as k tends to infinity.

1. Introduction
Pre-training on diverse data endows large language models
(LLMs) with strong generic language capabilities. However,
goal-directed downstream tasks like coding, mathematical
reasoning, and dialogue systems require adapting the LLM
to the task at hand. Since the goals in these tasks can be
framed as rewards, this adaptation can take the form of
reward maximization.

First, we evaluate Q-probes with access to ground truth
rewards on coding benchmarks our best Q-probe achieves
17% higher accuracy on MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) compared to the base Code-LLaMA-7B (Roziere et al., 2023)
and outperforms finetuning on successes with LORA (Hu
et al., 2021) and few shot prompting. Although again, we
emphasize that Q-probes are not mutually exclusive with
these other techniques and can be combined for even better
results. One key component of the results is a novel objective for training the Q-probes via direct policy learning.

1
John A. Paulson School Of Engineering And Applied Sciences,
Harvard University 2 Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and
Artificial Intelligence, Harvard University 3 Center of Mathematical
Sciences and Applications, Harvard University. Correspondence
to: Kenneth Li <ke li@g.harvard.edu>, David Brandfonbrener
<david brandfonbrener@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

