Bidirectional Reciprocative Information Communication for Few-Shot Semantic
Segmentation

Yuanwei Liu 1 Junwei Han 1 2 Xiwen Yao 1 Salman Khan 3 4 Hisham Cholakkal 3 Rao Muhammad Anwer 3
Nian Liu 3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan 3 5

Abstract

Existing few-shot semantic segmentation methods typically rely on a one-way flow of category
information from support to query, ignoring the
impact of intra-class diversity. To address this,
drawing inspiration from cybernetics, we introduce a Query Feedback Branch (QFB) to propagate query information back to support, generating a query-related support prototype that is more
aligned with the query. Subsequently, a Query
Amplifier Branch (QAB) is employed to amplify
target objects in the query using the acquired support prototype. To further improve the model, we
propose a Query Rectification Module (QRM),
which utilizes the prediction disparity in the query
before and after support activation to identify challenging positive and negative samples from ambiguous regions for query self-rectification. Furthermore, we integrate the QFB, QAB, and QRM
into a feedback and rectification layer and incorporate it into an iterative pipeline. This configuration enables the progressive enhancement of
bidirectional reciprocative flow of category information between query and support, effectively
providing query-adaptive support information and
addressing the intra-class diversity problem. Extensive experiments conducted on both PASCAL5i and COCO-20i datasets validate the effectiveness of our approach. The code is available at
https://github.com/LIUYUANWEI98/IFRNet.

Figure 1. Comparison between existing framework (a)&(b) and
our approach (c) for FSS. The red dotted line indicates the information flow of category information. (a) The category information
is extracted from support and flows into the query to identify target
objects. (b) The category information simultaneously flows from
support and query into the intermediate representation. However,
in our method (c), the category information circulates bidirectionally between query and support, which could be more compatible
with target object in the query.

1. Introduction
Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) poses a significant
challenge in computer vision, aiming to segment objects in
images with a minimal number of labeled examples. This
concept aligns with the human capability to comprehend
new concepts based on limited instances, providing flexibility and practicality, particularly in scenarios where collecting an extensive amount of annotated data is impractical.
Following a typical paradigm proposed by (Shaban et al.,
2017), most FSS methods (Zhang et al., 2021a; Li et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022b;
Fan et al., 2022a; Gao et al., 2022; Moon et al., 2023; Tian
et al., 2020; MAO, 2022; Nguyen & Todorovic, 2019; Dong
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Australian National University 5 CVL, Linkoping University. Correspondence to: Nian Liu <liunian228@gmail.com>, Junwei Han
<junweihan2010@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

