Demystifying SGD with Doubly Stochastic Gradients

Kyurae Kim 1 Joohwan Ko 2 Yi-An Ma 3 Jacob R. Gardner 1

Abstract

such as

{
minimize

Optimization objectives in the form of a sum of
intractable expectations are rising in importance
(e.g., diffusion models, variational autoencoders,
and many more), a setting also known as “finite sum with infinite data.” For these problems,
a popular strategy is to employ SGD with doubly stochastic gradients (doubly SGD): the expectations are estimated using the gradient estimator of each component, while the sum is estimated by subsampling over these estimators.
Despite its popularity, little is known about the
convergence properties of doubly SGD, except
under strong assumptions such as bounded variance. In this work, we establish the convergence
of doubly SGD with independent minibatching
and random reshuffling under general conditions,
which encompasses dependent component gradient estimators. In particular, for dependent estimators, our analysis allows fined-grained analysis of the effect correlations. As a result, under
a per-iteration computational budget of 𝑏 × 𝑚,
where 𝑏 is the minibatch size and 𝑚 is the number of Monte Carlo samples, our analysis suggests where one should invest most of the budget
in general. Furthermore, we prove that random
reshuffling (RR) improves the complexity dependence on the subsampling noise.

𝒙∈𝒳⊆ℝ𝑑

𝐹 (𝒙) ≜

1 ∑𝑛
𝑓
𝑖=1 𝑖 (𝒙)
𝑛

}
.

(1)

When 𝑛 is large, SGD quickly converges to low-accuracy
solutions by subsampling over components 𝑓1 , … , 𝑓𝑛 . The
properties of SGD on the finite sum class have received an
immense amount of interest (Bottou et al., 2018) as it includes empirical risk minimization (ERM; Vapnik, 1991).
Unfortunately, for an emerging large set of problems in machine learning, we may not have direct access to the components 𝑓1 , … , 𝑓𝑛 . That is, each 𝑓𝑖 may be defined as an
intractable expectation, or an “infinite sum”
𝑓𝑖 (𝒙) = 𝔼𝞰∼𝜑 𝑓𝑖 (𝒙; 𝞰) ,

(2)

where we only have access to the noise distribution 𝜑
and the integrand 𝑓𝑖 (𝒙; 𝞰), and 𝞰 is a potentially continuous and unbounded source of stochasticity; a setting
Zheng & Kwok (2018); Bietti & Mairal (2017) have previously called “finite sum with infinite data.” Such problems
include the training of diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019), variational autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014), solving ERM under differential privacy (Bassily et al., 2014; Song et al., 2013), and also classical problems such as variational inference (Ranganath et al., 2014;
Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014; Kucukelbir et al., 2017),
and variants of empirical risk minimization (Dai et al.,
2014; Bietti & Mairal, 2017; Shi et al., 2021; Orvieto et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2021). In contrast to the finite sum setting where SGD has traditionally been applied, our problem takes the form of
{
}
1 ∑𝑛
𝔼 𝑓
𝞰) .
minimize 𝐹 (𝒙) ≜
𝑖=1 𝞰∼𝜑 𝑖 (𝒙;

1. Introduction

𝒙∈𝒳⊆ℝ𝑑

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD; Robbins & Monro,
1951; Bottou, 1999; Nemirovski et al., 2009; ShalevShwartz et al., 2011) is the de facto standard for solving
large scale optimization problems of the form of finite sums

𝑛

These optimization problems are typically solved using SGD with doubly stochastic gradients (doubly SGD;
coined by Dai et al. 2014; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla 2014),
so-called because, in addition to subsampling over 𝑓𝑖 ,
stochastic estimates of each component 𝑓𝑖 are used.

1
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A. 2 KAIST, Daejeon,
South Korea, Republic of 3 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Kyurae Kim <kyrkim@seas.upenn.edu>.

Previous studies have relied on strong assumptions to analyze doubly stochastic gradients. For instance, Kulunchakov & Mairal (2020); Bietti & Mairal (2017); Zheng
& Kwok (2018) have (i) assumed that the variance of each
component estimator is bounded by a constant, which contradicts componentwise strong convexity (Nguyen et al.,

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

