Sharp Rates in Dependent Learning Theory:
Avoiding Sample Size Deflation for the Square Loss

Ingvar Ziemann 1 Stephen Tu 2 George J. Pappas 1 Nikolai Matni 1

Abstract

dent data. Examples exhibiting such dependencies are far
ranging and abundant, and include forecasting applications
and data from controls/robotics systems. Over the last several decades, an order-wise rather sharp theory of learning
with independent data has emerged. An entirely incomplete list of these advances includes the introduction of
local Rademacher compleixities by Bartlett et al. (2005),
sharp rates in misspecified linear regression by Hsu et al.
(2012), and culminates in the learning without concentration framework by Mendelson (2014), which enables an
instance-optimal understanding of many standard learning
problems through a critical radius that is sensitive to both
the noise scale and the (local) geometry of the hypothesis
class.

In this work, we study statistical learning with
dependent (β-mixing) data and square loss in
a hypothesis class F ⊂ LΨp where Ψp is the
norm ∥f ∥Ψp ≜ supm≥1 m−1/p ∥f ∥Lm for some
p ∈ [2, ∞]. Our inquiry is motivated by the
search for a sharp noise interaction term, or variance proxy, in learning with dependent data. Absent any realizability assumption, typical nonasymptotic results exhibit variance proxies that
are deflated multiplicatively by the mixing time of
the underlying covariates process. We show that
whenever the topologies of L2 and Ψp are comparable on our hypothesis class F —that is, F is a
weakly sub-Gaussian class: ∥f ∥Ψp ≲ ∥f ∥ηL2 for
some η ∈ (0, 1]—the empirical risk minimizer
achieves a rate that only depends on the complexity of the class and second order statistics in its
leading term. Our result holds whether the problem is realizable or not and we refer to this as
a near mixing-free rate, since direct dependence
on mixing is relegated to an additive higher order term. We arrive at our result by combining
the above notion of a weakly sub-Gaussian class
with mixed tail generic chaining. This combination allows us to compute sharp, instance-optimal
rates for a wide range of problems. Examples
that satisfy our framework include sub-Gaussian
linear regression, more general smoothly parameterized function classes, finite hypothesis classes,
and bounded smoothness classes.

In principle, one expects these results to be carried over to
the dependent (β-mixing) setting through blocking (Bernstein, 1927; Yu, 1994).1 At a high level, the blocking technique involves splitting the original data (of length n ∈ N)
into consecutive blocks, each of length k ∈ N, with the
length chosen such that the starting points of each block
are approximately independent. Indeed, several prior works
pursue this route (Mohri & Rostamizadeh, 2008; Kuznetsov
& Mohri, 2017; Roy et al., 2021). However, the drawback
with this approach is that it typically deflates the original
sample size by the block length factor k. If such a deflation
were to appear in the final rate of convergence, this would
clearly constitute worst-case behavior; it corresponds to every data point being revealed repeatedly, k times and with
perfect dependence, within a sequence of n observations.
In the context of the square loss function, the typical approach to sidestep this sample size deflation relies on the
“noise” (residual term) forming a martingale difference sequence. This approach has been carried out for parametric
inference in (generalized) linear dynamical systems by Simchowitz et al. (2018) and Kowshik et al. (2021) and also
for more general hypothesis classes and supervised learning with square loss by Ziemann & Tu (2022). For the
square loss function the martingale approach requires that
the problem is strongly realizable: the best predictor in the
hypothesis class should coincide with the regression function (conditional expectation of targets given past inputs).

1. Introduction
While a significant portion the data used in modern learning algorithms exhibits temporal dependencies, we still
lack a sharp theory of supervised learning from depen1
University of Pennsylvania 2 University of Southern California.
Correspondence to: Ingvar Ziemann <ingvarz@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

See Appendix E.1 for a description of this technique.

