EvGGS: A Collaborative Learning Framework for Event-based Generalizable
Gaussian Splatting

Jiaxu Wang 1 Junhao He 1 Ziyi Zhang 1 Mingyuan Sun 2 Jingkai Sun 1 Renjing Xu 1

Abstract

collect multiviews), such as Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
(Mildenhall et al., 2021) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl
et al., 2023). However, conventional RGB cameras suffer from severe motion blurs when the moving speeds
of cameras are fast and cannot be used in extreme lighting/dark environments due to their low dynamic ranges.
The bio-inspired event cameras independently respond to
log-intensity changes for each pixel asynchronously, instead
of measuring absolute intensity synchronously at a constant
rate, like in standard cameras. These unique principles
contribute to multiple advantages of event cameras: high
dynamic ranges, low latency, and high temporal resolution.

Event cameras offer promising advantages such as
high dynamic range and low latency, making them
well-suited for challenging lighting conditions
and fast-moving scenarios. However, reconstructing 3D scenes from raw event streams is difficult
because event data is sparse and does not carry absolute color information. To release its potential
in 3D reconstruction, we propose the first eventbased generalizable 3D reconstruction framework,
called EvGGS, which reconstructs scenes as 3D
Gaussians from only event input in a feedforward
manner and can generalize to unseen cases without any retraining. This framework includes a
depth estimation module, an intensity reconstruction module, and a Gaussian regression module.
These submodules connect in a cascading manner,
and we collaboratively train them with a designed
joint loss to make them mutually promote. To
facilitate related studies, we build a novel eventbased 3D dataset with various material objects and
calibrated labels of grayscale images, depth maps,
camera poses, and silhouettes. Experiments show
models that have jointly trained significantly outperform those trained individually. Our approach
performs better than all baselines in reconstruction quality, and depth/intensity predictions with
satisfactory rendering speed.

Most existing 3D vision methods merely focus on standard
cameras and do not provide event-based solutions because
the output of event streams is very different from ordinary
images, which are composed of the polarity, pixel location,
and time stamp, occurring only at a sparse set of locations.
A few studies (Rudnev et al., 2023; Hwang et al., 2023)
attempt to combine event cameras with NeRF, but their rendering results struggle with blurred edges and boundaries,
and soft fogs often exist in front of the camera lens. The
reason is NeRF encodes scenes in continuous networks,
thereby cannot effectively fit discontinuities and empties
which are common in event representations. More recently,
3DGS introduced a novel representation that formulates the
scene as 3D Gaussians with learnable parameters including color, opacity, and covariance. 3DGS enables more
photo-realistic renderings with less memory cost and faster
rendering speeds. Likewise, 3DGS only reconstructs a scene
from per-scene optimization.

1. Introduction

Furthermore, the above-mentioned event-based neural reconstruction methods require per-scene optimization, and
cannot generalize to unseen scenes. In contrast, some works
(Lin et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023a) have investigated the
generalizable NeRF and 3DGS for RGB frames. However,
no work adapts these approaches to event data at present.
This is because most generic NeRFs rely on image-based
rendering, they perform spatial interpolation across nearby
views to the target view, whereas the event stream does not
contain rich information to interpolate novel views. This
work attempts to reconstruct 3DGS from raw event data in a
feedforward manner, enabling it to generalize to unobserved

3D reconstruction has played a critical role in computer
vision communities and is vital in many applications, e.g.
robotics, VR/AR, and graphics. Recently, several works
have proposed promising approaches that can reconstruct
high-fidelity 3D scenes from a moving RGB camera (to
1
Function Hub, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (GZ), Guangzhou, China 2 Faculty of Robot Science and
Engineering, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China. Correspondence to: Renjing Xu <renjingxu@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

