Supervised Matrix Factorization:
Local Landscape Analysis and Applications

Joowon Lee * 1 Hanbaek Lyu * 2 Weixin Yao * 3

Abstract

In many cases, these features may include vast amounts
of irrelevant or redundant information, posing challenges
for generalization and interpretability. To address this, the
integration of interpretable dimension reduction techniques
prior to classification becomes important.

Supervised matrix factorization (SMF) is a classical machine learning method that seeks lowdimensional feature extraction and classification
tasks at the same time. Training an SMF model
involves solving a non-convex and factor-wise
constrained optimization problem with at least
three blocks of parameters. Due to the high nonconvexity and constraints, theoretical understanding of the optimization landscape of SMF has
been limited. In this paper, we provide an extensive local landscape analysis for SMF and derive several theoretical and practical applications.
Analyzing diagonal blocks of the Hessian naturally leads to a block coordinate descent (BCD)
algorithm with adaptive step sizes. We provide
global convergence and iteration complexity guarantees for this algorithm. Full Hessian analysis
gives minimum L2 -regularization to guarantee
local strong convexity and robustness of parameters. We establish a local estimation guarantee
under a statistical SMF model. We also propose a
novel GPU-friendly neural implementation of the
BCD algorithm and validate our theoretical findings through numerical experiments. Our work
contributes to a deeper understanding of SMF optimization, offering insights into the optimization
landscape and providing practical solutions to enhance its performance.

Matrix factorization (MF) is a classical unsupervised feature extraction framework that learns latent structures in
complex datasets. It is regularly applied in the analysis
of text and images (Elad & Aharon, 2006; Mairal et al.,
2007; Peyré, 2009). In particular, nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) (Lee & Seung, 2000) stands out as one
of the most widely used modern MF tools, aiming to approximately factorize a data matrix into the product of two
nonnegative matrices. Nonnegativity is crucial for enabling
interpretable ”parts-based learning” (Lee & Seung, 1999) of
high-dimensional objects. This feature has led NMF finding
applications in various domains, including text analysis for
topic modeling, image reconstruction, bioinformatics, and
the extraction of latent motifs from networks (Sitek et al.,
2002; Berry & Browne, 2005; Berry et al., 2007; Chen et al.,
2011; Taslaman & Nilsson, 2012; Boutchko et al., 2015;
Ren et al., 2018; Lyu et al., 2024).
Supervised matrix factorization (SMF) is a popular classical machine learning method that aims to perform lowdimensional feature extraction and classification tasks simultaneously. Given that matrix factorization and classification are not inherently aligned objectives, SMF involves
a necessary trade-off when aiming to achieve both goals
simultaneously. As its name implies, SMF integrates a classification model and MF into a single optimization problem.
While it has been applied to various problem domains (Zhao
et al., 2015; Yankelevsky & Elad, 2017; Li et al., 2019), our
current understanding of its optimization landscape and the
behavior of widely used iterative optimization algorithms
remains limited.

1. Introduction
In classical classification models, the standard approach
uses observed high-dimensional raw features as the input.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of
Wisconsin - Madison, WI, USA 2 Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, WI, USA 3 Department of Statistics,
University of California, Riverside, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Hanbaek Lyu <hlyu@math.wisc.edu>.

At its core, training SMF requires solving a non-convex
constrained optimization problem involving three or four
blocks of parameters. Even the optimization landscape
of NMF, a two-block constrained bi-convex problem, is
not completely understood (Panageas et al., 2020; Bjorck
et al., 2021) to date. This lack of thorough understanding
makes the optimization landscape of SMF challenging to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

