Sarah Frank-Wolfe: Methods for Constrained Optimization
with Best Rates and Practical Features
Aleksandr Beznosikov 1 2 3 4 David Dobre 5 Gauthier Gidel 5 6

Abstract

of the model with parameters x applied to a large number
of data points, indexed by i = 1, . . . , n. Because n is large,
calculating the full gradient of f is expensive. Therefore,
stochastic methods which very rarely resort to calling ∇f
(or avoid it altogether) are of particular importance. In this
problem setting, we assume the set X ⊂ Rd to be convex,
that projecting onto this set is expensive, and that it also
admits a fast linear minimization oracle (LMO).

The Frank-Wolfe (FW) method is a popular approach for solving optimization problems with
structured constraints that arise in machine learning applications. In recent years, stochastic versions of FW have gained popularity, motivated by
large datasets for which the computation of the
full gradient is prohibitively expensive. In this
paper, we present two new variants of the FW
algorithms for stochastic finite-sum minimization.
Our algorithms have the best convergence guarantees of existing stochastic FW approaches for both
convex and non-convex objective functions. Our
methods do not have the issue of permanently collecting large batches, which is common to many
stochastic projection-free approaches. Moreover,
our second approach does not require either large
batches or full deterministic gradients, which is
a typical weakness of many techniques for finitesum problems. The faster theoretical rates of our
approaches are confirmed experimentally.

The study of methods for (1) that do not require projections
has a history of more than half a century. Arguably the most
popular projection-free method is the Frank-Wolfe (a.k.a,
Conditional Gradient algorithm (Frank & Wolfe, 1956)).
This method maintains sparse iterates and only requires
a linear minimization oracle that takes into account the
specificity of the constraint set X . In particular, the classical
version of the method considers a linear approximation of
the function at the current point xk , and minimizes this
approximation on the set X :
sk = arg min⟨∇f (xk ), s − xk ⟩,
s∈X

xk+1 = xk + ηk (sk − xk ),
2
where ηk is parameter-free and equal to k+2
.

1. Introduction

In the last decade, the Frank-Wolfe-type approaches have
attracted increasing interest in the machine-learning community because of their good performance on sparse problems, or on problems where the constraints are complex
but structured (e.g., various ℓp balls, trace norms), having applications to submodular optimization (Bach, 2011),
vision (Miech et al., 2017; Bojanowski et al., 2014), and
variational inference (Krishnan et al., 2015).

Empirical risk minimization is a cornerstone for training
supervised machine learning models such as various regressions, support vector machine, and neural networks (ShalevShwartz & Ben-David, 2014). We consider a constrained
problem of this type:
n

min f (x) =

x∈X ⊂Rd

(2)

1X
fi (x) .
n i=1

(1)

Due to the significant increase in dataset size and complexity within the machine learning community, stochastic
algorithms are of great interest and are the focus of this
paper. In particular, we seek to answer the two following
questions:

The objective function of (1) has the form of a finite sum.
Typically, this setting corresponds to the sum of the losses
1

Innopolis University, Russia 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Russia 3 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia 4 Yandex, Russia 5 Universite de’ Montreal and Mila,
Canada 6 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Aleksandr
Beznosikov <anbeznosikov@gmail.com>.

1. Can we improve upon the convergence rates
of existing approaches for (1)?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2. Can we avoid the computation of both full gradients and large batches of stochastic gradients?
1

