Test-Time Regret Minimization in Meta Reinforcement Learning

Mirco Mutti 1 Aviv Tamar 1

Abstract

Although powerful, the efficiency of RL is a long-standing
issue. The theory says that the regret of a RL algorithm,
i.e., the difference between the value of the deployed policy and
√ the optimal policy in hindsight, inescapably scales
with H in the worst case (Jaksch et al., 2010; Osband
& Van Roy, 2016), H being the total number of episodes
of interactions with the MDP. Even if the real world is arguably better behaved than the worst-case MDP, the most
successful algorithms (Schulman et al., 2015; Mnih et al.,
2015) still take thousands of interaction episodes to learn a
competitive policy in simulation, which draws pessimism
for RL to be applied for learning in the real world.

Meta reinforcement learning sets a distribution
over a set of tasks on which the agent can train
at will, then is asked to learn an optimal policy
for any test task efficiently. In this paper, we consider a finite set of tasks modeled through Markov
decision processes with various dynamics. We
assume to have endured a long training phase,
from which the set of tasks is perfectly recovered,
and we focus on regret minimization against the
optimal policy in the unknown test task. Under a
separation condition that states the existence of a
state-action pair revealing a task against another,
Chen et al. (2022) show that O(M 2 log(H)) regret can be achieved, where M, H are the number
of tasks in the set and test episodes, respectively.
In our first contribution, we demonstrate that the
latter rate is nearly optimal by developing a novel
lower bound for test-time regret minimization under separation, showing that a linear dependence
with M is unavoidable. Then, we present a family
of stronger yet reasonable assumptions beyond
separation, which we call strong identifiability,
enabling algorithms achieving fast rates log(H)
and sublinear dependence with M simultaneously.
Our paper provides a new understanding of the
statistical barriers of test-time regret minimization
and when fast rates can be achieved.

A promising direction to improve RL efficiency is meta
RL (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015), in which a distribution over
the set of tasks we can face is considered. In meta RL, we
first have a training phase on some tasks sampled from the
latter distribution, for which the learning efficiency is less
of an issue (e.g., a simulator is available). Then, we exploit
the collected knowledge to achieve faster learning in a test
task, which is assumed to come from the same distribution.
Much of the previous work in meta RL focuses on algorithms for the training stage (Duan et al., 2016; Finn et al.,
2017; Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2019; 2021),
or analyse generalization of the trained model to the test
task (Simchowitz et al., 2021; Tamar et al., 2022; Rimon
et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022; Zisselman et al., 2023).
Here we study meta RL from a different perspective. We
assume to have spent infinite time in the training phase,
such that the task distribution can be recovered (we mean
the full specifications of all the MDPs in the set, not just the
task distribution itself), and we aim to minimize the regret
against the optimal policy in the test task. Especially,

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018) is
a popular tool for learning an optimal decision policy
through sampled interactions with a Markov Decision Process (MDP), a general framework encompassing countless
applications, ranging from robotics (Xu et al., 2023; Kaufmann et al., 2023) to algorithms design (Fawzi et al., 2022),
conversational agents (Stiennon et al., 2020), and others.

Does perfect meta RL training provably improve the
learning efficiency on the test task against standard RL?
We believe that a positive answer is an essential theoretical
ground for motivating meta RL, as there is little incentive to
undergo a costly training (at least in terms of computation)
without guarantees of improved efficiency on the test task.

1
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Mirco Mutti <mirco.m@technion.ac.il>.

Even in simple settings, in which the distribution is supported on a finite set of M tasks, meta
√ RL provides little
hope, as the regret still scales with H in the worst case,
with only marginal gains in the statistical efficiency w.r.t.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

