Geometric Active Exploration in Markov Decision
Processes: the Benefit of Abstraction
Riccardo De Santi 1 2 Federico Arangath Joseph * 1 Noah Liniger * 1 Mirco Mutti 3 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract

of an unknown quantity of interest f : S → R, where S
denotes a space of experiments. Typically, the problem considers a limited budget of resources, e.g., number of experiments, and assumes the possibility to directly sample f at
arbitrary inputs s ∈ S. Conceptually, an optimal design can
be interpreted as a distribution over experiments determining the probability with which these should be carried out in
order to minimize the uncertainty of f (Pukelsheim, 2006).

How can a scientist use a Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithm to design experiments over a
dynamical system’s state space? In the case of
finite and Markovian systems, an area called
Active Exploration (AE) relaxes the optimization
problem of experiments design into Convex
RL, a generalization of RL admitting a wider
notion of reward. Unfortunately, this framework
is currently not scalable and the potential of
AE is hindered by the vastness of experiment
spaces typical of scientific discovery applications.
However, these spaces are often endowed with
natural geometries, e.g., permutation invariance
in molecular design, that an agent could leverage
to improve the statistical and computational efficiency of AE. To achieve this, we bridge AE and
MDP homomorphisms, which offer a way to exploit known geometric structures via abstraction.
Towards this goal, we make two fundamental
contributions: we extend MDP homomorphisms
formalism to Convex RL, and we present, to
the best of our knowledge, the first analysis
that formally captures the benefit of abstraction
via homomorphisms on sample efficiency.
Ultimately, we propose the Geometric Active
Exploration (GAE) algorithm, which we analyse
theoretically and experimentally in environments
motivated by problems in scientific discovery.

Interestingly, in a wide variety of applications the input
space S corresponds to the state space of a dynamical
system (Mutny et al., 2023). Therefore, the agent carrying
out the experiments must respect the underlying dynamics
and cannot teleport from any experiment, now interpreted
as a state s ∈ S, to any other experiment. For instance,
consider the environmental sensing problem illustrated
in Figure 1, where an agent aims to actively estimate
the amount of air pollution caused by the diffusion of
a chemical substance released from a point source. To
address this problem, the agent chooses sampling policies to
minimize an estimation error of the amount of pollutant f .
In the case of time-discrete and Markovian dynamical
systems, this problem is known as Active Exploration
(AE) (Mutny et al., 2023; Tarbouriech & Lazaric, 2019;
Tarbouriech et al., 2020). AE frames the experiments design
task as an instance of Convex Reinforcement Learning (Convex RL) (Hazan et al., 2019; Zahavy et al., 2021), a recent
generalization of RL where the agent aims to minimize a
convex functional of the state-action distribution induced by
a policy interacting with the environment.
The AE formulation of the OED problem on dynamical systems is promising as it allows to learn (from data) optimal
sampling policies that respect the system dynamics while
minimizing a measure of uncertainty of f . Nonetheless,
solving an instance of Convex RL typically entails solving
a sequence of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and
estimating the visitation density at each iteration (Hazan
et al., 2019). As a consequence, current Active Exploration
methods are not scalable, hindering their use in real-world
scientific discovery problems where experiment spaces are
generally immense (Wang et al., 2023; Thiede et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The problem of optimal experimental design (OED)
(Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995) refers to the task of optimally
selecting experiments to minimize a measure of uncertainty
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 2 ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland
3
Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Riccardo De Santi
<rdesanti@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Luckily, these spaces are often endowed with natural geometries, as in the case of permutation invariances in molecular
1

