Debiased Offline Representation Learning for Fast Online Adaptation in
Non-stationary Dynamics

Xinyu Zhang * 1 2 Wenjie Qiu * 1 2 Yi-Chen Li * 1 2 3 Lei Yuan 1 2 3 Chengxing Jia 1 2 3
Zongzhang Zhang 1 2 Yang Yu 1 2 3

Abstract

However, online RL training typically requires millions of
interaction steps (Kaiser et al., 2020; Wu & Zhang, 2023),
posing a risk to safety and cost constraints in real-world
scenarios (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015). Different from online RL, offline RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019;
Kumar et al., 2020; Ran et al., 2023) aims to learn an optimal policy, exclusively from datasets pre-collected by certain behavior policies, without further interactions with the
environment. Showing great promise in turning datasets
into powerful decision-making machines, offline RL has
attracted wide attention recently (Levine et al., 2020).

Developing policies that can adapt to nonstationary environments is essential for real-world
reinforcement learning applications. Nevertheless, learning such adaptable policies in offline
settings, with only a limited set of pre-collected
trajectories, presents significant challenges. A
key difficulty arises because the limited offline
data makes it hard for the context encoder to differentiate between changes in the environment
dynamics and shifts in the behavior policy, often leading to context misassociations. To address this issue, we introduce a novel approach
called Debiased Offline Representation learning
for fast online Adaptation (DORA). DORA incorporates an information bottleneck principle
that maximizes mutual information between the
dynamics encoding and the environmental data,
while minimizing mutual information between
the dynamics encoding and the actions of the behavior policy. We present a practical implementation of DORA, leveraging tractable bounds of
the information bottleneck principle. Our experimental evaluation across six benchmark MuJoCo
tasks with variable parameters demonstrates that
DORA not only achieves a more precise dynamics encoding but also significantly outperforms
existing baselines in terms of performance.

Previous offline RL methods commonly assume that the
learned policy will be deployed to environments with stationary dynamics (Kumar et al., 2020), while unavoidable
perturbations in real world will lead to non-stationary dynamics (Choi, 2000). For example, the friction coefficient of
the ground changes frequently when a robotic vacuum walks
on the floor covered by different surfaces. Policies trained
for stationary dynamics will be unable to deal with nonstationary ones since the optimal behaviors depend on the
certain dynamic. Nevertheless, training an adaptable policy
from offline datasets for online adaptation in non-stationary
dynamics is overlooked in current RL studies. In this paper,
we focus on the setting where the environment dynamics,
such as gravity or damping of the controlled robot, change
unpredictably within an episode.
Offline Meta Reinforcement Learning (OMRL), which
trains a generalizable meta policy from a multi-task dataset
generated in different dynamics, offers a potential solution
to handle non-stationary dynamics. Among existing OMRL
methods, the gradient-based approaches (Lin et al., 2022b)
may not be ideal solutions, as extra gradient updates are
likely to cause drastic performance degradation due to the instability of policy gradient methods (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
In comparison, context-based OMRL methods (Yuan & Lu,
2022; Li et al., 2021) extract task-discriminative information
from trajectories by learning a context encoder. However,
these methods still face severe challenges when encountering non-stationary dynamics. Firstly, the representations
from the learned encoder may exhibit a biased correlation
with the data-collecting behavior policy (Yuan & Lu, 2022).

1. Introduction
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), the agent attempts to find
an optimal policy that maximizes the cumulative reward
obtained from the environment (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 3 Polixir Technologies. Correspondence to: Zongzhang Zhang <zzzhang@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

