Configurable Mirror Descent: Towards a Unification of Decision Making
Pengdeng Li 1 Shuxin Li 1 * Chang Yang 2 * Xinrun Wang 3 Shuyue Hu 4 Xiao Huang 2 Hau Chan 5 Bo An 1 6

Abstract

1. Introduction

Decision-making problems, categorized as singleagent, e.g., Atari, cooperative multi-agent, e.g.,
Hanabi, competitive multi-agent, e.g., Hold’em
poker, and mixed cooperative and competitive,
e.g., football, are ubiquitous in the real world. Although various methods have been proposed to
address the specific decision-making categories,
these methods typically evolve independently and
cannot generalize to other categories. Therefore,
a fundamental question for decision-making is:
Can we develop a single algorithm to tackle ALL
categories of decision-making problems? There
are several main challenges to address this question: i) different categories involve different numbers of agents and different relationships between
agents, ii) different categories have different solution concepts and evaluation measures, and iii)
there lacks a comprehensive benchmark covering
all the categories. This work presents a preliminary attempt to address the question with three
main contributions. i) We propose the generalized mirror descent (GMD), a generalization of
MD variants, which considers multiple historical
policies and works with a broader class of Bregman divergences. ii) We propose the configurable
mirror descent (CMD) where a meta-controller
is introduced to dynamically adjust the hyperparameters in GMD conditional on the evaluation
measures. iii) We construct the G AME B ENCH
with 15 academic-friendly games across different decision-making categories. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CMD achieves empirically competitive or better outcomes compared to
baselines while providing the capability of exploring diverse dimensions of decision making.

Decision-making problems are pervasive in the real world
(Sutton & Barto, 2018; Shoham & Leyton-Brown, 2008),
which can be generally categorized into single-agent, e.g.,
Atari (Mnih et al., 2015), cooperative multi-agent, e.g.,
Hanabi game (Bard et al., 2020), competitive multi-agent,
e.g., Hold’em poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2018; 2019),
and mixed cooperative and competitive (MCC), e.g., football (Kurach et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022a). To solve these
problems, various methods are proposed where notable examples include PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for single-agent
category, QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) for cooperative multiagent category and PSRO (Lanctot et al., 2017) for competitive category. Despite the successes in specific categories,
these methods are developed almost independently and cannot generalize to other categories. Therefore, a fundamental
question for decision making to answer is:
Can we develop a single algorithm to tackle ALL
categories of decision-making problems?
Agent
Number
Single
Agent
Agent
Relations

Cooperative
Multi-agent
Decision
Making
Competitive
Multi-agent

Solution
Concepts
MCC
Multi-agent
Evaluation
Measures

Figure 1. Overview of the categories of decision making and the
four desiderata for the required method to satisfy.

There are several critical challenges to address this fundamental question. First, the different categories of decisionmaking problems include different numbers of agents and
different relationships between agents. There is one agent
for the single-agent category, while multiple agents for the
other three categories, therefore, the reinforcement learning methods, e.g., PPO, mainly developed for single-agent
decision-making problems, cannot be directly applied to
multi-agent categories. Furthermore, even for multi-agent
categories, QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) is developed to handle the cooperative multi-agent category and cannot be applied to the competitive category. Second, different decisionmaking categories have different solution concepts, where
the optimal (joint) policy is considered in the single-agent

*

Equal contribution 1 Nanyang Technological University 2 The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 Singapore Management University (work done while at NTU) 4 Shanghai Artifcial Intelligence
Laboratory 5 University of Nebraska-Lincoln 6 Skywork AI. Correspondence to: Xinrun Wang <xrwang@smu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

