Orthogonal Bootstrap: Efficient Simulation of Input Uncertainty

Kaizhao Liu 1 Jose Blanchet 2 Lexing Ying 3 Yiping Lu 4 5

Abstract

Koltchinskii & Zhilova, 2021; Koltchinskii, 2022; Zhou
et al., 2021a; Etter & Ying, 2021; Ma & Ying, 2022), improving worst group generalization (Sagawa et al., 2020;
Nguyen et al., 2022) and, most influential, constructing the
confidence interval (Tukey, 1958; Stine, 1985; Efron, 1992a;
Efron & Tibshirani, 1994).

Bootstrap is a popular methodology for simulating
input uncertainty. However, it can be computationally expensive when the number of samples
is large. We propose a new approach called Orthogonal Bootstrap that reduces the number of
required Monte Carlo replications. We decomposes the target being simulated into two parts:
the non-orthogonal part which has a closed-form
result known as Infinitesimal Jackknife and the
orthogonal part which is easier to be simulated.
We theoretically and numerically show that Orthogonal Bootstrap significantly reduces the computational cost of Bootstrap while improving empirical accuracy and maintaining the same width
of the constructed interval.

Despite its benefits, Bootstrap is computationally demanding. Ideally, to simulate the Bootstrap estimation perfectly,
an infinite number of Monte Carlo replications of resamples
is required. In practice, only a finite number of Monte Carlo
replications can be actually performed, and this introduce an
error in the Bootstrap estimation (that can be characterized
by its variance), which we call the simulation error. Another source of error in the Bootstrap estimation arises from
the randomness in the data. The former can be controlled by
increasing the number of Monte Carlo replications, while
the latter can not be controlled if the samples are given. To
obtain a reasonable Bootstrap estimation, the number of
Monte Carlo replications required should at least ensure
that the simulation error is smaller than the error arising
from the data. In most applications, the number of Monte
Carlo replications required scales up with the number of
data points (Lam & Qian, 2018; 2022), where each replication can involve expensive optimization procedures to refit
models, making it extremely challenging to scale Bootstrap
resampling to large datasets. This drawback also occurs in
bagging (Wager et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
The input uncertainty problem (Lam & Qian, 2018) manifests as the propagation of statistical noise from input models, typically derived and calibrated from data, into the
subsequent output analysis. This noise can significantly
impact the accuracy and reliability of the resulting conclusions, necessitating robust strategies for quantification and
mitigation. Bootstrap (Stine, 1985; Efron, 1992a; Efron
& Tibshirani, 1994) is a non-parametric method that uses
random resampling with replacement to estimate this uncertainty. In this paper, we consider using Bootstrap to estimate
the mean and variance of a function with input uncertainty,
which has wide application in debiasing the functional estimation (Quenouille, 1949; Efron, 1982; Adams et al., 1971;
Cordeiro et al., 2014; Etter & Ying, 2020; Jiao & Han, 2020;

To address these issues, we propose an alternative method
called Orthogonal Bootstrap. We use semiparametric techniques to reduce the number of required Monte Carlo replications for stochastic simulation under input uncertainty. Our
method is inspired by recently proposed double/orthogonal
machine learning (Foster & Syrgkanis, 2019; Chernozhukov
et al., 2018; 2022b;a) which utilize the influence function
(Cook & Weisberg, 1982; Efron, 1992b) to debias parameter
estimates in the presence of nuisance parameters. Suppose
we want to estimate the uncertainty of the output using Bootstrap. We can regard the Bootstrap method as a two-stage
estimator. In the first stage, we generate resample distributions by resampling the original data with replacement
and calculate the output for each resampled distribution. In
the second stage, we simply calculate the variance of the
outputs from the first stage. We consider the first stage to
be “nuisance” because our primary interest is in the final

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Management Science
and Engineering, Stanford University 3 Department of Mathematics, Stanford University 4 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University 5 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Management Sciences, Northwestern University. Correspondence to: Kaizhao Liu <mrzt@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Yiping Lu <yiping.lu@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

