Bridging Environments and Language with Rendering Functions and
Vision-Language Models

Théo Cachet 1 2 Christopher R. Dance 1 Olivier Sigaud 2

Abstract

the convenience of natural language interaction with AI
models (Bubeck et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022). This
motivates the study of language-conditioned agents (LCAs)
that can execute diverse commands, specified with text, in
a given environment (Colas et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023).
Large-scale internet-scraped text and image data is a key
enabler of current LLMs and text-to-image models (Schuhmann et al., 2022; Gadre et al., 2023; Penedo et al., 2023).
However, data of comparable scale relating text with environments does not exist and human annotation is costly,
leading to the question: how can we learn LCAs given the
scarcity of annotated data?

Vision-language models (VLMs) have tremendous potential for grounding language, and thus
enabling language-conditioned agents (LCAs) to
perform diverse tasks specified with text. This
has motivated the study of LCAs based on reinforcement learning (RL) with rewards given by
rendering images of an environment and evaluating those images with VLMs. If single-task RL
is employed, such approaches are limited by the
cost and time required to train a policy for each
new task. Multi-task RL (MTRL) is a natural alternative, but requires a carefully designed corpus
of training tasks and does not always generalize
reliably to new tasks. Therefore, this paper introduces a novel decomposition of the problem
of building an LCA: first find an environment
configuration that has a high VLM score for text
describing a task; then use a (pretrained) goalconditioned policy to reach that configuration. We
also explore several enhancements to the speed
and quality of VLM-based LCAs, notably, the
use of distilled models, and the evaluation of configurations from multiple viewpoints to resolve
the ambiguities inherent in a single 2D view. We
demonstrate our approach on the Humanoid environment, showing that it results in LCAs that
outperform MTRL baselines in zero-shot generalization, without requiring any textual task descriptions or other forms of environment-specific
annotation during training.

Recently, foundation models (FMs) have emerged as promising tools to tackle this challenge. LLMs have been used
to orchestrate predefined motion primitives (Huang et al.,
2022; Zeng et al., 2022; Ichter et al., 2023), but the learning
of such primitives also suffers from the lack of annotated
data. Another approach is to use LLMs or vision-language
models (VLMs) to define reward functions for a given text,
either by source-code generation (Yu et al., 2023; Perez
et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023), or by image-text similarity
evaluation (Mahmoudieh et al., 2022; Tam et al., 2022; Cui
et al., 2022; Rocamonde et al., 2023; Adeniji et al., 2023).
One may couple such rewards with single-task reinforcement learning (STRL), but such approaches are limited by
the need to train a policy for each new task, making them too
slow for real-time application. Training multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) agents is a natural alternative (Fan
et al., 2022), which we explore in this paper. However, it
is not obvious how to construct a training corpus of textual
task descriptions that enables MTRL agents to generalize
reliably to new tasks (Cobbe et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020).
Therefore, this paper explores a novel decomposition of
the problem of building LCAs into VLM-based text-to-goal
generation and goal-reaching, as shown in Figure 1: we
find a configuration such that rendered images of the environment in this configuration have high VLM scores for a
given text; then we use a goal-conditioned reinforcement
learning (GCRL) agent to reach that configuration1 . In this
paper, configurations capture enough of the state to render

1. Introduction
The widespread adoption of large language models (LLMs)
and text-to-image models in modern society demonstrates
1

NAVER LABS Europe, Meylan 2 Institute of Intelligent Systems and Robotics, Sorbonne University, Paris. Correspondence
to: Théo Cachet <theo.cachet@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Videos and an interactive demo can be found at https://
europe.naverlabs.com/text2control

1

