New Bounds on the Cohesion of Complete-link and Other Linkage Methods for
Agglomerative Clustering

Sanjoy Dasgupta 1 Eduardo Laber 2
C i−1 by replacing two clusters of C i−1 with their union. Hierarchical clustering algorithms are implemented in widely
used machine learning libraries such as scipy and they
have applications in many contexts such as in the study of
evolution through phylogenetic trees (Eisen et al., 1998).

Abstract
Linkage methods are among the most popular algorithms for hierarchical clustering. Despite their relevance the current knowledge regarding the quality of the clustering produced
by these methods is limited. Here, we improve the currently available bounds on the maximum diameter of the clustering obtained by
complete-linkage for metric spaces. One
of our new bounds, in contrast to the existing ones,
allows us to separate complete-linkage
from single-linkage in terms of approximation for the diameter, which corroborates the
common perception that the former is more suitable than the latter when the goal is producing
compact clusters. We also show that our techniques can be employed to derive upper bounds
on the cohesion of a class of linkage methods that
includes the quite popular average-linkage.

There is a significant literature on hierarchical clustering; for
good surveys we refer to (Murtagh, 1983; Murtagh & Contreras, 2012). With regards to more theoretical work, one
important line of research consists of designing algorithms
for hierarchical clustering with provable guarantees for natural optimization criteria such as cluster diameter and the
sum of quadratic errors (Dasgupta & Long, 2005; Charikar
et al., 2004; Lin et al., 2010; Arutyunova & Röglin, 2022).
Another relevant line aims to understand the theoretical properties (e.g. approximation guarantees) of algorithms widely
used in practice, such as linkage methods (Dasgupta & Long,
2005; Ackermann et al., 2010; Großwendt & Röglin, 2015;
Arutyunova et al., 2021; Großwendt et al., 2019).
Here, we contribute to this second line of research by giving new and improved analysis for the
complete-linkage (Ackerman & Ben-David, 2016)
and also for a class of linkage methods that includes
average-linkage (Ackerman & Ben-David, 2016)
and minimax (Bien & Tibshirani, 2011).

1. Introduction
Clustering is the problem of partitioning a set of items so
that similar items are grouped together and dissimilar items
are separated. It is a fundamental tool in machine learning that is commonly used for exploratory analysis and for
reducing the computational resources required to handle
large datasets. For comprehensive descriptions of different
clustering methods and their applications, we refer to (Jain
et al., 1999; Hennig et al., 2015).

1.1. Our Results
Let (X , dist) be a metric space, where X is a set of n
points. The diameter diam(S) of a set of points S is given
by diam(S) = max{dist(x, y)|x, y ∈ S}. A k-clustering
C = {Ci |1 ≤ i ≤ k} is a partition of X into k groups.
We define max-diam(C) := max{diam(Ci )|1 ≤ i ≤ k}
Pk
and avg-diam(C) := k1 i=1 diam(Ci ). Moreover, let
OPTDM (k) and OPTAV (k) be, respectively, the minimum
possible max-diam and avg-diam of a k-clustering for
(X , dist).

One important type of clustering is hierarchical clustering.
Given a set of n points, a hierarchical clustering is a sequence of clusterings (C 0 , C 1 , . . . , C n−1 ), where C 0 is a
clustering with n unitary clusters, each of them corresponding to one of the n points, and C i , for i ≥ 1, is obtained from

Arbitrary k. First, in Section 3, we prove that for all k
the maximum diameter of the k-clustering produced by
complete-linkage is at most k 1.59 OPTAV (k). Since
OPTAV (k) ≤ OPTDM (k), our result is an improvement
over O(k 1.59 OPTDM (k)), the best known upper bound on
the maximum diameter of complete-linkage (Aru-

1

University of California San Diego, USA 2 Departamento de
Informática, PUC-RIO, Brazil. Correspondence to: Eduardo Laber
<eduardo.laber1@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

