A Fine-grained Analysis of Fitted Q-evaluation: Beyond Parametric Models

Jiayi Wang 1 Zhengling Qi 2 Raymond K. W. Wong 3

Abstract

known policy (Sutton & Barto, 2018). OPE is particularly
useful in high-stakes domains where the implementation
of a new policy can incur significant costs or risks, and
has been extensively studied in RL (e.g. Xie et al., 2019;
Duan et al., 2020; Yin & Wang, 2020; Chen & Qi, 2022; Ji
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). See Uehara et al. (2022)
for an overview of the OPE methods. Among various algorithms for OPE, fitted Q-evaluation (FQE) is arguably
one of the most popular algorithms. In FQE, Q-functions
(defined in (3)) are estimated in a backward manner using supervised learning methods, and their estimates are
then used to construct an estimated policy value (see (6)).
FQE has demonstrated significant empirical success in many
applications (Fu et al., 2021; Voloshin et al., 2019). Its popularity and success have also led to significant theoretical
interest in FQE. Several recent studies aim to provide theoretical justifications for its effectiveness (as discussed in
detail in Section 1.1). In this work, we delve deeply into
the analysis of FQE estimators within the framework of a
finite-horizon, time-inhomogeneous Markov Decision Process (MDP). Compared to existing analysis in FQE, our
objective is to provide a more comprehensive understanding
of the convergence rate on the error bound of estimating
the value of a target policy under both parametric and nonparametric models in terms of both the number of episodes
n and the horizon T . Specifically, we seek to address the
following three fundamental questions related to FQE:

In this paper, we delve into the statistical analysis
of the fitted Q-evaluation (FQE) method, which
focuses on estimating the value of a target policy
using offline data generated by some behavior policy. We provide a comprehensive theoretical understanding of FQE estimators under both parameteric and nonparametric models on the Q-function.
Specifically, we address three key questions related to FQE that remain largely unexplored in the
current literature: (1) Is the optimal convergence
rate for estimating the policy value regarding the
sample size n (n−1/2 ) achievable for FQE under
a non-parametric model with a fixed horizon (T )?
(2) How does the error bound depend on the horizon T ? (3) What is the role of the probability ratio
function in improving the convergence of FQE estimators? Specifically, we show that under the
completeness assumption of Q-functions, which
is mild in the non-parametric setting, the estimation errors for policy value using both parametric
and non-parametric FQE estimators can achieve
an optimal rate in terms of n. The corresponding
error bounds in terms of both n and T are also
established. With an additional realizability assumption on ratio functions, the rate√of estimation
√
errors can be improved from T 1.5 / n to T / n,
which matches the sharpest known bound in the
current literature under the tabular setting.

• Q1: For the fixed horizon T , how does the convergence
rate depend on the number of episodes n given the completeness assumption for Q-functions? Is the optimal
convergence rate (n−1/2 ) still achievable under nonparametric models of Q-functions?

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), off-policy evaluation (OPE)
is an important topic that focuses on estimating the expected
total reward (e.g., the value defined in (1)) of a target policy
based on data collected from a potentially different and un-

• Q2: How does the convergence rate depend on the growing horizon T ?

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas
at Dallas, Richardson, USA 2 School of Business, The George
Washington University, Washington, D.C., USA 3 Department of
Statistics, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA. Correspondence to: Zhengling Qi <qizhengling@email.gwu.edu>.

• Q3: What is the role of the probability ratio functions
wtπ (defined in (2)) in improving the convergence rate for
FQE estimators?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We will comment on these questions and the existing
progress towards addressing them in the following subsection.
1

