On the Weight Dynamics of Deep Normalized Networks

Christian H.X. Ali Mehmeti-Göpel 1 Michael Wand 1

Abstract

magnitudes (Yang et al., 2019). Further, using deep stacks
of layers also easily increase correlations, thereby causing
vanishing dimensionality (Saxe et al., 2013). Proper Initialization (He et al., 2015a) can reduce the problem; trying to
prevent it completely in a simple feed-forward network is
challenging though (Pennington et al., 2017).

Recent studies have shown that high disparities
in effective learning rates (ELRs) across layers in
deep neural networks can negatively affect trainability. We formalize how these disparities evolve
over time by modeling weight dynamics (evolution of expected gradient and weight norms) of
networks with normalization layers, predicting
the evolution of layer-wise ELR ratios. We prove
that when training with any constant learning rate,
ELR ratios converge to 1, despite initial gradient
explosion. We identify a “critical learning rate”
beyond which ELR disparities widen, which only
depends on current ELRs. To validate our findings, we devise a hyper-parameter-free warm-up
method that successfully minimizes ELR spread
quickly in theory and practice. Our experiments
link ELR spread with trainability, a relationship
that is most evident in very deep networks with
significant gradient magnitude excursions.

Modern architectures (He et al., 2016a; Vaswani et al., 2017)
thus usually address these issues by combining residual
connections (He et al., 2016a) and variants of normalization
layers such as batch normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy,
2015). The former implicitly performs a down-weighting
of deep paths, exponentially with depth (Veit et al., 2016),
and in combination with normalization layers, this effect is
further increased (at initialization) by decreasing the weight
of the residual branch (De and Smith, 2020). The central
objective of our paper is to understand how the dynamics
(over training time) of gradient magnitude excursions (we
do not consider correlations) are affected by normalization
layers (BN and the similar).

2. Related Work and Contributions
1. Introduction

Understanding of the benefits of BatchNorm standalone
is not straightforward and still subject to debate. The initial claim of reduced “internal covariate shift” was quickly
refuted (Awais et al., 2021) and many alternative explanations were proposed, such as smoothing of the loss surface
(Santurkar et al., 2018) or enabling bigger learning rates
(Bjorck et al., 2018). Salimans and Kingma (2016) introduced WeightNorm, a method to decouple a layer’s length
and direction by training them as independent network parameters. They also demonstrated that in weight-normalized
networks, gradients are orthogonal to layer weights, allowing update size calculation via the Pythagorean theorem.
Hoffer et al. (2018) showed that the “effective step size”
in normalized networks is approximately proportional to
1
; this shows that scale invariance gives us an additional
||W ||22
degree of freedom, as scaling a layer’s weights is equivalent
to inversely scaling its gradients or learning rate. You et
||F
al. (2017) have observed that the ratio ||∇W
||W ||F , which we
call effective learning rates (ELR), can vary wildly (up to
a factor ∼ 250 in AlexNet-BN) between layers after only
one step of gradient descent. The authors conjecture that
this can create instability in training, especially for large

In the past decade, combining neural networks and big
data has enabled dramatic breakthroughs (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; OpenAI, 2023), and network depth has been a key
factor: Compositions of many individual layers provide rich
function spaces that empirically appear to be better-aligned
with real-world data distributions than any other inductive
biases we are aware of today. A fundamental problem of
deep networks, maybe easily brushed over as technicality at
first sight, is the problem of vanishing and exploding gradients. Propagating signals through a multi-layer networks is
not easy: In the forward pass, the magnitude input signals
easily increases or decreases, thus leading to an exponential
excursion of signal magnitude. Similarly, during the backward pass, we easily obtain similar excursion of gradient
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. Correspondence to: Christian H.X. Ali Mehmeti-Göpel <chalimeh@unimainz.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

