Position: Quo Vadis, Unsupervised Time Series Anomaly Detection?

M. Saquib Sarfraz 1 2 Mei-Yen Chen 1 Lukas Layer 1 Kunyu Peng 2 Marios Koulakis 2

Abstract

points whose interpretation as anomalous might depend on
the system’s operational history or on the inter-connectivity
among sub-modules.

The current state of machine learning scholarship in Timeseries Anomaly Detection (TAD) is
plagued by the persistent use of flawed evaluation
metrics, inconsistent benchmarking practices,
and a lack of proper justification for the choices
made in novel deep learning-based model designs. Our paper presents a critical analysis of the
status quo in TAD, revealing the misleading track
of current research and highlighting problematic
methods, and evaluation practices. Our position advocates for a shift in focus from solely
pursuing novel model designs to improving
benchmarking practices, creating non-trivial
datasets, and critically evaluating the utility
of complex methods against simpler baselines.
Our findings demonstrate the need for rigorous
evaluation protocols, the creation of simple baselines, and the revelation that state-of-the-art deep
anomaly detection models effectively learn linear mappings. These findings suggest the need
for more exploration and development of simple
and interpretable TAD methods. The increment
of model complexity in the state-of-the-art deeplearning based models unfortunately offers very
little improvement. We offer insights and suggestions for the field to move forward.

Given the complexity of the problem and inspired from the
successes in other areas, such as natural language or audio processing, many state-of-the-art deep-learning architectures have been adjusted and applied to it. Such approaches aim to learn a latent representation of the normal
time-series data, e.g. LSTM (Park et al., 2017), Transformer (Tuli et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022), and sometimes explicitly model the inter-dependency among the
sub-components in the system, e.g. graph neural networks
(Deng & Hooi, 2021; Chen et al., 2021). Based on the
assumption that the anomalies constitute unseen patterns
which will not be modelled during reconstruction of the
series from the model, the difference between the original
and reconstructed series is used to detect them.
Although it is well intended, this line of research has never
provided evidence of the necessity of deep-learning, which
has been challenged namely in Audibert et al. (2022).
The state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep-learning approaches proceeded to introduce models of increased complexity using
questionable validation processes. Those processes involve
unsuitable benchmark datasets (Wu & Keogh, 2022) and,
most harmful to this field, the use of flawed evaluation protocols (Kim et al., 2022). The protocol which introduced
the most pitfalls is the point adjustment (PA) applied on the
point-wise F1 score which practically favors noisy predictions. It was gradually introduced in a series of papers (Xu
et al., 2018; Audibert et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Su
et al., 2019c) with the original intention of calibrating the
anomaly detection threshold on a hold-out dataset, but it
was subsequently demonstrated in Kim et al. (2022) that
uniformly random predictions outperform SOTA methods
and their performance tends to one as the average length
of the anomalies increases. Although using the standard
F1 score without point-adjust avoids those pitfalls, it still
leaves a gap by only focusing on point-wise time-stamp
level detection versus anomaly instance level detection,
which led to the introduction of new complementary rangebased metrics such as the ones in Tatbul et al. (2018), Wagner et al. (2023).

1. Introduction
Time series anomaly detection (TAD) is an active field of
machine learning with applications across multiple industries. For instance, many real-world systems such as vehicles, manufacturing plants, robots, and patient monitoring systems, involve a large number of interconnected sensors producing a great amount of data over time that can
be used to detect anomalous behaviour. The anomalies
can manifest as single irregular points or groups of such
1

Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation, Ulm, Germany 2 Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to:
M. Saquib Sarfraz <saquibsarfraz@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

The goal of this paper is to guide the TAD community to-

1

