Prior Mismatch and Adaptation in PnP-ADMM
with a Nonconvex Convergence Analysis

Shirin Shoushtari * 1 Jiaming Liu * 1 Edward P. Chandler 1 M. Salman Asif 2 Ulugbek S. Kamilov 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Imaging inverse problems consider the recovery of a clean
image from its corrupted observation. Such problems arise
across the fields of computational imaging, biomedical imaging, and computer vision. As imaging inverse problems are
typically ill-posed, solving them requires the use of image
priors. While many approaches have been proposed for implementing image priors, the current literature is primarily
focused on methods based on training deep learning (DL)
models to map noisy observations to clean images (McCann
et al., 2017; Lucas et al., 2018; Ongie et al., 2020).

Plug-and-Play (PnP) priors is a widely-used family of methods for solving imaging inverse problems by integrating physical measurement models
with image priors specified using image denoisers.
PnP methods have been shown to achieve stateof-the-art performance when the prior is obtained
using powerful deep denoisers. Despite extensive
work on PnP, the topic of distribution mismatch
between the training and testing data has often
been overlooked in the PnP literature. This paper
presents a set of new theoretical and numerical
results on the topic of prior distribution mismatch
and domain adaptation for the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) variant of PnP.
Our theoretical result provides an explicit error
bound for PnP-ADMM due to the mismatch between the desired denoiser and the one used for
inference. Our analysis contributes to the work in
the area by considering the mismatch under nonconvex data-fidelity terms and expansive denoisers. Our first set of numerical results quantifies
the impact of the prior distribution mismatch on
the performance of PnP-ADMM on the problem
of image super-resolution. Our second set of numerical results considers a simple and effective
domain adaption strategy that closes the performance gap due to the use of mismatched denoisers. Our results suggest the relative robustness
of PnP-ADMM to prior distribution mismatch,
while also showing that the performance gap can
be significantly reduced with only a few training
samples from the desired distribution.

Plug-and-Play (PnP) Priors (Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013;
Sreehari et al., 2016) have emerged as a class of iterative algorithms that can use DL denoisers as implicit image priors
for solving inverse problems. PnP algorithms sequentially
minimize a data-fidelity term to improve data consistency
and then perform regularization through an image denoiser.
PnP has been successfully used in many applications such as
super-resolution, phase retrieval, microscopy, and medical
imaging (Metzler et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2017; Meinhardt et al., 2017; Dong et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Wei
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021). The success of PnP has resulted in the development of its multiple variants (e.g., PnPPGM, PnP-SGD, PnP-ADMM. PnP-HQS) (Romano et al.,
2017; Buzzard et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2020; Reehorst &
Schniter, 2019; Hurault et al., 2022a; Kamilov et al., 2023),
strong interest in its theoretical analysis (Chan et al., 2017;
Teodoro et al., 2019; Ahmad et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2019c;a;
Liu et al., 2021), as well as investigation of its connection
to other methods used in inverse problems, such as score
matching (Cohen et al., 2021; Reehorst & Schniter, 2019)
and denoising diffusion probabilistic models (Kadkhodaie
& Simoncelli, 2021; Laumont et al., 2022).
Despite extensive literature on PnP, the research in the area
has mainly focused on the setting where the distribution of
the inference data is perfectly matched to that of the data
used for training deep learning denoisers, used as image
priors in PnP. Little work exists for PnP under mismatched
deep learning-based priors, where a distribution shift exists
between the training and test data (Shoushtari et al., 2022;
Reehorst & Schniter, 2019). In this paper, we investigate the
problem of mismatched priors in PnP-ADMM. We present

*

Equal contribution 1 Washington University in St. Louis, St.
Louis, MO, USA 2 University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Ulugbek S. Kamilov <kamilov@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

