Graph Neural Networks with a Distribution of Parametrized Graphs

See Hian Lee * 1 Feng Ji * 1 Kelin Xia 2 Wee Peng Tay 1

Abstract

many GNNs rely on a fixed graph shift operator, such as the
adjacency or Laplacian matrix, to analyze and learn from
graph data, assuming that the given graph is accurate and
noise-free. This approach has inherent limitations, considering that graph data is often uncertain. There are also models
such as GTN (Yun et al., 2019) and GAT (Veličković et al.,
2018) that determine weighted graph structures or shift operations in the training phase from multiple possibilities.
However, a single neighborhood feature aggregation mechanism is usually learned and used for testing.

Traditionally, graph neural networks have been
trained using a single observed graph. However,
the observed graph represents only one possible
realization. In many applications, the graph may
encounter uncertainties, such as having erroneous
or missing edges, as well as edge weights that provide little informative value. To address these challenges and capture additional information previously absent in the observed graph, we introduce
latent variables to parameterize and generate multiple graphs. The parameters follow an unknown
distribution to be estimated. We propose a formulation in terms of maximum likelihood estimation
of the network parameters. Therefore, it is possible to devise an algorithm based on ExpectationMaximization (EM). Specifically, we iteratively
determine the distribution of the graphs using a
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method,
incorporating the principles of PAC-Bayesian theory. Numerical experiments demonstrate improvements in performance against baseline models on
node classification for both heterogeneous and
homogeneous graphs.

The uncertainty mentioned above stems from the existence
of multiple potential variations in graph constructions as a
universal optimal method does not exist. Structural noise,
which includes missing or spurious edges, and the absence
of informative edge weights, further contributes to the uncertainty in graph data (Zhang et al., 2019; Dong & Kluger,
2023). Handling this uncertainty is crucial as the graph directly influences the results of both GSP and GNNs (Li et al.,
2021c).
Several GNN works have recognized that the provided graph
in benchmark datasets is suboptimal. For example, in (Topping et al., 2022), a method was introduced to enhance the
provided graph by rewiring it at graph bottlenecks. Similarly,
in (Li et al., 2021a) and (Ye et al., 2020), approaches were
developed to reweigh edges, to reduce information flow at
cluster boundaries. Another perspective involves considering the given or observed graph as a particular realization
of a graph model, as discussed in (Zhang et al., 2019) (cf.
Appendix F on related works). In their work, a Bayesian
framework was adopted to learn a more robust model that
can withstand perturbations in graph topology. These collective efforts underscore the common observation that the
observed graph is often imperfect, and determining the optimal graph is a non-trivial task, as it depends on both the
physical connections and the edge weights, which regulate
the rates of information transmission (Ji et al., 2023d).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have facilitated graph representational learning by building upon Graph Signal Processing (GSP) principles and expanding their application
in the domains of machine learning. Moreover, GNNs have
demonstrated their effectiveness across a wide range of tasks
in domains such as chemistry (Gilmer et al., 2017a), recommendation systems (Ying et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2022),
financial systems (Sawhney et al., 2021) and e-commerce
settings (Liu et al., 2022), among others. However, GSP and

Our work aligns with the viewpoint presented in (Zhang
et al., 2019). We conceptualize the observed graph as an
individual instance originating from a distribution of graphs,
which is influenced by one or more latent parameters. Nevertheless, in contrast to (Zhang et al., 2019) which proposed
a Bayesian framework, we propose an EM framework for
graph learning and name our model EMGNN. Even though

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 School
of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Wee Peng Tay <wptay@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

