Structure-Aware E(3)-Invariant Molecular Conformer Aggregation Networks
Duy M. H. Nguyen * 1 2 3 Nina Lukashina * 1 2 Tai Nguyen 3 An T. Le 4 TrungTin Nguyen 5 Nhat Ho 6
Jan Peters 3 4 7 Daniel Sonntag 3 8 Viktor Zaverkin 9 Mathias Niepert 1 2 9

Abstract

plications in drug discovery and material design (Butler
et al., 2018; Vamathevan et al., 2019; Choudhary et al.,
2022; Fedik et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2023). Most existing
machine learning approaches to molecular property prediction either incorporate 2D (topological) (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Gilmer et al., 2017b; Xu et al., 2018; Veličković
et al., 2018) or 3D (geometric) information of molecular
structures (Schütt et al., 2017; Schütt et al., 2021; Batzner
et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2022). 2D molecular graphs
describe molecular connectivity (covalent bonds) but ignore the spatial arrangement of the atoms in a molecule
(molecular conformation). 3D graph representations capture conformational changes but are commonly used to encode an individual conformer. Many molecular properties,
such as solubility and binding affinity (Cao et al., 2022),
however, inherently depend on a large number of conformations a molecule can occur as in nature, and employing
a single geometry per molecule limits the applicability of
machine-learning models. Furthermore, it is challenging to
determine conformers that predominantly contribute to the
molecular properties of interest. Thus, developing expressive representations for molecular systems when modeling
their properties is an ongoing challenge.

A molecule’s 2D representation consists of its
atoms, their attributes, and the molecule’s covalent bonds. A 3D (geometric) representation of a
molecule is called a conformer and consists of its
atom types and Cartesian coordinates. Every conformer has a potential energy, and the lower this
energy, the more likely it occurs in nature. Most
existing machine learning methods for molecular
property prediction consider either 2D molecular
graphs or 3D conformer structure representations
in isolation. Inspired by recent work on using
ensembles of conformers in conjunction with 2D
graph representations, we propose E(3)-invariant
molecular conformer aggregation networks. The
method integrates a molecule’s 2D representation
with that of multiple of its conformers. Contrary
to prior work, we propose a novel 2D–3D aggregation mechanism based on a differentiable solver
for the Fused Gromov-Wasserstein Barycenter
problem and the use of an efficient conformer
generation method based on distance geometry.
We show that the proposed aggregation mechanism is E(3) invariant and propose an efficient
GPU implementation. Moreover, we demonstrate
that the aggregation mechanism helps to significantly outperform state-of-the-art molecule property prediction methods on established datasets.
Our implementation is available at this link.

To overcome this, recent work has introduced molecular representations that incorporate both 2D molecular graphs and
3D conformers (Zhu et al., 2023). These methods aim to encode various molecular structures, such as atom types, bond
types, and spatial coordinates, leading to more comprehensive feature embeddings. The latest algorithms, including
graph neural networks, attention mechanisms (Axelrod &
Gómez-Bombarelli, 2023), and long short-term memory
networks (Wang et al., 2024b), have demonstrated improved
generalization capabilities in various molecular prediction
tasks. Despite their effectiveness, these methods struggle to
balance model complexity and performance and face scalability challenges mainly due to the computational cost of
generating 3D conformers. These problems are exacerbated
when using several conformers per system, underscoring
the need for strategies to mitigate these limitations.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is increasingly used for modeling and
analyzing properties of atomic systems with important ap*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Stuttgart, Germany 2 Max Planck Research School for
Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS) 3 German Research Center for
Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 4 Department of Computer Science,
Technische Universitat Darmstadt, Germany 5 School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Australia 6 Department
of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin,
USA 7 Hessian.AI 8 Department of Applied Artificial Intelligence,
Oldenburg University, Germany 9 NEC Laboratories Europe. Correspondence to: Duy H. M. Nguyen <hong01@dfki.de>.

Contributions. We propose a new message-passing neural network architecture that integrates both 2D and ensembles of 3D molecular structures. The approach introduces a geometry-aware conformer ensemble aggregation
strategy using Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) barycen-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

