An Interpretable Evaluation of Entropy-based Novelty of Generative Models

Jingwei Zhang 1 Cheuk Ting Li 2 Farzan Farnia 1

Abstract

diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) have attained remarkable
results in many machine learning problems. The success
of these models is primarily due to the great capacity of
deep neural networks to express the complex distributions
of image, audio, and text data. The impressive qualitative
results of deep generative models have inspired several theoretical and empirical studies on their evaluation to reveal
the advantages and disadvantages of existing architectures
for training generative models.

The massive developments of generative model
frameworks require principled methods for the
evaluation of a model’s novelty compared to a
reference dataset. While the literature has extensively studied the evaluation of the quality, diversity, and generalizability of generative models, the
assessment of a model’s novelty compared to a reference model has not been adequately explored in
the machine learning community. In this work, we
focus on the novelty assessment for multi-modal
distributions and attempt to address the following
differential clustering task: Given samples of a
generative model PG and a reference model Pref ,
how can we discover the sample types expressed
by PG more frequently than in Pref ? We introduce a spectral approach to the differential clustering task and propose the Kernel-based Entropic
Novelty (KEN) score to quantify the mode-based
novelty of PG with respect to Pref . We analyze
the KEN score for mixture distributions with wellseparable components and develop a kernel-based
method to compute the KEN score from empirical
data. We support the KEN framework by presenting numerical results on synthetic and real image
datasets, indicating the framework’s effectiveness
in detecting novel modes and comparing generative models. The paper’s code is available at:
github.com/buyeah1109/KEN.

To compare different generative modeling schemes, several evaluation metrics have been proposed in the literature.
The existing evaluation scores can be classified into two
categories: 1) distance-based metrics such as Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) and Kernel
Inception Distance (KID) (Bińkowski et al., 2018) measuring the closeness of the distribution of data and generative
model, 2) quality, diversity, and generalizability scores such
as Inception score (Salimans et al., 2016), Precision/Recall
(Sajjadi et al., 2018; Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019), and Density/Coverage (Naeem et al., 2020) assessing the sharpness
and variety of the generated data. The mentioned metrics
tend to assign higher scores to models closer to the underlying data distribution. While such a property is desired in the
evaluation of a learning framework, it may not result in an
assessment of a generative model’s novelty compared to a
baseline generative model or another reference distribution.
However, the massive developments of generative models
highlight the need to assess a model’s novelty compared to
other models, because an interpretable comparison between
generative models requires the identification of sample types
generated by one model more frequently than by the other
models. Moreover, prompt-based generative models are
often utilized to follow the user’s input text prompts to create
novel contents, e.g. images of a novel scene or object. If
the goal is to maximize the uncommonness of the generated
data compared to a reference dataset, a relevant evaluation
factor is the model’s expressed novelty in comparison to the
reference distribution.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models including variational autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013), generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and denoising
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Department of Information
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Jingwei Zhang <jwzhang22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>,
Cheuk Ting Li <ctli@ie.cuhk.edu.hk>, Farzan Farnia <farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.

In this work, we focus on the novelty evaluation task in the
context of multi-modal distributions which are often present
in large-scale image and text datasets due to the different
background features of the collected data. In our theoretical
analysis, we suppose the test and reference models consist

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

