Differentiable Mapper for Topological Optimization of Data Representation

Ziyad Oulhaj 1 Mathieu Carrière 2 Bertrand Michel 1

Abstract

Data Analysis (TDA), and has been used many times for
visualization purposes on different types of data, including,
but not limited to, single-cell sequencing (Wang et al., 2018;
Zechel et al., 2014), neural network architectures (Mitra &
Rao JV, 2021; Joseph et al., 2021), or 3D meshes (Wang,
2020; Rosen et al., 2018). Moreover, its ability to precisely
encode (within the graph) the presence and sizes of geometric and topological structures in the data in a mathematically
founded way (through the use of algebraic topology) has
also proved beneficial for highlighting subpopulations of
interest, which are usually detected as peculiar topological
structures of significant sizes, and identifying the key features that best explain such subpopulations against the rest
of the Mapper graph. This general pipeline has become
a key component in, e.g., biological inference in singlecell data sets, where differentiating stem cells can usually
be recovered from branching patterns in the corresponding
Mapper graphs (Rizvi et al., 2017a).

Unsupervised data representation and visualization using tools from topology is an active and
growing field of Topological Data Analysis (TDA)
and data science. Its most prominent line of work
is based on the so-called Mapper graph, which
is a combinatorial graph whose topological structures (connected components, branches, loops)
are in correspondence with those of the data itself. While highly generic and applicable, its use
has been hampered so far by the manual tuning
of its many parameters—among these, a crucial
one is the so-called filter: it is a continuous function whose variations on the data set are the main
ingredient for both building the Mapper representation and assessing the presence and sizes of
its topological structures. However, while a few
parameter tuning methods have already been investigated for the other Mapper parameters (i.e.,
resolution, gain, clustering), there is currently no
method for tuning the filter itself. In this work, we
build on a recently proposed optimization framework incorporating topology to provide the first
filter optimization scheme for Mapper graphs. In
order to achieve this, we propose a relaxed and
more general version of the Mapper graph, whose
convergence properties are investigated. Finally,
we demonstrate the usefulness of our approach by
optimizing Mapper graph representations on several datasets, and showcasing the superiority of
the optimized representation over arbitrary ones.

Parameter selection. However, it has quickly become
clear that the Mapper graph is quite sensitive to its parameters, in the sense that the structure of the graph can vary a lot
under (even small) changes of its parameters. As such, several pipelines based on Mapper graphs actually involve brute
force optimization: they first compute a grid of Mapper
graphs corresponding to many different sets of parameters,
and then they pick the best one, either by manual inspection
or with arbitrary criteria—leading to prohibitive running
times. In order to deal with this issue, several methods have
been proposed in the literature for either assessing the statistical robustness of a given Mapper graph with respect to
the distribution of the studied dataset (Belchı́ et al., 2020;
Brown et al., 2021), or for tuning the Mapper parameters
automatically (Carriere et al., 2018). Unfortunately, most
tuning methods involve simple heuristics that only work
for some, but not all Mapper parameters; in particular, the
so-called filter parameter has never been treated, to the best
of our knowledge. This is mostly because it is a general
continuous function, and can thus vary in a much wilder
parameter space than the other Mapper parameters.

1. Introduction
Mapper graphs and TDA. The Mapper graph introduced
in (Singh et al., 2007) is an essential tool of Topological
1

Nantes Université, École Centrale Nantes, Laboratoire de
Mathématiques Jean Leray, CNRS UMR 6629, Nantes, France
2
DataShape, Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur, Sophia Antipolis, France. Correspondence to: Ziyad Oulhaj <ziyad.oulhaj@ecnantes.fr>.

In another line of work, ensemble methods have recently
been proposed to combine Mapper graphs over multiple
parameter sets, rather than trying to find the best one (Kang
& Lim, 2021; Fitzpatrick et al., 2023), so as to be able

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

