Discovering Environments with XRM
Mohammad Pezeshki 1 Diane Bouchacourt 1 Mark Ibrahim 1 Nicolas Ballas 1
Pascal Vincent 1 2 3 David Lopez-Paz 1

Abstract

pear accurate, but fail when tested in new hospitals” (DeGrave et al., 2021).

Environment annotations are essential for the success of many out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization methods. Unfortunately, these are costly
to obtain and often limited by human annotators’ biases. To achieve robust generalization,
it is essential to develop algorithms for automatic
environment discovery within datasets. Current
proposals, which divide examples based on their
training error, suffer from one fundamental problem. These methods introduce hyper-parameters
and early-stopping criteria, which require a validation set with human-annotated environments,
the very information subject to discovery. In this
paper, we propose C ROSS -R ISK M INIMIZATION
(XRM) to address this issue. XRM trains twin
networks, each learning from one random half
of the training data, while imitating confident
held-out mistakes made by its sibling. XRM provides a recipe for hyper-parameter tuning, does
not require early-stopping, and can discover environments for all training and validation data.
Algorithms built on top of XRM environments
achieve oracle worst-group-accuracy, addressing
a long-standing challenge in OOD generalization. Code available at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/XRM.

1

Generally speaking, AI systems underperform on underrepresented groups in training data (Barocas et al., 2019).
The Waterbirds problem (Sagawa et al., 2019), depicted in
Figure 1, illustrates this with two classes (landbirds and
waterbirds) in two landscape environments (land and water), forming four groups: a majority group of waterbirds
in water (73% of examples), landbirds in land (22%), waterbirds in land (4%), and a minority group of landbirds
in water (1%). On this problem, learning machines often
favor the landscape spurious feature to classify the majority of examples and memorizes the remaining minorities to
achieve zero training error. An empirical risk minimization
(ERM) baseline, ignoring environment data (Vapnik, 1998),
achieves a mere 61% worst-group-accuracy, specifically on
the minority group, as illustrated in Figure 1’s right panel.
To improve upon ERM, researchers have developed a myriad of OOD generalization algorithms (Zhou et al., 2022a;
Wang et al., 2021). These methods use environment annotations to uncover invariant (environment-generic) patterns and discard spurious (environment-specific) ones (Arjovsky et al., 2019). As Figure 1 shows, group distributionally robust optimization (Sagawa et al., 2019, GroupDRO)
achieves a worst-group-accuracy of 87%. This outperforms
ERM by over twenty five points, a sizeable gap!
While promising, OOD algorithms targeting sub-population
shift require environment annotations, which are costly to
obtain and limited by human annotators’ biases and precision. Moreover, no single set of environment annotations
fits all OOD algorithms. The patterns misleading a learning
system might be alien or invisible to humans (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). Because of these reasons, OOD generalization
is currently confined to small data collections, and their
promise in the large-scale setting remains unfulfilled.

Introduction

AI systems pervade our lives, spanning applications such
as finance (Hand & Henley, 1997), healthcare (Jiang et al.,
2017), self-driving vehicles (Bojarski et al., 2016), and justice (Angwin et al., 2016). Despite outperforming humans
in many tasks, these systems fall apart under testing conditions different from their training environments (Geirhos
et al., 2020). For instance, during the COVID-19 pandemic,
thoracic x-ray classifiers incorrectly latched onto spurious
correlations such as patient’s age or position (Heaven, 2021),
leading to “an alarming situation in which the systems ap-

In light of the above, researchers developed algorithms for
automatic environment discovery (Bao & Barzilay, 2022;
Zheran Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022b; Lahoti et al.,
2020; Dagaev et al., 2021; Creager et al., 2020; Nam et al.,
2020). These methods typically build a robust system in
two phases. In phase-1, these methods train a classifier to
categorize training examples in two environments, based
on their training error. In phase-2, an OOD algorithm is

1
FAIR at Meta 2 Mila at Université de Montréal 3 CIFAR. Correspondence to: Mohammad Pezeshki <mpezeshki@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

