Feature Distribution on Graph Topology
Mediates the Effect of Graph Convolution: Homophily Perspective

Soo Yong Lee 1 Sunwoo Kim 1 Fanchen Bu 1 2 Jaemin Yoo 2 Jiliang Tang 3 Kijung Shin 1 2
Class

Abstract
How would randomly shuffling feature vectors
among nodes from the same class affect graph
neural networks (GNNs)? The feature shuffle, intuitively, perturbs the dependence between
graph topology and features (A-X dependence)
for GNNs to learn from. Surprisingly, we observe
a consistent and significant improvement in GNN
performance following the feature shuffle. Having overlooked the impact of A-X dependence
on GNNs, the prior literature does not provide
a satisfactory understanding of the phenomenon.
Thus, we raise two research questions. First, how
should A-X dependence be measured, while controlling for potential confounds? Second, how
does A-X dependence affect GNNs? In response,
we (i) propose a principled measure for A-X dependence, (ii) design a random graph model that
controls A-X dependence, (iii) establish a theory
on how A-X dependence relates to graph convolution, and (iv) present empirical analysis on realworld graphs that align with the theory. We conclude that A-X dependence mediates the effect of
graph convolution, such that smaller dependence
improves GNN-based node classification.

Features
Feature
Shuffle

Shuffled Graph

Original Graph

(a) Visualization of the feature shuffle. Features of the same class
nodes are shuffled. The shuffled node ratio is 0.6 in the example.
GCN  MLP  Label Propagation 

Acc. Gap (%)

Cora-Full

Computers

2

Ogbn-ArXiv
4

4
2

1

+5%p

0

0
0

0.5

1

2

+2%p
0

0.5

1

0

Shuffled Node Ratio

+4%p
0

0.5

1

(b) Accuracy gaps between the original and shuffled graphs.

Figure 1: An Intriguing Phenomenon. GCN performance
increases significantly over the feature shuffle, while those
of MLP and label propagation remain stationary.
tive (Oono & Suzuki, 2020; Abboud et al., 2021; You et al.,
2021; Wang & Zhang, 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2023; Baranwal et al., 2021; 2023).
However, in this work, we report an intriguing phenomenon
not well accounted for by the prior studies. How would
randomly shuffling feature vectors among nodes from the
same class affect GNNs? The feature shuffle, intuitively,
disrupts the dependence between graph topology and node
features (A-X dependence). Rather surprisingly, increasing
the shuffled node ratio consistently improves GCN (Kipf &
Welling, 2017) performance (Fig. 1). The performances of
MLP and label propagation (LP), however, remain the same
(for experiment details, refer to Sec. 5.1).

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are functions of graph topology and features. Understanding the conditions in which
GNNs become powerful is the key to their improvement
and effective applications. As such, many prior works have
investigated the conditions that affect GNN effectiveness,
especially from the node representation learning perspec1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence,
KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, Michigan, US. Correspondence to: Kijung Shin <kijungs@kaist.ac.kr>.

The prior studies on GNN theory do not provide a satisfactory understanding of the phenomenon. One line of studies
indicates how class distribution on graph topology, such as
class-homophily, can be critical for effective GNNs (Luan
et al., 2022; 2023; Ma et al., 2022; Mao et al., 2023; Platonov
et al., 2023a). The feature shuffle, however, does not intervene with label distribution because the class labels are not

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

