LQER: Low-Rank Quantization Error Reconstruction for LLMs

Cheng Zhang 1 Jianyi Cheng 2 George A. Constantinides 1 Yiren Zhao 1

Abstract

power (Luccioni et al., 2023). Meanwhile, empirical evidence suggests that only models with a sufficiently large
parameter count begin to show emergent capabilities (Hoffmann et al., 2022), thereby motivates the construction of
even larger models. Quantization then emerges as a promising technique to enhance the accessibility of LLMs by reducing the model size and simplifying inference computation.

Post-training quantization of Large Language
Models (LLMs) is challenging. In this work,
we introduce Low-rank Quantization Error
Reduction (LQER), which combines quantization and low-rank approximation to recover the
model capbility. LQER leverages an activationinduced scale matrix to drive the singular value
distribution of quantization error towards a desirable distribution, which enables near-lossless
W4A8 quantization on various LLMs and downstream tasks without the need for knowledge
distillation, grid search, or gradient-based iterative optimization. Unlike existing methods,
the computation pattern of LQER eliminates
the need for specialized Scatter and Gather processes to collect high-precision weights from irregular memory locations. Our W4A8 LLMs
achieve near-lossless performance on six popular downstream tasks, while using 1.36× fewer
hardware resources than the leading state-of-theart method. We open-sourced our framework at
github.com/ChengZhang-98/lqer.

Low-precision Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) of LLMs
has recently become an attractive solution for reducing computational and memory cost (Nagel et al., 2021). However, it
remains challenging due to the fact that 1) no further weight
training is allowed and 2) the presence of magnitude outliers
in model weights and activations. PTQ is a technique that
quantizes a pre-trained LLM directly, without additional
training, as fine-tuning LLMs usually requires substantial
resources. Many researchers have observed that the main
building block of LLMs, the transformer layer, produces
magnitude outliers in weights and activations (Wei et al.,
2022; Bondarenko et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2023). A simple
fixed-point quantization then either suffers from considerable clipping or overflow error or from considerable rounding error, depending on the choice of scaling. In both cases,
the quantization error propagates and accumulates through
the LLMs, leading to substantial task accuracy degradation.
To overcome this challenge, recent LLM PTQ methods investigate the statistical properties of LLMs and propose various fine-grained solutions to accommodate (Dettmers et al.,
2022; Frantar et al., 2022), mitigate (Xiao et al., 2023; Lee
et al., 2023a), or eliminate (Wei et al., 2023; Bondarenko
et al., 2023) these numerical outliers.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited impressive
capability on various natural language processing (NLP)
tasks (Brown et al., 2020). However, the substantial model
size and its associated computation costs demand considerable energy and hardware resources. For instance, deploying
BLOOM-176B (Workshop et al., 2022) requires 16 NVIDIA
A100 GPUs and consumes more than 2000 Watts of total

However, fine-grained treatments to numerical outliers usually come with a high optimization and/or hardware cost.
The optimization cost mainly stems from iterative optimization. For example, OmniQuant (Shao et al., 2023) takes 7.3
hours to quantize a LLaMA-30B model with 20 iterations
on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU (Lin, 2024). The popular weight-only quantization setup, such as GPTQ (Frantar
et al., 2022) and AWQ (Lin et al., 2023), dequantizes 4bit weights to FP16 at runtime, which actually impedes
inference on models larger than 7B (Hansen, 2024). Concurrently, many existing quantization frameworks select
values from irregular positions for high-precision computation, while maintaining other values in low-precision formats (Dettmers et al., 2023b; Lee et al., 2023b). For in-

1
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 2 Department
of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Cheng Zhang <cheng.zhang122@imperial.ac.uk>, Jianyi
Cheng <jianyi.cheng@cl.cam.ac.uk>, George A. Constantinides <g.constantinides@imperial.ac.uk>, Yiren Zhao
<a.zhao@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

