Reward Shaping for Reinforcement Learning with An Assistant Reward Agent

Haozhe Ma 1 Kuankuan Sima 2 Thanh Vinh Vo 1 Di Fu 1 Tze-Yun Leong 1

Abstract

progression (Ladosz et al., 2022). Additionally, the distribution of sparse rewards, typically characterized by a binary
step function, poses difficulties for gradient-based learning
methods. These issues highlight the promise of developing auxiliary informative rewards, potentially derived from
external expertise or the agent’s own accumulated experiences, while ensuring the agent retains its original optimal
policy (Singh et al., 2010; Sorg et al., 2010b;a).

Reward shaping is a promising approach to tackle
the sparse-reward challenge of reinforcement
learning by reconstructing more informative and
dense rewards. This paper introduces a novel dualagent reward shaping framework, composed of
two synergistic agents: a policy agent to learn the
optimal behavior and a reward agent to generate
auxiliary reward signals. The proposed method
operates as a self-learning approach, without reliance on expert knowledge or hand-crafted functions. By restructuring the rewards to capture
future-oriented information, our framework effectively enhances the sample efficiency and convergence stability. Furthermore, the auxiliary reward
signals facilitate the exploration of the environment in the early stage and the exploitation of the
policy agent in the late stage, achieving a selfadaptive balance. We evaluate our framework on
continuous control tasks with sparse and delayed
rewards, demonstrating its robustness and superiority over existing methods.

Reward shaping (RS) has proven to be effective in addressing the sparse-reward challenge. It supplements environmental rewards with detailed, dense signals, thereby (a) providing fine-grained, meaningful, and informative insights,
(b) offering immediate feedback without waiting for the
end of long trajectories, and (c) typically presenting the
most direct objectives for agents at each interaction with
the environment (Gupta et al., 2022; Ng et al., 1999). However, RS methods face certain limitations. One branch uses
manually crafted reward functions or learns from expert
demonstrations (Bıyık et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2021; Wu
et al., 2021a), but this relies heavily on prior knowledge,
which is often limited and expensive to acquire, and may introduce human biases that could degrade agent performance.
Alternatively, another branch seeks to autonomously learn
intrinsic rewards by uncovering hidden features, such as
incorporating exploration bonuses (Devidze et al., 2022;
Ostrovski et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017), driving agent
by curiosity (Pathak et al., 2017), or rewarding for novel
states (Burda et al., 2018). These strategies often set additional criteria to motivate the agent to simultaneously
optimize extra goals. Without careful balance, agents risk
becoming trapped in local optima, deviating from the original optimal policy.

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved notable advancements across various domains. However, challenges persist in environments with sparse and delayed rewards, especially in long-horizon tasks like robotic control
and video games. The lack of immediate or rich feedback
hinders the agent’s ability to discriminate the values of different actions. Effective exploration strategies become crucial in this context, as they determine whether an agent
can promptly find a beneficial trajectory. Efficient earlystage exploration helps the agent gather numerous positive
samples, minimizing sampling costs and hastening learning

To address the challenge of sparse and delayed rewards
and the limitations of current methods, we propose a novel
framework, Reinforcement Learning with an Assistant
Reward Agent (ReLara). This framework automatically
learns a dense assistant reward function without requiring
external human knowledge or introducing additional objectives. It also effectively maintains a self-adaptive balance
between exploration and exploitation, as well as between
intrinsic and extrinsic rewards, thereby ensuring the consistency of the learned optimal policies and avoiding the risk of
local optima. ReLara consists of two agents that cooperate
with each other: a Reward Agent and a Policy Agent. The

1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Haozhe Ma <haozhe.ma@u.nus.edu>, Tze-Yun Leong
<leongty@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

