Diving into Underwater: Segment Anything Model Guided Underwater Salient
Instance Segmentation and A Large-scale Dataset

Shijie Lian * 1 Ziyi Zhang * 2 Hua Li † 1 3 Wenjie Li 1 Laurence Tianruo Yang 1 4 5 Sam Kwong 6
Runmin Cong 7 8

Abstract
60

With the breakthrough of large models, Segment
Anything Model (SAM) and its extensions have
been attempted to apply in diverse tasks of computer vision. Underwater salient instance segmentation is a foundational and vital step for various underwater vision tasks, which often suffer
from low segmentation accuracy due to the complex underwater circumstances and the adaptive
ability of models. Moreover, the lack of largescale datasets with pixel-level salient instance annotations has impeded the development of machine learning techniques in this field. To address these issues, we construct the first largescale underwater salient instance segmentation
dataset (USIS10K), which contains 10,632 underwater images with pixel-level annotations in 7
categories from various underwater scenes. Then,
we propose an Underwater Salient Instance Segmentation architecture based on Segment Anything Model (USIS-SAM) specifically for the
underwater domain. We devise an Underwater
Adaptive Visual Transformer (UA-ViT) encoder
to incorporate underwater domain visual prompts
into the segmentation network. We further design an out-of-the-box underwater Salient Feature
Prompter Generator (SFPG) to automatically generate salient prompters instead of explicitly providing foreground points or boxes as prompts in
SAM. Comprehensive experimental results show

AP(%)

Extra Prediction

Ours: USIS-SAM
RSPrompter (TGARS’24)
WaterMask (ICCV’23)
SAM (ICCV’23)
URank+ RDPNet (TIP’21)
URank+ OQTR (TMM’23)

Localization Fault

50
Low
Precision

WaterMask

GT

40
Instance
Confusion

AP50

AP75

mAP

URank+RDPNet

Ours

Figure 1. A simple comparison of USIS-SAM and other state-ofthe-art methods trained on the USIS10K dataset. Different colors
represent different salient instances. URank represents the underwater image enhancement method in UnderwaterRanker (Guo
et al., 2023).

that our USIS-SAM method can achieve superior
performance on USIS10K datasets compared to
the state-of-the-art methods. Datasets and codes
are released on Github.

1. Introduction
In recent years, fundamental models such as Generative
Pre-Trained Transformer (GPT)-4 (Achiam et al., 2023),
Language Learning with Adaptive Multi-task Architecture
(LLaMA) (Touvron et al., 2023), and Segment Anything
Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023) have made significant
progress and greatly contributed to the advancement of the
society. Among them, SAM has recently performed well
in many segmentation tasks due to its excellent encoderdecoder transformation framework and large training dataset
SA-1B. After being fine-tuned or modified appropriately, it
has strong potential for segmentation applications in medical
images (Wu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024), remote sensing
images (Chen et al., 2023a), and other fields.

*
Equal contribution 1 Hainan University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 3 Key Laboratory
of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology & Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of
Education, China 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology 5 St. Francis Xavier University 6 LIngnan University, School
of data science, Hong Kong 7 Shandong University, School of
Control Science and Engineering 8 Key Laboratory of Machine
Intelligence and System Control, Ministry of Education, Jinan,
China. † Correspondence to: Hua Li <lihua@hainanu.edu.cn>.

To meet the growing demands for underwater exploration,
the deep learning vision community is increasingly focusing
on the development and application of underwater vision
tasks. Salient Instance Segmentation (SIS), an emerging
and promising visual task, aims to segment out visually
salient objects in a scene and distinguish individual salient

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

