Hyperbolic Active Learning for Semantic Segmentation under Domain Shift

Luca Franco * 1 Paolo Mandica * 2 Konstantinos Kallidromitis 3 Devin Guillory 4 Yu-Teng Li 4 Trevor Darrell 4
Fabio Galasso 1 2

Abstract

Ning et al., 2021) have addressed this labeling challenge via
domain adaptation, capitalizing on large source datasets for
pre-training and domain-adapting with few target annotations (Ben-David et al., 2010). Most recently, active domain
adaptation (ADA) has emerged as an effective strategy, i.e.
annotating only a small set of target pixels in successive
labelling rounds (Ning et al., 2021). State-of-the-art (SOTA)
ADA (Shin et al., 2021b; Wu et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022a)
relies on the entropy of predicted pseudo-labels, which they
define as prediction uncertainty, as the core strategy for
active learning (AL) data acquisition. In fact, prediction
uncertainty correlates well with the likelihood of pixel classification mistakes, but it is only one of the factors of the
overall model uncertainty, as we argue in this work.

We introduce a hyperbolic neural network approach to pixel-level active learning for semantic
segmentation. Analysis of the data statistics leads
to a novel interpretation of the hyperbolic radius
as an indicator of data scarcity. In HALO (Hyperbolic Active Learning Optimization), for the
first time, we propose the use of epistemic uncertainty as a data acquisition strategy, following the
intuition of selecting data points that are the least
known. The hyperbolic radius, complemented by
the widely-adopted prediction entropy, effectively
approximates epistemic uncertainty. We perform
extensive experimental analysis based on two established synthetic-to-real benchmarks, i.e. GTAV
→ Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes. Additionally, we test HALO on Cityscape → ACDC
for domain adaptation under adverse weather conditions, and we benchmark both convolutional
and attention-based backbones. HALO sets a new
state-of-the-art in active learning for semantic segmentation under domain shift and it is the first
active learning approach that surpasses the performance of supervised domain adaptation while
using only a small portion of labels (i.e., 1%).1

Following extensive literature (Depeweg et al., 2017;
Kendall & Gal, 2017; Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021;
Valdenegro-Toro & Mori, 2022), we distinguish aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty, and we propose the second for
the data acquisition strategy in active learning. Epistemic
uncertainty is an indicator of the state of knowledge about
the task. This uncertainty stems not only from inaccuracies,
as identified by prediction uncertainty, but also from the information the model has been exposed to thus far, including
the amount of data considered. In the domain adaptation
task, the domain gap arises from the model’s lack of understanding of the new domain data, akin to the definition
of epistemic uncertainty. Building upon this intuition, we
propose HALO (Hyperbolic Active Learning Optimization),
a novel approach for active domain adaptation, where we
introduce the use of epistemic uncertainty into the data acquisition strategy. Our in-depth analysis shows that the
hyperbolic radius effectively estimates data scarcity, revealing it as a key component in the estimation of epistemic
uncertainty. The combination of the radius with a complementary information signal such as prediction entropy offers
a comprehensive estimate of epistemic uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Dense prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation (SS),
are important in applications such as self-driving cars, manufacturing, and medicine. However, these tasks necessitate
pixel-wise annotations, which can incur substantial costs
and time inefficiencies (Cordts et al., 2016). Previous methods (Xie et al., 2022a; Vu et al., 2019; Shin et al., 2021b;a;
*
Equal contribution 1 ITALAI S.R.L. 2 Sapienza University of
Rome 3 Panasonic North America 4 UC Berkeley. Correspondence
to: Luca Franco <luca.franco@italailabs.com>, Paolo Mandica
<paolo.mandica@uniroma1.it>.

Interpreting the hyperbolic radius as a proxy to data scarcity
diverges from known interpretations in the hyperbolic literature. The SOTA hyperbolic SS model (Atigh et al.,
2022) trains with class hierarchies, which they manually
define. As a result, their hyperbolic radius represents the
parent-to-child hierarchical relations in the Poincaré ball.
We adopt Atigh et al. (2022) without enforcing hierarchi-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code
available
at
https://github.com/
paolomandica/HALO.

1

