Principled Penalty-based Methods for Bilevel Reinforcement Learning and
RLHF
Han Shen 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Tianyi Chen 1

Abstract

ing, including hyper-parameter optimization (Franceschi
et al., 2018), meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Rajeswaran
et al., 2019), continue learning (Borsos et al., 2020), and
adversarial learning (Jiang et al., 2021). Existing applications mostly concentrate on supervised learning setting, thus
research on BLO has been predominantly confined to the
static optimization setting (Franceschi et al., 2017), where
in both the upper and lower-level problems, the objective
functions are (strongly-)convex functions. However, this setting is insufficient to model more complex game-theoretic
behaviors with sequential decision-making.

Bilevel optimization has been recently applied to
many machine learning tasks. However, their applications have been restricted to the supervised
learning setting, where static objective functions
with benign structures are considered. But bilevel
problems such as incentive design, inverse reinforcement learning (RL), and RL from human
feedback (RLHF) are often modeled as dynamic
objective functions that go beyond the simple
static objective structures, which pose significant
challenges of using existing bilevel solutions. To
tackle this new class of bilevel problems, we introduce the first principled algorithmic framework
for solving bilevel RL problems through the lens
of penalty formulation. We provide theoretical
studies of the problem landscape and its penaltybased (policy) gradient algorithms. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms via simulations in the Stackelberg game and RLHF.

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a
principled framework for sequential decision-making problems and has achieved tremendous empirical success in
recent years (Silver et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022). In
this work, we study the BLO problem in the context of RL,
where the lower-level problem is an RL problem and the
upper-level problem can be either smooth optimization or
RL. Specifically, in the lower-level problem, the follower
solves a Markov decision process (MDP) determined by the
leader’s decision variable x, and returns a optimal policy of
this MDP to the leader, known as the best response policy.
The leader aims to maximize its own objective function,
subject to the constraint that the follower always adopts
the best response policy. This formulation of bilevel RL
encompasses a range of applications such as Stackelberg
Markov games (Stackelberg, 1952), reward learning (Hu
et al., 2020), and RL from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017). As an example, in RL from human
feedback, the leader designs a reward rx for the follower’s
MDP, with the goal that the resulting optimal policy yields
the desired behavior of the leader.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization (BLO) has emerged as an effective
framework in machine learning. In a nutshell, BLO involves
two coupled optimization problems in the upper and lower
levels respectively, where they have different decision variables, denoted by x and y respectively. The lower-level
problem is a constraint for the upper-level problem, e.g., in
the upper level, we minimize a function f (x, y) with the
constraint that y is a solution to the lower-level problem determined by x, i.e., y ∈ Y ∗ (x). Here Y ∗ (x) is the solution
set of the lower-level problem determined by x.

Despite its various applications, the bilevel RL problem
is difficult to solve. Broadly speaking, the main technical
challenge lies in handling the constraint, i.e., the lower-level
problem. The lower-level problem of bilevel RL extends
from static smooth optimization to policy optimization in
RL, and thus faces significant technical challenges. Such an
extension loses a few optimization structures, such as strong
convexity and uniform Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) condition,
which are critical for existing BLO algorithms (Ghadimi &
Wang, 2018; Shen & Chen, 2023). Specifically, there are
two mainstream approaches for BLO: (a) implicit gradient

BLO enjoys a wide range of applications in machine learn1

Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, United States 2 Department
of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University, United States.
Correspondence to: Han Shen <shenh5@rpi.edu>, Tianyi Chen
<chentianyi19@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

