FedLMT: Tackling System Heterogeneity of Federated Learning via Low-Rank
Model Training with Theoretical Guarantees

Jiahao Liu 1 2 Yipeng Zhou 3 Di Wu 1 2 Miao Hu 1 2 Mohsen Guizani 4 Quan Z. Sheng 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) has received unprecedented attention due to its ability to preserve privacy. However, the
FL performance is susceptible to the inherent heterogeneity
in FL clients (Kairouz et al., 2021) due to giant discrepancies of data distribution and resource capability among
FL clients, e.g., storage, communication, and computation.
How to handle data heterogeneity has been explored in existing works (Tan et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023). Yet, how
to handle resource capability heterogeneity (namely system
heterogeneity) is still not fully studied (Pfeiffer et al., 2023).

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging machine
learning paradigm for preserving data privacy.
However, diverse client hardware often has varying computation resources. Such system heterogeneity limits the participation of resourceconstrained clients in FL, and hence degrades
the global model accuracy. To enable heterogeneous clients to participate in and contribute to
FL training, previous works tackle this problem
by assigning customized sub-models to individual
clients with model pruning, distillation, or lowrank based techniques. Unfortunately, the global
model trained by these methods still encounters
performance degradation due to heterogeneous
sub-model aggregation. Besides, most methods
are heuristic-based and lack convergence analysis. In this work, we propose the FedLMT framework to bridge the performance gap, by assigning clients with a homogeneous pre-factorized
low-rank model to substantially reduce resource
consumption without conducting heterogeneous
aggregation. We theoretically prove that the convergence of the low-rank model can guarantee the
convergence of the original full model. To further
meet clients’ personalized resource needs, we extend FedLMT to pFedLMT, by separating model
parameters into common and custom ones. Finally, extensive experiments are conducted to verify our theoretical analysis and show that FedLMT
and pFedLMT outperform other baselines with
much less communication and computation costs.

The mainstream technique to address system heterogeneity
is to assign customized sub-models to individual clients in
accordance with their capabilities. These methods can be divided into four main categories. 1) Width-scale methods that
create sub-models from the global full model by pruning
channels (Alam et al., 2022). 2) Depth-scale methods which
generate sub-models by dividing the global model based on
the model depth for layer-wise training (Kim et al., 2023).
3) Distillation methods where the server utilizes knowledge
distillation to allow clients to own heterogeneous models
(Zhang et al., 2022). 4) Low-rank based methods where
sub-models are created through low-rank decomposition
(Yao et al., 2021). However, most of them need to aggregate
heterogeneous sub-models, which may impair the performance of the aggregated global model (Zhang et al., 2023).
The reason is that heterogeneous sub-models have distinct
characteristics and loss landscapes. Simply weighting the
average of these sub-models will cause inconsistency and
hence introduce errors (Kang et al., 2023). Besides, most
methods are heuristic-based and lack convergence analysis.
In this work, we propose FedLMT, a general FL framework
with low-rank model training, to tackle system heterogeneity. In FedLMT, each client trains a pre-factorized low-rank
model with the same model architecture, which is more
lightweight than the original full model and inherently reduces computation and communication costs. Since clients’
sub-models are homogeneous, we can bypass the problems
caused by heterogeneous aggregation. Indeed, our experiments show that FedLMT outperforms other methods with
much lower computation overhead and is more robust under
typical heterogeneous FL settings described in (Diao et al.,

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China 2 Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big
Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China 3 School of Computing, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University,
Sydney, Australia 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial
Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE. Correspondence to: Di
Wu <wudi27@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

