The Non-linear F -Design and Applications to Interactive Learning

Alekh Agarwal 1 Jian Qian 2 Alexander Rakhlin 2 Tong Zhang 3

Abstract

& Szepesvári, 2020; Wagenmaker et al., 2021; Foster et al.,
2021; Agarwal & Zhang, 2022; Mhammedi et al., 2023).
The classical theory of experimental design is most welldeveloped when the experimental data is subsequently modeled using (generalized) linear functions. In such cases, the
target is to obtain closed-form expressions or nearly-sharp
bounds for a number of definitions of an optimal design,
along with efficient algorithms for computing them.

We propose a generalization of the classical Goptimal design concept to non-linear function
classes. The criterion, termed F -design, coincides with G-design in the linear case. We compute the value of the optimal design, termed the
F -condition number, for several non-linear function classes. We further provide algorithms to
construct designs with a bounded F -condition
number. Finally, we employ the F -design in a variety of interactive machine learning tasks, where
the design is naturally useful for data collection
or exploration. We show that in four diverse settings of confidence band construction, contextual bandits, model-free reinforcement learning,
and active learning, F -design can be combined
with existing approaches in a black-box manner
to yield state-of-the-art results in known problem
settings as well as to generalize to novel ones.

The core intuition behind experimental design, when we
subsequently fit data using functions from a particular class,
is the following. We want a small subset of the inputs,
such that querying the values of the desired outputs at these
instances allows us to (approximately) extrapolate to the rest
of the domain, for any function in our class. That is, the set
of query instances serves as a basis tailored to the function
class. When the function class has an underlying linear
structure, the Euclidian basis is always a sufficient (and
without assumptions on the domain, an optimal) design.
When the functions under consideration are non-linear, finding such a minimal set is quite non-trivial, as different functions can have varying degrees of sensitivity in different
parts of the instance space. Consequently, much of the literature on non-linear experimental design has focused on
local or asymptotic design criteria. In such approaches, we
assume that the functions under consideration have already
been localized to a “small” neighborhood of the optimal
solution, and we seek a good design for this local region of
the parameter space, often using Taylor or other expansions
to reduce the local design problem to a linear one. However, the availability of such a local region is a stringent
assumption in practice, where no prior knowledge might be
available until we carry out data collection. This is a particularly pronounced concern in interactive ML scenarios,
where we often start with no initial samples and seed good
models using a limited amount of data.

1. Introduction
Developed by pioneers like Fisher and Wald, experimental
design is a foundational area of study in statistics and machine learning (Cochran & Cox, 1948; Montgomery, 2017;
Casella et al., 2008; Pronzato & Pázman, 2013). In contrast
to vanilla statistical learning, where the data are assumed to
be sampled from a fixed and unknown distribution, experimental design allows the learner to choose a distribution
over the underlying input space to their advantage. Good
experimental designs form the bedrock of efficient data collection and learning in sample-constrained scenarios, with
applications in social and natural sciences, healthcare settings, and beyond (Jackson & Cox, 2013; Keskin Gündoğdu
et al., 2016). More recently, the increasing popularity of
interactive paradigms such as active learning, bandits, and
reinforcement learning have also made experimental design
a key component of machine learning algorithms (Lattimore

One notable exception for the non-linear case is the eluder
dimension, which was originally proposed in Russo &
Van Roy (2013) and further refined in several works (Jin
et al., 2021; Foster et al., 2020). Eluder dimension is a
complexity measure of a function class with a similar perspective of quantifying how many samples suffice to reliably
evaluate some measure of the fitness of functions from a
class over the entire input space, and we discuss it in more

1
Google 2 MIT 3 UIUC. Correspondence to: Alekh Agarwal
<alekhagarwal@google.com>, Jian Qian <jianqian@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

