A Unified Framework for Learning with Nonlinear
Model Classes from Arbitrary Linear Samples

Ben Adcock 1 Juan M. Cardenas 2 Nick Dexter 3

Abstract

question of learning guarantees. In other words: how much
training data suffices to ensure good generalization, and
how is this influenced by the choice of model class and the
random process generating the training data?

This work considers the fundamental problem of
learning an unknown object from training data
using a given model class. We introduce a framework that allows for objects in arbitrary Hilbert
spaces, general types of (random) linear measurements as training data and general types of nonlinear model classes. We establish a series of learning guarantees for this framework, which provide
explicit relations between the amount of training
data and the model class to ensure near-best generalization bounds. In doing so, we introduce the
key notion of the variation of a model class with
respect to a distribution of sampling operators.
We show that this framework can accommodate
many different types of well-known problems of
interest, such as matrix sketching by random sampling, compressed sensing with isotropic vectors,
active learning in regression and compressed sensing with generative models. In all cases, known
results become straightforward corollaries of our
general theory. Hence, this work provides a powerful framework for studying and analyzing many
different types of learning problems.

This question has often been addressed for specific types
of training data. For instance, in the case of regression,
the training data consists of pointwise evaluations of some
target function, or in the case of computational imaging, the
training data may consist of samples of the Fourier or Radon
transform of some target image. It is also commonly studied
for specific model classes, e.g., polynomial spaces (Adcock
et al., 2022c) or spaces of sparse vectors (Foucart & Rauhut,
2013), spaces of low-rank matrices or tensors (Davenport
& Romberg, 2016), spaces defined by generative models
(Bora et al., 2017), single- (Gajjar et al., 2023) or multilayer neural networks (Adcock & Dexter, 2021; Adcock
et al., 2021; 2022b), Fourier sparse functions (Erdelyi et al.,
2020), (sparse) random feature models (Avron et al., 2017;
Hashemi et al., 2023) and many more.
In this paper, we introduce a unified framework for learning
with nonlinear model classes from arbitrary linear samples.
The main features of this framework are:
(i) the object is an element of a separable Hilbert space;
(ii) each measurement is taken randomly and independently according to a random linear operator;
(iii) the measurements may be scalar- or vector-valued, or,
in general, may take values in a Hilbert space;
(iv) the measurements can be multimodal, i.e., generated
by different distributions of random linear operators,
as long as a certain nondegeneracy condition holds;
(v) the model class can be linear or nonlinear, but should
be contained in (or covered by) a union of finitedimensional subspaces;
(vi) the resulting learning guarantees are given in terms of
the variation of the model class with respect to the
sampling distributions.

1. Introduction
Learning an unknown object from a finite set of training
data is a fundamental problem in computer science. Typically, in modern settings, one seeks to learn an approximate
representation in a nonlinear model class (also known as an
approximation space or hypothesis set). It is also common
to generate the training data randomly according to some
distribution. Of critical importance in this endeavour is the
1
Department of Mathematics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada 2 Ann and H. J. Smead Department of Aerospace
Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder,
Colorado, USA 3 Department of Scientific Computing, Florida
State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA. Correspondence to:
Nick Dexter <nick.dexter@fsu.edu>.

We present a series of examples to highlight the generality
of this framework. In various cases, our learning guarantees
either include or improve known results.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

