Sample Complexity Bounds for Estimating Probability Divergences
under Invariances
Behrooz Tahmasebi 1 Stefanie Jegelka 2

Abstract

control and dynamical systems (Bunne, 2023).
Estimating the 1-Wasserstein distance is known to be a
difficult task in general, and it suffers from the curse of
dimensionality (Tsybakov, 2009). The slow convergence
rate is generally unimprovable, as there exist probability
measures that are difficult to estimate. However, in many
applications (e.g., graphs, point clouds, molecules, spectral
data), the underlying probability measures are invariant with
respect to a group action on the input space. As observed in
recent works (Birrell et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023), considering the group invariances in the mathematical model can
help improve the convergence rate of the 1-Wasserstein distance and the Sobolev Integral Probability Metrics (Sobolev
IPMs), with applications, e.g., to generative models for invariant data.

Group-invariant probability distributions appear
in many data-generative models in machine learning, such as graphs, point clouds, and images.
In practice, one often needs to estimate divergences between such distributions. In this work,
we study how the inherent invariances, with respect to any smooth action of a Lie group on a
manifold, improve sample complexity when estimating the 1-Wasserstein distance, the Sobolev
Integral Probability Metrics (Sobolev IPMs), the
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD), and also
the complexity of the density estimation problem
(in the L2 and L∞ distance). Our results indicate
a two-fold gain: (1) reducing the sample complexity by a multiplicative factor corresponding to the
group size (for finite groups) or the normalized
volume of the quotient space (for groups of positive dimension); (2) improving the exponent in
the convergence rate (for groups of positive dimension). These results are completely new for
groups of positive dimension and extend recent
bounds for finite group actions.

In this paper, we study the sample complexity gain of
invariances for estimating probability measures in the 1Wasserstein distance, the Sobolev IPMs, the Maximum
Mean Discrepancy (MMD), and also for the density estimation problem (in L2 and L∞ distance). We consider
probability measures supported on a given1 connected compact smooth manifold M that are invariant with respect to
a smooth action of a Lie group G on M. In this general
setting, given a (Borel) probability measure µ, supported on
the manifold M, we prove that there exists an estimator µ̃
(as a function of n i.i.d. samples from µ), such that

1. Introduction
Estimating the optimal transportation distance (Villani,
2021; Villani et al., 2009; Santambrogio, 2015) between
probability measures is a fundamental problem in statistics,
with many applications in machine learning, from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020;
Arjovsky et al., 2017; Salimans et al., 2018; Mallasto et al.,
2019) to domain adaptation and generalization (Flamary
et al., 2016; Courty et al., 2014; Chuang et al., 2021), geometric data processing (e.g., Wasserstein barycenters (Cuturi
& Doucet, 2014) and intrinsic dimension estimation (Block
et al., 2022)), biomedical research (Zhang et al., 2021), and

E[D(µ, µ̃)] ≲

 δ κG
G

n

,

(1)

where D can be replaced by the 1-Wasserstein distance,
Sobolev IPMs, MMD, and also the L2 (M) and L∞ (M)
distance between distributions (the density estimation problem in L2 (M) and L∞ (M)). The exponent κG and the
factor δG depend on the distribution’s smoothness properties and the quotient space’s dimension and volume.
The new sample complexity bound shows two different
aspects of gain of invariances. First, the quantity κG is
observed to be a non-increasing function of the quotient

1
MIT CSAIL 2 TU Munich and MIT CSAIL. Correspondence
to: Behrooz Tahmasebi <bzt@mit.edu>.

1
Throughout this paper, we always assume that the underlying
space is a known manifold; this is distinguished from a related
body of work on estimating distributions supported on unknown
low-dimensional embedded manifolds (Divol, 2022).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

