Unsupervised Concept Discovery Mitigates Spurious Correlations

Md Rifat Arefin 1 Yan Zhang 2 Aristide Baratin 2 Francesco Locatello 3 Irina Rish 1 Dianbo Liu 4
Kenji Kawaguchi 4

Abstract

literature (Shah et al., 2020), this phenomenon pervades the
landscape of deep learning models (Geirhos et al., 2020).

Models prone to spurious correlations in training
data often produce brittle predictions and introduce unintended biases. Addressing this challenge typically involves methods relying on prior
knowledge and group annotation to remove spurious correlations, which may not be readily available in many applications. In this paper, we
establish a novel connection between unsupervised object-centric learning and mitigation of
spurious correlations. Instead of directly inferring subgroups with varying correlations with labels, our approach focuses on discovering concepts: discrete ideas that are shared across input samples. Leveraging existing object-centric
representation learning, we introduce CoBalT: a
concept balancing technique that effectively mitigates spurious correlations without requiring human labeling of subgroups. Evaluation across
the benchmark datasets for sub-population shifts
demonstrate superior or competitive performance
compared state-of-the-art baselines, without the
need for group annotation. Code is available at
https://github.com/rarefin/CoBalT

While models relying on spurious correlations may perform
well on average across i.i.d. test data, they often struggle
on specific subgroups where these correlations do not hold.
Common approaches involve partitioning the training data
based on prior knowledge of spurious information and adjusting the training process to ensure consistency across
these groups (Sagawa et al., 2020; Kirichenko et al., 2023;
Arjovsky et al., 2019). However, most real-world datasets
lack explicit annotations highlighting spurious information.
Manual annotation is expensive and can be ill-defined, as
the appropriate groupings may not be immediately apparent.
On the other hand, self-supervised learning (Chen et al.,
2020; Caron et al., 2020; 2021; Grill et al., 2020; He et al.,
2020) has produced powerful representation learners. Several methods (Cho et al., 2021; Wen et al., 2022) aim to learn
high-level concepts by semantic grouping of areas within an
input image into object-centric instances. Wen et al. (2022),
for instance, leverage slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020)
to decompose complex scenes into constituent objects via
contrastive learning alone. While their original aim was
downstream task representation learning, we posit that such
decomposition can help mitigating spurious correlations. By
treating semantic groupings as concept sources discovered
by the model, they can serve as data-driven proxies of subgroup labels. This differs from existing work in spurious
correlation, which typically directly infers subgroups (see
related work in Section 2). Our approach models concepts
that do not necessarily correspond directly to subgroups;
typically, we use a significantly larger number of concepts
than annotated subgroups in the dataset.

1. Introduction
A critical concern with deep learning models arises from
their well-known tendency to base their predictions on correlations present in the training data rather than robustly
informative features (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Sagawa et al.,
2020). For instance, in image classification, translating an
image by a few pixels (Azulay & Weiss, 2019) or modifying
the background (Beery et al., 2018) can drastically change
the predictions of the model. Often viewed as resulting from
the so-called ‘simplicity bias’ of deep neural networks in the

This paper demonstrates the use of object-centric representation learning approaches to design classifiers robust to
spurious correlations without the need for human-labeled
subgroup annotations. We introduce CoBalT, a method
combining concept discovery with concept balancing for
robust classification. CoBalT follows a two-stage procedure
common in the literature: first, inferring information about
the training data, and then leveraging this information for
robust training.

1
Mila, University of Montreal, Canada 2 Samsung - SAIT AI
Lab, Montreal, Canada 3 Institute of Science and Technology Austria 4 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Md
Rifat Arefin <rifat.arefin@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In Stage 1, we propose to vector quantize semantic group1

