On Dimensionality of Feature Vectors in MPNNs

César Bravo * 1 2 Alexander Kozachinskiy * 2 3 Cristóbal Rojas * 1 2

Abstract

MPNNs work as follows. First, as inputs to them, we consider simple undirected graphs with node labels. MPNNs
work in layers, where each node of a graph has its own
feature vector that is updated at each layer. The initial feature vector of a node is some encoding of the label of this
node (typically a one-hot encoding if the number of different labels is not too big). In each layer, the feature vector
of a node v is updated as follows. One takes the sum of
feature vectors of the neighbors of v, multiplies it by some
matrix (with learnable entries), and adds the feature vector
of v itself, multiplied by some other matrix (with learnable
entries as well). After that, a non-linear activation function
is applied coordinate-wise to the resulting vector, yielding
the new feature vector of v.

We revisit the result of Morris et al. (AAAI’19)
that message-passing graphs neural networks
(MPNNs) are equal in their distinguishing power
to the Weisfeiler–Leman (WL) isomorphism test.
Morris et al. show their result with ReLU activation function and O(n)-dimensional feature vectors, where n is the size of the graph. Recently, by
introducing randomness into the architecture, Aamand et al. (NeurIPS’22) improved this bound to
O(log n)-dimensional feature vectors, although
at the expense of guaranteeing perfect simulation
only with high probability. In all these constructions, to guarantee equivalence to the WL test,
the dimension of feature vectors in the MPNN
has to increase with the size of the graphs. However, architectures used in practice have feature
vectors of constant dimension. Thus, there is a
gap between the guarantees provided by these results and the actual characteristics of architectures
used in practice. In this paper we close this gap
by showing that, for any non-polynomial analytic
(like the sigmoid) activation function, to guarantee that MPNNs are equivalent to the WL test,
feature vectors of dimension d = 1 is all we need,
independently of the size of the graphs.

Why do MPNNs perform well in practice? To answer this
question, one needs to understand which specific architectural characteristics of MPNNs can provide guarantees on
their performance, for example in terms of their trainability, generalization power, or their ability to fit the data. In
this paper we will focus on the ability of MPNNs to accurately represent the data, a property commonly referred to
as expressive power.
A main feature of MPNNs is that, by design, they compute functions on graphs that assign the same output to
isomorphic graphs. That is, the functions they compute
are always invariant under isomorphisms. Which invariant functions can MPNNs compute? It turns out that this
question is related to the MPNNs’s ability to distinguish
non-isomorphic graphs, in the sense of being able to produce different outputs for graphs that are not isomorphic.
An MPNN architecture is said to be complete for a class
of graphs if it can distinguish all pairs of non-isomorphic
graphs within the class. As shown in (Chen et al., 2019),
an MPNN architecture is universal (can approximate any
invariant function arbitrarily well) within a class of graphs,
if and only if it is complete for that class. Therefore, it
becomes relevant to identify the characteristics of MPNN
architectures that guarantee maximal distinguishing power.

1. Introduction
A plethora of real-life data is represented as a graph. A
common deep-learning architecture for this kind of data is a
graph neural network (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2008). In this
paper, we focus on message-passing graph neural networks
(MPNN), which are rather simple architectures that have
proved to be quite useful in practice.
*

Equal contribution 1 Instituto de Ingenierı́a Matemática y Computacional, Universidad Católica de Chile 2 Centro Nacional de
Inteligencia Artificial, Chile 3 Instituto Milenio Fundamentos de
los Datos, Chile. Correspondence to: Alexander Kozachinskiy
<alexander.kozachinskyi@cenia.cl>.

It was observed independently by (Xu et al., 2019) and (Morris et al., 2019) that the distinguishing power of MPNNs
is upper bounded by the so-called Weisfeiler-Leman (WL)
test (Leman & Weisfeiler, 1968), in the sense that MPNNs
are incapable of distinguishing two node-labeled graphs

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

