SpikeLM: Towards General Spike-Driven Language Modeling
via Elastic Bi-Spiking Mechanisms

Xingrun Xing 1 2 3 Zheng Zhang 3 Ziyi Ni 1 2 Shitao Xiao 3 Yiming Ju 3 Siqi Fan 3 Yequan Wang 3
Jiajun Zhang 1 2 Guoqi Li 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Creating artificial general intelligence by simulating the
human brain has always been a human dream, which is
known as Brain-Inspired Computing (BIC) (Mehonic &
Kenyon, 2022; Zhang et al., 2020b). Although artificial neural networks (ANNs) (Touvron et al., 2023; Kirillov et al.,
2023) have achieved tremendous success, the working ways
are still so different from the human brain. The biological
neurons communicate with spikes (Roy et al., 2019) and
only activate when the membrane potential exceeds a certain threshold. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Maass,
1997) are designed by simulating biological neuron dynamics (Gerstner et al., 2014), and have distinctive attributions
of biological plausiblity, event-driven sparsity, and binary
activation. Given event-driven computation, high sparsity is
dynamically achieved by event occurrence. Given binary activations, matrix multiplications convert to accumulate (AC)
operations. These characteristics make bio-inspired SNNs
a significantly energy-efficient alternative (Yin et al., 2021;
Schuman et al., 2022) to traditional ANNs. Deepening our
understanding of spiking neurons (Fang et al., 2021b) and
expanding the usage scope of SNNs (Kim et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2024) have become increasingly valuable issues.

Towards energy-efficient artificial intelligence
similar to the human brain, the bio-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs) have advantages of
biological plausibility, event-driven sparsity, and
binary activation. Recently, large-scale language
models exhibit promising generalization capability, making it a valuable issue to explore more
general spike-driven models. However, the binary
spikes in existing SNNs fail to encode adequate
semantic information, placing technological challenges for generalization. This work proposes the
first fully spiking mechanism for general language
tasks, including both discriminative and generative ones. Different from previous spikes with
{0,1} levels, we propose a more general spike
formulation with bi-directional, elastic amplitude,
and elastic frequency encoding, while still maintaining the addition nature of SNNs. In a single
time step, the spike is enhanced by direction and
amplitude information; in spike frequency, a strategy to control spike firing rate is well designed.
We plug this elastic bi-spiking mechanism in language modeling, named SpikeLM. It is the first
time to handle general language tasks with fully
spike-driven models, which achieve much higher
accuracy than previously possible. SpikeLM also
greatly bridges the performance gap between
SNNs and ANNs in language modeling. Our
code is available at https://github.com/XingrunXing/SpikeLM.

Previous SNNs mainly focus on computer vision (Wu et al.,
2021; Hu et al., 2021) due to relatively simple tasks and
smaller model sizes. Recently, large-scale language models
(Touvron et al., 2023; Du et al., 2022) exhibit much more
advanced generalization ability (Brown et al., 2020) than
other fields in machine learning, which motivates us to
pursue more general spike-driven models with language
modeling. However, this objective is no-trial due to the
technological challenges in spike representation (Deng &
Gu, 2020; Guo et al., 2023b) and optimization (Neftci et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2023c). In representation,
binary spike leads to severe information loss (Deng & Gu,
2020), making it difficult to generalize across language tasks.
In optimization, large-scale language models require stable
and highly efficient gradient calculation, while neuronal
dynamics in SNNs are non-differentiable. Therefore, there
are very limited language-oriented SNNs.

1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Zheng Zhang <zhangz.goal@gmail.com>, Jiajun
Zhang <jjzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>, Guoqi Li <guoqi.li@ia.ac.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This work focuses on fully spike-driven language modeling
1

