Practical Hamiltonian Monte Carlo on Riemannian Manifolds
via Relativity Theory

Kai Xu 1 Hong Ge 2

Abstract

where H(q, p) = U (q) + K(q, p) is the Hamiltonian energy and U, K are the potential and kinetic energy, respectively. To sample from a target with access to its unnormalized log-density L, we construct a Hamiltonian system with
U (q) = −L(q) and define the kinetic energy K or equivalently the momentum distribution. We then propose a sample q′ from a trajectory t̂ obtained from numerical integration starting from the current q and a random p. There are
various ways to define the kinetic energy, to integrate Hamiltonian dynamics numerically, and to draw samples from the
numerically integrated trajectory. The combinations of these
choices lead to different types of HMC algorithms in the
literature (Neal, 2011; Hoffman & Gelman, 2011; Girolami
& Calderhead, 2011; Betancourt, 2018). Due to its high efficiency for high-dimensional, differentiable densities and its
availability in modern probabilistic programming languages
(Carpenter et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2018), HMC has been
applied to a range of domains including statistical physics
(Duane et al., 1987), neuroscience (Sengupta et al., 2016;
Linderman et al., 2016; Jha et al., 2022), bioinformatics
(Larranaga et al., 2006), social science (Peng et al., 2016)
and machine learning (Barber, 2012).

Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) samples from
an unnormalized density by numerically integrating Hamiltonian dynamics. Girolami & Calderhead (2011) extend HMC to Riemannian manifolds, but the resulting method faces integration
instability issues for practical usage. While previous works have tackled this challenge by using
more robust metric tensors than Fisher’s information metric, our work focuses on designing numerically stable Hamiltonian dynamics. To do so, we
start with the idea from Lu et al. (2017), which designs momentum distributions to upper-bound the
particle speed. Then, we generalize this Lu et al.
(2017) method to Riemannian manifolds. In our
generalization, the upper bounds of velocity norm
become position-dependent, which intrinsically
limits step sizes used in high curvature regions
and, therefore, significantly reduces numerical errors. We also derive a more tractable algorithm to
sample from relativistic momentum distributions
without relying on the mean-field assumption.

HMC’s sampling efficiency highly depends on the local geometric structure of the target. Various HMC extensions have
proposed to utilize the underlying geometry through the
kinetic energy function by using a global pre-conditioning
matrix (Neal, 2011; Carpenter et al., 2017), or a positiondependent conditioning matrix (Girolami & Calderhead,
2011; Betancourt, 2013), commonly referred as Riemannian
HMC (RHMC). For RHMC, numerical integration becomes
more difficult, leading to significantly more divergent transitions and hindering sampling efficiency. This is because
the position-dependent momentum distribution sometimes
produces large momentum realizations in regions with high
curvature. These large momentum variables often lead to instability in numerical integration. A naive solution requires
using an unrealistically small step size that works across all
parameter space regions during generalized leapfrog integration: regions with large curvature determine the upper
bound for the acceptable step size.

1. Introduction
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) method to sample from a target distribution
π known up to its unnormalized log-density L, i.e. π(q) ∝
exp (L(q)). MCMC works by iteratively proposing new
states based on current states to produce a chain of samples
converging asymptotically to the target. In HMC, new states
are proposed by integrating the Hamiltonian dynamics with
position q(τ ) and momentum p(τ ) at time τ defined as
dq/dτ = ∇p H

and dp/dτ = −∇q H,

(1)

1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge MA, United States
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Kai Xu <xuk@ibm.com>.
2

Recently, Lu et al. (2017) proposed an effective way to stabilize Hamiltonian simulation inspired by Einstein’s theory

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

