Adaptive Sampling of k-space in Magnetic Resonance
for Rapid Pathology Prediction

Chen-Yu Yen * 1 Raghav Singhal * 1 Umang Sharma 1 Rajesh Ranganath 1 Sumit Chopra 1 Lerrel Pinto 1
Adaptive sampling of
k-space with ASMR

Abstract
Magnetic Resonance (MR) imaging, despite its
proven diagnostic utility, remains an inaccessible
imaging modality for disease surveillance at the
population level. A major factor rendering MR inaccessible is lengthy scan times. An MR scanner
collects measurements associated with the underlying anatomy in the Fourier space, also known
as the k-space. Creating a high-fidelity image
requires collecting large quantities of such measurements, increasing the scan time. Traditionally
to accelerate an MR scan, image reconstruction
from under-sampled k-space data is the method of
choice. However, recent works show the feasibility of bypassing image reconstruction and directly
learning to detect disease directly from a sparser
learned subset of the k-space measurements. In
this work, we propose Adaptive Sampling for MR
(ASMR), a sampling method that learns an adaptive policy to sequentially select k-space samples
to optimize for target disease detection. On 6
out of 8 pathology classification tasks spanning
the Knee, Brain, and Prostate MR scans, ASMR
reaches within 2% of the performance of a fully
sampled classifier while using only 8% of the
k-space, as well as outperforming prior state-ofthe-art work in k-space sampling such as EMRT,
LOUPE, and DPS.

Learned
Classifier

Predicted
Pathologies
Observation:
prior
samples

Edema
Action:
Next sample
Selection

Abnormal
Mass
Enlarged
Ventricles

Figure 1. Overview of ASMR. Given a set of prior samples from
the MR scanner, ASMR proposes the next sample to collect.These
sampling steps are repeated for a fixed set of iterations T , at which
point the collected samples are used by a classifier to predict the
presence of a fixed set of pathologies. ASMR is trained to optimize
classification performance and sidesteps reconstruction altogether.

culoskeletal disorders (Dean Deyle, 2011; Elvenes et al.,
2000). An MR machine sequentially measures the responses
to radio-frequency pulses of a human body placed in a magnetic field to generate cross-sectional images (slices) of the
anatomy (Liang & Lauterbur, 2000; Zbontar et al., 2018).
The measurements are acquired in the Fourier space, also
known as the k-space (Liang & Lauterbur, 2000) in the MR
community. The spatial image is then constructed by applying a multi-dimensional Fourier transform to the k-space
data. High-resolution MR images require a large number of
k-space measurements, leading to increased scan times (up
to 40 minutes, depending on the anatomy) (Zbontar et al.,
2018).

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance (MR) imaging is a diagnostic medical
imaging tool that exhibits superior soft-tissue contrast in
its generated images. This has led to MR scans being the
gold standard for diagnosing a range of cancers (Winawer
et al., 1997; Ilic et al., 2018; Elmore et al., 1998), and mus*

Equal contribution 1 New York University. Correspondence to:
Chen-Yu Yen <chenyu.yen@nyu.edu>, Raghav Singhal <rsinghal@nyu.edu>.

Reducing MR scan times is an active area of research. A
common approach is to under-sample the k-space and then
use image reconstruction techniques such as compressed
sensing (Lustig et al., 2008; Zbontar et al., 2018; Donoho,
2006) and deep learning (Sriram et al., 2020; Chung & Ye,
2022) to reconstruct the underlying image accurately. A

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

