Graph External Attention Enhanced Transformer

Jianqing Liang 1 Min Chen 1 Jiye Liang 1

Abstract

focuses on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). A milestone
example is GCN (Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling,
2017). It performs convolution operations on the graph.
Based on the framework of message-passing GNNs (Gilmer
et al., 2017), GraphSage (Hamilton et al., 2017), GatedGCN (Bresson & Laurent, 2017) and GIN (Xu et al.,
2019) adapt to complex graph data by employing different
message-passing strategies. While message-passing GNNs
have recently emerged as prominent methods for graph representation learning, there still exist some critical limitations, including the limited expressiveness (Xu et al., 2019;
Morris et al., 2019), over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2020; Oono & Suzuki, 2020), over-squashing (Alon
& Yahav, 2021) and poor long-range dependencies.

The Transformer architecture has recently gained
considerable attention in the field of graph representation learning, as it naturally overcomes
several limitations of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) with customized attention mechanisms
or positional and structural encodings. Despite
making some progress, existing works tend to
overlook external information of graphs, specifically the correlation between graphs. Intuitively,
graphs with similar structures should have similar
representations. Therefore, we propose Graph External Attention (GEA) — a novel attention mechanism that leverages multiple external node/edge
key-value units to capture inter-graph correlations implicitly. On this basis, we design an
effective architecture called Graph External Attention Enhanced Transformer (GEAET), which
integrates local structure and global interaction
information for more comprehensive graph representations. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate that GEAET achieves stateof-the-art empirical performance. The source
code is available for reproducibility at: https:
//github.com/icm1018/GEAET.

Instead of aggregating local neighborhood, Graph Transformers (GTs) capture interaction information between any
pair of nodes through a single self-attention layer. Some
of the existing works focus on customizing specific attention mechanisms or positional encodings (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2020; Ying et al., 2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Hussain et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023), while others combine
message-passing GNNs to design hybrid architectures (Wu
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Rampášek et al., 2022).
These methods enable nodes to interact with all other nodes
within a graph, facilitating the direct modeling of longrange relations. This may address typical issues such as
over-smoothing in GNNs.

1. Introduction

While the above-mentioned methods have achieved impressive results, they are confined to internal information
within the graph, neglecting potential correlations with other
graphs. In fact, strong correlations between different graphs
generally exist in numerous practical scenarios, such as
molecular graph data. Figure 1 shows 3 molecular graphs
with a benzene ring structure. Intuitively, exploiting intergraph correlations can improve the effectiveness of graph
representation learning.

Graph representation learning has attracted widespread attention in the past few years. It plays a crucial role in
various applications, such as social network analysis (Pal
et al., 2020), drug discovery (Gaudelet et al., 2021), protein
design (Ingraham et al., 2019), medical diagnosis (Li et al.,
2020b) and so on.
Early research in graph representation learning primarily

In this work, we address the critical question of how to
incorporate external information into graph representation
learning. Our principal contribution is to introduce a novel
Graph External Attention (GEA) mechanism, which implicitly learns inter-graph correlations with the external keyvalue units. Moreover, we design Graph External Attention
Enhanced Transformer (GEAET), combining inter-graph

1

Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education, School
of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, China. Correspondence to: Jiye Liang
<ljy@sxu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

