COLD-Attack: Jailbreaking LLMs with Stealthiness and Controllability

Xingang Guo * 1 Fangxu Yu * 2 Huan Zhang 1 Lianhui Qin 2 3 Bin Hu 1

Abstract

Warning: This paper contains potentially harmful text.

Jailbreaks on large language models (LLMs) have
recently received increasing attention. For a comprehensive assessment of LLM safety, it is essential to consider jailbreaks with diverse attributes,
such as contextual coherence and sentiment/stylistic variations, and hence it is beneficial to study
controllable jailbreaking, i.e. how to enforce
control on LLM attacks. In this paper, we formally formulate the controllable attack generation problem, and build a novel connection between this problem and controllable text generation, a well-explored topic of natural language
processing. Based on this connection, we adapt
the Energy-based Constrained Decoding with
Langevin Dynamics (COLD), a state-of-the-art,
highly efficient algorithm in controllable text generation, and introduce the COLD-Attack framework which unifies and automates the search of
adversarial LLM attacks under a variety of control requirements such as fluency, stealthiness,
sentiment, and left-right-coherence. The controllability enabled by COLD-Attack leads to
diverse new jailbreak scenarios which not only
cover the standard setting of generating fluent
(suffix) attack with continuation constraint, but
also allow us to address new controllable attack
settings such as revising a user query adversarially with paraphrasing constraint, and inserting
stealthy attacks in context with position constraint.
Our extensive experiments on various LLMs
(Llama-2, Mistral, Vicuna, Guanaco, GPT-3.5,
and GPT-4) show COLD-Attack’s broad applicability, strong controllability, high success rate,
and attack transferability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Yu-Fangxu/COLD-Attack.

1. Introduction
Recently, jailbreaking on large language models (LLMs)
has received increasing attention from the machine learning
community (Goldstein et al., 2023; Kang et al., 2023). Identifying various jailbreaks is crucial for fixing potential vulnerabilities in LLMs, marking itself an important research
topic for AI safety. Currently, jailbreaking techniques can
be categorized as white-box approaches (Guo et al., 2021;
Wen et al., 2023; Wallace et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023d) and black-box methods
(Shen et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2023a; Abdelnabi et al., 2023;
Perez & Ribeiro, 2022; Li et al., 2023b; Zeng et al., 2024;
Mehrotra et al., 2023; Chao et al., 2023). Both strategies are
crucial and provide complementary benefits in deepening
our understanding of LLM safety. Specifically, white-box
methods require the use of internal model knowledge but
are capable of generating less predictable attacks in an automated manner. In comparison, black-box methods can
directly probe commercial LLMs with no internal access,
while they typically rely on more patterned prompts. To
provide a comprehensive safety evaluation of LLMs, both
white-box and black-box methods should be further studied.
In this paper, we tackle a critical unresolved challenge in
automatic white-box methods: the controllability of adversarial LLM attacks. Originally, state-of-the-art white-box
techniques such as GCG (Zou et al., 2023) fail to produce
semantically meaningful attacks and are highly susceptible
to perplexity-based defense. Recent advancements, particularly through two AutoDAN publications (Zhu et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2023d), have focused on generating fluent attacks
automatically to bypass perplexity filters for the purpose
of improving stealthiness. However, fluency alone does
not guarantee stealthiness in general. More importantly,
a thorough safety assessment of LLMs demands rigorous
adversarial testing across diverse attack features beyond
fluency. Currently, the path to constraining automatic whitebox methods to impose controlled features (e.g., sentiments,
contextual coherence, etc) on generated attacks remains an
open question. To bridge this gap, we develop the first automatic search framework that gives a unified treatment of
controllability and stealthiness in white-box LLM attacks.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois at Urbana–
Champaign 2 University of California, San Diego 3 Allen Institute
for AI. Correspondence to: Bin Hu <binhu7@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

