QUEST: Query-Aware Sparsity for Efficient Long-Context LLM Inference

Jiaming Tang * 1 2 Yilong Zhao * 1 3 Kan Zhu 3 Guangxuan Xiao 2 Baris Kasikci 3 Song Han 2 4

Abstract
As the demand for long-context large language
models (LLMs) increases, models with context
windows of up to 128K or 1M tokens are becoming increasingly prevalent. However, longcontext LLM inference is challenging since the
inference speed decreases significantly as the sequence length grows. This slowdown is primarily caused by loading a large KV cache during
self-attention. Previous works have shown that
a small portion of critical tokens will dominate
the attention outcomes. However, we observe the
criticality of a token highly depends on the query.
To this end, we propose Quest, a query-aware KV
cache selection algorithm. Quest keeps track of
the minimal and maximal Key values in KV cache
pages and estimates the criticality of a given page
using Query vectors. By only loading the Top-K
critical KV cache pages for attention, Quest significantly speeds up self-attention without sacrificing
accuracy. We show that Quest can achieve up to
7.03× self-attention speedup, which reduces inference latency by 2.23× while performing well
on tasks with long dependencies with negligible accuracy loss. Code is available at https:
//github.com/mit-han-lab/quest.

Figure 1. Comparison between Dense Attention(a), QueryAgnostic Sparsity (b) and Quest’s Query-aware Sparsity (c). Quest
significantly speeds up self-attention while maintaining high accuracy by dynamically determining the critical tokens based on
the current query. T represents the total sequence length and L
represents the number of critical tokens for attention.

However, processing long-context requests is challenging.
Due to the auto-regressive nature of LLMs, generating one
token would require reading the entire KV cache. For Llama
7B model (Touvron et al., 2023) with 32k context length,
the KV cache can occupy 16GB of space, which requires at
least 11 ms to read, which contributes to more than 50% of
the inference latency* , limiting the overall throughput.
Despite the increasingly large size of the KV cache, previous
works have shown that a small portion of the tokens can
dominate the accuracy of token generation (Zhang et al.,
2023b; Ge et al., 2024). Therefore, we can dramatically
reduce the inference latency by only loading the critical
tokens, while still maintaining accuracy. Thus, it is essential
to identify critical portions of the KV cache.

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs)
has shaped our daily lives. With the increasing demand
for multi-round conversations and long document queries,
the maximum context length of LLMs has dramatically
grown from 2K to 1M (Liu et al., 2024a; Peng et al., 2023;
Tworkowski et al., 2023). The 128k context length GPT4 model has already been deployed in large-scale serving,
which is equivalent to 300 pages of text (OpenAI, 2023).

In this work, we further observe that the criticality of the
tokens can change with different query tokens. As shown in
Fig. 2, the critical tokens vary a lot with different queries.
Therefore, we need a dynamic and efficient approach to determine which portion of the KV cache needs to be attended
to. To this end, we propose Quest, a query-aware criticality
estimation algorithm for long-context LLM inference that
efficiently and effectively identifies critical KV cache tokens
and performs self-attention selectively on chosen tokens, as
shown in Fig. 1.

*
1
Equal contribution
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
MIT 3 University of Washington 4 NVIDIA. Correspondence to: Song Han <songhan@mit.edu>, Baris Kasikci
<baris@cs.washington.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To reduce the overhead of KV cache criticality estimation,
* Tested with FP16 FlashInfer implementation on an RTX4090

1

