Langevin Policy for Safe Reinforcement Learning

Fenghao Lei 1 Long Yang 2 Shiting Wen 3 Zhixiong Huang 1 Zhiwang Zhang 3 Chaoyi Pang 3

Abstract

Existing safe RL algorithms are classified into the following
categories: surrogate function methods (e.g, CPO (Achiam
et al., 2017), FOCOPS(Zhang et al., 2020), CUP(Yang
et al., 2022)), primal-dual methods (e.g., RCPO (Tessler
et al., 2018), PDO (Chow et al., 2017), RPD-PG(Ding et al.,
2023)), Lyapunov-based method (Chow et al., 2018), and
Barrier function method (Luo & Ma, 2021). All of the
above methods are based on optimization, which formulates the policy as a parametric function. Optimization and
Monte Carlo sampling are the two main classes of algorithms to solve machine learning problems, but it is still
unknown whether Monte Carlo sampling works well for RL
or not. More seriously, the folk wisdom is that Monte Carlo
sampling is necessarily inefficient than optimization based
methods and is only warranted in situations where estimates
of uncertainty are needed (Ma et al., 2019). However, recent
sampling based methods (e.g., diffusion model (Ho et al.,
2020), noise conditional score network (NCSN) (Song &
Ermon, 2019)) show its great success in a variety of domains (e.g., image synthesis (Ramesh et al., 2022), video
generation (Ramesh et al., 2022)). It is still unclear whether
Monte Carlo sampling based methods can lead to desirable
performance in exploring safe policy, which is the main
focus of this paper.

Optimization and sampling based algorithms are
two branches of methods in machine learning,
while existing safe reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms are mainly based on optimization, it
is still unclear whether sampling based methods
can lead to desirable performance with safe policy. This paper formulates the Langevin policy for safe RL, and proposes Langevin ActorCritic (LAC) to accelerate the process of policy inference. Concretely, instead of parametric
policy, the proposed Langevin policy provides
a stochastic process that directly infers actions,
which is the numerical solver to the Langevin dynamic of actions on the continuous time. Furthermore, to make Langevin policy practical on RL
tasks, the proposed LAC accumulates the transitions induced by Langevin policy and reproduces them with a generator. Finally, extensive
empirical results show the effectiveness and superiority of LAC on the MuJoCo-based and Safety
Gym tasks. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/Lfh404/LAC.

This paper considers the safe RL under the background
of constrained policy optimization (CPO) (Achiam et al.,
2017). Zhang et al. (2020) shows the optimal update policy
of CPO as an energy-based model. In this work, we seek to
solve safe RL problem from a sampling perspective, which
introduces a new form of policy learning that approximates
safe optimal policy via Langevin dynamics, Langevin Policy. As all the issues in RL, there exists a classical trade-off
between exploitation and exploration in Langevin policy.
Langevin policy injects noise during the sampling process,
which naturally exhibits the capability of exploration. However, it is not trivial to naively apply Langevin policy to
RL tasks, due to the well-known limitation of Langevin
MCMC with its inherent inefficiency caused by the iterative sampling process (Xie et al., 2018), which we consider
an exploitation problem since the valuable information obtained through Langevin policy is conventionally discarded.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has significantly boosted
its utilization in many challenging tasks, e.g., playing
games (Silver et al., 2017; Mnih et al., 2015), robot
control (Schulman et al., 2015), and discovering algorithms (Mankowitz et al., 2023; Fawzi et al., 2022). However, when considering the deployment of RL in the real
world such as autonomous driving and surgical robots, ensuring safety is a critical factor. These applications require
careful consideration of constraints to mitigate the risk of
causing harm to humans.
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 School of Computer and Data Engneering, NingboTech University, Ningbo, China. Correspondence to:
Shiting Wen <wensht@nit.zju.edu.cn>.

To address this issue, we propose Langevin Actor-Critic
(LAC), which is a practical implementation to tackle above
exploitation-exploration trade-off dilemma. Concretely,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

