Prompting4Debugging: Red-Teaming Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
by Finding Problematic Prompts

Zhi-Yi Chin * 1 Chieh-Ming Jiang * 1 Ching-Chun Huang 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Wei-Chen Chiu 1

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models, e.g. Stable Diffusion (SD), lately have shown remarkable ability
in high-quality content generation, and become
one of the representatives for the recent wave of
transformative AI. Nevertheless, such advance
comes with an intensifying concern about the
misuse of this generative technology, especially
for producing copyrighted or NSFW (i.e. not
safe for work) images. Although efforts have
been made to filter inappropriate images/prompts
or remove undesirable concepts/styles via model
fine-tuning, the reliability of these safety mechanisms against diversified problematic prompts
remains largely unexplored. In this work, we
propose Prompting4Debugging (P4D) as a debugging and red-teaming tool that automatically
finds problematic prompts for diffusion models
to test the reliability of a deployed safety mechanism. We demonstrate the efficacy of our P4D
tool in uncovering new vulnerabilities of SD
models with safety mechanisms. Particularly,
our result shows that around half of prompts
in existing safe prompting benchmarks which
were originally considered “safe” can actually
be manipulated to bypass many deployed safety
mechanisms, including concept removal, negative
prompt, and safety guidance. Our findings suggest that, without comprehensive testing, the evaluations on limited safe prompting benchmarks
can lead to a false sense of safety for text-toimage models. Our codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/joycenerd/P4D

Figure 1: Given an existing text-to-image (T2I) diffusion
model G ′ with safety mechanism which ideally can remove
the target concept (e.g. nudity) from the generated image
(while the same input prompt would lead to inappropriate
content for the typical T2I diffusion model G), our proposed
Prompting4Debugging (P4D) red-teams G ′ to automatically
uncover the safety-evasive prompts.

1. Introduction
In recent years, generative models have been making remarkable advancements across multiple domains, such as
text, images, and even code generation, blurring the distinction between the works created by AI systems and those
crafted by human experts. One prominent area of focus
upon generative AI is text-to-image (T2I) generation (Li
et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022;
Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022), where most of
the state-of-the-art T2I methods are built upon the diffusion
models, in which these T2I diffusion models enable the
transformation of textual information into images. They not
only bridge the gap between natural language processing
and visual content creation, but also enhance the interaction
and understanding across these two modalities. One of the
main factors leading to the exceptional performance of T2I
diffusion models nowadays stems from the vast amount of
training data available on the internet, allowing the models
to generate a wide range of content, including natural animals, sketches, cartoon images, and even artistic images.

WARNING: This paper contains model outputs
that may be offensive or upsetting in nature.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 2 IBM
Research, NY 10598, USA. Correspondence to: Zhi-Yi Chin
<joycenerd.cs09@nycu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

