From Fourier to Neural ODEs: Flow Matching for Modeling Complex Systems

Xin Li 1 Jingdong Zhang 2 3 Qunxi Zhu 3 Chengli Zhao 1 Xue Zhang 1 Xiaojun Duan 1 Wei Lin 2 3 4 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Complex dynamical systems have garnered considerable
attention across various disciplines in the natural and social sciences. These systems are typically characterized by
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or partial differential equations (PDEs) (Perko, 1991; Meiss, 2007; Li et al.,
2024). However, the explicit forms of these underlying
systems are often completely unknown a priori, and the
available information about such systems is commonly obtained through experimentally collected time series data.
Unfortunately, these data are often noisy and limited due to
measurement errors, resource constraints, and the high cost
of data collection. As a result, there is an urgent need to
uncover the underlying dynamics of these systems without
prior knowledge of the specific governing equations, relying solely on the measured time series data (Legaard et al.,
2021; Zhu et al., 2023). The successful modeling of these
systems enables downstream tasks such as prediction (Carroll, 2018; Pathak et al., 2018) and control (Sanhedrai et al.,
2020; Zhang & Zhou, 2022). Therefore, the development
of an efficient and robust data-driven approach for system
modeling is of utmost significance.

Modeling complex systems using standard neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) often
faces some essential challenges, including high
computational costs and susceptibility to local
optima. To address these challenges, we propose a simulation-free framework, called Fourier
NODEs (FNODEs), that effectively trains NODEs
by directly matching the target vector field based
on Fourier analysis. Specifically, we employ the
Fourier analysis to estimate temporal and potential high-order spatial gradients from noisy observational data. We then incorporate the estimated spatial gradients as additional inputs to
a neural network. Furthermore, we utilize the
estimated temporal gradient as the optimization
objective for the output of the neural network.
Later, the trained neural network generates more
data points through an ODE solver without participating in the computational graph, facilitating
more accurate estimations of gradients based on
Fourier analysis. These two steps form a positive feedback loop, enabling accurate dynamics
modeling in our framework. Consequently, our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
terms of training time, dynamics prediction, and
robustness. Finally, we demonstrate the superior
performance of our framework using a number of
representative complex systems.

Recently, there has been a tremendous amount of interest
in applying machine learning technologies, such as autoregressive models (Ding et al., 2018), sparsity-promoting
methods (Kaiser et al., 2017; Meiss, 2007), reservoir computing (Pathak et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023), and Neural
ODEs (NODEs) (Chen et al., 2018), to model complex dynamical systems. In particular, NODEs and their extensions
(Holt et al., 2022; Bilovs et al., 2021; Lanzieri et al., 2022),
which involve continuously defined dynamics, have been
extensively utilized for coping with the continuous-time
datasets due to the direct parameterization of the vector field
of ODEs, enabling them to naturally capture the underlying dynamics of continuous-time systems solely based on
observational data. Despite their successes, NODEs often
encounter challenges related to high computational costs
and susceptibility to local optima. During the training process, the NODEs may gradually exhibit complex dynamic
behaviors, such as drastic fluctuations or stiffness. These
behaviors significantly increase the time required for numerical solving and the memory consumption for backpropagation (Chen et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021; Finlay et al.,
2020). Furthermore, the corresponding adjoint method for

1

College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan 410073, China. 2 School of Mathematical
Sciences, LMNS, and SCMS, Fudan University, China. 3 Research
Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University, China.
4
State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan
University, China. 5 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
China. Correspondence to: Qunxi Zhu <qxzhu16@fudan.edu.cn>,
Chengli Zhao <chenglizhao@nudt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

