OSSCAR: One-Shot Structured Pruning in Vision and Language Models with
Combinatorial Optimization

Xiang Meng 1 Shibal Ibrahim 1 Kayhan Behdin 1 Hussein Hazimeh 2 Natalia Ponomareva 2 Rahul Mazumder 1

Abstract

nents, e.g., channels in convolutional layers, neurons in
dense layers and heads in multi-head attention. Structured
pruning offers a practical solution to improve inference latency on standard hardware in contrast to unstructured pruning (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi & Stork, 1992; Han et al.,
2015), which requires specialized hardware and software.

Structured pruning is a promising approach for
reducing the inference costs of large vision and
language models. By removing carefully chosen structures, e.g., neurons or attention heads,
the improvements from this approach can be realized on standard deep learning hardware. In
this work, we focus on structured pruning in the
one-shot (post-training) setting, which does not require model retraining after pruning. We propose
a novel combinatorial optimization framework
for this problem, based on a layer-wise reconstruction objective and a careful reformulation
that allows for scalable optimization. Moreover,
we design a new local combinatorial optimization algorithm, which exploits low-rank updates
for efficient local search. Our framework is time
and memory-efficient and considerably improves
upon state-of-the-art one-shot methods on vision
models (e.g., ResNet50, MobileNet) and language
models (e.g., OPT-1.3B – OPT-30B). For language models, e.g., OPT-2.7B, OSSCAR can lead
to 125× lower test perplexity on WikiText with
2× inference time speedup in comparison to the
state-of-the-art ZipLM approach. Our framework
is also 6× – 8× faster. Notably, our work considers models with tens of billions of parameters, which is up to 100× larger than what has
been previously considered in the structured pruning literature. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/mazumder-lab/OSSCAR.

Despite clear computational benefits from structured pruning, significant challenges remain. Structured pruning is
generally associated with a significant drop in utility. To
recover lost accuracy, most existing methods (Li et al., 2017;
Molchanov et al., 2017; He et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2017; Yu
et al., 2018) rely on gradual pruning or iterative retraining,
where the model is finetuned on the original loss after every
pruning stage. Such finetuning or retraining is expensive—
they may not be desirable or possible for large datasets and
models under resource constraints. For example, finetuning
an LLM on a standard GPU (A100) may not be possible
beyond a few billion parameters (Malladi et al., 2023). In
this context, recent works such as Kwon et al. (2022); Kurtić
et al. (2023) focus on the challenging task of one-shot structured pruning which is performed post-training. Here, a
pre-trained model is compressed (without retraining) based
on a small amount of calibration data while retaining model
accuracy as much as possible.
Despite impressive advances, state-of-the-art methods appear to face challenges in terms of increased computation
time, memory usage, and balancing utility with structured
sparsity. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
optimization-based framework for one-shot structured pruning, which is highly scalable and can achieve good utilitysparsity tradeoffs. We employ a layer-wise reconstruction
objective and a careful structure-aware reformulation of the
optimization formulation to enable more scalability. To
obtain good solutions to the problem, we propose a local
combinatorial optimization algorithm, which leverages problem structure to perform efficient local search. By integrating these algorithmic components, we demonstrate that our
method is capable of handling large vision and language
models, up to 30 billion parameters using a single 32GB
V100 GPU — an improvement over prior approaches that
can handle up to 340 million parameters.

1. Introduction
Structured pruning (Lebedev & Lempitsky, 2016; Wen et al.,
2016) reduces model size by removing entire subcompo1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
Google Research, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Xiang Meng <mengx@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

