MAGNOLIA:
Matching Algorithms via GNNs for Online Value-to-go Approximation

Alexandre Hayderi 1 Amin Saberi 2 Ellen Vitercik 1 2 Anders Wikum 2

Abstract

In the notoriously challenging Online Bayesian Bipartite
Matching (OBBM) problem, there is a bipartite graph with
online and offline nodes and weighted edges. The node sets
could, for example, represent crowdworkers and tasks, with
weights encoding workers’ payoffs for completing tasks.
Matching occurs over a series of rounds, with one online
node arriving with known probability in each round. Upon
a successful arrival, a matching algorithm must determine
whether to match the node to an offline node. Alternatively,
the algorithm can skip the node, in which case it will never
be matched, leaving nodes available for the future. The goal
is to compute a high-weight matching. However, it is not
known which online nodes will arrive a priori.

Online Bayesian bipartite matching is a central
problem in digital marketplaces and exchanges,
including advertising, crowdsourcing, ridesharing, and kidney exchange. We introduce a graph
neural network (GNN) approach that emulates the
problem’s combinatorially-complex optimal online algorithm, which selects actions (e.g., which
nodes to match) by computing each action’s valueto-go (VTG)—the expected weight of the final
matching if the algorithm takes that action, then
acts optimally in the future. We train a GNN to estimate VTG and show empirically that this GNN
returns high-weight matchings across a variety of
tasks. Moreover, we identify a common family
of graph distributions in spatial crowdsourcing
applications, such as rideshare, under which VTG
can be efficiently approximated by aggregating
information within local neighborhoods in the
graphs. This structure matches the local behavior
of GNNs, providing theoretical justification for
our approach.

The online optimal algorithm for OBBM, OPTon , knows
the distribution over online node arrivals but not the future
realization of arriving nodes. Upon the arrival of an online node, OPTon takes the action (i.e., the choice of the
matching edge or the decision to skip) that maximizes the
weight of the final matching in expectation over the future
node arrivals. In more detail, OPTon can be formulated as
a dynamic programming (DP) routine. At each timestep, it
computes the value-to-go (VTG) of each action, which is
the expected final matching weight if it (1) takes that action
and then (2) takes each subsequent action to maximize the
expected weight of the final matching. The DP routine takes
the action with the highest VTG.

1. Introduction
Online matching is a critical problem in many digital marketplaces. In advertising, website visitors are matched to
ads (Mehta et al., 2013), and on crowdsourcing platforms,
crowdworkers are matched to appropriate tasks (Tong et al.,
2020). The rideshare industry faces the complex task of
matching riders with drivers (Zhao et al., 2019), while in
medical fields such as kidney exchange, donors must be efficiently matched to patients (Ezra et al., 2020). The challenge
is that irrevocable matching decisions must be made online
without precise knowledge of how demand will evolve.

1.1. Our contributions
We train a graph neural network (GNN) that empirically
competes with this omnipotent optimal algorithm by estimating the VTG of each action. Moreover, we provide
a theoretical analysis that helps justify this deep learning
architecture’s suitability for the OBBM problem.
Key challenges. The primary obstacle we face is the sheer
complexity of OBBM: it takes exponential space in the
worst case to provide even a constant-factor approximation
to OPTon (Papadimitriou et al., 2021). Nonetheless, we
show empirically that GNNs compete with OPTon across
many tasks. Moreover, although deep learning architectures
are notoriously difficult to analyze theoretically, we prove a
correspondence between the functions computable by GNNs

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Department of Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Anders Wikum <wikum@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

