Hybrid Neural Representations for Spherical Data

Hyomin Kim 1 Yunhui Jang 1 Jaeho Lee 1 Sungsoo Ahn 1

Abstract

However, CNRs have been less investigated for spherical
signals despite the important scientific applications, e.g.,
global weather and climate modeling (Hersbach et al., 2018)
or the analysis of cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation (de Bernardis et al., 2000). This is noteworthy given
the necessity for interpolating and increasing the resolution of spherical signals in these applications. For example,
spatial or temporal interpolation is required for building a
fine-grained weather forecasting system (Lam et al., 2023;
Bi et al., 2023). Increasing the resolution of CMB data
may discover new insights about the early universe (Bennett
et al., 1996; Spergel et al., 2003; Ade et al., 2014).

In this paper, we study hybrid neural representations for spherical data, a domain of increasing relevance in scientific research. In particular,
our work focuses on weather and climate data
as well as cosmic microwave background (CMB)
data. Although previous studies have delved into
coordinate-based neural representations for spherical signals, they often fail to capture the intricate details of highly nonlinear signals. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel approach named Hybrid Neural Representations for
Spherical data (HNeR-S). Our main idea is to use
spherical feature-grids to obtain positional features which are combined with a multi-layer perceptron to predict the target signal. We consider
feature-grids with equirectangular and hierarchical equal area isolatitude pixelization structures
that align with weather data and CMB data, respectively. We extensively verify the effectiveness
of our HNeR-S for regression, super-resolution,
temporal interpolation, and compression tasks.

To this end, recent works (Esteves et al., 2022; Grattarola
& Vandergheynst, 2022; Koestler et al., 2022; Schwarz
et al., 2023; Huang & Hoefler, 2023) have investigated
CNRs based on coordinate-based multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs). To featurize the spherical coordinates, they use the
sinusoids from the Cartesian coordinate system (Schwarz
et al., 2023; Huang & Hoefler, 2023), spectral embeddings
of the discretized manifold (Grattarola & Vandergheynst,
2022; Koestler et al., 2022), or the spherical harmonics with
fixed frequency components (Esteves et al., 2022). However, these methods suffer from the inherent limitation of
coordinate-based MLPs: lack of expressive power to approximate highly nonlinear signals to their finest details.

1. Introduction
Coordinate-based neural representations (CNRs) form a
family of techniques to parameterize the target signal using
a neural network that maps input coordinates to signal values (Xie et al., 2021). This results in a continuous function
that seamlessly interpolates discretized coordinates of the
target signal. As a case in point, when applied to image
representation, CNRs trained to fit RGB values on 2D-pixel
coordinates can also predict the continuum of coordinates
between pixels. This capability has been proven to be useful in representing, interpolating, and increasing the signal
resolutions of various modalities, including images (Chen
et al., 2021), signed distance functions (Park et al., 2019),
and radiance fields (Mildenhall et al., 2021) as special cases.

For Euclidean data, recent works (Chabra et al., 2020;
Müller et al., 2022; Martel et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020;
Peng et al., 2021) have resolved this issue by using hybrid
neural representations that combine feature-grid structures
with the MLP. Their key idea is to decompose the input
space into grid structures and assign learnable parameters
as positional features for each point in the grid. Then the
positional features can largely fluctuate accordingly with the
unconstrained point-wise parameters. However, extending
the existing hybrid neural representation to spherical data is
non-trivial since they rely on grid structures and interpolation algorithms specific to Euclidean domains, e.g., sparse
voxel grids and Euclidean distance-based interpolation, that
are highly redundant or ill-defined for spherical data.

1

Pohang University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Hyomin Kim <hyomin126@postech.ac.kr>, Sungsoo
Ahn <sungsoo.ahn@postech.ac.kr>.

Contribution. In this work, we develop a novel hybrid
neural representation for spherical data (HNeR-S) that combines spherical feature-grids with MLP. Our main idea is to
use a hierarchy of coarse- to fine-grained spherical feature-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

