Two Fists, One Heart: Multi-Objective Optimization Based Strategy Fusion for
Long-tailed Learning

Zhe Zhao 1 2 Pengkun Wang 1 3 HaiBin Wen 4 Wei Xu 1 Song Lai 2 Qingfu Zhang 2 Yang Wang 1 3 5

Abstract

Real-world data generally follows a long-tailed
distribution, which makes traditional highperformance training strategies unable to show
their usual effects. Various insights have been
proposed to alleviate this challenging distribution. However, some observations indicate that
models trained on long-tailed distributions always
show a trade-off between the performance of head
and tail classes. For a profound understanding of
the trade-off, we first theoretically analyze the
trade-off problem in long-tailed learning and creatively transform the trade-off problem in longtailed learning into a multi-objective optimization
(MOO) problem. Motivated by these analyses,
we propose the idea of strategy fusion for MOO
long-tailed learning and point out the potential
conflict problem. We further design a MultiObjective Optimization based Strategy Fusion
(MOOSF), which effectively resolves conflicts,
and achieves an efficient fusion of heterogeneous
strategies. Comprehensive experiments on mainstream datasets show that even the simplest strategy fusion can outperform complex long-tailed
strategies. More importantly, it provides a new
perspective for generalized long-tailed learning.
The code is available in the accompanying supplementary materials. Code is available at here.

Figure 1. Visualization of the attention to different frequency
classes by different long-tailed learning strategies. The three axises
Many, Medium, and Few represent the model’s performance on
head classes, mid classes, and tail classes respectively. By visualizing the performance changes on the three frequency classes during
training for six different existing strategies (see Appendix C.2 for
details) in this 3D coordinate system, we find that all strategies
will bias the direction of performance improvement towards one
axis in the later stage of training.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made significant strides in the realm of
computer vision (LeCun et al., 2015; Russakovsky et al.,
2015; Cao et al., 2019), manifesting in tasks such as image
classification and semantic segmentation. However, existing
deep models face challenges when dealing with long-tailed
distribution data (Yang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2021; Tang
et al., 2020). Characterized by an imbalance distribution
of sample classes, long-tailed distributions are prevalent in
real-world datasets and often result in models performing
well on head classes but poorly on tail classes in terms of
generalization (Vapnik, 1991; Zhang et al., 2021).

1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026,
China 2 City University of Hong Kong 3 Suzhou Institute for
Advanced Research, University of Science and Technology of
China, Suzhou 215123, China 4 Shaoguan University 5 Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, USTC. Correspondence to: Pengkun Wang <pengkun@ustc.edu.cn>, Yang Wang
<angyan@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address the above problems associated with long-tailed
learning, researchers have proposed numerous strategies,
1

