An Iterative Min-Min Optimization Method for Sparse Bayesian Learning

Yasen Wang 1 2 Junlin Li 3 Zuogong Yue 2 4 Ye Yuan 2 4
where y ∈ Rn is the output vector, Φ(x) ∈ Rn×m is the
overcomplete dictionary matrix composed of basis functions on the input vector x, w ∈ Rm is the unknown weight
vector, and ε is the uncorrelated Gaussian noise distributed
as N (0, λIn ) with the unknown variance λ. Notably, realizing sparse recovery for w is a fundamental problem
in machine learning communities with applications to various science and engineering disciplines, such as signal
processing (Donoho, 2006; Kümmerle et al., 2021; Ament
& Gomes, 2021a), system identification (Yuan et al., 2019;
Sun et al., 2021; 2022; Wang et al., 2023), and regression
and classification tasks (Figueiredo, 2003; Ren et al., 2020).
Consequently, it is particularly important to design an optimization method with rigorous theoretical guarantees for
solving (1) given the sparse constraint on w.

Abstract
As a well-known machine learning algorithm,
sparse Bayesian learning (SBL) can find sparse
representations in linearly probabilistic models
by imposing a sparsity-promoting prior on model
coefficients. However, classical SBL algorithms
lack the essential theoretical guarantees of global
convergence. To address this issue, we propose an
iterative Min-Min optimization method to solve
the marginal likelihood function (MLF) of SBL
based on the concave-convex procedure. The
method can optimize the hyperparameters related
to both the prior and noise level analytically at
each iteration by re-expressing MLF using auxiliary functions. Particularly, we demonstrate that
the method globally converges to a local minimum or saddle point of MLF. With rigorous theoretical guarantees, the proposed novel SBL algorithm outperforms classical ones in finding sparse
representations on simulation and real-world examples, ranging from sparse signal recovery to
system identification and kernel regression.

To encourage the sparsity of representations, SBL imposes
a sparsity-promoting prior p(w | γ) on w to balance model
complexity and modeling error (Tipping, 2001; Ament &
Gomes, 2021b), where γ is the hyperparameter vector. Incorporating the sparsity-promoting prior, the automatic relevance determination framework is naturally implemented
to remove irrelevant basis functions (MacKay, 1992; 1995).
Following Bayes’ rule, combining the prior distribution
p(w | γ) and likelihood function p(y | w, λ) can derive the
posterior distribution of w as follows:

1. Introduction

p(w | γ, λ) ∝ p(w | γ)p(y | w, λ).

Sparse Bayesian learning (SBL) originally addresses the issue of obtaining sparse representations over the input space
to the corresponding target in supervised learning (Tipping,
2001). Mathematically, we can formalize the problem as
finding a sparse solution to the following linearly probabilistic model:
y = Φ(x)w + ε,

(2)

Furthermore, the unknown hyperparameters coupled in the
posterior distribution can be estimated by maximizing the
marginal likelihood function (MLF) as follows:
Z
p(y | w, λ)p(w | γ)p(γ)p(λ)dw,
(3)

(1)

where p(γ) and p(λ) are non-informative priors imposed
on γ and λ, respectively. It is also referred to as evidence
maximization or type-II maximum likelihood (Neal, 2012;
Magris & Iosifidis, 2023). However, current optimization
methods used for maximizing the MLF of SBL lack the
essential theoretical guarantees of global convergence.

1

School of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 State
Key Lab of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Fuyang Normal University,
Fuyang, China 4 School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
Correspondence to: Ye Yuan <yye@hust.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose a novel optimization method to
maximize the MLF of SBL. To this end, we first demonstrate
that MLF is the sum of a concave function and a convex
function. For such optimization problems, the concaveconvex procedure (CCCP) provides an iterative method to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

