Towards Realistic Model Selection for Semi-supervised Learning

Muyang Li 1 Xiaobo Xia 1 Runze Wu 2 Fengming Huang 1 Jun Yu 3 Bo Han 4 Tongliang Liu 1

Abstract

works usually unrealistically assumed the existence of a
labeled validation set that is much larger than the labeled
training set itself (Rasmus et al., 2015), or simply omit the
model selection process (Berthelot et al., 2019b), which are
clearly problematic in real-world applications (Oliver et al.,
2018). Instead, a more pragmatic strategy would be to split
out a validation set from the available labeled data.

Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) has shown remarkable success in applications with limited supervision. However, due to the scarcity of labels in the training process, SSL algorithms are
known to be impaired by the lack of proper model
selection, as splitting a validation set will further reduce the limited labeled data, and the size
of the validation set could be too small to provide a reliable indication to the generalization
error. Therefore, we seek alternatives that do not
rely on validation data to probe the generalization performance of SSL models. Specifically,
we find that the distinct margin distribution in
SSL can be effectively utilized in conjunction
with the model’s spectral complexity, to provide
a non-vacuous indication of the generalization error. Built upon this, we propose a novel model
selection method, specifically tailored for SSL,
known as Spectral-normalized Labeled-margin
Minimization (SLAM). We prove that the model
selected by SLAM has upper-bounded differences
w.r.t. the best model within the search space. In
addition, comprehensive experiments showcase
that SLAM can achieve significant improvements
compared to its counterparts, verifying its efficacy
from both theoretical and empirical standpoints.

Nonetheless, this approach is fraught with difficulties, the
inherent scarcity of labeled data in SSL contexts means that
diverting any portion of it to a validation set will significantly hamper the performance of the SSL model. Furthermore, the limited size of the validation data could lead to
ineffective model selection (Mohri et al., 2018). This conundrum underscores the urgent need for alternative methods
for model selection within the SSL framework.
One potential way to address this dilemma is to directly
estimate the generalization ability of the SSL model based
only on the training data, which efficiently utilizes all the
data at hand. In order for the estimation of generalization
on training set, the notion of hypothesis complexity, plays a
vital role in understanding generalization estimation from a
philosophical perspective (Niyogi & Girosi, 1996). It is wellknown that a learning model’s generalization error bound
can be decomposed to its empirical error and hypothesis
complexity (Wei et al., 2020). When multiple models exhibit
similar training errors, the one with lower complexity is
anticipated to better generalize to unseen data, which aligns
with the Occam’s razor principle - the simplest hypothesis
that consistent with our observations is more likely to be the
correct one (MacKay, 2003; Lotfi et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Attributed to recent advancements in deep learning methodologies, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has illustrated
strong performances across multiple domains with minimal
supervision (Sohn et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022b; Huang
et al., 2023). However, despite its success, model selection one of the most fundamental problems in machine learning,
has not been adequately addressed in SSL. Where existing

However, as promising as it may sound, directly estimating
an SSL model’s generalization capability on the training
sample is not easy, as two prominent obstacles arise: (1)
despite the rigorous theoretical guarantee of said generalization error bounds, most existing generalization measures are not specifically designed for SSL context, as the
influence of unlabeled data and noisy pseudo-labels are
not accounted. Therefore, whether these measures can be
effectively adapted to SSL remains a question to be explored (Mey & Loog, 2022); (2) the limited labeled sample
poses an additional challenge, estimating the generalization
performance of learning model heavily relies on the assumption that the observed labeled data distribution is faithful to

1
Sydney AI Center, The University of Sydney 2 FUXI AI
Lab, NetEase 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Hong Kong Baptist University. Correspondence to: Tongliang
Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

