AdsorbDiff: Adsorbate Placement via Conditional Denoising Diffusion

Adeesh Kolluru 1 John R. Kitchin 1

Abstract

and finding the lowest energy configuration.

Determining the optimal configuration of adsorbates on a slab (adslab) is pivotal in the exploration of novel catalysts across diverse applications. Traditionally, the quest for the lowest energy adslab configuration involves placing the adsorbate onto the slab followed by an optimization process. Prior methodologies have relied on
heuristics, problem-specific intuitions, or bruteforce approaches to guide adsorbate placement.
In this work, we propose a novel framework for
adsorbate placement using denoising diffusion.
The model is designed to predict the optimal adsorbate site and orientation corresponding to the
lowest energy configuration. Further, we have an
end-to-end evaluation framework where diffusionpredicted adslab configuration is optimized with a
pretrained machine learning force field and finally
evaluated with Density Functional Theory (DFT).
Our findings demonstrate an acceleration of up
to 5x or 3.5x improvement in accuracy compared
to the previous best approach. Given the novelty
of this framework and application, we provide
insights into the impact of pre-training, model architectures, and conduct extensive experiments to
underscore the significance of this approach.

Finding the lowest energy configuration for an adsorbate
and slab requires a global optimum (which is non-convex)
search across different sites on the slab. Conventional approaches solve this in two steps - (1) heuristically place
the adsorbate on certain important sites and (2) perform
optimization with quantum mechanical calculators like Density Functional Theory (DFT) on each of these sites. The
lowest energy site out of these is considered for calculating
adsorption energy, which is a thermodynamic descriptor for
how good that catalyst is. With recent advances in machine
learning methods for predicting forces, it has become possible to perform optimization with ML force fields (MLFFs)
instead of Density Functional Theory (DFT) making this
process faster and easier to test many sites and find better
minima. These ML force fields are trained on DFT data to
predict energies and forces corresponding to different adslab
configurations.
The recent release of the OC20-Dense dataset (Lan et al.,
2023) signifies a significant advancement in the computation
of the lowest energy adslab configuration. This work employs a blend of heuristic and random adsorbate placements
across 100 sites, with subsequent optimizations across each
site using Density Functional Theory (DFT) to calculate
adsorption energy. The study further introduces AdsorbML,
a paradigm characterized by a brute-force exploration of
initial adsorbate placements. Employing pre-trained machine learning (ML) force fields from OC20, AdsorbML
streamlines the optimization process, culminating in the
determination of the lowest energy adsorbate-slab (adslab)
configuration. The predictive accuracy of these configurations is rigorously validated against DFT single-points or
complete DFT optimization. This hybrid approach results
in a computational acceleration of 2000-fold in adsorption
energy calculations compared to the sole reliance on DFT
calculations.

1. Introduction
Heterogenous catalysis plays an important role in developing chemicals in industries, environmental protection
through converters, and the synthesis of alternative fuels
(Liu & Li, 2017; Zitnick et al., 2020). Modeling these chemical reactions involve an intermediate adsorbate on a catalyst
slab which determines the efficacy of the catalyst for that
particular reaction. Discovering a novel catalyst computationally involves screening through billions of candidates

Recent developments in graph neural network (GNN) based
ML architectures have increased the accuracies of adsorption energy prediction significantly by encoding geometric information of atoms in more explicit ways. However,
there’s little to no work done on improving the adsorption
site prediction which could help us get away with the currently used brute-force approach.

1

Department of Chemical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to:
Adeesh Kolluru
<akolluru@andrew.cmu.edu>,
John R. Kitchin <jkitchin@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

