The Fundamental Limits of Least-Privilege Learning

Theresa Stadler 1 * Bogdan Kulynych 2 * Michael C. Gastpar 1 Nicolas Papernot 3 Carmela Troncoso 1

Abstract

such misuse in model training and inference MLaaS settings, respectively. In both cases, individuals share a feature
representation of their raw data with the service provider;
in the form of model updates in the collaborative learning
setting (McMahan & Ramage, 2017; Hao, 2019) and of
feature encodings in the model partitioning setting (Osia
et al., 2018; Chi et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Brown et al.,
2022). Proponents of both techniques argue that, because
individuals only share a representation of their data, and
not the data itself, the service provider no longer has access
to information that might be abused for purposes other than
the intended task.

The promise of least-privilege learning – to find
feature representations that are useful for a learning task but prevent inference of any sensitive
information unrelated to this task – is highly appealing. However, so far this concept has only
been stated informally. It thus remains an open
question whether and how we can achieve this
goal. In this work, we provide the first formalisation of the least-privilege principle for machine
learning and characterise its feasibility. We prove
that there is a fundamental trade-off between a
representation’s utility for a given task and its
leakage beyond the intended task: it is not possible to learn representations that have high utility
for the intended task but, at the same time prevent
inference of any attribute other than the task label itself. This trade-off holds regardless of the
technique used to learn the feature mappings that
produce these representations. We empirically
validate this result for a wide range of learning
techniques, model architectures, and datasets.

Unintended Feature Leakage. However, previous research shows that a passive adversary can misuse the shared
representations to infer data attributes that are unrelated to
the learning task, or even reconstruct data records (Boenisch
et al., 2023; Ganju et al., 2018; Melis et al., 2019; Song &
Shmatikov, 2019). For instance, Song & Shmatikov (2019)
show that features extracted from a gender classification
model also reveal an individual’s race. Even higher-layer
features, that are assumed to be more learning-task specific, might lead to such unexpected inferences (Mo et al.,
2021). These examples show that limiting data access to
feature representations does not necessarily prevent unintended information leakage and thus, does not fully mitigate
the risk of data misuse associated with attributes other than
the learning task.

1. Introduction
The need to reveal data to untrusted service providers to obtain value from machine learning as a service (MLaaS) puts
individuals at risk of data misuse and harmful inferences.
The service provider observes raw data records at training
or inference time and might abuse them for purposes other
than the intended learning task. For instance, an image
shared with a provider for the purpose of face verification
might be misused to infer an individual’s race and lead to
discrimination (Citron & Solove, 2022).

Least-Privilege Learning. Some works (Osia et al., 2018;
Melis et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2022) suggest that the
solution to this issue is to ensure that the feature mappings
that produce such representations follow the least-privilege
principle (LPP). That is, to enforce that the representations
shared with the service provider only contain information
relevant to the learning task, and nothing else. Previous
work repeatedly suggests least-privilege learning (LPL) as a
promising avenue to prevent data misuse. Yet, it has only
been described informally and lacks a precise definition.

Sharing Representations to Prevent Data Misuse. Collaborative learning and model partitioning claim to prevent
*
Equal contribution 1 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Lausanne
University Hospital & University of Lausanne, Switzerland
3
University of Toronto & Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Theresa Stadler <theresa.stadler@epfl.ch>.

Contributions. We make the following contributions:
I) We provide the first formalisation of the least-privilege
principle for machine learning as a variant of the generalized Conditional Entropy Bottleneck problem (Fischer, 2020). Our formalisation enables us to charac-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

