Discovering Features with Synergistic Interactions in Multiple Views

Chohee Kim 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 2 3 Changhee Lee 1

Abstract

one must understand the values of both variables to accurately identify the outcome. In other words, knowledge of an
individual variable alone is insufficient to provide adequate
information about the target outcome of interest.

Discovering features with synergistic interactions
in multi-view data, that provide more information
gain when considered together than when considered separately, is particularly valuable. This fosters a more comprehensive understanding of the
target outcome from diverse perspectives (views).
However, despite the increasing opportunities presented by multi-view data, surprisingly little attention has been paid to uncovering these crucial interactions. To address this gap, we formally define the problem of selecting synergistic and non-synergistic feature subsets in multiview data, leveraging an information-theoretic
concept known as interaction information. To this
end, we introduce a novel deep learning-based
feature selection method that identifies different
interactions across multiple views, employing a
Bernoulli relaxation technique to solve this intractable subset searching problem. Experiments
on synthetic, semi-synthetic, and real-world multiview datasets demonstrate that our model discovers relevant feature subsets with synergistic and
non-synergistic interactions, achieving remarkable similarity to the ground truth. Furthermore,
we corroborate the discovered features with supporting medical and scientific literature, underscoring its utility in elucidating complex dependencies and interactions in multi-view data.

Unraveling features with synergistic interactions is particularly valuable in understanding complicated mechanisms
comprised of multi-view data, where each view represents a
set of different features, potentially from diverse modalities
or sources, describing the same object. A typical example is
deciphering cellular function mechanisms from multi-omics
data (Bunnik & Le Roch, 2013; Vidal et al., 2011). For
instance, diseases rarely arise from the malfunction of a
single gene product. Instead, they often stem from the complex interactions of thousands of gene products (Barabási,
2007). Furthermore, the genes associated with a disease
may individually have minor effects, but when combined,
their cumulative impact can be significant (Petretto et al.,
2007). These intricate interactions lead to diverse responses
to treatment, underscoring the necessity for a comprehensive analysis of the interplay across multiple omic layers
(Benson, 2016). For example, heat shock proteins are frequently deregulated in breast cancer, but their implications
vary depending on the cellular context: specific microRNAs
are up-regulated in cases of poor prognosis, whereas certain
genes are co-expressed in instances of favorable prognosis
(Buttacavoli et al., 2021).
Furthermore, considering that fewer than 1% of gene products are involved in such pathological pathways, pinpointing the responsible genomes and their interplay is essential for comprehending the underlying mechanism. This
understanding, in turn, facilitates effective clinical decisionmaking tailored to individual patients (Jackson et al., 2018).
Thus, while multi-view data presents many opportunities,
it also requires careful and precise analysis, considering relationships between features across different views to fully
leverage its potential.

1. Introduction
Synergistic interaction offers information gain we attain
from a relationship when attributes are considered together,
which cannot be achieved when they are examined separately (McGill, 1954). A straightforward example is the exclusive OR (XOR) operation between two variables, where

Unfortunately, existing multi-view feature selection methods fail to capture the essence of crucial interactions across
diverse views. Their primary focus lies on simplistic approaches such as concatenating multiple views and applying
traditional single-view feature selection methods (Acharya
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019), or capturing limited multiview interactions based on pre-defined knowledge graphs

1

Chung-Ang University, South Korea 2 University of Cambridge, UK 3 The Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence to:
Changhee Lee <chl8856@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

