Boximator: Generating Rich and Controllable Motions for Video Synthesis

Jiawei Wang * 1 Yuchen Zhang * 1 Jiaxin Zou 1 Yan Zeng 1 Guoqiang Wei 1 Liping Yuan 1 Hang Li 1

Abstract

In this work, we introduce a novel approach utilizing boxshaped constraints as a universal mechanism for fine-grained
motion control. Our method introduces two types of constraints: hard box, which precisely delineates an object’s
bounding box, and soft box, defining a broader region within
which the object must reside. The soft box can be as tight
as the object’s exact bounding box, or as loose as the frame
boundary. We control multiple objects across frames by
associating unique object IDs with these boxes. Our proposed method, named Boximator (combining “box” and
“animator”), offers several benefits:

Generating rich and controllable motion is a pivotal challenge in video synthesis. We propose
Boximator, a new approach for fine-grained motion control. Boximator introduces two constraint
types: hard box and soft box. Users select objects
in the conditional frame using hard boxes and then
use either type of boxes to roughly or rigorously
define the object’s position, shape, or motion path
in future frames. Boximator functions as a plug-in
for existing video diffusion models. Its training
process preserves the base model’s knowledge by
freezing the original weights and training only the
control module. To address training challenges,
we introduce a novel self-tracking technique that
greatly simplifies the learning of box-object correlations. Empirically, Boximator achieves stateof-the-art video quality (FVD) scores, improving
on two base models, and further enhanced after
incorporating box constraints. Its robust motion
controllability is validated by drastic increases
in the bounding box alignment metric. Human
evaluation also shows that users favor Boximator
generation results over the base model.

1. Boximator serves as a flexible motion control tool.
It manages the motion of both foreground and background objects, as well as modifies the pose of larger
objects (e.g., human) by adjusting smaller components.
Refer to Figure 1 for illustrations.1
2. In scenarios where generation is conditioned on an image, as seen in image-to-video and many state-of-theart text-to-video methods (Zeng et al., 2023; Girdhar
et al., 2023), users can easily select objects by drawing hard boxes around them. This visually-grounded
approach is more straightforward compared to the
language-grounded controls (Huang et al., 2023; Ma
et al., 2023), which require verbal descriptions for all
objects.

1. Introduction

3. For frames lacking user-defined boxes, Boximator allows approximate motion path control via algorithmgenerated soft boxes. These soft boxes can be constructed based on a pair of user-specified boxes, or
based on a hard box combined with a user-specified
motion path. See Figure 1(c)-(e) for examples of userspecified motion paths.

Video synthesis has recently experienced remarkable advancements (Ho et al., 2022b;a; Singer et al., 2022; Girdhar
et al., 2023; Ge et al., 2023; Kondratyuk et al., 2023). These
models typically utilize either a text prompt or a key frame
to generate videos. Recent research focuses on enhancing
the controllability by incorporating frame-level constraints,
such as sketches, depth maps (Wang et al., 2023c; Guo et al.,
2023), human poses (Xu et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b), trajectories (Yin et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023d), and conditional images (Qing et al., 2023;
Zeng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023).

Boximator functions as a plug-in for existing video diffusion
models. We encode every box constraint by four coordinates,
an object ID, and a hard/soft flag. During training, we
freeze the base model’s text encoder and U-Net, feeding
the box encoding through a new type of self-attention layer.
This design is inspired by GLIGEN (Li et al., 2023), where
bounding boxes are combined with object description texts
to achieve region control for image synthesis. However,

*

Equal contribution 1 ByteDance Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Jiawei Wang, Yuchen Zhang <{wangjiawei.424,
zhangyuchen.zyc}@bytedance.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Check our website for more cases: https://boximator.
github.io/

1

