NeWRF: A Deep Learning Framework for
Wireless Radiation Field Reconstruction and Channel Prediction
Haofan Lu 1 Christopher Vattheuer 1 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1 Omid Abari 1

Abstract
We present NeWRF, a novel deep-learning-based
framework for predicting wireless channels. Wireless channel prediction is a long-standing problem in the wireless community and is a key technology for improving the coverage of wireless
network deployments. Today, a wireless deployment is evaluated by a site survey which is a cumbersome process requiring an experienced engineer to perform extensive channel measurements.
To reduce the cost of site surveys, we develop
NeWRF, which is based on recent advances in
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). NeWRF trains a
neural network model with a sparse set of channel
measurements, and predicts the wireless channel
accurately at any location in the site. We introduce a series of techniques that integrate wireless
propagation properties into the NeRF framework
to account for the fundamental differences between the behavior of light and wireless signals.
We conduct extensive evaluations of our framework and show that our approach can accurately
predict channels at unvisited locations with significantly lower measurement density than prior
state-of-the-art.

Figure 1. The tomography of a wireless field (channel) in a
simple environment. Like water ripples, wireless signals can
add up constructively or destructively, causing fine-scale spatial
variation. Our algorithm, NeWRF, reconstructs this field from a
sparse set of channel measurements.

Department of Computer Science, University of California Los
Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, United States. Correspondence to:
Haofan Lu <haofan@cs.ucla.edu>.

optimize the deployment of base stations. However, to conduct an effective site survey, an experienced engineer needs
to perform measurements for a very dense grid of points.
Today, this exhaustive measurement is rarely done due to
its intractable time and cost. Instead, a sparse measurement
approach is usually taken, where the engineer walks with a
radio receiver in the site and measures the wireless channels
at random locations. A wireless channel is a measure of the
distortions imposed on wireless signals as they propagate
from a transmitter to a receiver, which determines the quality of communication. The wireless channel is represented
as a complex number that characterizes factors such as signal attenuation, phase rotation, and interference. Although
the random sparse measurement approach is much more
efficient than the exhaustive grid-based survey, it fails to uncover the signal quality at unvisited locations; therefore, can
potentially miss many dead spots. As a supplement, wireless
ray-tracing simulations (Remcom, 2023) are also performed
to analyze the distribution of wireless fields, which uses
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models of the environment.
However, ray-tracing simulations are not reliable since CAD
models cannot fully replicate how real-world environments
interact with wireless signals. Therefore, successive site
surveys are always required for further validation and calibration.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we introduce a deep learning framework that
reduces the time and cost of wireless site surveys. Our goal
is to predict the wireless channel in every location in the

1. Introduction
Wireless networks (such as WiFi and 5G) have become an
essential part of our lives. Real-world WiFi and cellular deployments commonly encounter many issues such as dead
spots, dropped signals, sudden outages, and slow throughput, potentially undermining the connectivity of wireless
devices. To solve these issues, site surveys (Kar & Dappuri, 2018) are often conducted to measure the quality of
the wireless network in various locations and, if required,
1

1

