Online Matching with Stochastic Rewards:
Provable Better Bound via Adversarial Reinforcement Learning

Qiankun Zhang * 1 Aocheng Shen * 1 Boyu Zhang 1 Hanrui Jiang 1 Bingqian Du 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Optimization in an online setting is one of the most significant research branches in combinatorial optimization,
because it captures more practical real-world applications
by considering sequential variables or constraints arriving
over time. For example, in online advertising, a search
engine like Google must select an advertiser to show for a
search request, without any knowledge of the future requests
that may follow. This scenario is intrinsically modeled by
the online bipartite matching (OBM) problem proposed by
Karp et al. (1990). To deal with the challenge of the uncertainty of inputs, theoretical studies (See Mehta (2013) for a
survey) constantly improve the ratio between the (expected)
solution given by an algorithm and the optimal solution to a
corresponding offline benchmark, which is called competitive ratio. Recently, there has been a line of research using
machine learning (ML) techniques to solve online optimization problems, among which, reinforcement learning (RL)
achieves remarkable success in finding high-performance
algorithms (Du et al., 2022a; Kong et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2019; Alomrani et al., 2021). These successes essentially
stem from the similarities in sight between RL and online
algorithms. Both of them deal with sequences of inputs,
and target on finding strategies that optimize (maximize or
minimize) their objectives (or cumulative rewards).

For a specific online optimization problem, for example, online bipartite matching (OBM), research
efforts could be made in two directions before it
is finally closed, i.e., the optimal competitive online algorithm is found. One is to continuously
design algorithms with better performance. To
this end, reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated great success in literature. However, little
is known on the other direction: whether RL helps
explore how hard an online problem is. In this
paper, we study a generalized model of OBM,
named online matching with stochastic rewards
(OMSR, FOCS 2012), for which the optimal competitive ratio is still unknown. We adopt an adversarial RL approach that trains two RL agents
adversarially and iteratively: the algorithm agent
learns for algorithms with larger competitive ratios, while the adversarial agent learns to produce a family of hard instances. Through such
a framework, agents converge at the end with a
robust algorithm, which empirically outperforms
the state of the art (STOC 2020). Much more significantly, it allows to track how the hard instances
are generated. We succeed in distilling two structural properties from the learned graph patterns,
which remarkably reduce the action space, and
further enable theoretical improvement on the
best-known hardness result of OMSR, from 0.621
(FOCS 2012) to 0.597. To the best of our knowledge, this gives the first evidence that RL can
help enhance the theoretical understanding of an
online problem.

However, almost all existing works target training algorithms for online optimization problems, for which the optimal competitive ratios have been known. In other words,
their results indicate that the RL agents can eventually converge to perform the best on the worst-case inputs, and
the learned policies are broadly consistent with the bestknown theoretical algorithms (e.g., the online primal-dual
algorithms). These attempts are significant but preliminary.
There is a large class of open-ended online optimization
problems, which may face critical challenges from two directions: one is to find robust algorithms as previous works,
corresponding to improve the lower bound of competitive
ratio; another one is to construct hard instances, corresponding to an upper bound, such that no algorithm can achieve a
competitive ratio better than that. Applying RL approaches
to such problems raises the following interesting questions:

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Correspondence
to: Qiankun Zhang <qiankun@hust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

