Contextualized Policy Recovery: Modeling and Interpreting Medical Decisions
with Adaptive Imitation Learning

Jannik Deuschel * 1 2 Caleb N. Ellington * 1 Yingtao Luo 1 Benjamin J. Lengerich 3 4 Pascal Friederich 2
Eric P. Xing 5 1 6

Abstract

1. Introduction

Interpretable policy learning seeks to estimate
intelligible decision policies from observed actions; however, existing models force a tradeoff
between accuracy and interpretability, limiting
data-driven interpretations of human decisionmaking processes. Fundamentally, existing approaches are burdened by this tradeoff because
they represent the underlying decision process as
a universal policy, when in fact human decisions
are dynamic and can change drastically under
different contexts. Thus, we develop Contextualized Policy Recovery (CPR), which re-frames
the problem of modeling complex decision processes as a multi-task learning problem, where
each context poses a unique task and complex
decision policies can be constructed piece-wise
from many simple context-specific policies. CPR
models each context-specific policy as a linear
map, and generates new policy models on-demand
as contexts are updated with new observations.
We provide two flavors of the CPR framework:
one focusing on exact local interpretability, and
one retaining full global interpretability. We assess CPR through studies on simulated and real
data, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
predicting antibiotic prescription in intensive care
units (+22% AUROC vs. previous SOTA) and
predicting MRI prescription for Alzheimer’s patients (+7.7% AUROC vs. previous SOTA). With
this improvement, CPR closes the accuracy gap
between interpretable and black-box methods, allowing high-resolution exploration and analysis
of context-specific decision models.

Interpretable policy learning (Hüyük et al., 2022) seeks
to recover an underlying decision-making process from a
dataset of demonstrated behavior, and represent this process
as an interpretable model that can be quantified, audited,
and intuitively understood. This approach has gained considerable attention in the medical informatics community
as a promising approach for improving standards of care by
detecting bias, explaining sub-optimal outcomes (Lengerich
et al., 2022), and quantifying regional (McKinlay et al.,
2007) and institutional (Westert et al., 2018) differences.
Classic machine learning algorithms for policy inference
are based on inverse reinforcement learning (Ng & Russell, 2000) or imitation learning (Bain & Sammut, 1999;
Piot et al., 2014; Ho & Ermon, 2016), and use black-box
architectures such as recurrent neural networks. These approaches have been applied in various medical domains,
most prominently oncology prognosis (Beck et al., 2011;
Esteva et al., 2017). However, black-box methods have been
met with skepticism from the medical community based on
a lack of interpretability as well as an inability to identify
catastrophic failure modes and generalization issues (Laï
et al., 2020; Royal Society (Great Britain) and Royal Society
(Great Britain) Staff, 2017).
To address this, several recent works have proposed highly
constrained policy parametrizations for interpretability.
These parameterizations take the form of recurrent decision
trees (Pace et al., 2022), visual decision boundaries (Hüyük
et al., 2022), high-level programming syntax (Verma et al.,
2018) or outcome preferences (Yau et al., 2020). Highly
constrained models are generally more interpretable, but
their interpretability stems from restrictive modeling architectures, sacrificing performance or imposing obscure constraints that make real-world applications challenging. The
primary challenge is that human decisions are informed by a
variety of factors including patient background, medical history, lab tests, and more, and true human decision processes
are complex. Thus, compressing the decision policy into a
single universal observation-to-action mapping necessitates
the use of large nonparametric models (e.g. neural nets) that
preclude direct interpretability, or produce a model which

*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology 3 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard 4 MIT
5
MBZUAI 6 Petuum, Inc.. Correspondence to: Caleb N. Ellington
<cellingt@cs.cmu.edu>, Eric P. Xing <epxing@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

