Unbiased Multi-Label Learning from Crowdsourced Annotations

Mingxuan Xia 1 2 Zenan Huang 2 Runze Wu 3 Gengyu Lyu 4 Junbo Zhao 2 Gang Chen 2 Haobo Wang 1 2

Abstract
This work studies the novel Crowdsourced MultiLabel Learning (CMLL) problem, where each
instance is related to multiple true labels but the
model only receives unreliable labels from different annotators. Although a few Crowdsourced
Multi-Label Inference (CMLI) methods have been
developed, they require both the training and testing sets to be assigned crowdsourced labels and
focus on true label inferring rather than prediction,
making them less practical. In this paper, by excavating the generation process of crowdsourced
labels, we establish the first unbiased risk estimator for CMLL based on the crowdsourced
transition matrices. To facilitate transition matrix
estimation, we upgrade our unbiased risk estimator by aggregating crowdsourced labels and
transition matrices from all annotators while guaranteeing its theoretical characteristics. Integrating with the unbiased risk estimator, we further
propose a decoupled autoencoder framework to
exploit label correlations and boost performance.
We also provide a generalization error bound to
ensure the convergence of the empirical risk estimator. Experiments on various CMLL scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/MingxuanXia/CLEAR.

Crowdsourced Multi-Label Inference (CMLI)

?

Crowdsourced Training set
Crowdsourced Testing set

Ground-truth Labels

Crowdsourced Multi-Label Learning (CMLL)
Crowdsourced Training set
Unlabeled Testing set

?

Predictor

Unseen
Instances

Figure 1. CMLI approaches focus on directly uncovering the
ground-truth labels given the crowdsourced ones on both training and testing sets, while CMLL takes a further step by learning a
robust predictor based on crowdsourced labels that can generalize
well on unseen instances.

applications such as image recognition (Zha et al., 2008;
Chen et al., 2019b), document classification (Rubin et al.,
2012; Xiao et al., 2019), protein function prediction (Wu
et al., 2014), and so on. However, the success of MLL
relies on large amounts of precisely labeled data, making
data annotation labor-intensive and time-consuming. On the
other hand, crowdsourcing (Snow et al., 2008; Albarqouni
et al., 2016; Rodrigues & Pereira, 2018) has recently established itself as an efficient and cost-effective solution for
large-scale data annotation, where labels are collected from
low-cost crowds. This gives rise to the potential significance
of implementing crowdsourcing in the context of MLL.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (MLL) deals with scenarios where each
instance belongs to multiple categories concurrently (Zhang
& Zhou, 2007; 2014), which is widely adopted in real-world

Nonetheless, the study of crowdsourcing MLL has been
overlooked, since most existing crowdsourcing methods
emphasize multi-class classification problems, where each
instance is associated with a single label (Guan et al., 2018;
Rodrigues & Pereira, 2018; Wei et al., 2022; Gao et al.,
2022). Recently, a few Crowdsourced Multi-Label Inference
(CMLI) (Zhang & Wu, 2018; Li et al., 2019) approaches
have been proposed to address the crowdsourcing scenario
when learning with multiple labels. As shown in the upper part of Figure 1, CMLI approaches focus on directly
uncovering the ground-truth labels given the crowdsourced
ones on both training and testing sets. However, CMLI

1

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo,
China 2 State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 3 Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase
Inc., Hangzhou, China 4 Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Haobo Wang <wanghaobo@zju.edu.cn>, Runze Wu <wurunze1@corp.netease.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

