Privacy Backdoors: Stealing Data with Corrupted Pretrained Models

Shanglun Feng 1 Florian Tramèr 1

Abstract

data points to the model weights during finetuning. The
trapped data can then be extracted by reading from the finetuned model’s weights. Compared to prior related attacks
in Federated Learning (Boenisch et al., 2023; Fowl et al.,
2021) that steal data points in a single training step, our data
traps have to survive an entire finetuning run, with multiple
training epochs and thousands of update steps.

Practitioners commonly download pretrained machine learning models from open repositories and
finetune them to fit specific applications. We show
that this practice introduces a new risk of privacy backdoors. By tampering with a pretrained
model’s weights, an attacker can fully compromise the privacy of the finetuning data. We show
how to build privacy backdoors for a variety of
models, including transformers, which enable an
attacker to reconstruct individual finetuning samples, with a guaranteed success! We further show
that backdoored models allow for tight privacy
attacks on models trained with differential privacy
(DP). The common optimistic practice of training
DP models with loose privacy guarantees is thus
insecure if the model is not trusted. Overall, our
work highlights a crucial and overlooked supply
chain attack on machine learning privacy.

We thus propose a new backdoor design that is single-use:
once our backdoor activates and a data point is written to the
model’s weights, the backdoor becomes inactive, thereby
preventing further alteration of those weights during training.
Our backdoor thus acts a bit like a latch, the logic circuit
underlying digital memory: once the backdoor is set and
the data is written to memory (i.e., to the model weights), it
“latches” on until the end of training.
By design, our attacks capture individual training examples
with high probability, with minimal impact on the pretrained
model’s utility. We apply these attacks to MLPs and pretrained transformers (ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)) and reconstruct dozens of finetuning examples across various downstream tasks.

1. Introduction

We then consider a stronger black-box threat model, where
the attacker only has query access to the finetuned model.
By adapting techniques from the model extraction literature (Tramèr et al., 2016; Carlini et al., 2020), we show that
even a black-box attacker can recover entire training inputs.
We further show that our backdoors enable simpler, perfect
membership inference attacks, which infer with 100% accuracy whether a data point was used for training. We use
these backdoors to build the first tight end-to-end attack on
the seminal differentially private SGD algorithm of Abadi
et al. (2016). That is, the privacy leakage observable by our
adversary nearly matches the provable upper-bound from
the algorithm’s privacy analysis. Our result thus challenges
the common assumption that the privacy guarantees of DPSGD are overly conservative in practice. This has led to
the adoption of loose privacy budgets (e.g., ε ≥ 9 in (Ramaswamy et al., 2020)), which we show to be insecure in
the presence of backdoored models.

Sharing and finetuning of large pretrained models has become a common practice, enabling rapid prototyping and
development of new applications across various domains.
Platforms like Huggingface currently host nearly 500,000
models, shared by various companies, researchers, and other
users. This trend brings to light new security concerns, particularly in the form of supply chain attacks. Prior work has
recognized the impact of such attacks on model integrity,
where a backdoor is planted into a model to hijack its downstream behavior (Gu et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018).
In this work, we shift the focus from integrity to privacy
vulnerabilities, and introduce privacy backdoors, where
a malicious model provider tampers with model weights
to compromise the privacy of future finetuning data. Our
backdoor attacks create “data traps” that directly write some
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Florian Tramèr <florian.tramer@inf.ethz.ch>.

Overall, our results bring to light a new attack vector in the
modern machine learning supply chain, and emphasizes the
need for more stringent privacy protections when operating
with untrusted shared models.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

