Trust the Model Where It Trusts Itself
Model-Based Actor-Critic with Uncertainty-Aware Rollout Adaption

Bernd Frauenknecht * 1 Artur Eisele * 1 Devdutt Subhasish 1 Friedrich Solowjow 1 Sebastian Trimpe 1

Abstract

interaction by inferring information from a learned environment model. Unfortunately, model errors can lead to faulty
conclusions that severely impact the agent’s performance. It
is therefore critical to ensure the accuracy of these models.

Dyna-style model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) combines model-free agents with predictive transition models through model-based rollouts. This combination raises a critical question:
“When to trust your model?”; i.e., which rollout
length results in the model providing useful data?
Janner et al. (2019) address this question by gradually increasing rollout lengths throughout the
training. While theoretically tempting, uniform
model accuracy is a fallacy that collapses at the
latest when extrapolating. Instead, we propose
asking the question “Where to trust your model?”.
Using inherent model uncertainty to consider local accuracy, we obtain the Model-Based ActorCritic with Uncertainty-Aware Rollout Adaption
(MACURA) algorithm. We propose an easy-totune rollout mechanism and demonstrate substantial improvements in data efficiency and performance compared to state-of-the-art deep MBRL
methods on the MuJoCo benchmark.

Model-based policy optimization (MBPO) (Janner et al.,
2019) represents the current state-of-the-art in Dyna-style
MBRL (Sutton, 1991), combining a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
agent (Haarnoja et al., 2018a;b) with a Probabilistic Ensemble (PE) model (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). Janner
et al. (2019) address two distinct learning problems: using
interaction between the agent and the environment to train
the model and, simultaneously, employing model-based rollouts to train the agent. The agent queries the model in short
rollouts branched off from states that were observed during environment interaction. The length of these rollouts is
gradually increased throughout training, balancing model
usage against the risk of model exploitation.
Janner et al. (2019) answer the question “When to trust
your model?” with time-based arguments. Essentially, uniform model accuracy is postulated after sufficiently long
training which motivates to use the model for rollouts of predetermined length. However, both the training time and the
rollout lengths are notoriously difficult to preschedule. Furthermore, the assumption of uniform model improvement is
problematic for complex systems.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown unprecedented
results in challenging domains such as gameplay (Mnih
et al., 2015; OpenAI et al., 2019b) and nonlinear control
(OpenAI et al., 2019a; Wurman et al., 2022). For engineering problems, however, the data inefficiency of model-free
state-of-the-art approaches (Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja
et al., 2018a) remains a substantial challenge (Kostrikov
et al., 2023; Frauenknecht et al., 2023), prompting the need
for more efficient methods (Janner et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2021). One such method, model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL), reduces the necessary degree of environment

Instead, we consider model accuracy as a local property,
putting the question “Where to trust your model?” at the
heart of our approach. The inherent uncertainty of PE models allows for adaptive rollout lengths: wherever the model
is uncertain, rollouts are terminated quickly, while longer
rollouts can be generated where it is certain.
In this paper, we analyze the learning process of Dynastyle MBRL and present Model-Based Actor-Critic with
Uncertainty-Aware Rollout Adaption (MACURA), an algorithm with an easy-to-tune mechanism for model-based
rollout length scheduling. In particular, we present the following technical contributions:

*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering (DSME), RWTH Aachen University, 52068
Aachen, Germany. Correspondence to: Bernd Frauenknecht
<bernd.frauenknecht@dsme.rwth-aachen.de>.

• We show monotonic improvement by restricting modelbased rollouts to a subset E ⊆ S of the state space S;
• We construct the subset E based on a novel and easyto-compute model uncertainty measure; and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

