Logistic Variational Bayes Revisited

Michael Komodromos 1 Marina Evangelou 1 Sarah Filippi 1
{(yi , xi )}ni=1 . In simple settings, such as when f takes
the parametric form, f (x) = x⊤ β, where β ∈ Rp is the
coefficient vector, methods such as Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) can be used to sample from the posterior
distribution. However, for large p MCMC is known to perform poorly. Alternatively, when f takes a non-parametric
form, as in Logistic Gaussian Process (GP) Classification,
MCMC does not scale well with n (Kuss & Rasmussen,
2005; Rasmussen & Williams, 2006).

Abstract
Variational logistic regression is a popular method
for approximate Bayesian inference seeing widespread use in many areas of machine learning
including: Bayesian optimization, reinforcement
learning and multi-instance learning to name a
few. However, due to the intractability of the
Evidence Lower Bound, authors have turned to
the use of Monte Carlo, quadrature or bounds to
perform inference, methods which are costly or
give poor approximations to the true posterior. In
this paper we introduce a new bound for the expectation of softplus function and subsequently
show how this can be applied to variational logistic regression and Gaussian process classification.
Unlike other bounds, our proposal does not rely
on extending the variational family, or introducing
additional parameters to ensure the bound is tight.
In fact, we show that this bound is tighter than the
state-of-the-art, and that the resulting variational
posterior achieves state-of-the-art performance,
whilst being significantly faster to compute than
Monte-Carlo methods.

To address these limitations practitioners have turned to
Variational Inference (VI), which seeks to approximate the
posterior distribution with an element from a family of distributions known as the variational family (Blei et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2019a). Formally, this involves computing an
approximate variational posterior, given by the minimizer of
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the posterior,
π(·|D), and a distribution within the variational family, Q′ ,
q̃(·) = argmin DKL (q(·) || π(·|D)).

Typically, the variational family, Q′ , is chosen to be a family
of Gaussian distributions,

Q′ = Nd (µ, Σ) : µ ∈ Rd , Σ ∈ Sd+ ,
(2)

1. Introduction

whereupon restricting Σ = diag(σ12 , . . . , σd2 ), gives rise to
a mean-field Gaussian variational family, which we denote
by Q. This choice is typically made for computational convenience and often leads to tractable optimization problems
(Bishop, 2007).

Logistic regression involves modelling the probability of
a binary response yi ∈ {0, 1} given a set of covariates
xi ∈ Rp for i = 1, . . . , n. Formally,
yi ∼ Bernoulli(pi ),

pi = s(f (xi )) =

(1)

q(·)∈Q′

1
1 + exp(−f (xi ))

In practice however, the KL divergence in (1) is intractable
and cannot be optimized directly, and so the Evidence Lower
Bound (ELBO),

where pi is the probability of observing yi = 1, f : Rp → R
is the unknown model function, and s(·) is the sigmoid
function.

ELBO(q(·)) = Eq(·) [ℓ(D|·)] − DKL (q(·)∥p(·)) (3)
Qn
is maximized instead, where ℓ(D|·) = log i=1 p(yi |xi , ·)
is the log-likelihood function and p(·) is the prior, which
we set to a Gaussian with zero mean vector and identity
covariance throughout.

In the context of Bayesian inference the goal is to compute the posterior distribution of f given the data D =
1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Michael Komodromos
<mk1019@ic.ac.uk>.

In the context of variational logistic regression there is a
further limitation wherein the expected value of the loglikelihood is intractable. This arises through the need to
compute the expectation EX [log(1 + exp(X))] for some X.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

