Codebook Features: Sparse and Discrete Interpretability for Neural Networks

Alex Tamkin 1 Mohammad Taufeeque 2 Noah D. Goodman 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

Understanding neural networks is challenging in
part because of the dense, continuous nature of
their hidden states. We explore whether we can
train neural networks to have hidden states that are
sparse, discrete, and more interpretable by quantizing their continuous features into what we call
codebook features. Codebook features are produced by finetuning neural networks with vector
quantization bottlenecks at each layer, producing
a network whose hidden features are the sum of
a small number of discrete vector codes chosen
from a larger codebook. Surprisingly, we find that
neural networks can operate under this extreme
bottleneck with only modest degradation in performance. In addition, we can control a model’s
behavior by finding codes that activate on a desired behavior, then activating those same codes
during generation. We first validate codebook features on a finite state machine dataset with far
more hidden states than neurons. In this setting,
our approach overcomes the superposition problem by assigning states to distinct codes, and we
find that we can make the neural network behave
as if it is in a different state by activating the code
for that state. We then train Transformer language
models with up to 410M parameters on two natural language datasets. We identify codes in these
models representing diverse, disentangled concepts (ranging from negative emotions to months
of the year) and find that we can guide the model
to generate different topics and pronoun genders
by activating these codes during inference. Overall, codebook features appear to be a promising
unit of analysis and control for neural networks
and interpretability. Our codebase and models are
open-sourced at this URL.1

The strength of neural networks lies in their ability to learn
emergent solutions that we could not program ourselves.
Unfortunately, the learned programs inside neural networks
are challenging to make sense of, in part because they differ
from traditional software in important ways. Most strikingly,
the state of a neural network program, including intermediate computations and features, is implemented in dense,
continuous vectors inside of a network. As a result, many
different pieces of information are commingled inside of
these vectors, violating the software engineering principle
of separation of concerns (Dijkstra, 1982). Moreover, the
continuous nature of these vectors means no feature is ever
truly off inside of a network; instead, they are activated to
varying degrees, vastly increasing the complexity of this
state and the possible interactions within it.
A natural question is whether it is possible to recover some
of the sparsity and discreteness properties of traditional software systems while preserving the expressivity and learnability of neural networks. To make progress here, we
introduce a structural constraint into training that refactors
a network to adhere more closely to these design principles. Specifically, we finetune a network with trainable
vector quantization bottlenecks (Gray, 1984) at each layer,
which are sparse and discrete. We refer to each vector in
this bottleneck as a code and the entire library of codes as
the codebook. See Figure 1 for a visual depiction of this
motivation.
The resulting codebooks learned through this process are a
promising interface for understanding and controlling neural
networks. For example, when we train a codebook language
model on the outputs of a finite state machine, we find a
precise mapping between activated codes in different layers
of the model to the states of the state machine, overcoming the challenge of superposition (Elhage et al., 2022b).
Furthermore, we demonstrate a causal role for these codes:
changing which code is activated during the forward pass
causes the network to behave as if it were in a different state.
Additionally, we apply codebook features to transformer
language models with up to 410M parameters, showing that
despite this bottleneck, they can be trained with only modest accuracy degradation compared to the original model.
We find codes that activate on a wide range of concepts,

1
Anthropic, Work performed while at Stanford University.
FAR AI 3 Stanford University. Correspondence to: Alex Tamkin
<atamkin@cs.stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Author contributions listed in Appendix A .

1

