Roping in Uncertainty: Robustness and Regularization in Markov Games

Jeremy McMahan 1 Giovanni Artiglio 1 Qiaomin Xie 1
A robust Markov game (S, {Ai }i∈[N ] , P ⋆ , r ⋆ , H, U) is defined by a standard Markov game (MG) G⋆ := (P ⋆ , r ⋆ ),
called the nominal game, and an uncertainty set U :=
P × U r that describes all possible models that could be
realized. Here, P is the set of possible transition kernels,
and U r is the set of possible reward functions. A common
solution concept for RMGs is the Markov-perfect robust
Nash Equilibrium (MPRNE). A policy π is an MPRNE
if, for each stage game (h, s), π is a mutual best response
assuming the worst-case model for each player.

Abstract
We study robust Markov games (RMG) with srectangular uncertainty. We show a general equivalence between computing a robust Nash equilibrium (RNE) of a s-rectangular RMG and computing a Nash equilibrium (NE) of an appropriately
constructed regularized MG. The equivalence result yields a planning algorithm for solving srectangular RMGs, as well as provable robustness
guarantees for policies computed using regularized methods. However, we show that even for
just reward-uncertain two-player zero-sum matrix
games, computing an RNE is PPAD-hard. Consequently, we derive a special uncertainty structure
called efficient player-decomposability and show
that RNE for two-player zero-sum RMG in this
class can be provably solved in polynomial time.
This class includes commonly used uncertainty
sets such as L1 and L∞ ball uncertainty sets.

Unlike classical RMDPs, solving RMGs is already difficult
when only the reward function has uncertainty. Specifically,
a single-stage game with reward uncertainty can capture
arbitrary general-sum games and so is PPAD-hard to solve.
Surprisingly, unlike traditional game theory, even the twoplayer zero-sum version of reward-uncertain RMGs with
|S| = H = 1 and the minimal (s, a)-rectangularity assumption is PPAD-hard to solve. Similarly, two-player zero-sum
RMGs with only transition uncertainty and H = 2 periods
are also PPAD-hard to solve. Thus, solving even simple
RMGs is already a computational challenge.

1. Introduction

Although many advances have been made for RMDPs,
RMGs are much less understood. The seminal paper (Zhang
et al., 2020b) devised algorithms to learn a robust NE (RNE)
for RMGs but only proved asymptotic convergence of their
methods. On the other hand, Blanchet et al. (2023) proposed
provably sample-efficient algorithms to learn an RNE for the
special case of (s, a)-rectangular RMGs, but their methods
require an efficient planning oracle that does not currently
exist in the literature. Creating such a planning oracle is
one of the goals of this work. Lastly, adding a regularizer to
the value function of an MG has shown promise to improve
robustness empirically, but formal guarantees have not been
shown in the multi-agent setting (Zhang et al., 2020a).

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) and RL in simulated environments are effective ways to deal with situations where
traditional online RL would be too risky or costly. However,
these approaches suffer from the sim-to-real gap in which
slight differences in the models can lead to policies with
poor performance in the true environment. To combat the
sim-to-real gap, robust policies were studied using the framework of robust Markov decision processes (RMDP) (Satia &
Lave, 1973) and later robust Markov Games (RMG) (Zhang
et al., 2020b). Robust approaches have been effective in
the real world, especially for navigating UAVs in missioncritical multi-agent environments (Chen et al., 2023) and
in queuing systems (Kardeş et al., 2011). In practice, regularization has been a popular approach to improving the
robustness and convergence of multi-agent RL algorithms
with empirical success.

Our Contributions. We study the computational complexity of computing MPRNE for RMGs with s-rectangular
uncertainty. We show that computing an MPRNE of an
RMG with s-rectangular uncertainty can be done by computing a Markov-perfect NE (MPNE) of an appropriately
designed regularized MG. In particular, the regularizer corresponds to the support function of the uncertainty set for
the stage game. Furthermore, we show that for most wellknown regularization functions, such as entropy and ℓp norm

1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. Correspondence to:
Jeremy McMahan <jmcmahan@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

