High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization via Semi-Supervised Learning
with Optimized Unlabeled Data Sampling

Yuxuan Yin 1 Yu Wang 1 Peng Li 1

Abstract
We introduce a novel semi-supervised learning
approach, named Teacher-Student Bayesian Optimization (TSBO), integrating the teacher-student
paradigm into BO to minimize expensive labeled data queries for the first time. TSBO incorporates a teacher model, an unlabeled data
sampler, and a student model. The student is
trained on unlabeled data locations generated by
the sampler, with pseudo labels predicted by the
teacher. The interplay between these three components implements a unique selective regularization to the teacher in the form of student feedback. This scheme enables the teacher to predict high-quality pseudo labels, enhancing the
generalization of the GP surrogate model in the
search space. To fully exploit TSBO, we propose two optimized unlabeled data samplers to
construct effective student feedback that well
aligns with the objective of Bayesian optimization. Furthermore, we quantify and leverage
the uncertainty of the teacher-student model for
the provision of reliable feedback to the teacher
in the presence of risky pseudo-label predictions. TSBO demonstrates significantly improved
sample-efficiency in several global optimization
tasks under tight labeled data budgets. The implementation is available at https://github.
com/reminiscenty/TSBO-Official.

Figure 1: Visualization of queried data (dots) and trends
(arrow sequences) on a high-dimensional molecule design
task (Sterling & Irwin, 2015) to maximize the Penalized
LogP score (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). Red and blue
colors represent TSBO and a baseline (with vanilla BO), respectively. The evaluation budget is 450 in both approaches.

gate model, e.g., a Gaussian Process (GP) (Seeger, 2004), of
the objective function and then iteratively selecting the most
promising locations for new labeled data query based on a
criterion that balances exploration and exploitation (Kushner, 1964; Jones et al., 1998; Srinivas et al., 2010). Recent
work has extended BO’s applicability to high-dimensional
tasks with various dimension reduction methods including
linear embedding (Wang et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2020),
nonlinear projections (Moriconi et al., 2020), and deep autoencoders (Kusner et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Tripp et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020; Grosnit et al., 2021; Maus et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023b).

1. Introduction
Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Brochu et al., 2010) is widely
adopted for black-box optimization, which is particularly
useful when the objective function is expensive or impractical to evaluate directly. BO operates by constructing a surro-

Despite these encouraging advances, labeled data acquisition remains inherently costly and presents a key bottleneck
in BO across many application domains such as functional
molecule design (Brown et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2022), structural optimization (Zoph et al., 2018; Lukasik et al., 2022),
and failure analysis (Hu et al., 2018; Liang, 2019).

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA. Correspondence to: Peng
Li <lip@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address the challenge of data query efficiency in blackbox optimization, we introduce a unified Semi-Supervised
1

