Cluster-Aware Similarity Diffusion for Instance Retrieval

Jifei Luo 1 Hantao Yao 2 3 Changsheng Xu 2 3

Abstract

mance becomes a pivotal task, also known as re-ranking.
Among re-ranking methods, Query Expansion (QE) (Chum
et al., 2007; Arandjelović & Zisserman, 2012; Gordo et al.,
2017; 2020) is a representative approach that involves the
weighted summation of features from top-ranked images
to generate enhanced features for a secondary round of retrieval. However, QE is a primitive operation that cannot
explore the data manifold structure.

Diffusion-based re-ranking is a common method
used for retrieving instances by performing similarity propagation in a nearest neighbor graph.
However, existing techniques that construct the
affinity graph based on pairwise instances can lead
to the propagation of misinformation from outliers
and other manifolds, resulting in inaccurate results. To overcome this issue, we propose a novel
Cluster-Aware Similarity (CAS) diffusion for instance retrieval. The primary concept of CAS is
to conduct similarity diffusion within local clusters, which can reduce the influence from other
manifolds explicitly. To obtain a symmetrical and
smooth similarity matrix, our Bidirectional Similarity Diffusion strategy introduces an inverse
constraint term to the optimization objective of
local cluster diffusion. Additionally, we have optimized a Neighbor-guided Similarity Smoothing
approach to ensure similarity consistency among
the local neighbors of each instance. Evaluations
in instance retrieval and object re-identification
validate the effectiveness of the proposed CAS,
our code is publicly available.

To model the intricacies of the underlying data manifold,
diffusion-based re-ranking methods (Donoser & Bischof,
2013; Iscen et al., 2017; 2018; Yang et al., 2019; Chang
et al., 2019; Pang et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2017b; 2019b) have
been proposed to perform similarity propagation within the
nearest neighbor graph. The concept of ranking data concerning the intrinsic global manifold structure in a diffusion
manner was initially introduced by (Zhou et al., 2003b). Various methods (Yang et al., 2009; Donoser & Bischof, 2013;
Gao et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2023) propose to iteratively
propagate the similarity among pairwise neighbors in the
graph during each iteration. To capture the complex relationships between instances, some studies (Yang et al., 2013;
Zhang et al., 2015; Bai et al., 2019a) expand the diffusion
theory to a hypergraph, thereby considering higher-order
information. However, since these graphs and hypergraphs
are constructed based on pairwise instances, the similarity
propagation is prone to mistakenly spread information from
outliers and other manifolds throughout the entire graph,
leading to suboptimal performance. Therefore, mitigating
the influence of samples from other manifolds during similarity propagation is crucial for enhancing the robustness of
diffusion-based re-ranking.

1. Introduction
Instance retrieval aims to search through a large-scale
database to identify images that share similar content with a
given image. Recently, traditional descriptors (Lowe, 2004;
Jégou et al., 2012) are gradually being supplanted by global
descriptors extracted with deep neural networks (Radenović
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2023) for instance
retrieval. Due to factors such as illumination, occlusion, and
variations in viewpoint among images, the global descriptors
may not yield optimal retrieval results. Therefore, refining
the initial retrieval results to enhance the retrieval perfor-

In diffusion-based re-ranking methods, the connections of
outliers or other manifolds to individual instances can reduce the reliability of ranking during the process of similarity propagation. Therefore, the intuitive idea is to use the
neighborhood cluster of each individual instance to guide
the process of diffusion. Different from existing methods
that propagate the similarity among the entire graph, we aim
to constrain the similarity propagation among the local clusters consisting of the individual instance and its neighbors.
Most of the undesired instances can be explicitly filtered
out by the approximated local cluster, allowing us to benefit
from reducing the impact of other manifolds. Based on
the assumption that samples belonging to the same cluster

1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Hantao Yao <hantao.yao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

