On a Combinatorial Problem Arising in Machine Teaching

Joakim Sunde 1 Brigt Håvardstun 1 Jan Kratochvı́l 2 Jan Arne Telle 1

Abstract

AI (Yang et al., 2021).

We study a model of machine teaching where
the teacher mapping is constructed from a size
function on both concepts and examples. The
main question in machine teaching is the minimum number of examples needed for any concept,
the so-called teaching dimension. A recent paper
(Ferri et al., 2024) conjectured that a worst case
for this model, as a function of the size of the concept class, occurs when the consistency matrix
contains the binary representations of numbers
from zero and up. In this paper we prove their
conjecture. The result can be seen as a generalization of a theorem resolving the edge isoperimetry
problem for hypercubes (Hart, 1976). Our proof is
based on a generalization of a lemma of (Graham,
1970).

Various models of machine teaching have been proposed,
e.g. the classical teaching dimension model (Goldman &
Kearns, 1995), the optimal teacher model (Balbach, 2008),
recursive teaching (Zilles et al., 2011), preference-based
teaching (Gao et al., 2017), no-clash teaching (Fallat et al.,
2023), and probabilistic teaching (Ferri et al., 2022). In
(Telle et al., 2019) a model focusing on teaching size is
introduced, and in (Ferri et al., 2024) an algorithm called
Greedy constructing the teacher mapping in this model is
given.
Greedy assumes two total orderings ≺·C on C and ≺·X on
X, with ≺·X extended to ≺·W on subsets of labelled examples W = 2X×{0,1} by shortlex ordering. In the Greedy
algorithm the teacher defines its mapping iteratively: go
through W in the order of ≺·W , and for a given witness
w = {(x1 , b1 )...(xq , bq )}, find the earliest (in ≺·C order)
c ∈ C consistent with w (i.e. with M (c, xi ) = bi for all
1 ≤ i ≤ q) such that T (c) is not yet defined, then set
T (c) = w and continue with next witness (or drop this w if
no such c exists).

1. Introduction
In formal models of machine learning (Valiant, 1984) we
have a concept class C of possible hypotheses, an unknown
target concept c∗ ∈ C and training data given by correctly
labelled random examples. The concept class C is given
by a binary matrix M whose rows are concepts and whose
column set is the domain of examples X, with M (c, x) =
1 if c is consistent with x labelled positively, i.e. with
(x, 1) rather than with (x, 0). In formal models of machine
teaching a set of labelled examples w called a witness is
instead carefully chosen by a teacher T , i.e. T (c∗ ) = w, so
the learner can reconstruct c∗ . The common goal is to keep
the teaching dimension, i.e., the cardinality of the witness
set, maxc∈C |T (c)|, as small as possible. In recent years,
the field of machine teaching has seen various applications
in fields like pedagogy (Shafto et al., 2014), trustworthy
AI (Zhu et al., 2018), reinforcement learning (Zhang et al.,
2021), active learning (Wang et al., 2021) and explainable

To compare the teaching dimension achievable by Greedy
to that of other models, the authors of (Ferri et al., 2024)
argued as follows when a large witness is used: If Greedy
assigns T (c) = w for some w = {(x1 , b1 )...(xq , bq )}, then
we may ask why was c not assigned to a smaller witness?
Assuming there are |X| = n examples, any subset Q ⊆ X
of size q−1 when labelled consistent with c has already been
tried by Greedy, and hence some other concept must already
have been assigned to any such Q, and all these concepts

n
are distinct. This means we must have taught q−1
=k
other concepts already. But then we have already taught at
least k + 1 concepts and we can again ask why were any of
these not taught by a smaller witness of size q − 2? It must
be that any such witnesses (labelled to be consistent with
some concept among the k + 1 we already have) must have
been used to teach other, again distinct, concepts.

1
Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Bergen,
Norway 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Praha, Czech Republic.
Correspondence to: Joakim Sunde <Joakim.Sunde@uib.no>.

Note that, to verify how many distinct witnesses exist, corresponding to new concepts, that are labelled consistently
with one of these k + 1 concepts, one must sum up the
number of distinct rows when projecting on q − 2 columns,
for all choices of these columns. Note that the number of
distinct rows, i.e., witnesses, and hence the number of con-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

