SCoRe: Submodular Combinatorial Representation Learning

Anay Majee 1 Suraj Kothawade 2 Krishnateja Killamsetty 3 Rishabh Iyer 1

Abstract
In this paper we introduce the SCoRe1
(Submodular Combinatorial Representation
Learning) framework, a novel approach in
representation learning that addresses inter-class
bias and intra-class variance. SCoRe provides a
new combinatorial viewpoint to representation
learning, by introducing a family of loss functions
based on set-based submodular information
measures. We develop two novel combinatorial
formulations for loss functions, using the Total
Information and Total Correlation, that naturally
minimize intra-class variance and inter-class bias.
Several commonly used metric/contrastive learning loss functions like supervised contrastive loss,
orthogonal projection loss, and N-pairs loss, are
all instances of SCoRe, thereby underlining the
versatility and applicability of SCoRe in a broad
spectrum of learning scenarios. Novel objectives
in SCoRe naturally model class-imbalance with
up to 7.6% improvement in classification on
CIFAR-10-LT, CIFAR-100-LT, MedMNIST,
2.1% on ImageNet-LT, and 19.4% in object
detection on IDD and LVIS (v1.0), demonstrating
its effectiveness over existing approaches.

Figure 1. Objectives in SCoRe are resilient to inter-class bias
and intra-class variance in long-tail settings. Applying L(θ) to
(a) reduces inter-class bias by promoting inter-cluster separation
in (b) while reducing intra-class variance in (c) by inducing intracluster compactness.

1. Introduction

work. Notably, robust recognition necessitates that head and
tail classes share visual features to compensate for the sparse
examples in tail classes, a concept underscored in (Liu et al.,
2019; 2022). However, this sharing can inadvertently lead to
confusion and erroneous predictions between visually similar objects also known as inter-class bias (Agarwal et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2019b), depicted in Figure 1. Moreover, the prevalence of head classes often biases models (He
et al., 2016; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) towards them,
adversely affecting performance on tail classes. The considerable variability within head classes, have been shown to
generate local sub-centers (Deng et al., 2020) that intensify
this bias and contribute to substantial intra-class variance,
also showcased in Figure 1. To effectively navigate these
complexities (further detailed in Section 2), the underlying model must adeptly minimize both inter-class bias and
intra-class variance. We highlight in Section 2 that exist-

Visual Object Recognition in real-world scenarios prominently features a long-tail distribution, where abundant
(head) and rare (tail) objects coexist. The Open Long-Tail
Recognition (OLTR) benchmark, as introduced in (Liu et al.,
2019), tackles the dual challenges of imbalanced and fewshot learning within a single, streamlined training frame1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas
at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA 2 Google Research, Sunnyvale,
CA, USA 3 IBM Research, San Jose, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Anay Majee <anay.majee@utdallas.edu>, Rishabh Iyer
<rishabh.iyer@utdallas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Project page: https://anaymajee.me/assets/
project_pages/score.html.

1

