Coactive Learning for Large Language Models using Implicit User Feedback

Aaron D. Tucker 1 Kianté Brantley 1 Adam Cahall 1 Thorsten Joachims 1

Abstract

𝑦

We propose coactive learning as a model and feedback mechanism for training large language models (LLMs). The key insight is that users provide
implicit feedback whenever they edit the text y
proposed by an LLM. While the edited text ȳ is
typically not a gold-standard example for supervised training, coactive learning merely requires
that the edited text ȳ is an improvement over the
proposed text y. Note that such weak implicit
preference feedback ȳ ≻ y is available in many
application settings on a per-user basis, thus enabling the personalization of LLMs. In this paper,
we develop the theoretical basis for coactive training of non-linear models, and we derive CoRLL
as the first coactive learning algorithm for LLMs.
Empirical results indicate that CoRLL is effective
even for weak and noisy coactive preference feedback, making it a promising algorithm for training
and personalization of LLMs from feedback that
is naturally collected in many use cases.

Draft 𝑦
Context 𝑥

LLM

Learn from
𝑦ത ≻ 𝑦

𝑦ത

Human
Improve
𝑦 to 𝑦ത

Figure 1. In coactive learning the policy generates a response y
given prompt x. The user’s actions then provide a (possibly noisy)
improved response ȳ, and the implied preference ȳ ≻ y is used to
improve the policy.

Motivated by this use-case of Human-AI writing collaboration, we propose coactive learning (Shivaswamy &
Joachims, 2012) as a new online-learning model for LLM
training through which users can instruct the system. Figure 1 illustrates the coactive learning process. For a given
context x (e.g., customer complaint), the LLM presents the
user (e.g., customer representative) with its current best response y (e.g., response to customer complaint), and the
user either accepts y as is, or performs edits to improve
it to ȳ. It is clear that ȳ provides an interesting feedback
signal, but in many applications, it would be unjustified to
assume that ȳ is a gold-standard response as required by
standard supervised learning algorithms. A key strength
of coactive learning is its ability to learn even if ȳ is just
an incremental improvement over y, which it interprets as
pairwise preference feedback ȳ ≻ y.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly being used
as an interactive tool to assist humans in writing more effectively. These models can quickly generate text that the human user can either accept or modify if desired, resulting in
significant improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness
of writing. For example, email editors are already beginning
to automatically generate text that users can edit, and there
are many applications where LLMs can write the first draft
(e.g., responses to customer complaints, insurance adjuster
reports). However, to produce writing that aligns with user
preferences and expertise, such writing assistants will require substantial personalization and contextual adaptation.
This personalization will ensure the writing style suits the
user and the system improves its task-specific knowledge.

In this paper, we derive CoRLL as the first coactive learning
algorithm for LLM training, and we provide a theoretical
justification that goes beyond the known results for linear
models (Shivaswamy & Joachims, 2012). CoRLL builds
on reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
which is commonly used to align LLMs with human preferences (Stiennon et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). However,
conventional RLHF can be viewed as dueling bandit feedback (Yue et al., 2009), where both y and ȳ are generated
from the LLM, and the user has to actively provides a pair-

1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY. Correspondence to: Aaron Tucker <aarondtucker@cs.cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by

the author(s).

1

