Domain Generalisation via Imprecise Learning

Anurag Singh 1 Siu Lun Chau 1 Shahine Bouabid 2 Krikamol Muandet 1

Abstract

(LLM) that surpass human-level generalisation capabilities
in specific domains.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalisation is challenging because it involves not only learning from
empirical data, but also deciding among various
notions of generalisation, e.g., optimising the
average-case risk, worst-case risk, or interpolations thereof. While this choice should in principle be made by the model operator like medical doctors, this information might not always be
available at training time. The institutional separation between machine learners and model operators leads to arbitrary commitments to specific
generalisation strategies by machine learners due
to these deployment uncertainties. We introduce
the Imprecise Domain Generalisation framework
to mitigate this, featuring an imprecise risk optimisation that allows learners to stay imprecise by
optimising against a continuous spectrum of generalisation strategies during training, and a model
framework that allows operators to specify their
generalisation preference at deployment. Supported by both theoretical and empirical evidence,
our work showcases the benefits of integrating
imprecision into domain generalisation.

Despite notable achievements, these systems may catastrophically fail when operated on out-of-domain (OOD)
data because theoretical guarantees for their generalisation
hinge on the assumption of independent and identically distributed (IID) training and deployment data, with empirical
risk minimisation (ERM) being the dominant learning algorithm (Vapnik, 1991; 1995). Emerging challenges like
distribution shifts (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Beery
et al., 2018; 2020; Koh et al., 2021), adversarial attacks
(Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014), and strategic manipulations (Hardt et al., 2016; Perdomo et al., 2020;
Vo et al., 2023) have prompted researchers to question the
validity of algorithms developed under this assumption. This
gap has fueled interest in OOD generalisation, prompting
the exploration of novel learning algorithms and resulting in
rapid developments in domain adaptation (Wilson and Cook,
2020; Zhao et al., 2022), domain generalisation (Wang et al.,
2021b; Zhou et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2021), and test-time
adaptation (Sun et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021a; Chen et al.,
2023a), among others.
In IID generalisation, where test loss aligns with training
loss, the learner’s goal of minimising the training loss aligns
with the operator’s expectation of small test loss. Bounded
data uncertainty, within finite data, enables the learner to
assess model generalisation during deployment. Historically, the IID assumption is accompanied by another critical,
but often overlooked assumption: the overlap between the
learner and the operator, who employs the model in realworld contexts. Conversely, OOD generalisation still lacks
a precise definition, leading to additional ambiguity termed
“generalisation uncertainty”. Unlike data uncertainty, generalisation uncertainty arises from a lack of knowledge about
deployment environments, whether due to natural shifts
(across hospitals, experimental conditions, and time) or artificial ones (adversarial attacks, strategic manipulation), and
cannot be mitigated by additional data collection.

1. Introduction
The capability to generalise knowledge, a hallmark of both
biological and artificial intelligence (AI), has seen remarkable progress in recent years. Developments in generalpurpose learning algorithms (Vapnik, 1991; Hofmann et al.,
2008; LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016), model
architectures (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Cohen and Welling,
2016; Vaswani et al., 2017), and training infrastructures
(Ratner et al., 2019) have given rise to AI systems such
as generative models (GenAI) and large language models
Anurag Singh is part of the Graduate School of Computer
Science at Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. 1 CISPA
Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK. Correspondence to: Anurag Singh <anurag.singh@cispa.de>.

Prior research has addressed generalisation uncertainty independently by introducing various concepts of OOD generalisation including worst-case generalisation (Arjovsky
et al., 2019; Ben-Tal et al., 2009; Sagawa et al., 2020;
Krueger et al., 2021), average-case generalisation (Blan-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

