Factored-Reward Bandits with Intermediate Observations
Marco Mussi * 1 Simone Drago * 1 Marcello Restelli 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

& Rusmevichientong, 2012; Den Boer, 2015). On the other
hand, the advertising budget we invest influences the number
of potential customers that will be exposed to such an item,
i.e., the number of impressions we are able to generate with
the advertisement campaign (Feldman et al., 2007). Thus,
every time we select a price-budget pair (i.e., action vector),
we observe a noisy realization of the conversion rate, which
depends on the price, and a noisy realization of the expected
number of impressions, which depends on the budget we
invest in advertising (i.e., intermediate observations). Thus,
our objective is to maximize the revenue (i.e., reward) that is
computed as the product between the price, the conversion
rate, and the impressions (which will give us our income)
subtracting the invested advertising budget.1

In several real-world sequential decision problems, at every step, the learner is required to select
different actions. Every action affects a specific
part of the system and generates an observable intermediate effect. In this paper, we introduce the
Factored-Reward Bandits (FRBs), a novel setting
able to effectively capture and exploit the structure of this class of scenarios, where the reward
is computed as the product of the action intermediate observations. We characterize the statistical
complexity of the learning problem in the FRBs,
by deriving worst-case and asymptotic instancedependent regret lower bounds. Then, we devise
and analyze two regret minimization algorithms.
The former, F-UCB, is an anytime optimistic approach matching the worst-case lower bound (up
to logarithmic factors) but fails to perform optimally from the instance-dependent perspective.
The latter, F-Track, is a bound-tracking approach, that enjoys optimal asymptotic instancedependent regret guarantees.

This scenario can be, in principle, addressed as a standard
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB, Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020)
by looking at the reward (i.e., revenue) only and considering
price-budget couples as actions. However, with such an
approach, intermediate observations (i.e., the conversion
rate – consequence of the price we set – and the impressions
we generate – a consequence of the adv budget we invest)
that could provide useful information would be ignored
with a possible detrimental effect on the learning process.
Indeed, if we look just at the reward and disregard this
factored structure, the learning problem will: (i) present an
unnecessarily large action space, including all the possible
combinations of action components (e.g., price and budget
pairs), and (ii) suffer a possibly amplified effect of the noise
in the reward due to the product of the noisy intermediate
observations (e.g., impressions times conversion rate).

1. Introduction
In several real-world sequential decision-making problems,
the learner is required to select, at every interaction, different
actions, i.e., an action vector, acting on different portions of
the system, each producing an intermediate observation. In
such scenarios, the reward is often a combination of these
observations. Consider, for instance, the case in which we
want to sell a product on an e-commerce website. Our goal
is to maximize the overall revenue derived from the sales of
a given item. In this business process, we have to choose
(i) the price at which to sell the product and (ii) how much
budget to invest in advertising. On the one hand, the price
we set determines the propensity of the users to buy a given
item, i.e., the conversion rate, representing for each price,
the fraction of the customers that will buy the item (Broder

A notion of factored bandits has been studied in (Zimmert
& Seldin, 2018) in which the expected reward is a general
function of the action components. No intermediate observations are considered and the noise is applied to the final
reward only. Thus, this setting ultimately fails to model the
real-world scenarios we are interested in, where the intermediate observations play a crucial role and are combined
with a specific function (i.e., the product). As we shall see
later in the paper, this specificity, motivated by the considered real-world scenarios, will allow us to obtain tighter and
more detailed performance guarantees.

*
Equal contribution 1 Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: Marco Mussi <marco.mussi@polimi.it>.

1

The formalization of this example and an additional motivating
example are reported in Appendix A.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

