A Distributional Analogue to the Successor Representation

Harley Wiltzer * 1 2 Jesse Farebrother * 1 2 3 Arthur Gretton 3 4 Yunhao Tang 3 André Barreto 3 Will Dabney 3
Marc G. Bellemare 1 2 5 Mark Rowland 3

Abstract

be available at training time in order to predict the return
distribution. For example, if we wish to evaluate a trained
policy on a new task with regard to various performance
criteria, these predictions of the return distributions must be
trained from scratch. This paper contributes a method that
overcomes this drawback, allowing for zero-shot evaluation
of novel reward functions without requiring further learning.

This paper contributes a new approach for distributional reinforcement learning which elucidates
a clean separation of transition structure and reward in the learning process. Analogous to how
the successor representation (SR) describes the expected consequences of behaving according to a
given policy, our distributional successor measure
(SM) describes the distributional consequences of
this behaviour. We formulate the distributional
SM as a distribution over distributions and provide theory connecting it with distributional and
model-based reinforcement learning. Moreover,
we propose an algorithm that learns the distributional SM from data by minimizing a two-level
maximum mean discrepancy. Key to our method
are a number of algorithmic techniques that are
independently valuable for learning generative
models of state. As an illustration of the usefulness of the distributional SM, we show that it
enables zero-shot risk-sensitive policy evaluation
in a way that was not previously possible.

In the case of predicting just the expected return, such zeroshot evaluation is made possible by learning the successor
representation (SR; Dayan, 1993). This approach has recently been extended to continuous state spaces (Blier et al.,
2021; Blier, 2022), and the introduction of a variety of density modelling and generative modelling techniques mean
that such zero-shot transfer is now possible at scale (Janner
et al., 2020; Touati & Ollivier, 2021; Touati et al., 2023).
This paper extends the idea of the successor representation
to distributional RL, by defining the distributional successor measure (DSM). We show that the DSM is a rewardagnostic object that can by combined with any deterministic
reward function to obtain the corresponding distribution of
returns, extending zero-shot transfer to the entire distribution of returns. Our primary algorithmic contribution is the
δ-model, a tractable approximation to the distributional successor measure based on ensembles of diverse generative
models, along with practical implementation techniques that
are crucial for success. We exhibit the power of δ-models by
demonstrating their unique ability generalize across tasks
and risk-sensitive criteria without necessitating any further
data collection or training, which could be expensive or
dangerous – a feat that no other method can accomplish.

1. Introduction
Distributional reinforcement learning (Morimura et al.,
2010; Bellemare et al., 2017a; 2023) is an approach to
reinforcement learning (RL) that focuses on learning the
entire probability distribution of an agent’s return, not just
its expected value. Distributional RL has been shown to
improve deep RL agent performance (Yang et al., 2019;
Nguyen-Tang et al., 2021), and provides a flexible approach
to risk-aware decision-making (Dabney et al., 2018a; Zhang
& Weng, 2021; Fawzi et al., 2022). A notable drawback of
existing approaches to distributional RL is that rewards must

2. Background
In the sequel, Law(X) denotes the probability measure govL
erning a random variable X, and X = Y (read equal in
distribution) is written to indicate that Law(X) = Law(Y ).
The notation P(A) defines the space of probability measures over a set A. We also write (X, Y ) ∼ µ ⊗ ν to refer
to the pair of independent samples X ∼ µ, Y ∼ ν.

*

Equal contribution 1 McGill University 2 Mila - Québec
AI Institute 3 Google DeepMind 4 Gatsby Unit, University College London 5 CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Harley
Wiltzer <harley.wiltzer@mail.mcgill.ca>, Jesse Farebrother <jfarebro@cs.mcgill.ca>.

We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) with state
space X , finite action space A, transition kernel p : X ×
A → P(X ), bounded and measurable reward function

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

