Position: Social Choice Should Guide AI Alignment
in Dealing with Diverse Human Feedback

Vincent Conitzer 1 2 Rachel Freedman 3 Jobst Heitzig 4 Wesley H. Holliday 5 Bob M. Jacobs 6
Nathan Lambert 7
Milan Mossé 5
Eric Pacuit 8
Stuart Russell 3
Hailey Schoelkopf 9
1
10 11
Emanuel Tewolde William S. Zwicker

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recently, reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) has become the primary strategy that leading AI
companies such as OpenAI (OpenAI, 2023), Anthropic (Anthropic, 2023), Meta (Meta, 2023), and Google (Google,
2023) use to make pretrained large language models (LLMs)
more capable and controllable (Christiano et al., 2017;
Ziegler et al., 2019) and to align them with human values. However, RLHF faces many limitations and challenges (Casper et al., 2023; Lambert & Calandra, 2023),
including unrepresentative data (Prabhakaran et al., 2021;
Feffer et al., 2023), unrealistic models of human decisionmaking (Hong et al., 2022; Freedman et al., 2021; Siththaranjan et al., 2023; Lambert et al., 2023), and insufficient
modeling of human diversity (Kirk et al., 2023; Freedman
et al., 2023) which may lead to political bias (Motoki et al.,
2023; Rozado, 2024). We propose that ideas from social
choice theory (Arrow, 2012; Fishburn, 1973; Kelly, 1988;
Brandt et al., 2015)—e.g., concerning whose preferences
should be integrated into decisions and how this should be
done—are needed to solve many of these open problems.

Foundation models such as GPT-4 are fine-tuned
to avoid unsafe or otherwise problematic behavior,
such as helping to commit crimes or producing
racist text. One approach to fine-tuning, called reinforcement learning from human feedback, learns
from humans’ expressed preferences over multiple outputs. Another approach is constitutional
AI, in which the input from humans is a list of
high-level principles. But how do we deal with
potentially diverging input from humans? How
can we aggregate the input into consistent data
about “collective” preferences or otherwise use
it to make collective choices about model behavior? In this paper, we argue that the field of social choice is well positioned to address these
questions, and we discuss ways forward for this
agenda, drawing on discussions in a recent workshop on Social Choice for AI Ethics and Safety
held in Berkeley, CA, USA in December 2023.

While models that are solely pretrained on internet data
may produce repetitive or harmful text, RLHF trains models
to follow instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022) and produce
helpful and “harmless” outputs (Bai et al., 2022a) based on
human judgments. RLHF gathers example outputs from a
pretrained LLM or examples written by humans. Next, humans are asked to select the outputs that best meet specified
criteria (such as being “helpful” or “unbiased”). These judgments, often called preferences, are then used to fine-tune
the LLM. From a social choice perspective, this method
raises several critical questions: Which humans are asked
to judge outputs? What criteria do they use? How are
their judgments combined? And how do their expressed
judgments relate to their actual preferences?

1

Foundations of Cooperative AI Lab, Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Institute
for Ethics in AI, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
3
Center for Human-Compatible AI, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley,
USA 4 Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam,
Brandenburg, Germany 5 Department of Philosophy, University of
California, Berkeley, USA 6 Department of Philosophy and Moral
Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Begium 7 Allen Institute for
AI, Berkeley, California, USA 8 Department of Philosophy, University of Maryland, College Park, USA 9 EleutherAI 10 Department
of Mathematics, Union College, Schenectady, USA 11 Murat Sertel Center for Advanced Economic Studies, Istanbul Bilgi University, Istanbul, Turkey. Correspondence to: Vincent Conitzer
<conitzer@cs.cmu.edu>.

Constitutional AI (CAI), which involves reinforcement
learning from AI feedback (RLAIF), is an alternative addressing some of these questions (Bai et al., 2022b). Humans produce a “constitution” that specifies principles that
the LLM is trained to align with. However, one must still

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

