Differentially Private Domain Adaptation with Theoretical Guarantees

Raef Bassily 1 Corinna Cortes 2 Anqi Mao 3 Mehryar Mohri 2 3

Abstract

The problem faced in practice is often even more challenging, since the labeled data from the target domain can be
sensitive and subject to privacy constraints (Bassily, Mohri,
and Suresh, 2022). For example, a corporation such as an
airline company, or an institution such as a hospital, may
seek to train a classifier based on private labeled data it
has collected, as well as a large amount of data available
from a public domain. To share the classifier internally, let
alone share it publicly to the benefit of other institutions or
individuals, it may have to train the classifier with privacy
guarantees. In the absence of the public domain data and
without the adaptation scenario, the framework of differential privacy (Dwork, McSherry, Nissim, and Smith, 2006b;
Dwork and Roth, 2014b) can be used to privately learn a
classifier that can be shared publicly. But, how can we rigorously design a differentially private algorithm for supervised
domain adaptation?

In many applications, the labeled data at the
learner’s disposal is subject to privacy constraints
and is relatively limited. To derive a more accurate predictor for the target domain, it is often
beneficial to leverage publicly available labeled
data from an alternative domain, somewhat close
to the target domain. This is the modern problem
of supervised domain adaptation from a public
source to a private target domain. We present two
(ε, δ)-differentially private adaptation algorithms
for supervised adaptation, for which we make
use of a general optimization problem, recently
shown to benefit from favorable theoretical learning guarantees. Our first algorithm is designed
for regression with linear predictors and shown to
solve a convex optimization problem. Our second
algorithm is a more general solution for loss functions that may be non-convex but Lipschitz and
smooth. While our main objective is a theoretical analysis, we also report the results of several
experiments. We first show that the non-private
versions of our algorithms match state-of-the-art
performance in supervised adaptation and that for
larger values of the target sample size or ε, the
performance of our private algorithms remains
close to that of their non-private counterparts.

This paper deals precisely with the problem of devising
a private (supervised) domain adaptation algorithm with
theoretical guarantees for this scenario. Our scenario covers
any standard privacy learning scenario where additional data
from another public source is sought.
The problem of domain adaptation has been theoretically
investigated in a series of publications in the past and the
notion of discrepancy was shown to be a key divergence
measure to the analysis of adaptation (Kifer et al., 2004;
Blitzer et al., 2008; Ben-David et al., 2010; Mansour et al.,
2009; Cortes & Mohri, 2011; Mohri & Muñoz Medina,
2012; Cortes & Mohri, 2014; Cortes et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020b). Building on this prior work, Awasthi, Cortes,
and Mohri (2024) recently gave a general theoretical analysis of supervised adaptation that holds for any method
relying on reweighting the source and target labeled samples, including reweighting methods that depend on the
predictor selected. Thus, the analysis covers a large number
of algorithms in adaptation, including importance weighting
(Sugiyama et al., 2007b; Lu et al., 2021; Sugiyama et al.,
2007a; Cortes et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2020a), KLIEP
(Sugiyama et al., 2007b), Kernel Mean Matching (KMM)
(Huang et al., 2006), discrepancy minimization (DM) or generalized discrepancy minimization (Cortes & Mohri, 2014;
Cortes et al., 2019). The authors also suggested a general
optimization problem that consists of minimizing the righthand side of their learning bound.

1. Introduction
In many applications, the labeled data at hand is not sufficient to train an accurate model for a target domain. Instead,
a large amount of labeled data may be available from another domain, a source domain, somewhat close to the target
domain. The problem then consists of using the labeled data
available from both the source and target domains to come
up with a more accurate predictor for the target domain.
This is the setting of supervised domain adaptation.
1

The Ohio State University 2 Google Research, New York, NY;
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Anqi Mao <aqmao@cims.nyu.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

