Off-policy Evaluation Beyond Overlap:
Sharp Partial Identification Under Smoothness

Samir Khan 1 Martin Saveski 2 Johan Ugander 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is the task of estimating the
value of an evaluation/target policy using data from a behavior/logging policy, and arises naturally in many settings
(Li et al., 2010; 2011; Bottou et al., 2013; Swaminathan
et al., 2017; Liao et al., 2021; Chin et al., 2022). The two
standard approaches to off-policy evaluation are reweighting and imputation. Reweighting methods, as the name
suggests, reweight outcomes observed under the behavior
policy to obtain unbiased estimates of the evaluation policy.
Imputation methods, on the other hand, model the expected
outcome of taking an action as a function of covariates, and
then use this model to estimate the off-policy value. Finally,
doubly-robust methods combine these two approaches to obtain better theoretical guarantees (Dudı́k et al., 2011). Once
an estimator of the off-policy value is available, the estimated policy value can be optimized over a policy class to
select an optimal policy, which is the task of policy learning.

Off-policy evaluation, and the complementary
problem of policy learning, use historical data collected under a logging policy to estimate and/or
optimize the value of a target policy. Methods
for these tasks typically assume overlap between
the target and logging policy, enabling solutions
based on importance weighting and/or imputation. Absent such an overlap assumption, existing
work either relies on a well-specified model or
optimizes needlessly conservative bounds. In this
work, we develop methods for no-overlap policy
evaluation without a well-specified model, relying instead on non-parametric assumptions on
the expected outcome, with a particular focus on
Lipschitz smoothness. Under such assumptions
we are able to provide sharp bounds on the offpolicy value, along with asymptotically optimal
estimators of those bounds. For Lipschitz smoothness, we construct a pair of linear programs that
upper and lower bound the contribution of the nooverlap region to the off-policy value. We show
that these programs have a concise closed form
solution, and that their solutions converge under
the Lipschitz assumption to the sharp partial identification bounds at a minimax optimal rate, up to
log factors. We demonstrate the effectiveness our
methods on two semi-synthetic examples, and obtain informative and valid bounds that are tighter
than those possible without smoothness assumptions.

All of these methods for policy evaluation and learning
generally rely on an overlap assumption, which ensures that
any action with positive probability under the evaluation
policy also has positive probability under the behavior policy.
If the overlap assumption is not satisfied, the weights used
by reweighting methods will be infinite, and the models used
by imputation methods will only be valid under strong wellspecification assumptions. In both cases, overlap violations
lead to biased estimates of the off-policy value and suboptimal choices of learned policy (Sachdeva et al., 2020).
This state of affairs raises the question: if we do not have
overlap and are unwilling to assume a well-specified model,
can we say anything about the off-policy value? In such
a case, the off-policy value is not point-identified, so we
cannot provide a point estimate, but can still provide partial
identification bounds on the off-policy value.
In this work, we propose new estimators and resolve open
questions in the policy evaluation and learning literatures
by identifying tight bounds on the off-policy value in the
presence of overlap violations under modest non-parametric
assumptions on the expected outcome function, and give
rate-optimal estimators of these bounds (up to log-factors).
We focus on smoothness assumptions that constrain the

1

Department of Statistics, Stanford University 2 Information
School, University of Washington 3 Department of Management
Science and Engineering, Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Samir Khan <samirk@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

