Failures Are Fated, But Can Be Faded: Characterizing and Mitigating
Unwanted Behaviors in Large-Scale Vision and Language Models

Som Sagar 1 Aditya Taparia 1 Ransalu Senanayake 1

Abstract

To name a few examples of failures: incorrect detections
in the computer vision module of autonomous vehicles can
lead to fatal accidents (Madrigal, 2018), or commercial generative AI-based platforms that are susceptible to producing
stereotypical or racist outputs can create societal stigma and
perpetuate bias. The importance of identifying such failure
modes stems from two different aspects. First, engineers and
data scientists need to understand the numerous factors that
affect model performance to debug these models. Second,
policymakers, legislative bodies, and insurance companies
need an accessible method to audit the capabilities of these
models. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the main requirement for
both stakeholders is an efficient tool that can automatically
explore various areas of the failure landscape.

In large deep neural networks that seem to perform surprisingly well on many tasks, we also
observe a few failures related to accuracy, social biases, and alignment with human values,
among others. Therefore, before deploying these
models, it is crucial to characterize this failure
landscape for engineers to debug and legislative
bodies to audit models. Nevertheless, it is infeasible to exhaustively test for all possible combinations of factors that could lead to a model’s
failure. In this paper, we introduce a post-hoc
method that utilizes deep reinforcement learning to explore and construct the landscape of
failure modes in pre-trained discriminative and
generative models. With the aid of limited human feedback, we then demonstrate how to restructure the failure landscape to be more desirable by moving away from the discovered failure
modes. We empirically show the effectiveness of
the proposed method across common Computer
Vision, Natural Language Processing, and VisionLanguage tasks. Github: https://github.
com/somsagar07/FailureShiftRL

Although users of deep neural network-based systems frequently encounter failures, as evidenced by daily social media posts, there have been relatively few attempts to develop
techniques for exploring the landscape of these failures.
This is primarily due to the exceedingly high number of
test cases, rendering classical search techniques impractical.
Models often fail due to a combination of several factors,
which may exist in either the continuous, discrete, or hybrid
domain. A model might fail in one case while performing
adequately in another seemingly similar case, emphasizing
the stochastic nature of the failure landscape and thus exacerbating the difficulty of the problem. For instance, as
shown in the histogram of Fig. 1, changing the profession
in a text prompt result in bias.

1. Introduction
No dataset or model, regardless of its size, can encompass
the full spectrum of real-world scenarios. Consequently,
they are expected to fail under certain conditions. However,
unlike in white-box modeling, where we construct models
from first principles by clearly defining assumptions, it is
impossible to know a priori which factors contribute to the
failures of deep learning models. These failures often only
become apparent after deployment, when the models are
exposed to diverse and unpredictable real-world data.

To tackle these challenges, we need a method that can explore large spaces by taking many possible actions while
also taking into account the stochasticity of the system.
As a solution, we propose a deep Reinforcement Learning
(deep RL)-based method to post-hoc characterize the failure
landscape of large-scale pre-trained deep neural networks.
The deep RL-based algorithm iteratively interacts with the
environment (i.e., the model we want to audit) to learn a
stochastic policy that can find failures by satisfying criteria,
either implicit or explicit, provided by a human. We propose
various operating modes of the deep RL-based algorithm to
explore the failure landscape with different specificities as
engineers and legislative bodies have different needs.

1

School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona
State University, Tempe, United States of America. Correspondence to: Som Sagar <ssagar6@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Characterizing the failure landscape is not useful if it cannot
1

