Extracting Training Data from Document-Based VQA Models

Francesco Pinto 1 2 * Nathalie Rauschmayr 2 Florian Tramèr 3 Philip Torr 1 Federico Tombari 2

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have made
remarkable progress in document-based Visual
Question Answering (i.e., responding to queries
about the contents of an input document provided
as an image). In this work, we show these models can memorize responses for training samples
and regurgitate them even when the relevant visual information has been removed. This includes
Personal Identifiable Information (PII) repeated
once in the training set, indicating these models
could divulge memorised sensitive information
and therefore pose a privacy risk. We quantitatively measure the extractability of information in
controlled experiments and differentiate between
cases where it arises from generalization capabilities or from memorization. We further investigate
the factors that influence memorization across
multiple state-of-the-art models and propose an effective heuristic countermeasure that empirically
prevents the extractability of PII.

Figure 1. A malicious user may prompt a Vision-Language Model
(VLM) to reveal secret information about a victim by generating a copy of the original document with the secret information
missing (black box). If the secret was part of the training questionanswer pairs, the VLM may respond correctly. For ethical reasons,
we anonymize (grey boxes) personal information of a DocVQA
(Mathew et al., 2021) sample on which the attack is successful for
the Donut model (Kim et al., 2022). The answer is repeated only
once in the whole training set, yet it is memorized.

1. Introduction

the correct response. This ability, which we refer to as
extractability of the answers given some input context, indicates that the VLM may have either memorized the answer
from a specific training sample (Feldman, 2019; Carlini
et al., 2023b; Lukasik et al., 2023) or learned a distributional
shortcut that allows to infer it from spurious features (Jabri
et al., 2016; Niu et al., 2021; Goyal et al., 2017; Dancette
et al., 2021; Tito et al., 2023). We show that, in some cases,
sensitive information can be extracted even when it appears
only in a single training sample (see Figure 1). In order
to fix this unintended behaviour of the models, we introduce a simple mitigation strategy that reduces the amount
of extractable PIIs to zero.

Document-Based Visual Question Answering (Mathew
et al., 2021)—the task of answering questions about the
content of documents presented as visual inputs—has witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years, with modern Vision-Language Models (VLMs) gaining the ability
to comprehend textual information exclusively from visual
cues and provide accurate responses (Davis et al., 2022; Lee
et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b;a; GPT).
However, our paper exposes a concerning behavior of these
models: even when the answer to a question is explicitly
removed from the input image and is unique or sporadically
repeated across the training set, the VLM can still provide
*

In this study, we investigate this phenomenon across three
state-of-the-art Document-Based VQA models: Donut (Kim
et al., 2022), Pix2Struct (Lee et al., 2023) and PALI-3 (Chen
et al., 2023b)). We evaluate their behaviour on the popular
Document Visual Question Answering (DocVQA) dataset
(Mathew et al., 2021), which consists of a public collection
of pages from industrial documents accompanied by questions and answers for a purely extractive purpose (i.e., the

1

Equal contribution Department of Engineering of Science,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Google, Zurich, Switzerland
3
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Francesco
Pinto <francesco1.pinto@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

