Causality Based Front-door Defense Against
Backdoor Attack on Language Models

Yiran Liu * 1 Xiaoang Xu * 2 Zhiyi Hou 3 Yang Yu 4

Abstract

mula, which also explains why previous methods
failed. Our code to reproduce the experiments is
available at: https://github.com/lyr17/FrontdoorAdjustment-Backdoor-Elimination.

We have developed a new framework based on
the theory of causal inference to protect language models against backdoor attacks. Backdoor attackers can poison language models with
different types of triggers, such as words, sentences, grammar, and style, enabling them to
selectively modify the decision-making of the
victim model. However, existing defense approaches are only effective when the backdoor
attack form meets specific assumptions, making
it difficult to counter diverse backdoor attacks.
We propose a new defense framework Front-door
Adjustment for Backdoor Elimination (FABE)
based on causal reasoning that does not rely on
assumptions about the form of triggers. This
method effectively differentiates between spurious and legitimate associations by creating a
’front door’ that maps out the actual causal relationships. The term ’front door’ refers to a text
that retains the semantic equivalence of the initial input, which is generated by an additional,
fine-tuned language model, denoted as the defense model. Our defense experiments against
various attack methods at the token, sentence, and
syntactic levels reduced the attack success rate
from 93.63% to 15.12%, improving the defense
effect by 2.91 times compared to the best baseline result of 66.61%, achieving state-of-the-art
results. Through ablation study analysis, we analyzed the effect of each module in FABE, demonstrating the importance of complying with the
front-door criterion and front-door adjustment for-

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely adopted due to
their outstanding capabilities in language understanding and
generation (Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Penedo
et al., 2023; Anil et al., 2023). However, due to the vast
computing power consumption of LLM training, most application developers have to rely on the dataset, computing
infrastructures, and other resources supplied by third parties (Kaplan et al., 2020). Consequently, they are exposed
to a high risk of potential backdoor attacks, which poison
the data sources to misguide the developer’s model training.(Yang et al., 2023). Literature has provided evidence
explaining how the backdoor attacks fail LLM training by simultaneously inserting triggers in texts and tampering with
the associated labels (Gu et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019; Qi
et al., 2021c). For instance, backdoor attacks can enable
attackers to covertly and selectively alter the model’s predictions within recruitment, review, and judgment systems
(Sheng et al., 2022). Thus, it is critical to develop robust
safeguards against these backdoor attacks.
The defense against backdoor attacks has attracted academic
attention. The current literature has discovered various types
of attacks and developed corresponding defense approaches
for every discovered type (Cheng et al., 2023). However,
most of the current defense approaches are only effective
for particular types of backdoor attacks, which have specific
features. Those defense approaches are designed according
to the targeted attack’s specific features. For instance, some
methods are designed to remove specific triggers (Qi et al.,
2021a; Shao et al., 2021; He et al., 2023). However, in the
real world, the types of attacks are hard to foresee. Various
types of attacks can also be combined to appear. Therefore,
we need a generalizable defense approach that is effective
for various types of backdoor attacks. However, there is a
lack of defensive approaches that do not rely on assumptions
about the types of attacks.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin University of Science and
Technology, Harbin, China 3 Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 4 School of Economics and
Management, China University of Petroleum, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yang Yu <yangyu1@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

