Weighted Distance Nearest Neighbor Condensing

Lee-Ad Gottlieb 1 Timor Sharabi 1 Roi Weiss 1

Abstract

without their disadvantages: For example, a naive nearest
neighbor approach may require storing the entire sample.
To address the disadvantages of the NN classifier, (Hart,
1968) introduced the technique of sample compression for
the NN classifier. This work defined the minimum consistent subset problem (also called the nearest neighbor condensing problem): Given a sample, find a minimal subset
of the sample that is consistent with it, meaning that for
every point of the sample, its nearest neighbor in the subset (that is the condensed set) has the same label. (Hart,
1968) further suggested a heuristic for the NN condensing
problem. Analysis of this problem, as well as the creation
of new heuristics for it, has been the subject of extensive
research since its introduction (Gates, 1972; Ritter et al.,
1975; Devroye et al., 1996; Wilson & Martinez, 2000).

The problem of nearest neighbor condensing has
enjoyed a long history of study, both in its theoretical and practical aspects. In this paper, we introduce the problem of weighted distance nearest
neighbor condensing, where one assigns weights
to each point of the condensed set, and then
new points are labeled based on their weighted
distance nearest neighbor in the condensed set.
We study the theoretical properties of this new
model, and show that it can produce dramatically better condensing than the standard nearest
neighbor rule, yet is characterized by generalization bounds almost identical to the latter. We then
suggest a condensing heuristic for our new problem. We demonstrate Bayes consistency for this
heuristic, and also show promising empirical results.

Our Contribution In this paper, we introduce a novel
modification of the NN condensing problem. In our new
condensing problem (presented formally in Section 2),
each point of the condensed set is also assigned a weight.
We modify the distance function to consider weighted distance, meaning that the distance from a new point to a point
in the condensed set is their original distance divided by
the weight of the point in the condensed set. It follows
that assigning high weight to a point in the condensed set
increases its influence on the labeling of new points. We
call the new problem of choosing a condensed set and assigning its weights the weighted distance nearest neighbor
condensing problem.

1. Introduction
The nearest neighbor (NN) classifier, introduced by (Fix &
Hodges, 1951), is an intuitive and popular learning tool. In
this model, a learner observes a sample of labeled points,
and given a new point to be classified, assigns the new point
the same label as its nearest neighbor in the sample. It
was subsequently demonstrated by Cover & Hart (1967)
that when no label noise is present, the nearest neighbor
classifier’s expected error converges to zero as the sample
size grows. This and other results helped spawn a deep
body of research into proximity-based classification (Devroye et al., 1996; Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).

We proceed with an in-depth study of the statistical properties of weighted distance condensing (Section 3). Crucially,
we find that our model allows dramatically better condensing than what is possible under standard (that is, unweighted) NN condensing: There are families of instances
wherein the optimal condensing under unweighted NN rule
is of size Θ(n), while condensing under the weighted NN
(WNN) rule yields a condensed set of size exactly 2 (Theorem 3.1). At the same time, we demonstrate generalization
bounds for condensing under the WNN rule which are almost identical to those previously known for the NN rule
(Theorem 3.4). This means that the much more powerful
weighted rule can be adopted with only negligible increase
in the variance of the model, so that the more powerful rule
does not contribute to overfitting.

Nearest neighbor classifiers enjoy other advantages as well.
They require only a distance function on the points, and do
not even require that the host space be metric. They also
extend naturally to the multi-class setting. Yet they are not
1
Department of Computer Science, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel. Correspondence to: Lee-Ad Gottlieb <leead@ariel.ac.il>,
Timor Sharabi <timorsharabi@gmail.com>, Roi Weiss
<roiw@ariel.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

