Exploring Correlations of Self-Supervised Tasks for Graphs

Taoran Fang 1 Wei Zhou 1 Yifei Sun 1 Kaiqiao Han 1 Lvbin Ma 2 Yang Yang * 1

Abstract

narios and have been widely applied in various downstream
tasks such as node classification (Jiang et al., 2019), link
prediction (Kipf & Welling, 2016b), vertex clustering (Ramaswamy et al., 2005), and recommendation systems (Ying
et al., 2018). However, two fundamental challenges hinder
the large-scale practical applications of GNNs. One is the
scarcity of high-quality labeled data in the real world (Zitnik
et al., 2018), and the other is the low generalization ability
of the trained models caused by over-fitting (Rong et al.,
2019; Feng et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2022).

Graph self-supervised learning has sparked a research surge in training informative representations without accessing any labeled data. However, our understanding of graph self-supervised
learning remains limited, and the inherent relationships between various self-supervised tasks
are still unexplored. Our paper aims to provide
a fresh understanding of graph self-supervised
learning based on task correlations. Specifically,
we evaluate the performance of the representations trained by one specific task on other tasks
and define correlation values to quantify task correlations. Through this process, we unveil the
task correlations between various self-supervised
tasks and can measure their expressive capabilities, which are closely related to downstream
performance. By analyzing the correlation values
between tasks across various datasets, we reveal
the complexity of task correlations and the limitations of existing multi-task learning methods. To
obtain more capable representations, we propose
Graph Task Correlation Modeling (GraphTCM)
to illustrate the task correlations and utilize it to
enhance graph self-supervised training. The experimental results indicate that our method significantly outperforms existing methods across
various downstream tasks.

To address these challenges, graph self-supervised learning (Liu et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021) offers
a promising training paradigm to reduce the reliance on task
labels and demonstrates significant potential in strengthening GNNs in an unsupervised manner. These methods
specifically construct a variety of graph self-supervised
tasks based on structural and attribute information from
the training graphs, wherein the supervision signals are automatically acquired from the graph itself without accessing
any labeled data. By employing well-designed graph selfsupervised tasks, these methods enable the GNN model to
extract more informative representations from unlabeled
data, leading to improved generalization (Hu et al., 2020c;
Qiu et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020b; Fang et al., 2024; Huang
et al., 2024) and robustness (You et al., 2020b; Jovanovi’c
et al., 2021) on downstream datasets.
However, two fundamental problems impede further comprehension of graph self-supervised learning. The first problem is the lack of understanding regarding the correlations
between different graph self-supervised tasks. Despite the
multitude of graph self-supervised tasks with diverse training objectives, discussions on the correlations between these
tasks are scarce. Additionally, the differences in trained representations between various self-supervised tasks remain
unexplored, limiting a comprehensive understanding of the
expressive capabilities of the trained representations. The
second problem revolves around how to train sufficiently
general and robust self-supervised representations. While
existing graph self-supervised methods can train representations that excel on their respective tasks, there is no direct
guarantee of the performance of trained representations on
downstream tasks. In practice, downstream tasks encompass
diverse forms, posing a significant challenge in ensuring the
universality of trained representations.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have garnered widespread
attention from researchers due to their remarkable success in
graph representation learning (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019). Most existing studies on GNNs have focused on (semi-)supervised sce1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Zhejiang Huayun Information Technology, Hangzhou, China. Our code is available at: https:
//github.com/zjunet/GraphTCM. Correspondence to:
Yang Yang <yangya@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

