Graph Structure Extrapolation for Out-of-Distribution Generalization

Xiner Li 1 Shurui Gui 1 Youzhi Luo 1 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract

graph OOD research is only in its early stage (Wu et al.,
2022b;a; Bevilacqua et al., 2021; Gui et al., 2023). With various applications and unique complexity, graph OOD problems call for specific solutions. Data augmentation (DA)
methods have shown a significant boost in generalization
capability and performance improvement across multiple
fields (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Yao et al., 2022; Park
et al., 2022; Han et al., 2022), creating a promising possibility for graph OOD studies. Currently, environment-aware
DA methods for graph OOD are under-explored.

Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization deals
with the prevalent learning scenario where test
distribution shifts from training distribution. With
rising application demands and inherent complexity, graph OOD problems call for specialized
solutions. While data-centric methods exhibit
performance enhancements on many generic machine learning tasks, there is a notable absence
of data augmentation methods tailored for graph
OOD generalization. In this work, we propose to
achieve graph OOD generalization with the novel
design of non-Euclidean-space linear extrapolation. The proposed augmentation strategy extrapolates structure spaces to generate OOD graph
data. Our design tailors OOD samples for specific
shifts without corrupting underlying causal mechanisms. Theoretical analysis and empirical results
evidence the effectiveness of our method in solving target shifts, showing substantial and constant
improvements across various graph OOD tasks.

Conventional data augmentations increase the amount of
data and act as regularizers to reduce over-fitting, which
empirically enhances model performance in previous studies (Rong et al., 2019; You et al., 2020). Many DA techniques (Zhang et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2021), including graph data augmentations (GDA), exclusively interpolate data samples to generate new ones.
Interpolation-based DA boosts model performances by
making overall progress in learning (Xu et al., 2020),
Mixup (Zhang et al., 2017) being a typical example. However, practical tasks are often out-of-distribution instead of
in-distribution (ID). Thus, models are expected to extrapolate instead of interpolate. Currently, few augmentation
studies focus on extrapolation, especially for graphs. The
distribution area where models cannot generalize to is also
hardly reachable when generating augmentation samples
using traditional techniques, which is a substantial obstacle
to OOD generalization. Although graphon calculation (Han
et al., 2022) is a potential avenue to extrapolate, the lack of
consideration in environment information and causal design
renders its causal correlations easily breached. Thus, the
performance gain from DA appears limited in OOD tasks.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms typically assume training and
test data are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.).
However, distribution shift is a common problem in realworld applications, which substantially degrades model performance. The out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
problem deals with learning scenarios where test distributions shift from training distributions and remain unknown
during the training phase. The area of OOD generalization
has gained increasing interest over the years, and multiple
OOD methods have been proposed (Ganin et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Krueger et al., 2021; Gui et al., 2024).
Although both general OOD problems and graph analysis (Veličković et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021b; Gui et al.,
2022b; Sun et al., 2024) have been intensively studied,

In this work, we propose to solve OOD generalization in
graph classification tasks from a data-centric perspective.
To stimulate the potential improvement of DA in OOD tasks,
we study graph-space extrapolation, essentially, generating
OOD data samples. Graph data has the complex nature
of topological irregularity and connectivity, with unique
types of distribution shifts in structure. Theoretically, it is
impossible to solve unknown shifts without auxiliary information (Lin et al., 2022). Thus, injecting environment information (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020) in training to convey
the types of shifts is a necessary and promising solution
for OOD. We innovatively propose an environment-aware

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji
<sji@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

