BB OX -A DAPTER: Lightweight Adapting for Black-Box Large Language Models

Haotian Sun* 1 Yuchen Zhuang* 1 Wei Wei 2 Chao Zhang 1 Bo Dai 1

Abstract
Adapting state-of-the-art Large Language Models
(LLMs) like GPT-4 and Gemini for specific tasks
is challenging. Due to the opacity in their parameters, embeddings, and even output probabilities,
existing fine-tuning adaptation methods are inapplicable. Consequently, adapting these black-box
LLMs is only possible through their API services,
raising concerns about transparency, privacy, and
cost. To address these challenges, we introduce
BB OX -A DAPTER, a novel lightweight adapter for
black-box LLMs. BB OX -A DAPTER distinguishes
target and source domain data by treating target
data as positive and source data as negative. It
employs a ranking-based Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) loss to promote the likelihood of
target domain data while penalizing that of the
source domain. Furthermore, it features an online
adaptation mechanism, which incorporates realtime positive data sampling from ground-truth,
human, or AI feedback, coupled with negative
data from previous adaptations. Extensive experiments demonstrate BB OX -A DAPTER’s effectiveness and cost efficiency. It improves model performance by up to 6.77% across diverse tasks and
domains, while reducing training and inference
costs by 31.30x and 1.84x, respectively.

Data

White-Box LLM

Data

Grey-Box LLM

Adapter

Output

Model Parameters
Output Probabilities

Token Probs

Output
Model Parameters
Output Probabilities
...

Data

Black-Box LLM

Adapter

Output
Model Parameters
Output Probabilities

Figure 1. Illustration of white-box, grey-box, and black-box LLM
adaptation. White-box has complete access to both model parameters and output probabilities, grey-box has access only to output
probabilities, and black-box lacks access to both.
indicates
the models with trainable parameters, whereas
indicates the
inaccessible fixed parameters.

box LLMs like GPT-3.5 (OpenAI, 2022) and Gemini (Team
et al., 2023) presents significant challenges due to the lack
of direct access to internal model parameters.
Adapting black-box LLMs can be achieved by preparing
and uploading training data through fine-tuning APIs, such
as the OpenAI GPT-3.5-turbo fine-tuning API (Peng et al.,
2023). However, employing fine-tuning APIs for LLM adaptation has several critical issues: (1) Transparency: Aside
from a restricted set of adjustable hyperparameters (e.g.,
the number of tuning epochs), the fine-tuning process remains largely opaque. Crucial aspects, such as the extent
of trainable layers and specific model weights, are often
undisclosed, hindering optimal customization. (2) Privacy:
Uploading training data via APIs introduces potential risks
of privacy breaches, limiting the use of LLMs in sensitive
domains. For instance, electronic health records containing
confidential healthcare information require stringent privacy
measures. (3) Cost: The cost associated with fine-tuning
APIs is considerably higher compared to inference, making
the adaptation expensive. The fine-tuning cost will significantly increase with hyperparameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional abilities in comprehending and generating text across
a wide range of tasks (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022). Despite their growing capabilities, general-purpose, pre-trained
LLMs still require further customization to achieve optimal
performance on specific use cases. However, adapting black*

Equal contribution 1 Georgia Tech 2 Accenture. Correspondence to: Haotian Sun <haotian.sun@gatech.edu>, Bo Dai <bodai@cc.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

