An Explicit Frame Construction for Normalizing 3D Point Clouds

Justin Baker * 1 2 Shih-Hsin Wang * 1 2 Tommaso de Fernex 1 Bao Wang 1 2

Abstract

it significantly boosts the sample efficiency, and promotes
the inductive bias of the learning algorithms (Hinton et al.,
2011; Cohen & Welling, 2017; Romero et al., 2020; van der
Pol et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024).

Many real-world datasets are represented as 3D
point clouds – yet they often lack a predefined
reference frame, posing a challenge for machine
learning or general data analysis. Traditional
methods for determining reference frames and
normalizing 3D point clouds often struggle
with specific inputs, lack theoretical guarantees,
or require massive data. We introduce a new
algorithm that overcomes these limitations and
guarantees both universality and compatibility
with any learnable framework for 3D point cloud
analysis. Our algorithm works with any input
point cloud and performs consistently regardless
of input complexities, unlike data-driven methods
that are susceptible to biases or limited training
data. Empirically, our algorithm outperforms
existing methods in effectiveness and generalizability across diverse benchmark datasets.
Code is available at https://github.
com/Utah-Math-Data-Science/
alignment.

Input NH3 Molecule

PCA Normalization (Bellekens et al., 2014)

Learning-based Normalization (Winter et al., 2022)

Asymmetric Unit Normalization (Ours)

1. Introduction
Analyzing 3D point clouds – in applications such as molecular modeling (Thomas et al., 2018; Gebauer et al., 2019;
Batzner et al., 2022), geometric processing (Mitra et al.,
2004; Morell et al., 2014; Wang & Kim, 2019), and robotics
(Pomerleau et al., 2015; Mi et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2018)
– is challenging. The 3D point clouds can have arbitrary
positions and orientations but lack a fixed reference frame.
Despite this, certain features of the objects should exhibit
equivariance or invariance as the frame undergoes transformations. Understanding and leveraging the equivariance
or invariance properties of the point cloud is crucial for
efficient, accurate, and robust machine learning (ML), as

Figure 1. Normalized NH3 molecules for a set of rotated input (first
row). PCA result is inconsistent in both rotation and reflection
(second row). Data-driven (learned) normalization is consistent
but introduces error in the positional data quantified by a root mean
square error (RMSE), with respect to the ground truth positional
data, of 0.0924 (third row). Our proposed asymmetric unit normalization is both consistent and error-free (last row).

Shifts in positions of a point cloud can be addressed by
centering the point cloud at the origin. Orientation variations, however, present a tougher challenge. Two main
categories of approaches have emerged to address orientation variations. The first category approaches incorporate equivariance and invariance directly into ML models
through architectural (e.g. neural network) constraints, en-

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 2 Scientific Computing and
Imaging (SCI) Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah,
USA. Correspondence to: Bao Wang <wangbaonj@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

