Feature Contamination: Neural Networks Learn Uncorrelated Features
and Fail to Generalize
Tianren Zhang * 1 Chujie Zhao * 1 Guanyu Chen 1 Yizhou Jiang 1 Feng Chen 1 2

Abstract

wild (Amodei et al., 2016; Beery et al., 2018; Koh et al.,
2021). In the last decade, it has proved that the conventional
principle of empirical risk minimization (ERM), when combined with deep neural networks, can lead to remarkable
in-distribution (ID) generalization performance given sufficient training data. Nevertheless, this powerful paradigm
can often fail in out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization,
where distribution shifts occur due to data variations that are
not well-covered in training (Torralba & Efros, 2011; Beery
et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2018; DeGrave et al., 2021).

Learning representations that generalize under
distribution shifts is critical for building robust
machine learning models. However, despite significant efforts in recent years, algorithmic advances in this direction have been limited. In this
work, we seek to understand the fundamental difficulty of out-of-distribution generalization with
deep neural networks. We first empirically show
that perhaps surprisingly, even allowing a neural
network to explicitly fit the representations obtained from a teacher network that can generalize
out-of-distribution is insufficient for the generalization of the student network. Then, by a theoretical study of two-layer ReLU networks optimized by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) under
a structured feature model, we identify a fundamental yet unexplored feature learning proclivity
of neural networks, feature contamination: neural
networks can learn uncorrelated features together
with predictive features, resulting in generalization failure under distribution shifts. Notably, this
mechanism essentially differs from the prevailing
narrative in the literature that attributes the generalization failure to spurious correlations. Overall,
our results offer new insights into the non-linear
feature learning dynamics of neural networks and
highlight the necessity of considering inductive
biases in out-of-distribution generalization.1

In response, recent years have witnessed a surge of developing algorithms that promote OOD generalization. However,
the effectiveness of many proposed algorithms has been
called into question by recent work (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2021; Koh et al., 2021), in which no tested algorithm exhibits a significant advantage over ERM under fair comparisons. On the other hand, it turns out that the most effective
means of improving OOD generalization to date is pretraining on a more diverse dataset (Taori et al., 2020; Wiles
et al., 2022), with notable examples including CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and GPT (Brown et al., 2020). Yet, using
additional pre-training data also blurs the notion of “OOD”
itself since it essentially expands the training distribution.
Moreover, it has been observed that when the test distribution differs from the pre-training distribution, pre-trained
models can also suffer from performance degradation (Bommasani et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Li & Flanigan, 2023).
The limited algorithmic success underlines the necessity
of identifying and understanding the fundamental factors
behind OOD generalization. In particular, a prevailing narrative in the literature attributes the OOD generalization
failure to spurious correlations (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Nagarajan et al., 2021; Schölkopf et al., 2021). This explanation is inspired by the observation that the representations
learned by ERM can absorb features that have correlational
yet non-causal relationships with the output (Beery et al.,
2018; Geirhos et al., 2020), and it has motivated a main line
of algorithmic endeavor of designing better representation
learning objectives in recent years (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Krueger et al., 2021; Mitrovic et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022;
Shi et al., 2022). However, despite being intuitive, it remains
elusive how much this failure mode actually contributes to
the OOD generalization failure in practice—as we will elab-

1. Introduction
The capability of generalizing under distribution shifts is
crucial for machine learning systems to be deployed in the
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 LSBDPA Beijing Key Laboratory, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Feng Chen <chenfeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
trzhang0116/feature-contamination.

1

