MobileLLM: Optimizing Sub-billion Parameter Language Models
for On-Device Use Cases
Zechun Liu 1 Changsheng Zhao 1 Forrest Iandola 1 Chen Lai 1 Yuandong Tian 1 Igor Fedorov 1
Yunyang Xiong 1 Ernie Chang 1 Yangyang Shi 1 Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi 1 Liangzhen Lai 1
Vikas Chandra 1

Abstract

52
48
46
44
42
40

ra
ereb

C

V
M
ia
M
PT PT
eo
s-G O GPT-N BLOO Pyth RWK bileLL
o

M

Figure 1: Average score on zero-shot common sense tasks
for LLMs smaller than 1B parameters. Each bubble’s area is
proportional to the model size of a variant in a model family.
The results of previous methods were evaluated using opensource Hugging Face models to ensure consistent evaluation
procedures. The full list of tasks is in Table 3.

communicate and work but also shaping everyday entertainment experiences. Prominent examples of contemporary
LLM products, such as ChatGPT and Perplexity AI, primarily operate in cloud environments. Leading models
such as ChatGPT4 exceed 1 trillion parameters.1 However,
envisioning a future scenario characterized by widespread
human reliance on LLMs in both front-end conversational
interfaces and back-end operations like recommendation
system, equating to ∼5% of individuals’ daily time. In this
hypothetical scenario, employing GPT-4 at a processing rate
of 50 tokens/s entails the deployment of around one hundred
million H100 GPUs2 , each capable of 60 TFLOPs/s3 . This
computation scale, excluding communication and data trans-

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are permeating various
facets of human life, influencing not only the way people
1
Meta.
Correspondence to:
liu@meta.com>.

Diameter
0 125 350 #Params(M)

50

Accuracy

This paper addresses the growing need for efficient large language models (LLMs) on mobile devices, driven by increasing cloud costs
and latency concerns. We focus on designing
top-quality LLMs with fewer than a billion parameters, a practical choice for mobile deployment. Contrary to prevailing belief emphasizing the pivotal role of data and parameter quantity in determining model quality, our investigation underscores the significance of model architecture for sub-billion scale LLMs. Leveraging
deep and thin architectures, coupled with embedding sharing and grouped-query attention mechanisms, we establish a strong baseline network
denoted as MobileLLM, which attains a remarkable 2.7%/4.3% accuracy boost over preceding
125M/350M state-of-the-art models. Additionally, we propose an immediate block-wise weightsharing approach with no increase in model size
and only marginal latency overhead. The resultant models, denoted as MobileLLM-LS,
demonstrate a further accuracy enhancement
of 0.7%/0.8% than MobileLLM 125M/350M.
Moreover, MobileLLM model family shows significant improvements compared to previous subbillion models on chat benchmarks, and demonstrates close correctness to LLaMA-v2 7B in API
calling tasks, highlighting the capability of small
models for common on-device use cases.

Zechun Liu <zechun-

1

https://the-decoder.com/gpt-4-has-a-trillion-parameters
Detailed calculation can be found in the appendix.
3
https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/h100/

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2

1

