Using AI Uncertainty Quantification to Improve Human Decision-Making

Laura R. Marusich 1 Jonathan Z. Bakdash 2 Yan Zhou 2 Murat Kantarcioglu 2

Abstract

2019). However, there is conflicting evidence in the existing
literature as to whether presenting AI UQ for predictions
can improve human decision-making accuracy, and how to
best communicate this uncertainty information (Lai et al.,
2021). These conflicting results may be due in part to ”a
lack of discussion on the reliability of uncertainty estimates,
sometimes referred to as calibration” (Lai et al., 2021, p.
15).

AI Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) has the potential to improve human decision-making beyond AI predictions alone by providing additional
probabilistic information to users. The majority of past research on AI and human decisionmaking has concentrated on model explainability
and interpretability, with little focus on understanding the potential impact of UQ on human
decision-making. We evaluated the impact on
human decision-making for instance-level UQ,
calibrated using a strict scoring rule, in two online
behavioral experiments. In the first experiment,
our results showed that UQ was beneficial for
decision-making performance compared to only
AI predictions. In the second experiment, we
found UQ had generalizable benefits for decisionmaking across a variety of representations for
probabilistic information. These results indicate
that implementing high quality, instance-level UQ
for AI may improve decision-making with real
systems compared to AI predictions alone.

In order to resolve these questions, we use well-calibrated,
instance-level AI Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) evaluated
using a strict scoring rule (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007) using
the ground truth for class labels 1 . We evaluate the impact of
this AI UQ in two pre-registered, large sample size, online
behavioral experiments assessing human decision-making.
Decision-making is measured objectively using response accuracy and confidence calibration with accuracy. We found
that providing high-quality AI UQ meaningfully improves
decision-accuracy and confidence calibration over an AI
prediction alone. Additionally, the benefits of this AI UQ
appear to be generalizable – decision-making was similar
for AI UQ presented with different visualizations and types
of information. Our results indicate well-calibrated AI UQ
is beneficial for decision-making.
The paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we provide the background information on uncertainty and human
decision-making and an overview of existing techniques for
AI UQ. Section 3 describes our UQ technique and experimental design. In section 4, we report findings from the
behavioral experiments comparing human decision making
accuracy with or without UQ information. In section 5, we
report the impact of different visualizations of UQ information. Finally, sections 6 and 7 conclude by discussing the
implications of our results and future work.

1. Introduction
Using AI to improve human decision-making requires effective human-AI interaction. Recent work on human-AI interaction guidelines focuses on explainability and interpretability (Amershi et al., 2019), which may improve subjective
human ratings of trust in and usability of AI. However, a
quantitative synthesis of studies found that explanations
may not generally improve decision accuracy beyond AI
prediction alone (Schemmer et al., 2022) in many application domains. One less-explored possibility for promoting
effective human-AI interaction is AI Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) for predictions. AI UQ is posited to be key for
human decision-making (Abdar et al., 2021b; Jalaian et al.,

2. Background and Related Work
2.1. Human Decision-Making and Uncertainty

1
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory 2 University of
Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX. Correspondence to: Laura
Marusich <laura.m.cooper20.civ@army.mil>, Yan Zhou
<yan.zhou2@utdallas.edu>.

The possible benefit of AI UQ is supported by work in
the judgment and decision-making literature on decision1
We wish to highlight that for the classification task, ground
truths for class labels are utilized to offer well-calibrated, high
quality, instance-level uncertainty quantification for human subject
experiments.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

