Slot Abstractors: Toward Scalable Abstract Visual Reasoning

Shanka Subhra Mondal 1 Jonathan D. Cohen 2 Taylor W. Webb 3

Abstract

pattern or rule. These are a common testbed of human intelligence. Given a few example demonstrations of such
problems, humans can easily identify the abstract pattern
or rule, and then systematically generalize it to novel stimuli (Raven, 1938; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Fleuret et al.,
2011; Lake et al., 2015). Neural networks, on the other hand,
often struggle to perform this type of abstract visual reasoning, tending to overfit to the concrete details of problems
in the training data, and failing to extract the underlying
abstract pattern or rule (Lake & Baroni, 2018; Barrett et al.,
2018; Ricci et al., 2018).

Abstract visual reasoning is a characteristically
human ability, allowing the identification of relational patterns that are abstracted away from
object features, and the systematic generalization of those patterns to unseen problems. Recent work has demonstrated strong systematic
generalization in visual reasoning tasks involving multi-object inputs, through the integration
of slot-based methods used for extracting objectcentric representations coupled with strong inductive biases for relational abstraction. However,
this approach was limited to problems containing a single rule, and was not scalable to visual
reasoning problems containing a large number of
objects. Other recent work proposed Abstractors,
an extension of Transformers that incorporates
strong relational inductive biases, thereby inheriting the Transformer’s scalability and multi-head
architecture, but it has yet to be demonstrated how
this approach might be applied to multi-object visual inputs. Here we combine the strengths of the
above approaches and propose Slot Abstractors,
an approach to abstract visual reasoning that can
be scaled to problems involving a large number of
objects and multiple relations among them. The
approach displays state-of-the-art performance
across four abstract visual reasoning tasks, as well
as an abstract reasoning task involving real-world
images.

To build models that can demonstrate human-like systematic
generalization, several methods have recently been proposed
(Webb et al., 2020; 2021; Kerg et al., 2022; Altabaa et al.,
2023) to promote inference of relations among objects in the
internal representations of neural networks. These methods
implement a simple architectural inductive bias for relational abstraction, called the “relational bottleneck” (Webb
et al., 2023a), that drives the network to abstract over the
features of objects, and identify relations among them that
are necessary to perform the task. These methods demonstrated the learning and strong systematic generalization of
abstract patterns from a few training examples, but were limited to inputs with pre-segmented visual objects. To address
this, subsequent work proposed Object-Centric Relational
Abstraction (OCRA) (Webb et al., 2023b), an approach that
integrates a relational bottleneck with object-centric representation learning methods (Greff et al., 2019; Burgess
et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020; Engelcke et al., 2021).
Though OCRA extends the capacity for strong abstract visual reasoning to images with more than one object, it is not
scalable to problems with a large number of objects (example problem in Figure 1). This is because OCRA computes
relational embeddings for all pairs of N objects in a given
scene, which are then further processed by a Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), resulting in a combined complexity of O(N 4 ). Moreover, OCRA’s reasoning capacity was
limited to problems involving a single relation.

1. Introduction
Abstract visual reasoning problems contain visual objects,
the features of which collectively exemplify an abstract
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, US 2 Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, US 3 Department of
Psychology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, US. Correspondence to: Shanka Subhra Mondal <smondal@princeton.edu>.

Recently, Abstractors (Altabaa et al., 2023) were proposed
as an extension of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) for
modeling relations between objects disentangled from the
object features. The Abstractor implements a relational
bottleneck using relational cross-attention, a variant of the
attention mechanisms in Transformers. Though this ap-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

