G LI D E with a C A PE: A Low-Hassle Method to Accelerate Speculative Decoding

Cunxiao Du 1 Jing Jiang 1 Xu Yuanchen 2 Jiawei Wu 2 Sicheng Yu 1 Yongqi Li 3 Shenggui Li 4 Kai Xu 4
Liqiang Nie 5 Zhaopeng Tu 6 Yang You 2

Abstract

Step N-1: Verification

Speculative decoding is a relatively new decoding
framework that leverages small and efficient
draft models to reduce the latency of LLMs. In
this study, we introduce G LI D E and C A PE, two
low-hassle modifications to vanilla speculative
decoding to further improve the decoding speed
of a frozen LLM. Specifically, G LI D E is a
modified draft model architecture that reuses the
cached keys and values from the target LLM,
while C A PE is a proposal expansion method that
uses the draft model’s confidence scores to help
select additional candidate tokens for verification.
Extensive experiments on different benchmarks
demonstrate that our proposed G LI D E draft
model significantly reduces the expected decoding latency. Additional evaluation using walltime
reveals that G LI D E can accelerate Vicuna models
up to 2.17x and further extend the improvement
to 2.61x with C A PE. We release our code,
data, and the trained draft models at https:
//github.com/NonvolatileMemory/
GliDe_with_a_CaPE_ICML_24.

Step N: Decoding

Step N-1: Verification & KV Cache

Step N: Decoding
w/ KV Cache

Step N+1: Verification
Target Model

Step N+1: Verification & KV Cache
Draft Model

Target Model

Vanilla Speculative Decoding

Draft Model

Speculative Decoding

(a) How Speculative with KV Cache Decoding works?
target model: Vicuna-7b

Acceptance Rate (%)

100

I need more
candidate tokens!

I need less
candidate tokens!

Cat on the __
50

0

Fish in the __
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Draft Model Output Confidence

Draft Model
with Confident Output: Shelf

Draft Model
with Unconfident Output: Sky

(b) Confidence v.s. Acceptance Rate, how to utilize it?

Figure 1. (a) Comparison between vanilla speculative decoding
and our G LI D E. (b) There is a positive correlation between acceptance rate and confidence score.

duce LLM serving latency, speculative decoding (SD) has
been proposed as a viable solution (Stern et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023). The key idea of SD is
to use a smaller and more efficient draft model to predict
the next γ tokens in the output sequence and then use the
original LLM, which is called the target model, to verify
the proposed γ tokens in parallel. SD hinges on the insight
that not all output tokens are equally difficult to predict;
employing a smaller but more efficient draft model that can
correctly predict those “easy” tokens helps save inference
time. The success of SD relies heavily on the acceptance
rate of the tokens proposed by the draft model, or in other
words, how likely the target model will accept the proposed
tokens. Therefore, the design of the draft model and its
proposal mechanism play a central role in accelerating SD.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become increasingly
powerful and are now adopted for a wide range of applications such as machine translation (Jiao et al., 2023) and fact
verification (Zhang & Gao, 2023; 2024). Many LLM applications require real-time responses, e.g., machine translation
systems (Yu et al., 2022b). However, LLMs are typically
based on the autoregressive transformer architecture, which
generates output tokens step by step and thus suffers from
high latency, particularly with larger model sizes. To re-

Recent work on SD acceleration has explored two promising directions. The first direction relies on the intuition
that the more closely the draft model’s predictions align
with those of the target model, the greater the likelihood
of the proposed tokens being accepted. Along this line,
researchers have proposed to align the draft model with
the target model through distillation training (Zhou et al.,
2024; Miao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) or to use the

1

Singapore Management University 2 National University of
Singapore 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 HPC-AI Tech.
5
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 6 Tencent AI Lab. Correspondence to: Jing Jiang <jingjiang@smu.edu.sg>, Zhaopeng
Tu <zptu@tencent.com>, Yang You <youy@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

