RLAIF vs. RLHF: Scaling Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback with AI Feedback
Harrison Lee 1 Samrat Phatale 1 Hassan Mansoor 1 Thomas Mesnard 1 Johan Ferret 1 Kellie Lu 2
Colton Bishop 1 Ethan Hall 2 Victor Carbune 1 Abhinav Rastogi 1 Sushant Prakash 2

Abstract

RLAIF and RLHF Win Rates

Reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) has proven effective in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences,
but gathering high-quality preference labels is expensive. RL from AI Feedback (RLAIF), introduced in Bai et al. (2022b), offers a promising
alternative that trains the reward model (RM) on
preferences generated by an off-the-shelf LLM.
Across the tasks of summarization, helpful dialogue generation, and harmless dialogue generation, we show that RLAIF achieves comparable
performance to RLHF. Furthermore, we take a
step towards “self-improvement” by demonstrating that RLAIF can outperform a supervised finetuned baseline even when the AI labeler is the
same size as the policy, or even the exact same
checkpoint as the initial policy. Finally, we introduce direct-RLAIF (d-RLAIF) - a technique that
circumvents RM training by obtaining rewards
directly from an off-the-shelf LLM during RL,
which achieves superior performance to canonical RLAIF. Our results suggest that RLAIF can
achieve performance on-par with using human
feedback, offering a potential solution to the scalability limitations of RLHF.

RLAIF

RLHF

Win Rate vs. SFT

80%

70%

71%

73%

63% 64%

60%

50%

Summarization

Helpfulness

Harmless Rate by Policy
90%
88%

Harmless Rate

80%
76%
70%
60%

64%

50%

SFT

RLHF

RLAIF

Figure 1: Human evaluators strongly prefer RLAIF and
RLHF over the SFT baseline for summarization and helpful
dialogue generation. Furthermore, when compared head-tohead, RLAIF is equally preferred to RLHF. For harmless
dialogue generation, RLAIF outperforms RLHF.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
is an effective technique for aligning language models to
human preferences (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022). It is cited as one of the key drivers of success in modern conversational language models, such as ChatGPT (Liu
et al., 2023) and Bard (Manyika, 2023). A key advantage of

training language models with reinforcement learning (RL)
is that it enables optimization on complex, sequence-level
objectives that are not easily differentiable and therefore
ill-suited for traditional supervised fine-tuning (SFT).
One obstacle for employing RLHF at scale is its dependence on high-quality human preference labels. Modern
large language models (LLMs) have shown a high degree of
alignment with human judgment (Gilardi et al., 2023; Ding
et al., 2023), suggesting that LLM-generated preference labels may be a viable substitute for human labels. Bai et al.
(2022b) was the first effort to explore Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF), where RL was conducted

1

Google DeepMind 2 Google. Correspondence to: Harrison Lee <harrisonlee@google.com>, Samrat Phatale <samratph@google.com>, Hassan Mansoor <hassan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

