Regularized Q-learning through Robust Averaging

Peter Schmitt-Förster 1 Tobias Sutter 1
setting, where one only has access to a single trajectory of
data generated under some fixed policy. A learning algorithm then updates its estimate of a single state-action pair
using one state transition from the sampled trajectory in
every step. In this paper, we focus on the asynchronous
setting, which is the considerably more challenging task
than the synchronous setting due to the Markovian nature
of its sampling process.

Abstract
We propose a new Q-learning variant, called 2RA
Q-learning, that addresses some weaknesses of
existing Q-learning methods in a principled manner. One such weakness is an underlying estimation bias which cannot be controlled and often results in poor performance. We propose
a distributionally robust estimator for the maximum expected value term, which allows us to
precisely control the level of estimation bias introduced. The distributionally robust estimator
admits a closed-form solution such that the proposed algorithm has a computational cost per iteration comparable to Watkins’ Q-learning. For
the tabular case, we show that 2RA Q-learning
converges to the optimal policy and analyze its
asymptotic mean-squared error. Lastly, we conduct numerical experiments for various settings,
which corroborate our theoretical findings and indicate that 2RA Q-learning often performs better
than existing methods.

One of the most popular RL algorithms is Q-learning
(Watkins, 1989; Watkins & Dayan, 1992), which iteratively
learns the value function and hence the corresponding optimal policy of an MDP with unknown transition kernel.
When designing an RL algorithm, there are various desirable properties such an algorithm should have, including
(i) convergence to an optimal policy, (ii) efficient computation, and (iii) “good” performance of the learned policy
after finitely many iterations. Watkins’ Q-learning is known
to converge to the optimal policy under relatively mild conditions (Tsitsiklis, 1994) and a finite-time analysis is also
available (Even-Dar & Mansour, 2001; Beck & Srikant,
2012; Qu & Wierman, 2020). Moreover, its simple update
rule requires only one single maximization over the action
space per step. The simplicity of Watkins’ Q-learning, however, comes at the cost of introducing an overestimation bias
(Thrun & Schwartz, 1993; van Hasselt, 2010), which can
severely impede the quality of the learned policy (Szita &
Lörincz, 2008; Strehl et al., 2009; Thrun & Schwartz, 1993;
van Hasselt, 2010). It has been experimentally demonstrated
that both, overestimation and underestimation bias, may improve learning performance, depending on the environment
at hand (see Sutton & Barto (2018, Chapter 6.7) and Lan
et al. (2020) for a detailed explanation). Therefore, deriving a Q-learning method equipped with the possibility to
precisely control the (over- and under-)estimation bias is
desirable.

1. Introduction
The optimal policy of a Markov Decision Process (MDP) is
characterized via the dynamic programming equations introduced by Bellman (1957). While these dynamic programming equations critically depend on the underlying model,
model-free reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn these
equations by interacting with the environment without any
knowledge of the underlying model (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018; Meyn, 2022). There are
two fundamentally different notions of interacting with the
unknown environment. The first one is referred to as the synchronous setting, which assumes sample access to a generative model (or simulator), where the estimates are updated
simultaneously across all state-action pairs in every iteration step. The second concept concerns an asynchronous

Related Work. In the last decade, several Q-learning
variants have been proposed to improve the weakness of
Watkins’ Q-learning while aiming to admit the desirable
properties (i)-(iii). We discuss approaches that are most
relevant to our work. Double Q-learning (van Hasselt, 2010)
mitigates the overestimation bias of Watkins’ Q-learning by
introducing a double estimator for the maximum expected
value term. While Double Q-learning is known to converge

1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Konstanz, Germany. Correspondence to: Peter Schmitt-Förster
<peter.schmitt-foerster@uni-konstanz.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

