An Information-Theoretic Analysis of
In-Context Learning

Hong Jun Jeon 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Qi Lei 3 Benjamin Van Roy 4

Abstract

is possible with such short sequences, their work initiated
the study of modeling ICL as Bayesian inference or other
thoroughly studied learning processes such as empirical
risk minimization. As much of the theoretical community is
most familiar with error analyses of empirical risk minimization, much of the existing results (Li et al., 2023a; Bai et al.,
2023; Edelman et al., 2021) study the error of an ICL under
the assumption that ICL is competitive in out-of-sample
performance with empirical risk minimization. However,
each of these error bounds is limited in some way such as exponential depth dependence (Edelman et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2023a) or error which decays only with the number of sequences and not the length of the sequences (Edelman et al.,
2021; Bai et al., 2023). The results which do demonstrate
that error decays in both the number of training sequences
and sequence length often rely on contrived mixing time
assumptions (Zhang et al., 2023b) or stability conditions
which are equivalent to fast mixing (Li et al., 2023a).

Previous theoretical results pertaining to metalearning on sequences build on contrived and
convoluted mixing time assumptions. We introduce new information-theoretic tools that lead to
a concise yet general decomposition of error for
a Bayes optimal predictor into two components:
meta-learning error and intra-task error. These
tools unify analyses across many meta-learning
challenges. To illustrate, we apply them to establish new results about in-context learning with
transformers and corroborate existing results a
simple linear setting. Our theoretical results characterize how error decays in both the number of
training sequences and sequence lengths. Our results are very general; for example, they avoid
contrived mixing time assumptions made by all
prior results that establish decay of error with sequence length.

Our work revisits the idea of modeling ICL as Bayesian
inference. In this work, we introduce new informationtheoretic tools based on work by Jeon et al. (2023) which
lead to a concise yet general decomposition of error in
meta-learning from sequences. This decomposition exactly
characterizes error of a Bayes optimal predictor as the sum
of two components: meta-learning error, and intra-task error.
Notably, our results (e.g. Theorem 4.2) show the metalearning error is equal to

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have observed the capability of large
language models (LLMs) to learn from data within just
its context window. This puzzling phenomenon referred
to as in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), has
captured the attention of the theoretical machine learning
community. As the data available in-context is dwarfed
by the extensive pretraining set, meta-learning stands as a
prevailing explanation for ICL (Xie et al., 2022).

I(all data; meta parameters)
number of sequences × sequence length
and intra-task error is equal to

As aforementioned, Xie et al. (2022) introduced the idea
that ICL could be interpreted as implicit Bayesian inference
within a mixture of HMMs. While their theoretical results
rely on contrived assumptions and fail to explain how ICL

I(task data; task parameters|meta parameters)
.
sequence length
Our results also do not make contrived assumptions on
the data generating process such as stability or fast mixing
within the sequence. To demonstrate the use of our theory,
we specialize it to produce novel results for meta-learning a
sparse mixture of transformer models. The result provides
a compelling narrative as to how ICL is possible with such
few examples.

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 New
York University, New York City, NY, USA 4 Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Hong Jun Jeon
<hjjeon@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

As some of our tools are non-standard to much of the community, we begin by introducing our framework in the sim1

