Position: Graph Foundation Models Are Already Here

Haitao Mao * 1 Zhikai Chen * 1 Wenzhuo Tang 1 Jianan Zhao 2 3 Yao Ma 4 Tong Zhao 5 Neil Shah 5
Mikhail Galkin 6 Jiliang Tang 1

Abstract

et al., 2021) and even deliver promising efficacy with fewshot task demonstrations (Dong et al., 2022; Mao et al.,
2024).

Graph Foundation Models (GFMs) are emerging
as a significant research topic in the graph domain,
aiming to develop graph models trained on extensive and diverse data to enhance their applicability across various tasks and domains. Developing
GFMs presents unique challenges over traditional
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which are typically trained from scratch for specific tasks on
particular datasets. The primary challenge in constructing GFMs lies in effectively leveraging vast
and diverse graph data to achieve positive transfer. Drawing inspiration from existing foundation
models in the CV and NLP domains, we propose
a novel perspective for the GFM development by
advocating for a “graph vocabulary”, in which the
basic transferable units underlying graphs encode
the invariance on graphs. We ground the graph
vocabulary construction from essential aspects
including network analysis, expressiveness, and
stability. Such a vocabulary perspective can potentially advance the future GFM design in line with
the neural scaling laws. All relevant resources
with GFM design can be found here.

Meanwhile, graphs are vital and distinctive data structures
that encapsulate non-Euclidean and intricate object relationships. Since various graphs embody unique relations, most
graph learning approaches are tailored to train from scratch
for a single task on a particular graph. This approach necessitates separate data collection and deployment for each
individual graph and task. Consequently, an intriguing question emerges: Is it possible to devise a Graph Foundation
Model (GFM) that benefits from large-scale training with
better generalization across different domains and tasks?
Despite advanced foundation models in other domains, the
development of GFMs remains in the infant stage. Recent
research has demonstrated initial successes of GFMs in
specialized areas, such as knowledge graphs (Galkin et al.,
2023; 2024) and molecules (Beaini et al., 2023). Notably,
most of these models are built on principles specific to
their domains. For instance, ULTRA for knowledge graph
completion (Galkin et al., 2023) draws inspiration from
double equivariance for inductive link prediction (Gao et al.,
2023a). However, there is still a lack of general guidance
on how to build GFMs that can effectively cater to a broad
spectrum of graph-based applications.

1. Introduction

The key difficulty in designing GFMs lies in finding the
invariance across diverse graph data, ranging from social
networks to molecular graphs with countless structural patterns, into the same representation space to achieve positive
transfer. The answer from the CV and NLP domains is a
shared vocabulary. In the NLP foundation models, the text
is first broken down into smaller units based on the vocabulary, which can be words, phrases, or symbols. In the CV
foundation models, the image is mapped to a series of discrete image tokens (Yu et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023) based
on the vision token vocabulary. The vocabulary defines the
basic units in the particular domain, transferable across different tasks and datasets. Therefore, the key challenges in
achieving the GFMs narrow down to how we can find the
graph vocabulary, the basic transferable units underlying
graphs to encode the invariance on graphs.

Foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021), which are
pre-trained on massive data and can be adapted to tackle
a wide range of downstream tasks, have achieved inimitable success in various domains, e.g., computer vision
(CV) (Radford et al., 2021) and natural language processing (NLP) (Bubeck et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Typically, foundation models can effectively utilize both the prior
knowledge obtained from the pre-training stage and the data
from downstream tasks to achieve better performance (Han
*
Equal contribution 1 Michigan State University 2 Université
de Montréal 3 Mila - Québec AI Institute 4 Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute 5 Snap Inc. 6 Intel Labs. Correspondence to: Haitao Mao
<haitaoma@msu.edu>, Zhikai Chen <chenzh85@msu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, finding a suitable graph vocabulary that works
1

