Averaging n-step Returns Reduces Variance in Reinforcement Learning

Brett Daley 1 2 Martha White 1 2 3 Marlos C. Machado 1 2 3

Abstract

a baseline (e.g., Barto et al., 1983; Sutton, 1984; Williams,
1992; Schulman et al., 2015a). Quicker policy evaluation
is therefore useful to many RL algorithms.

Multistep returns, such as n-step returns and
λ-returns, are commonly used to improve the
sample efficiency of reinforcement learning
(RL) methods. The variance of the multistep
returns becomes the limiting factor in their
length; looking too far into the future increases
variance and reverses the benefits of multistep
learning. In our work, we demonstrate the ability
of compound returns—weighted averages of
n-step returns—to reduce variance. We prove
for the first time that any compound return
with the same contraction modulus as a given
n-step return has strictly lower variance. We
additionally prove that this variance-reduction
property improves the finite-sample complexity
of temporal-difference learning under linear
function approximation. Because general compound returns can be expensive to implement,
we introduce two-bootstrap returns which reduce variance while remaining efficient, even
when using minibatched experience replay. We
conduct experiments showing that compound
returns often increase the sample efficiency of
n-step deep RL agents like DQN and PPO.

One way to achieve faster value-function learning is
through multistep returns, in which more than one reward
following an action is used to construct a prediction
target. Multistep returns are used extensively in deep RL
(e.g. Schulman et al., 2015b; Mnih et al., 2016; Munos
et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017; Hessel et al., 2018;
Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Wurman et al., 2022; Chebotar
et al., 2023; Schwarzer et al., 2023), where the value
function is approximated by a neural network. In theory,
multistep returns incorporate more information regarding
future outcomes, leading to faster credit assignment and, in
turn, faster learning. However, faster learning is not guaranteed in practice because looking farther into the future
increases variance and can end up requiring more samples
to estimate the mean. These two opposing factors must
be balanced to achieve fast and stable learning. The most
common multistep returns are n-step returns and λ-returns,
both of which span between standard temporal-difference
(TD; Sutton, 1988) learning (n = 1 or λ = 0) and Monte
Carlo learning (n → ∞ or λ = 1).
Implementation has generally been the main consideration
in choosing which of these return estimators to use. When
the value function is a lookup table or a linear parametric function, the λ-return is preferred for its efficient implementation using TD(λ) with eligibility traces (Sutton,
1988). However, in off-policy deep RL, the value function is a neural network trained with an experience replay
buffer (Lin, 1992), so the extra bootstrapping performed by
the λ-return becomes costly and n-step returns are more
common. Although recent work has explored ways to efficiently train neural networks using replayed λ-returns (e.g.,
Munos et al., 2016; Harb & Precup, 2016; Daley & Amato,
2019), λ-returns generally remain more expensive or complex to implement than n-step returns.

1. Introduction
Efficiently learning value functions is critical for reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Value-based RL methods
(e.g., Watkins, 1989; Rummery & Niranjan, 1994; Mnih
et al., 2015) encode policies implicitly in a value function,
and policy evaluation is the principal mechanism of learning. Even when RL methods instead learn parametric policies, accurate value functions are needed to guide policy
improvement (e.g., Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018) or to serve as
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Brett Daley
<brett.daley@ualberta.ca>.

Despite its more complicated implementation in deep RL,
the λ-return is interesting because it averages many nstep returns together. In this paper, we show that this averaging reduces variance compared to n-step returns and
that the variance reduction leads to faster learning. More
generally, the λ-return is an example of a compound re-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

