Federated Optimization with Doubly Regularized Drift Correction

Xiaowen Jiang 1 2 Anton Rodomanov 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1

Abstract

2017; Kairouz et al., 2021). However, privacy leaks can
still occur (Nasr et al., 2019).

Federated learning is a distributed optimization
paradigm that allows training machine learning
models across decentralized devices while keeping the data localized. The standard method,
FedAvg, suffers from client drift which can
hamper performance and increase communication costs over centralized methods. Previous works proposed various strategies to mitigate drift, yet none have shown consistently improved communication-computation trade-offs
over vanilla gradient descent across all standard function classes. In this work, we revisit
DANE, an established method in distributed optimization. We show that (i) DANE can achieve
the desired communication reduction under Hessian similarity constraints. Furthermore, (ii) we
present an extension, DANE+, which supports
arbitrary inexact local solvers and has more freedom to choose how to aggregate the local updates. We propose (iii) a novel method, FedRed, which has improved local computational
complexity and retains the same communication
complexity compared to DANE/DANE+. This is
achieved by doubly regularized drift correction.

Tackling communication bottlenecks is one of the key challenges in modern federated optimization (Konečnỳ et al.,
2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Stich, 2019). The relatively slow and unstable internet connections of participating clients often make communication highly expensive,
which might impact the effectiveness of the overall training process. Therefore, a standard metric to evaluate the
efficiency of a federated optimization algorithm is the total number of communication rounds required to reach a
certain accuracy.
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) as the pioneering algorithm improves the communication efficiency by doing
multiple local stochastic gradient descent updates before
communicating to the server. This strategy has demonstrated significant success in practice. However, when
the data is heterogeneous, FedAvg suffers from client
drift, which might result in slow and unstable convergence (Karimireddy et al., 2020). Subsequently, some advanced techniques, including drift correction and regularization, have been proposed to address this issue (Karimireddy et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Acar et al., 2021; Mitra
et al., 2021; Mishchenko et al., 2022). The communication complexity established in these methods often depends
on the smoothness constant L of each function in general,
which shows no advantage over the centralized gradientbased methods (see the first five rows in Table 1, Scaffnew
has a similar complexity to the centralized fast gradient
method under strong-convexity (Nesterov, 2018)).

1. Introduction
With the growing scale of datasets and the complexity of
models, distributed optimization plays an increasingly important role in large-scale machine learning. Federated
learning has emerged as an essential modern distributed
learning paradigm where clients (e.g. phones and hospitals)
collaboratively train a model without sharing their data,
thereby ensuring a certain level of privacy (McMahan et al.,

Instead of proving the dependency on the smoothness constant L, a recent line of research tries to develop algorithms with guarantees that rely on a potentially smaller
constant. Karimireddy et al. (2020) first demonstrated that
when minimizing quadratics, Scaffold can exploit the hidden similarity to reduce communication. Specifically, the
communication complexity only depends on a measure δB ,
which measures the maximum dissimilarity of Hessians
among individual functions. Notably, δB is always at most
L in order but can often be much smaller in practice. Subsequently, SONATA (Sun et al., 2022), its accelerated version (Tian et al., 2022), and Accelerated ExtraGradient
sliding (Kovalev et al., 2022) show explicit communica-

1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security,
Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken,
Germany.
Correspondence to:
<{xiaowen.jiang, anton.rodomanov, stich}@cispa.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

