SILVER: Single-loop variance reduction and application to federated learning

Kazusato Oko 1 2 Shunta Akiyama 1 Denny Wu 3 4 Tomoya Murata 2 5 Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract

second-order stationary point (SOSP; i.e., ∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ε
and λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ −δ).

Most variance reduction methods require multiple
times of full gradient computation, which is timeconsuming and hence a bottleneck in application
to distributed optimization. We present a singleloop variance-reduced gradient estimator named
SILVER (SIngle-Loop VariancE-Reduction) for
the finite-sum non-convex optimization, which
does not require multiple full gradients but nevertheless achieves the optimal gradient complexity.
Notably, unlike existing methods, SILVER provably reaches second-order optimality, with exponential convergence in the Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(PL) region, and achieves further speedup depending on the data heterogeneity. Owing to these advantages, SILVER serves as a new base method to
design communication-efficient federated learning algorithms: we combine SILVER with local updates, which gives the best communication
rounds and number of communicated gradients
across all range of Hessian heterogeneity, and, at
the same time, guarantees second-order optimality
and exponential convergence in the PL region.

To efficiently solve the problem (1), variance reduction is
a technique in minibatch sampling to construct an estimator of the full batch gradient with a smaller variance than
vanilla SGD by utilizing gradients at previous anchor points
(Gower et al., 2020). One of the difficulties in variance
reduction is that recursive updates of the gradient estimator
easily accumulate the error and eventually buries the correct
descent directions. Therefore, most variance reduction algorithms need to periodically compute the full batch (or large
minibatch) gradient to refresh the estimator (Roux et al.,
2012; Johnson and Zhang, 2013; Nguyen et al., 2017b; Fang
et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2020). However, such a gradientrefreshing step is time-consuming, complicates algorithms,
and becomes a bottleneck in application to distributed optimization since it leads to periodic synchronization between
the whole clients, which increases communication costs and
is sometimes impractical due to too many clients.
In this context, recent studies have attempted to develop
variance reduction algorithms that do not require multiple
full gradient computations (convex: Nguyen et al. (2021);
Beznosikov and Takáč (2021); non-convex: Cutkosky and
Orabona (2019); Liu et al. (2020); Li et al. (2021b); TranDinh et al. (2022)), which we refer to as single-loop.1
Among them, Li et al. (2021b) introduced ZeroSARAH
as a single-loop algorithm with optimal gradient complexity
for nonconvex optimization.

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Variance Reduced Finite-sum Optimization
We consider the finite-sum minimization problem, which is
ubiquitous in ML optimization (Bottou et al., 2018):
(
)
n
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x) .
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd

However, these single-loop methods are not as versatile as
to enjoy multiple advantages offered by popular variance
reduction methods that use full gradients. For example, as a
well-known full-gradient algorithm, SARAH (Nguyen et al.,
2017a; 2022; Li, 2019) requires full gradients to achieve (i)
the optimal gradient complexity in the nonconvex finite-sum
optimization, (ii) second-order optimality, and (iii) exponential convergence under the strong convexity, each of
which holds significant practical importance: (i) efficiently
finding stationary points is the primary goal of nonconvex
optimization. (ii) escaping from saddle points is necessary
to guarantee the quality of the solution since first-order sta-

Here each fi is smooth and can be nonconvex. We aim to
efficiently find a solution x that is an ε-first-order stationary point (i.e., ∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ε) and furthermore an (ε, δ)1
The University of Tokyo 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, RIKEN 3 New York University 4 Flatiron Institute 5 NTT
DATA Mathematical Systems Inc. Correspondence to: Kazusato
Oko <oko-kazusato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

1
This definition of single-loop excludes PAGE (Li et al., 2021a)
or Loopless SVRG / Loopless Katyusha (Kovalev et al., 2020),
which compute full gradient stochastically.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

