Weakly Convex Regularisers for Inverse Problems:
Convergence of Critical Points and Primal-Dual Optimisation

Zakhar Shumaylov 1 Jeremy Budd 2 Subhadip Mukherjee 3 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 1

Variational regularisation is the primary method
for solving inverse problems, and recently there
has been considerable work leveraging deeply
learned regularisation for enhanced performance.
However, few results exist addressing the convergence of such regularisation, particularly within
the context of critical points as opposed to global
minimisers. In this paper, we present a generalised formulation of convergent regularisation
in terms of critical points, and show that this is
achieved by a class of weakly convex regularisers. We prove convergence of the primal-dual hybrid gradient method for the associated variational
problem, and, given a Kurdyka–Łojasiewicz condition, an O(log k/k) ergodic convergence rate.
Finally, applying this theory to learned regularisation, we prove universal approximation for input
weakly convex neural networks (IWCNN), and
show empirically that IWCNNs can lead to improved performance of learned adversarial regularisers for computed tomography (CT) reconstruction.

ICNN approximation

IWCNN approximation

Figure 1: Contour plots comparing the distance function to a data
manifold (top-left) with learned regularisers for denoising this data,
via convex (bottom-left), standard (top-right), and weakly convex
(bottom-right) adversarial regularisation. The convex regulariser
lacks an interpretation as a distance function, whilst the weakly
convex regulariser, introduced in this work, retains this feature and
shows improved generalisation.

ter x∗ ∈ X from a transformed and noisy measurement
y δ = Ax∗ + η ∈ Y,

(1.1)

see (Engl et al., 1996). Here X and Y are Banach spaces;
A : X → Y is the forward model, assumed to be linear and
bounded, e.g. representing imaging physics; and η ∈ Y,
with ∥η∥Y ⩽ δ, describes measurement noise. However,
(1.1) is usually ill-posed, i.e. x ∈ X with A x = y δ may
not exist, be unique, or be continuous in y δ .

1. Introduction
In an inverse problem, one seeks to recover an unknown parameter (e.g., an image) that has undergone some, typically
lossy and noisy, transformation (e.g., during measurement).
Such problems arise frequently in science, e.g. in medical
imaging such as in MRI, CT, and PET, and also beyond
science, e.g. in art restoration (Natterer, 2001; Scherzer
et al., 2009; Calatroni et al., 2018).

An influential technique to overcome this ill-posedness
has been the variational approach pioneered by (Tikhonov,
1963) and (Phillips, 1962):


xα (y δ ) ∈ argmin αR(x) + D A x, y δ =: Jα,yδ (x) .

Mathematically, one seeks to estimate an unknown parame1

NN approximation

True

Abstract

x∈X

(1.2)

2

University of Cambridge, UK California Institute of Technology, USA 3 Department of Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, India. Correspondence to:
Zakhar Shumaylov <zs334@cam.ac.uk>.

Here: R : X → [0, ∞) is the regulariser, which aims to
incorporate prior knowledge about x∗ and penalise x if it is
not ‘realistic’; D : Y × Y → [0, ∞) is the data-fidelity term,
which quantifies the distance between y δ and A x and comes
from the distribution of the noise η; and α > 0 balances
the relative importance of the two terms. A regularisation

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

