Generalization Analysis of Stochastic Weight Averaging with General Sampling

Peng Wang 1 2 Li Shen 3 4 Zerui Tao 5 6 Shuaida He 7 Dacheng Tao 2

Abstract

ing (SWA) (Izmailov et al., 2018), which involves averaging
the model parameters obtained through Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD). SWA has empirically demonstrated significant benefits in enhancing generalization across various applications, including large-scale network training (Izmailov
et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2022), adversarial learning (Xiao
et al., 2022), etc. Indeed, SWA and related model averaging
techniques have become standard practices in training deep
neural network models. Consequently, a theoretical analysis
of SWA’s generalization capabilities is vital to further its
adoption in the deep learning community.

Stochastic weight averaging (SWA) method has
empirically proven its advantages compared to
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Despite it is
widespread used, theoretical investigations have
been limited, particularly in scenarios beyond
the ideal setting of convex and sampling with
replacement. However, non-convex cases and
sampling without replacement are very practical
in real-world applications. The main challenges
under the above settings are two-folds: (i) All
the historical gradient information introduced by
SWA is considered, while the analysis of SGD
using the tool of uniform stability requires only
to bound the current gradient. (ii) The (1 + αβ)expansion property causes the boundary of each
gradient step dependent on the previous step, making the boundary of each historical gradient in
SWA nested and the theoretical analysis even
harder. To address the theoretical challenges, we
adopt mathematical induction to find a recursive
representation that bounds the gradient at each
step. Based on this, we establish stability bounds
supporting sampling with and without replacement in the non-convex setting. Furthermore, the
derived generalization bounds of SWA are sharper
than SGD. At last, experimental results on several
benchmarks verify our theoretical results.

Due to the great complexity of neural networks, it is typically challenging to theoretically study the generalization
properties of deep learning optimizers. To address the issue,
one powerful tool is the sensitivity analysis (Bousquet &
Elisseeff, 2002), which builds connections between generalization and stability. In specific, one can bound the
generalization gap by analyzing stabilities of the algorithm.
Based on this, Hardt et al. (2016) study the generalization
property of SGD for both convex and non-convex functions.
Since then, there are many theoretical works based on stability to study SGD and its variants. Hardt et al. (2016) also
give generalization bounds of model averaging similar to
SWA, but constrain to the convex case and sampling with
replacement. Kuzborskij & Lampert (2018) study the generalization ability of SGD in the case of sampling without
replacement. Yang et al. (2021) extend the analysis of SGD
to online learning setting, where the data points are sampled
without replacement. Xiao et al. (2022) study the generalization bounds of SWA in adversarial training, but still limit
to the convex case. However, all these works do not study
the generalization of SWA under the more practical nonconvex settings. Moreover, the analysis of sampling without
replacement of SWA is also missing. In this paper, we aim
to give a thorough investigation of SWA under non-convex
setting, while considering different sampling mechanisms.

1. Introduction
The generalization ability of deep neural networks is a primary concern, particularly given their capacity to memorize
large datasets and potential for overfitting. A prevalent
method to improve this ability is Stochastic Weight Averag1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 Sun Yat-sen University, China 4 JD Explore Academy, China 5 Tokyo University of
Agriculture and Technology, Japan 6 RIKEN AIP, Japan 7 Southern
University of Science and Technology, China. Correspondence to:
Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>.

To conduct these theoretical studies, there are three main
challenges. ➀ The first challenge comes from the parameter
averaging in SWA. For SGD, building the boundary for the
step T only requires to consider the gradient generated by
the T -th sample. However, since each step of the SWA is
averaged, all the historical information before the T -th step
should be counted. To bound each step of the SWA, each
step must take into account the above-mentioned operations,

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

