Compute Better Spent: Replacing Dense Layers with Structured Matrices

Shikai Qiu * 1 Andres Potapczynski * 1 Marc Finzi 2 Micah Goldblum 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

2020), these linear layers consume the vast majority of the
parameters and computation (Kaplan et al., 2020), and are
primarily represented by dense matrices. Substituting these
dense matrices with structured matrices with fast matrixvector multiplies (MVMs) has the potential to significantly
improve the computational efficiency of these models. Unfortunately, there often isn’t an obvious algebraic structure
to exploit in the linear layers of such models, which process
end-to-end learned token embeddings rather than objects
with clear structures like images (Vaswani et al., 2017).

Dense linear layers are the dominant computational bottleneck in foundation models. Identifying more efficient alternatives to dense matrices has enormous potential for building more
compute-efficient models, as exemplified by the
success of convolutional networks in the image
domain. In this work, we systematically explore
structured matrices as replacements for dense matrices. We show that different structures often
require drastically different initialization scales
and learning rates, which are crucial to performance, especially as models scale. Using insights
from the Maximal Update Parameterization, we
determine the optimal scaling for initialization
and learning rates of these unconventional layers. Finally, we measure the scaling laws of different structures to compare how quickly their
performance improves with compute. We propose a novel matrix family containing Monarch
matrices, the Block Tensor-Train (BTT), which
we show performs better than dense matrices for
the same compute on multiple tasks. On CIFAR10/100 with augmentation, BTT achieves exponentially lower training loss than dense when
training MLPs and ViTs. BTT matches dense ViTS/32 performance on ImageNet-1k with 3.8 times
less compute and is more efficient than dense for
training small GPT-2 language models.

Structured matrices, however, are not limited to encoding
domain-specific inductive biases. They can also offer advantages over dense matrices by enabling different allocations
of the same computational budget. For example, a structured layer can be much wider than a dense layer given the
same number of parameters and compute. The compute
cost C of an MVM is O d2 for a d × d dense matrix, but
√

only O d3/2 for a block diagonal matrix with d blocks.
Consequently, given
can be
 the same compute C, the width

at most O C 1/2 for a dense layer, but O C 2/3 for such a
block diagonal layer. We can replace a dense layer of width
1024 with a 10× wider block diagonal layer, as illustrated in
Figure 1a. Both layers have the same number of parameters
and compute costs, but a larger width enables the model to
potentially store more information in its activations and use
more non-linearities to model complex functions. In this
light, structured matrices do not merely approximate dense
matrices but enable different ways of scaling up the models
with compute that make them potentially more expressive.
To study how structured layers compare against dense layers
as a function of compute, we will compare their scaling laws:
how compute translates to performance as the models scale
up. Across domains such as language, image, and video
modeling, the loss or error rate E of a well-trained neural
network has shown to be highly predictable as a function of
the compute C required by the model, often well-described
by a power law E ∝ C −α when data is not a bottleneck
(Kaplan et al., 2020; Sharma & Kaplan, 2022; Hoffmann
et al., 2022). If structured layers can achieve better scaling
laws, they will outperform dense layers at scale, delivering
exponentially better performance per unit compute if they
can improve the scaling exponent α.

1. Introduction
Regardless of their architectures, most neural networks consist of interleaved linear layers and simple non-linearities.
In large foundation models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 New York University 2 Carnegie Mellon
University. Correspondence to: Shikai Qiu <sq2129@nyu.edu>,
Andres Potapczynski <ap6604@nyu.edu>, Marc Finzi
<maf820@nyu.edu>, Micah Goldblum <goldblum@nyu.edu>,
Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we systematically study whether structured
1

