See More Details: Efficient Image Super-Resolution by Experts Mining

Eduard Zamfir 1 Zongwei Wu 1 * Nancy Mehta 1 Yulun Zhang 2 3 * Radu Timofte 1

Abstract

×2 SR on Manga109
CNN
Transformers

Reconstructing high-resolution (HR) images from
low-resolution (LR) inputs poses a significant
challenge in image super-resolution (SR). While
recent approaches have demonstrated the efficacy
of intricate operations customized for various objectives, the straightforward stacking of these disparate operations can result in a substantial computational burden, hampering their practical utility. In response, we introduce SeemoRe, an efficient SR model employing expert mining. Our approach strategically incorporates experts at different levels, adopting a collaborative methodology.
At the macro scale, our experts address rank-wise
and spatial-wise informative features, providing a
holistic understanding. Subsequently, the model
delves into the subtleties of rank choice by leveraging a mixture of low-rank experts. By tapping
into experts specialized in distinct key factors crucial for accurate SR, our model excels in uncovering intricate intra-feature details. This collaborative approach is reminiscent of the concept of “see
more”, allowing our model to achieve an optimal
performance with minimal computational costs
in efficient settings. The source codes will be
publicly made available at https://github.
com/eduardzamfir/seemoredetails

SeemoRe-L

39.4

+0.16dB

PSNR (dB)

SeemoRe-B
-17%

39.2

SRFormer
SwinIR

SeemoRe-T

39
+0.18dB

38.8

-51%

SAFMN
0

50

DDistill-SR
IMDN

ShuffleMixer

PAN
100

better

150

200

250

GMACS

Figure 1. Model complexity trade-off. Visualization of PSNR,
GMACS, and parameter counts on Manga109 dataset for ×2 task.
Our proposed SeemoRe excels the state-of-the-art CNN-based and
lightweight Transformer-based SR models. Marker size indicates
parameter counts w.r.t SwinIR-Light (Liu et al., 2021).

applications (Khani et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021a). Foreseeing the resource constraints, it is of substantial desire to
design an efficient SR model for gauging the HR images to
be perfectly visualized on these devices or platforms. Identifying the most plausible candidates for missing HR pixels
poses a particular challenge for SR. In the absence of external priors, the primary approaches for SR involves exploring
the intricate relationships among the neighboring pixels for
reconstruction. Recent SR models exemplify this through
methods such as (a) attention (Liang et al., 2021; Zhou
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023), (b) feature mixing (Hou
et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023), and (c) global-local context
modeling (Wang et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2022), yielding
remarkable accuracy.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) is a long-standing
low-level vision endeavour that pursues the reconstruction
of a high-resolution (HR) image from its degraded lowresolution (LR) counterpart. This challenging task has garnered considerable attention owing to the expeditious development of ultra-high definition devices and video streaming
Computer Vision Lab, CAIDAS & IFI, University of
Würzburg, Germany 2 AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China 3 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Zongwei Wu <zongwei.wu@uni-wuerzburg.de>,
Yulun Zhang <yulun100@gmail.com>.

Unlike other approaches in this work, we aim to avoid complex and disconnected blocks focusing on specific factors,
opting instead for a unified learning module specialized for
all aspects. However, an additional challenge arises due
to the efficiency requirement, rendering implicit learning
through a vast number of parameters unfeasible, especially
in the context of devices with limited resources.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To achieve such an efficient unification, we introduce
SeemoRe, which leverages the synergy of different experts
to maximize intra-feature intertwining, collaboratively learn-

1

1

