Causal Customer Churn Analysis with Low-rank Tensor Block Hazard Model

Chenyin Gao 1 Zhiming Zhang 2 Shu Yang 1

Abstract

companies adopt proper retention strategies and essentially
increase the customer lifetime value and the company’s
business value.

This study introduces an innovative method for analyzing the impact of various interventions on customer churn, using the potential outcomes framework. We present a new causal model, the tensorized latent factor block hazard model, which
incorporates tensor completion methods for a principled causal analysis of customer churn. A crucial element of our approach is the formulation
of a 1-bit tensor completion for the parameter
tensor. This captures hidden customer characteristics and temporal elements from churn records,
effectively addressing the binary nature of churn
data and its time-monotonic trends. Our model
also uniquely categorizes interventions by their
similar impacts, enhancing the precision and practicality of implementing customer retention strategies. For computational efficiency, we apply a
projected gradient descent algorithm combined
with spectral clustering. We lay down the theoretical groundwork for our model, including its
non-asymptotic properties. The efficacy and superiority of our model are further validated through
comprehensive experiments on both simulated
and real-world applications.

In our approach to analyzing causal churn, we define potential outcomes as the indicators of churn over time under
different levels of treatment. Thus, the potential outcomes
can be envisioned as a three-dimensional tensor, indexed
by the customer, time, and intervention, where each entry
represents whether a customer would churn at a particular
time under a specific treatment (see Figure 1). In practice,
only actual churn trajectories are observed. To address this,
tensor completion methods can be employed to fill in all
missing potential outcomes and facilitate the analysis of
various treatment strategies. Tensors effectively uncover the
hidden multiway data structure, often using low-rankness,
which decomposes the tensor into a low-dimensional core
tensor and matrix factors for each dimension. However,
applying these existing tensor completion methods presents
several challenges in our context.
Firstly, unlike tensors with continuous values, our churn
analysis tensor is binary, with entries as 0/1 indicators.
Moreover, once a customer churns at a certain time, it
remains churned, resulting in a monotone churn pattern.
Therefore, applying low-rankness to the original potential
outcome tensor may not be suitable in this case. Secondly,
many retention interventions might have similar effects on
customers, suggesting a potential benefit in grouping these
interventions for more accurate estimation and streamlined
implementation in practice. Previous research has proposed
integrating interventions based on prior knowledge (Laber
et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2018; Pan & Zhao, 2021). However,
a data-driven approach to identify and cluster interventions
with similar effects is desirable. For instance, Ma et al.
(2022) introduced a method using adaptive fusion penalty
for clustering interventions, but it is limited to single-stage
outcomes and parametric treatment effect models. Exploring and autonomously grouping interventions with similar
effects over time to streamline the dimension space is therefore a significant area of interest. Finally, a major challenge
arises from the uniform missing mechanisms in current matrix/tensor completion methods, which fail to consider the
endogeneity in treatment assignment. As a result, directly
applying these methods could lead to confounding biases.

1. Introduction
Customer retention, loyalty, and churn are increasingly important topics across industries. Customer churn, or attrition,
occurs when customers disengage from a company by ending subscriptions, moving to competitors, or changing their
buying habits (Buckinx et al., 2007). Analyzing and preventing churn is critical for sustainable growth and profitability. Companies often explore diverse retention strategies,
such as customized incentives, to extend customer lifetimes.
Understanding the causality behind customer churn helps
1
Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, U.S.A. 2 Independent scholar, Iowa State University, Ames, U.S.A..
Correspondence to: Shu Yang
<syang24@ncsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

