Diffusion Model-Augmented Behavioral Cloning

Shang-Fu Chen * 1 Hsiang-Chun Wang * 1 Ming-Hao Hsu 1 Chun-Mao Lai 1 Shao-Hua Sun 1

Abstract

maran et al., 2017) has inspired the research community
to develop DRL frameworks to control robots, aiming to
automate the process of designing sensing, planning, and
control algorithms by letting the robot learn in an end-to-end
fashion. Yet, acquiring complex skills through trial and error
can still lead to undesired behaviors even with sophisticated
reward design (Christiano et al., 2017; Leike et al., 2018;
Lee et al., 2019). Moreover, the exploring process could
damage expensive robotic platforms or even be dangerous
to humans (Garcıa & Fernández, 2015; Levine et al., 2020).

Imitation learning addresses the challenge of
learning by observing an expert’s demonstrations
without access to reward signals from environments. Most existing imitation learning methods
that do not require interacting with environments
either model the expert distribution as the conditional probability p(a|s) (e.g., behavioral cloning,
BC) or the joint probability p(s, a). Despite the
simplicity of modeling the conditional probability
with BC, it usually struggles with generalization.
While modeling the joint probability can improve
generalization performance, the inference procedure is often time-consuming, and the model can
suffer from manifold overfitting. This work proposes an imitation learning framework that benefits from modeling both the conditional and joint
probability of the expert distribution. Our proposed Diffusion Model-Augmented Behavioral
Cloning (DBC) employs a diffusion model trained
to model expert behaviors and learns a policy to
optimize both the BC loss (conditional) and our
proposed diffusion model loss (joint). DBC outperforms baselines in various continuous control
tasks in navigation, robot arm manipulation, dexterous manipulation, and locomotion. We design
additional experiments to verify the limitations of
modeling either the conditional probability or the
joint probability of the expert distribution, as well
as compare different generative models. Ablation studies justify the effectiveness of our design
choices.

To overcome this issue, imitation learning (i.e., learning
from demonstration) (Schaal, 1997; Osa et al., 2018) has
received growing attention, whose aim is to learn a policy
from expert demonstrations, which are often more accessible than appropriate reward functions for reinforcement
learning. Among various imitation learning directions, adversarial imitation learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Zolna et al.,
2021; Kostrikov et al., 2019) and inverse reinforcement
learning (Ng & Russell, 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004) have
achieved encouraging results in a variety of domains. Yet,
these methods require interacting with environments, which
can still be expensive or even dangerous.
On the other hand, behavioral cloning (BC) (Pomerleau,
1989; Bain & Sammut, 1995) does not require interacting
with environments. BC formulates imitation learning as a
supervised learning problem — given an expert demonstration dataset, an agent policy takes states sampled from the
dataset as input and learns to replicate the corresponding
expert actions. One can view a BC policy as a discriminative model p(a|s) that models the conditional probability of
actions a given a state s. Due to its simplicity and training
stability, BC has been widely adopted for various applications. However, BC struggles at generalizing to states
unobserved during training (Nguyen et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

To alleviate the generalization issue, we propose to augment BC by modeling the joint probability p(s, a) of expert state-action pairs with a generative model (e.g., diffusion models). This approach is motivated by Bishop &
Nasrabadi (2006) and Fisch et al. (2013), who illustrate that
modeling joint probability allows for better generalizing to
data points unobserved during training. However, with a
learned joint probability model p(s, a), retrieving a desired
action a requires actions sampling and optimization, i.e.,

Recently, the success of deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Arulku*
1
Equal contribution
National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
Correspondence to:
Shang-Fu Chen
<f07942144@ntu.edu.tw>,
Shao-Hua
Sun
<shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

