Localizing Task Information for Improved Model Merging and Compression

Ke Wang * 1 Nikolaos Dimitriadis * 1 Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez 2 3 François Fleuret 4 Pascal Frossard 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, the field of ML has witnessed a paradigm
shift with the release of foundation models and the influx
of associated checkpoints, significantly improving the performance on downstream applications (Devlin et al., 2019;
Ilharco et al., 2022; Wortsman et al., 2022b; Pruksachatkun
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023). The widespread adoption of foundation models has followed a proliferation of
works addressing practical challenges arising from their
sheer computational and storage requirements. For example,
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2022), quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022; 2023) address
aspects of training, fine-tuning and inference. An important
question remains how to efficiently leverage the existing
fine-tuned models towards improving models and building
generalist agents (Reed et al., 2022).

Model merging and task arithmetic have emerged
as promising scalable approaches to merge
multiple single-task checkpoints to one multi-task
model, but their applicability is reduced by significant performance loss. Previous works have
linked these drops to interference in the weight
space and erasure of important task-specific
features. Instead, in this work we show that
the information required to solve each task is
still preserved after merging as different tasks
mostly use non-overlapping sets of weights. We
propose TALL-masks, a method to identify these
task supports given a collection of task vectors
and show that one can retrieve > 99% of the
single task accuracy by applying our masks to
the multi-task vector, effectively compressing the
individual checkpoints. We study the statistics of
intersections among constructed masks and reveal
the existence of selfish and catastrophic weights,
i.e., parameters that are important exclusively to
one task and irrelevant to all tasks but detrimental
to multi-task fusion. For this reason, we propose
Consensus Merging, an algorithm that eliminates
such weights and improves the general performance of existing model merging approaches.
Our experiments in vision and NLP benchmarks
with up to 20 tasks, show that Consensus Merging
consistently improves existing approaches.
Furthermore, our proposed compression scheme
reduces storage from 57Gb to 8.2Gb while
retaining 99.7% of original performance.

Recent work has illuminated the benefits of interpolating
the weights of different models (Frankle et al., 2020; Ilharco
et al., 2022; Wortsman et al., 2022a; Ortiz-Jimenez et al.,
2023; Dimitriadis et al., 2023), offering scalable and effective techniques to edit the knowledge of pre-trained models.
Task arithmetic (TA) (Ilharco et al., 2023) has emerged as
a promising solution to fuse the knowledge of disparate
checkpoints into a single model with multi-objective
capabilities, forgoing the need for additional joint training
(Caruana, 1997) or optimizing over the exponentially large
number of task combinations (Standley et al., 2020; Fifty
et al., 2021). Prior studies have proposed more involved
merging techniques by resolving weight interference (Yadav
et al., 2023b), matching activations (Jin et al., 2023) or
by preserving task-specific important parameters (Matena
& Raffel, 2022; Tam et al., 2024). Despite these recent
advances, weight space interpolation for multi-task fusion
still suffers from significant drops in performance compared
to individual fine-tuned models.
In this paper, we present a novel view and show that
performance of the merged model can degrade even
without weight interference or information erasure through
a controlled experiment. In contrast, the discriminant
information for individual tasks is preserved and embedded
in the multi-task vector after merging disparate task
vectors, and we propose an algorithm, TALL-masks, that
identifies the subset of important parameters for each task

*

Equal contribution 1 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Google Deepmind 3 Work done
while at EPFL. 4 University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.. Correspondence to: Ke Wang <k.wang@epfl.ch>, Nikolaos Dimitriadis <nikolaos.dimitriadis@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

