Improving Context Understanding in Multimodal Large Language Models
via Multimodal Composition Learning

Wei Li 1

Hehe Fan 1 B

Yongkang Wong 2

Yi Yang 1

Mohan Kankanhalli 2
Retrieval Results

Multimodal Context

Abstract

Image query:

Previous efforts using frozen Large Language
Models (LLMs) for visual understanding, via
image captioning or image-text retrieval tasks,
face challenges when dealing with complex multimodal scenarios. In order to enhance the capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLM) in comprehending the context of
vision and language, we introduce Multimodal
Composition Learning (MCL) for the purpose
of mapping or aligning the vision and language
input. In particular, we introduce two tasks:
Multimodal-Context Captioning (MC-Cap) and
Multimodal-Context Retrieval (MC-Ret) to guide
a frozen LLM in comprehending the vision and
language context. These specialized tasks are
crafted to improve the LLM’s capacity for efficient processing and utilization of multimodal
inputs, thereby enhancing its proficiency in generating more accurate text or visual representations.
Extensive experiments on both retrieval tasks
(i.e., zero-shot composed image retrieval, visual
storytelling image retrieval and visual dialog image retrieval) and text generation tasks (i.e., visual
question answering) demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. The code is available at:
https://github.com/dhg-wei/MCL.

LLM

(a) without MCL (FROMAGe)

Text query:
is on a windowsill, is
transparent and there are
trees in the background

(b) with MCL (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between FROMAGe (Koh et al., 2023b) and
our MCL on zero-shot composed image retrieval. MCL enables the
frozen LLM to retrieve accurate images that match the multimodal
context (image and text queries).

by the strong contextual comprehension inherent in LLMs,
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) demonstrate
remarkable zero-shot abilities in multimodal tasks. Although trained on image captioning or image-text retrieval,
these models excel in activities such as visual question answering, contextual image retrieval, and multimodal dialogue. This versatility showcases their broad applicability
beyond their initial training focus. However, these methods
that utilize image captioning and image-text retrieval tasks
for vision-language mapping, mainly serving as ‘modality translation’, exhibit a deficiency in fostering sufficient
cross-modal interaction. This limitation results in subpar
performance on complex multimodal benchmarks (shown
in Fig. 1), like zero-shot composed image retrieval, which
require a profound understanding of multimodal contexts.

1. Introduction
Recent research (Merullo et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Koh
et al., 2023b;a) has shown that frozen Large Language Models (LLMs) can comprehend visual inputs and generate visual representations by learning a simple vision-language
mapping through the utilization of image-text pairs. Aided

In this paper, we introduce a Multimodal Composition
Learning (MCL) method to enhance the mapping between
the vision and language modalities for MLLMs. One notable
obstacle with this learning approach is the data intensiveness
problem. Existing multimodal composition datasets consisting of an image query, a text query and a composed image
target, which heavily rely on human labeling (Liu et al.,
2021a; Wu et al., 2021). Relying on manual annotation
limits the scope of these datasets to particular domains and
poses challenges for scaling up, thus impeding the development of a comprehensive vision-language mapping. To
obtain large-scale data for multimodal composition learning,
we propose to leverage LLMs to enhance the existing web-

Part of this work was done when Wei Li was an Intern at
National University of Singapore. 1 ReLER, CCAI, School of
Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China.
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Hehe Fan <hehefan@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

