UPOCR: Towards Unified Pixel-Level OCR Interface

Dezhi Peng † 1 2 Zhenhua Yang † 1 2 Jiaxin Zhang 1 2 Chongyu Liu 1 2 Yongxin Shi 1 2 Kai Ding 3 2
Fengjun Guo 3 2 Lianwen Jin ∗ 1 2
(a) Text Removal

Abstract

(b) Text Seg.

Existing optical character recognition (OCR)
methods rely on task-specific designs with divergent paradigms, architectures, and training strategies, which significantly increases the complexity of research and maintenance and hinders the
fast deployment in applications. To this end, we
propose UPOCR, a simple-yet-effective generalist model for Unified Pixel-level OCR interface.
Specifically, the UPOCR unifies the paradigm
of diverse OCR tasks as image-to-image transformation and the architecture as a vision Transformer (ViT)-based encoder-decoder with learnable task prompts. The prompts push the general feature representations extracted by the encoder towards task-specific spaces, endowing the
decoder with task awareness. Moreover, the
model training is uniformly aimed at minimizing the discrepancy between the predicted and
ground-truth images regardless of the inhomogeneity among tasks. Experiments are conducted
on three pixel-level OCR tasks including text removal, text segmentation, and tampered text detection. Without bells and whistles, the experimental results showcase that the proposed method
can simultaneously achieve state-of-the-art performance on three tasks with a unified single model,
which provides valuable strategies and insights
for future research on generalist OCR models.
Code is available at https://github.com/
shannanyinxiang/UPOCR.

(c) Tamp. Text Det.

Task Prompt

UPOCR

Figure 1. The proposed UPOCR is a unified pixel-level OCR interface which is simultaneously capable of diverse pixel-level OCR
tasks (e.g., (a) text removal, (b) text segmentation, and (c) tampered
text detection) by prompting ViT-based encoder-decoder, without
task- or benchmark-specific finetuning. At the bottom right, red
and green colors indicate tampered and real texts, respectively.

wide spectrum of pixel-level tasks that require dense perpixel predictions, e.g., text removal (Nakamura et al., 2017),
text segmentation (Xu et al., 2021), and tampered text detection (Wang et al., 2022b). Nowadays, there have been
massive methods that specialize in individual tasks, significantly contributing to the OCR advancement.
However, specialized OCR models significantly differ in
aspects of paradigms, architectures, and training strategies,
especially for pixel-level OCR tasks. (1) Paradigm: The
differences in paradigms are particularly reflected by divergent input and output formats. For instance, existing
approaches to text segmentation (Xu et al., 2021) and tampered text detection (Qu et al., 2023) typically transform
the input image into per-pixel classification probabilities to
distinguish text strokes or real/tampered texts from backgrounds. On the contrary, text removal (Zhang et al., 2019)
is aimed at producing vivid text-erased images from input
images. Moreover, recent studies (Liu et al., 2022a; Lee &
Choi, 2022; Wang et al., 2023c) commonly consolidate text
masks into inputs or outputs to promote text perception of
text removal models. (2) Architecture: Specialized models
typically elaborate dedicated modules for individual tasks.
Concretely, explicit text localization modules (Tursun et al.,

1. Introduction
Optical character recognition (OCR) is a flourishing field
with numerous real-world applications, encompassing a
†
Equal contribution 1 South China University of Technology
INTSIG-SCUT Joint Lab of Document Image Analysis and
Recognition 3 INTSIG Information Co. Ltd. Correspondence to:
Lianwen Jin <eelwjin@scut.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

