One Size Fits All for Semantic Shifts:
Adaptive Prompt Tuning for Continual Learning

Doyoung Kim 1 Susik Yoon 2 Dongmin Park 3 Youngjun Lee 1 Hwanjun Song 1 Jihwan Bang 1 Jae-Gil Lee 1

Abstract

specific prompting methods (e.g., S-Prompts (Wang et al.,
2022a)) train prompts individually designated for each task,
mainly to alleviate catastrophic forgetting which becomes
more pronounced with highly divergent tasks.

In real-world continual learning (CL) scenarios,
tasks often exhibit intricate and unpredictable semantic shifts, posing challenges for fixed prompt
management strategies which are tailored to only
handle semantic shifts of uniform degree (i.e., uniformly mild or uniformly abrupt). To address
this limitation, we propose an adaptive prompting approach that effectively accommodates semantic shifts of varying degree where mild and
abrupt shifts are mixed. AdaPromptCL employs
the assign-and-refine semantic grouping mechanism that dynamically manages prompt groups in
accordance with the semantic similarity between
tasks, enhancing the quality of grouping through
continuous refinement. Our experiment results
demonstrate that AdaPromptCL outperforms existing prompting methods by up to 21.3%, especially in the benchmark datasets with diverse
semantic shifts between tasks.

While these two approaches have proven effective in their
respective CL scenarios—similar tasks for universal prompting and distinct tasks for specific prompting, real-world
scenarios frequently involve intricate and unpredictable semantic shifts between tasks over time. Let us specify the
degree of semantic shifts by considering whether a higherlevel category of samples undergoes a change. For example,
in Figure 1(a), the shift from Task A to Task B is mild because both tasks involve product classification in the food
and beverage category; on the other hand, the shift from
Task B to Task C is abrupt because Task C belongs to the
apparel and accessories category. This example illustrates a
combination of semantic shifts of varying degrees.
Existing prompting methods, however, are not suitable to accommodate semantic shifts of varying degrees, but can only
accommodate those of uniform degree. In detail, universal
prompting supports uniformly mild shifts, while specific
prompting supports uniformly abrupt shifts. On the contrary, for a combination of mild and abrupt shifts in Figure
1(a), universal prompting incurs insufficient (one instead of
two) prompts, and specific prompting incurs redundant (four
instead of two) prompts. Consequently, the existing methods reach a sub-optimal solution, compromising between
forgetting prevention and knowledge transfer.

1. Introduction
Recently, rehersal-free continual learning (CL) methods
(Wang et al., 2022c;a;b; Gao et al., 2023) have gained interest because of their superior performance even without using
previous samples. Small learnable parameters, known as
prompts, are added to input data of various tasks for refining
a pre-trained model. These methods can be further categorized into universal and specific prompting methods, depending on how the prompts are managed for sequentially arriving tasks. Universal prompting methods (e.g., LAE (Gao
et al., 2023)) train a fixed set of prompts consistently used
for all tasks. This strategy captures generalizable knowledge accumulated from all prior tasks which is believed to
be beneficial for upcoming similar tasks. On the other hand,
1

In this paper, we contend that prompting methods should
accommodate semantic shifts of varying degrees. As a
consequence, we propose an adaptive prompting strategy
to address the limited effectiveness of the fixed prompting
strategy—either universal or specific. By carefully considering task semantics, adaptive prompting achieves minimal
yet adequate prompts that effectively accommodate varying
semantic shifts between tasks. As shown in Figure 1(a), it
appropriately updates an existing prompt for mildly shifted
tasks (e.g., Task B) and introduces a new prompt for abruptly
shifted tasks (e.g., Task C).

KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 Korea University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea 3 KRAFTON, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Jae-Gil Lee <jaegil@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The key issue here is grouping semantically similar tasks so
as to share a prompt among those tasks. This grouping is es1

