Homomorphism Counts for Graph Neural Networks: All About That Basis

Emily Jin 1 Michael Bronstein 1 İsmail İlkan Ceylan 1 Matthias Lanzinger 2 1

Abstract
G1

A large body of work has investigated the properties of graph neural networks and identified several limitations, particularly pertaining to their
expressive power. Their inability to count certain patterns (e.g., cycles) in a graph lies at the
heart of such limitations, since many functions
to be learned rely on the ability of counting such
patterns. Two prominent paradigms aim to address this limitation by enriching the graph features with subgraph or homomorphism pattern
counts. In this work, we show that both of these
approaches are sub-optimal in a certain sense and
argue for a more fine-grained approach, which incorporates the homomorphism counts of all structures in the “basis” of the target pattern. This
yields strictly more expressive architectures without incurring any additional overhead in terms
of computational complexity compared to existing approaches. We prove a series of theoretical
results on node-level and graph-level motif parameters and empirically validate them on standard
benchmark datasets.

(a) Sub(

, G1 ) = 2 and Hom(

, G1 ) = 120.

G2

(b) Sub(

, G2 ) = 2 and Hom(

, G2 ) = 140.

Figure 1. Two 1-WL indistinguishable graphs G1 and G2 . These
graphs have the same number of 5-cycles, but they can be distinguished by the homomorphism counts of 5-cycles. Sub(F, G) is
the number of times F occurs as a subgraph in G, and Hom(F, G)
is the number of homomorphisms from F to G.

Graph Motif Parameters for Counting Patterns. The
expressive power of MPNNs is upper bounded by the 1dimensional Weisfeiler Leman graph isomorphism test (1WL) (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019). Hence, all known
inexpressiveness results for 1-WL apply to MPNNs. In
particular, this implies that MPNNs cannot express a wide
variety of graph motif parameters, which include functions
that count the occurrences of basic graph patterns, such as
paths or cycles. Since these patterns are abundant in realworld domains (e.g., cycles in molecules), a large body of
work proposes enhancing the input graphs with such pattern
counts. One line of work enriches the graph features with
subgraph counts (Bouritsas et al., 2023; Bevilacqua et al.,
2022; Frasca et al., 2022), while another enriches the graph
features with homomorphism counts (Barceló et al., 2021).
Although both approaches increase the expressive power of
standard MPNNs, it remains unclear how these approaches
compare to one another in terms of expressiveness gained.
Example 1.1. Consider the graphs G1 and G2 from Figure 1, which are indistinguishable by 1-WL and both
contain two 5-cycles as subgraphs: formally we write
Sub( , G1 ) = Sub( , G2 ) = 2. Hence, adding subgraph counts for 5-cycles to 1-WL does not help in distinguishing these graphs, but adding homomorphism counts
for 5-cycles does help in distinguishing these graphs since
Hom( , G1 ) ̸= Hom( , G2 ).
△

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2008; Gori
et al., 2005) are a class of architectures for learning invariant functions on graphs. Their success in various domains (Shlomi et al., 2021; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Zitnik
et al., 2018) has led to a number of architectures (Kipf
& Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Velickovic et al., 2018;
Hamilton et al., 2017). Most of the architectures used in
practice fall under the framework of message passing neural
networks (MPNNs) from Gilmer et al. (2017), where the
core idea is to iteratively update each node’s representation
based on the messages received from the node’s neighbors.
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Institute for Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Vienna,
AT. Correspondence to: Emily Jin <emily.jin@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

