DFA-RAG: Conversational Semantic Router for Large Language Model
with Definite Finite Automaton
Yiyou Sun 1 2 Junjie Hu 1 Wei Cheng 2 Haifeng Chen 2

Abstract

remarkably adaptable and have proven effective in diverse
settings including customer service, marketing, education,
and healthcare (Wang et al., 2023b). Compared to traditional, rule-based dialogue systems (Abdul-Kader & Woods,
2015; Hussain et al., 2019; Adamopoulou & Moussiades,
2020), LLMs offer greater efficiency, scalability, and dynamism (Medeiros et al., 2019). However, their application
in practical scenarios often necessitates adherence to specific workflows or policies. For instance, an Emotional
Support Chatbot (Medeiros et al., 2019) must tailor its responses to various stress conditions, while customer service
bots typically follow predetermined response guidelines.

This paper introduces the retrieval-augmented
large language model with Definite Finite Automaton (DFA-RAG), a novel framework designed to enhance the capabilities of conversational agents using large language models (LLMs).
Traditional LLMs face challenges in generating
regulated and compliant responses in special scenarios with predetermined response guidelines,
like emotional support and customer service. Our
framework addresses these challenges by embedding a Definite Finite Automaton (DFA), learned
from training dialogues, within the LLM. This
structured approach acts as a semantic router
which enables the LLM to adhere to a deterministic response pathway. The routing is achieved
by the retrieval-augmentation generation (RAG)
strategy, which carefully selects dialogue examples aligned with the current conversational context. The advantages of DFA-RAG include an
interpretable structure through human-readable
DFA, context-aware retrieval for responses in conversations, and plug-and-play compatibility with
existing LLMs. Extensive benchmarks validate
DFA-RAG’s effectiveness, indicating its potential
as a valuable contribution to the conversational
agent.

In these scenarios, popular LLMs like GPT-3.5 or GPT-4
may generate inappropriate or misleading content (Wang
et al., 2023a) without specialized optimization. Fine-tuning
these models, while effective, is not always viable due
to open-source requirements, the need for intricate design (Ding et al., 2023), and substantial data to mitigate overfitting risks (Selvi, 2023). An alternative method, RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), which
references an additional knowledge base in generating a
response, has been explored to address these issues. Since
the generation quality of RAG is known to be sensitive to
the sample selection (Gao et al., 2023), it is therefore critical to design an effective selection strategy that ensures the
retrieval of the most relevant and contextually appropriate
samples. This poses unique challenges to apply RAG in
conversational scenarios, as one must identify partial conversational flows within historical training dialogues that
closely match the current conversation context.

1. Introduction

Targeting these challenges, we formally introduce the
new framework, DFA-based retrieval-augmented generation (dubbed DFA-RAG). This framework assumes that
a specific workflow is embedded within the training data
dialogues, which we model using a Definite Finite Automaton (as illustrated in Figure 1). Acting as a Semantic
Router (Horsey, 2024) like a decision-making layer, DFARAG routes conversations through a predefined trajectory.
This ensures that the LLM adheres to the workflow encoded
in the DFA. Specifically, each conversational utterance corresponds to a particular DFA state, where each state encapsulates responses from similar historical contexts. By utilizing
these historical examples as retrieved samples, DFA-RAG

Recent advancements in machine learning, particularly in
large language models (LLMs), have provided more possibilities in various fields. Their applications range from
document completion to chatbots (Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). These conversational agents with LLMs are
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin 2 NEC Laboratories America, inc., Princeton,
USA. Correspondence to: Yiyou Sun <sunyiyou@nec-labs.com>,
Haifeng Chen <haifeng@nec-labs.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

