Diffusion Rejection Sampling

Byeonghu Na 1 Yeongmin Kim 1 Minsang Park 1 Donghyeok Shin 1 Wanmo Kang 1 Il-Chul Moon 1 2

Abstract

tion (Kim et al., 2022b; Rombach et al., 2022; Lai et al.,
2023; Zheng et al., 2023a). Nonetheless, these methods
require time-consuming training of the diffusion model.

Recent advances in powerful pre-trained diffusion
models encourage the development of methods
to improve the sampling performance under welltrained diffusion models. This paper introduces
Diffusion Rejection Sampling (DiffRS), which
uses a rejection sampling scheme that aligns the
sampling transition kernels with the true ones
at each timestep. The proposed method can
be viewed as a mechanism that evaluates the
quality of samples at each intermediate timestep
and refines them with varying effort depending
on the sample. Theoretical analysis shows that
DiffRS can achieve a tighter bound on sampling
error compared to pre-trained models. Empirical results demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of DiffRS on the benchmark datasets
and the effectiveness of DiffRS for fast diffusion samplers and large-scale text-to-image diffusion models. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/aailabkaist/DiffRS.

In contrast to these approaches, recent advances in powerful pre-trained models (Rombach et al., 2022; Karras et al.,
2022) have led to a growing body of research focused on
leveraging them (Kim et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023a; Ning
et al., 2024). In line with these efforts, our goal is to effectively and efficiently leverage a well-trained diffusion model
to improve the sampling quality. We introduce a mechanism
that assesses the quality of a sample at each intermediate
timestep, allowing us to keep good samples as well as to
refine poor samples by injecting appropriate noise and by
going back to prior timesteps.
Specifically, we propose Diffusion Rejection Sampling
(DiffRS), which is based on the ratio of the true transition
kernel to the transition kernel of the pre-trained model for
each timestep, see Figure 1. The ratio can be estimated by
a time-dependent discriminator that distinguishes between
data and generated samples at each timestep. In cases where
samples are rejected, we adjust the noise intensity depending
on the rejected samples. We theoretically prove that discriminator training leads to a tighter upper bound on the sampling error of DiffRS compared to a pre-trained diffusion
model. In the experiments, DiffRS achieves new state-ofthe-art (SOTA) performance on CIFAR-10, and near-SOTA
performance on ImageNet 64×64 with fewer NFEs. Moreover, we demonstrate the effective application of DiffRS
to the fast diffusion samplers, such as DPM-Solver++ (Lu
et al., 2022b) and Consistency Model (Song et al., 2023),
and large-scale text-to-image generation models, including
Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have attracted considerable interest in various domains, such as image (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Rombach et al., 2022) and video generation (Ho et al.,
2022b; Voleti et al., 2022), due to their remarkable ability to
generate high-quality samples. The powerful generative capabilities of diffusion models have spurred extensive efforts
to further improve the sampling quality. A common strategy is to reduce the sampling interval, thereby increasing
the iterative sampling count (Karras et al., 2022). However, this comes at the cost of a higher number of network
evaluations, which slows down the sampling speed. An
alternative approach is to improve the training of the reverse
diffusion process to accurately model the reverse transi-

2. Preliminary
Diffusion Model Diffusion-based generative models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021)
are one of the most prominent deep generative models that
aim to approximate the data distribution to the model distribution. This model includes a forward diffusion process that
iteratively perturbs the data instances toward the prior distribution, and a corresponding reverse process that inverts the
forward process to sample from the modeled distribution.

1
Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST,
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 summary.ai, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea. Correspondence to: Il-Chul Moon <icmoon@kaist.ac.kr>,
Byeonghu Na <byeonghu.na@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

