Online Variational Sequential Monte Carlo

Alessandro Mastrototaro 1 Jimmy Olsson 1

Abstract

distributions—given records of observations, which is a delicate problem whose analytical solution is intractable outside
the limited cases of linear Gaussian models or models with
finite state space. In a recent line of research (Le et al.,
2018; Maddison et al., 2017; Naesseth et al., 2018), this
problem is addressed by combining variational inference
(Blei et al., 2017; Kingma & Welling, 2014) and sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC) methods (Gordon et al., 1993; Doucet
et al., 2001; Chopin & Papaspiliopoulos, 2020) in order to
design flexible families of variational joint-state distributions in the form of particle-trajectory laws. By optimizing
the Kullback–Leibler divergence from (KLD) the law of
the particle trajectories to the joint-smoothing distribution,
this variational SMC (VSMC) approach is killing two birds
with one stone by learning not only the unknown model
parameters but also, in parallel, an optimal particle proposal
kernel, the latter being a problem that has received a lot of
attention in the literature (Doucet et al., 2000; Cornebise
et al., 2008; Gu et al., 2015). The procedure can be viewed
as a non-trivial extension of the importance-weighted autoencoder (IWAE) proposed by Burda et al. (2016), where
standard self-normalized importance sampling has been replaced by sequential importance sampling with systematic
resampling in order to obtain a tighter evidence lower bound
(ELBO). The objective of VSMC is a similar ELBO whose
gradient is approximated by the expectation, under the law
of the random numbers generated by the SMC algorithm, of
the gradient of the logarithm of the standard particle-based
likelihood estimator, the latter being unbiased (Del Moral,
2004; Chopin & Papaspiliopoulos, 2020), is obtained as a
by-product of the particle approximation of the marginalstate posterior—or filter distribution—flow; thus, whereas
traditional particle-based inference in SSM typically relies
on particle approximation of the joint-smoothing distributions (with aim of approximating, e.g., the intermediate
quantity of the expectation–maximization, EM, algorithm
or the score function directly via the Fisher identity), which
is cumbersome due to the so-called particle-path degeneracy phenomenon (Kitagawa, 1996; Cappé et al., 2005,
Section 8.3), VSMC allows, using the reparameterization
trick, the model parameters as well as an optimal particle
proposal kernel to be simultaneously learned by processing
repeatedly the given data batch using a standard particle
filter.

Being the most classical generative model for serial data, state-space models (SSM) are fundamental in AI and statistical machine learning. In
SSM, any form of parameter learning or latent
state inference typically involves the computation
of complex latent-state posteriors. In this work,
we build upon the variational sequential Monte
Carlo (VSMC) method, which provides computationally efficient and accurate model parameter
estimation and Bayesian latent-state inference by
combining particle methods and variational inference. While standard VSMC operates in the offline
mode, by re-processing repeatedly a given batch
of data, we distribute the approximation of the
gradient of the VSMC surrogate ELBO in time using stochastic approximation, allowing for online
learning in the presence of streams of data. This
results in an algorithm, online VSMC, that is capable of performing efficiently, entirely on-the-fly,
both parameter estimation and particle proposal
adaptation. In addition, we provide rigorous theoretical results describing the algorithm’s convergence properties as the number of data tends to
infinity as well as numerical illustrations of its
excellent convergence properties and usefulness
also in batch-processing settings.

1. Introduction
Being the most classical structured probabilistic generative model for serial data, state-space models (SSM), also
known as general state-space hidden Markov models, are
fundamental and ubiquitous in AI and statistical machine
learning (Cappé et al., 2005; Bishop, 2016). In SSM, any
form of parameter learning or state inference typically involves the computation of complex joint posterior distributions of latent-state variables—the so-called joint-smoothing
1

Department of Mathematics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology , Stockholm, Sweden. Correspondence to: Alessandro
Mastrototaro <alemas@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

