Smooth Tchebycheff Scalarization for Multi-Objective Optimization

Xi Lin 1 Xiaoyuan Zhang 1 Zhiyuan Yang 1 Fei Liu 1 Zhenkun Wang 2 Qingfu Zhang 1

Abstract

to find a single solution or a finite set of solutions to approximate the Pareto set. This work focuses on the gradient-based
methods for differentiable multi-objective optimization.

Multi-objective optimization problems can be
found in many real-world applications, where
the objectives often conflict each other and cannot be optimized by a single solution. In the
past few decades, numerous methods have been
proposed to find Pareto solutions that represent
optimal trade-offs among the objectives for a
given problem. However, these existing methods could have high computational complexity
or may not have good theoretical properties for
solving a general differentiable multi-objective
optimization problem. In this work, by leveraging
the smooth optimization technique, we propose
a lightweight and efficient smooth Tchebycheff
scalarization approach for gradient-based multiobjective optimization. It has good theoretical
properties for finding all Pareto solutions with
valid trade-off preferences, while enjoying significantly lower computational complexity compared
to other methods. Experimental results on various
real-world application problems fully demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.

There are two main types of gradient-based multi-objective
optimization algorithms: the scalarization approach (Miettinen, 1999; Ehrgott, 2005) and the adaptive gradient
method (Fliege et al., 2019). However, both algorithms
have their own disadvantages. The simple linear scalarization is the most straightforward method, but will completely
miss all the solutions on the non-convex part of the optimal Pareto front (Das & Dennis, 1997; Ehrgott, 2005).
The classical Tchebycheff scalarization can find all Pareto
solutions that satisfy the decision-maker’s exact trade-off
preference (Bowman, 1976; Steuer & Choo, 1983), but it
suffers from a slow convergence rate due to its nonsmooth
(i.e., non-differentiable) nature. To overcome the limitations of scalarization approaches, many adaptive gradient
methods have been proposed in the past few decades (Fliege
& Svaiter, 2000; Schäffler et al., 2002; Désidéri, 2012).
These methods aim to find a valid gradient direction that
improves the performance of all objectives at each iteration.
While these methods have theoretical guarantees for finding
a Pareto stationary solution, their high pre-iteration computational complexity makes them less suitable for handling
large-scale problems in real-world applications.

1. Introduction

Instead of proposing another adaptive gradient method, this
work revisits the straightforward scalarization approach. In
particular, we leverage the powerful smooth approximation
technique (Nesterov, 2005; Beck & Teboulle, 2012) to develop a lightweight yet efficient scalarization approach with
promising theoretical properties. The main contributions of
this work are summarized as follows. 1

Many real-world applications involve multi-objective optimization problems, such as learning an accurate but also
fair model (Martinez et al., 2020), building a powerful yet
energy-efficient agent (Xu et al., 2020), and finding a drug
design that satisfies various criteria (Xie et al., 2021). However, these objectives often conflict each other, making it
impossible to optimize them simultaneously with a single
solution. For each nontrivial multi-objective optimization
problem, there exists a Pareto set that probably contains an
infinite number of Pareto solutions that represent different
optimal trade-offs among the objectives (Miettinen, 1999;
Ehrgott, 2005). Numerous algorithms have been proposed

• We propose a smooth Tchebycheff (STCH) scalarization approach for gradient-based multi-objective optimization, which can serve as a fast alternative to the
classic Tchebycheff scalarization.
• We provide detailed theoretical analyses to demonstrate
that STCH scalarization has promising theoretical properties while enjoying low computational complexity.

1

City University of Hong Kong (email: xi.lin@my.cityu.edu.hk)
2
Southern University of Science and Technology. Correspondence
to: Qingfu Zhang <qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk>.

• We further generalize STCH scalarization to support
efficient Pareto set learning.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Our source code is available at: github.com/Xi-L/STCH.

