Intersectional Unfairness Discovery

Gezheng Xu 1 Qi Chen 2 Charles X. Ling 1 3 Boyu Wang 1 3 Changjian Shui 3

Abstract

attribute), raising fairness concerns such as those related to
gender, race, and age. To this end, the community aims to
understand and eventually mitigate the prediction discrimination (Barocas et al., 2023).

AI systems have been shown to produce unfair
results for certain subgroups of population, highlighting the need to understand bias on certain
sensitive attributes. Current research often falls
short, primarily focusing on the subgroups characterized by a single sensitive attribute, while neglecting the nature of intersectional fairness of
multiple sensitive attributes. This paper focuses
on its one fundamental aspect by discovering diverse high-bias subgroups under intersectional
sensitive attributes. Specifically, we propose a
Bias-Guided Generative Network (BGGN). By
treating each bias value as a reward, BGGN efficiently generates high-bias intersectional sensitive attributes. Experiments on real-world text
and image datasets demonstrate a diverse and efficient discovery of BGGN. To further evaluate
the generated unseen but possible unfair intersectional sensitive attributes, we formulate them as
prompts and use modern generative AI to produce
new texts and images. The results of frequently
generating biased data provides new insights of
discovering potential unfairness in popular modern generative AI systems. Warning: This paper
contains generative examples that are offensive
in nature.

Despite the growing advances, most fairness research has
focused on a single sensitive attribute, such as age. Indeed,
an individual naturally has multi-dimensional identities and
can be recognized by different sensitive attributes. Consequently, the fairness issue cannot be merely considered
within a single attribute, but rather at the intersection of
multiple sensitive attributes. In the real-world, when adopting AI for healthcare, an AI-based disease diagnosis system
should take both demographic (e.g., sex, race, age) and clinical (e.g., tumor size, lesion count) sensitive attributes into
account. For example, Daneshjou et al. (2022) observed
that young female patients with darker skin can suffer a
significant prediction bias by a clear performance drop.
The above observation naturally raises the question of identifying discrimination in the presence of multiple sensitive
attributes. Indeed, in the health examples above, researchers
typically reported quite few particular types of intersectional
unfairness. Therefore, can we automatically recognize more
diverse intersectional unfair sensitive attribute?
In this paper, we formulate this objective as a discovery
problem (shown in Sec 2), where we develop a systematic
approach to proactively discover the unfairness that may be
present but unnoticed. We further consider the prediction
loss on the intersectional sensitive attribute as the fairness
criteria. That is, a larger prediction loss indicates a higher
bias value.

1. Introduction
AI-driven decision-making systems have emerged in numerous applications, such as product recommendation (Burke
et al., 2011), healthcare (Davenport & Kalakota, 2019),
autonomous driving (Grigorescu et al., 2020), and education (Zhang & Aslan, 2021). However, AI systems can
exhibit significant discrimination against individuals or certain subgroups of the population (referred to as the sensitive

Discovery through Enumeration. A natural and simple
method is to list all the combinations of the sensitive attributes, compute the corresponding prediction loss, and
then filter out the intersectional sensitive attributes of interest under a specific bias threshold (Roy et al., 2023). A
typical example is shown in Fig 1(a).

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Western
Ontario 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute. Correspondence to: Boyu Wang <bwang@csd.uwo.ca>, Changjian Shui
<changjian.shui@vectorinstitute.ai>.

However, a full enumeration is computationally infeasible
when facing numerous sensitive attributes, where the complexity of traversing all the intersections is of exponential
growth with the number of sensitive attributes. Therefore,
is it possible to conduct a fast discovery without a full enumeration?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

