Diffusion Models Demand Contrastive Guidance
for Adversarial Purification to Advance
Mingyuan Bai * 1 Wei Huang * 2 Tenghui Li * 3 1 4 Andong Wang 1 Junbin Gao 5 Cesar F Caiafa 1 6 Qibin Zhao 1

Abstract

rification methods by a large improvement.

In adversarial defense, adversarial purification can
be viewed as a special generation task with the
purpose to remove adversarial attacks and diffusion models excel in adversarial purification
for their strong generative power. With different
predetermined generation requirements, various
types of guidance have been proposed, but few
of them focuses on adversarial purification. In
this work, we propose to guide diffusion models for adversarial purification using contrastive
guidance. We theoretically derive the proper
noise level added in the forward process diffusion models for adversarial purification from a
feature learning perspective. For the reverse process, it is implied that the role of contrastive loss
guidance is to facilitate the evolution towards the
signal direction. From the theoretical findings
and implications, we design the forward process
with the proper amount of Gaussian noise added
and the reverse process with the gradient of contrastive loss as the guidance of diffusion models
for adversarial purification. Empirically, extensive experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, the
German Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark and
ImageNet datasets with ResNet and WideResNet
classifiers show that our method outperforms most
of current adversarial training and adversarial pu-

1. Introduction
Adversarial defense has been an important method to resist
adversarial attack to deep learning models. These adversarial attacks are imperceptible by human sense but can cause
deep neural networks (DNNs) to misclassify adversarially
attacked data. To address this vulnerability of DNNs, many
adversarial defense methods were designed, such as adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018), certified methods for
training (Gowal et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018; 2020a; Frosio & Kautz, 2023), and adversarial purification (Shi et al.,
2021; Yoon et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
Xiao et al., 2023). Adversarial training and certified methods for training rely on generated attacks, as a result, they
can only defend against such attacks. For unseen threats,
there are adversarial training methods designed to defend
against them, however, at the cost of significant clean accuracy decay (Laidlaw et al., 2021; Dolatabadi et al., 2022).
Instead, adversarial purification methods do not assume the
form of threat models and do not require retraining the classifier. For example, given adversarial examples, they use
generative models to generate clean examples such that they
are correctly classified (Samangouei et al., 2018; Hill et al.,
2021; Shi et al., 2021; Yoon et al., 2021). In recent years,
diffusion models have been attracting increasing attention
for their strong generative power and achieve the state-ofthe-art performance for adversarial purification (Nie et al.,
2022; Xiao et al., 2023). Besides, it is still a relatively new
topic for leveraging diffusion models to conduct adversarial
purification. DiffPure (Nie et al., 2022) firstly diffuses the
adversarial example with a small amount of Gaussian noise
followed by a reverse diffusion process, and hence removes
the adversarial attack, meanwhile preserving the semantic
information. However, theoretical studies in DiffPure show
that its upper bound of difference between purified data and
clean data is larger than the adversarial attacks. Also, its
purified data is still relatively indistinguishable among different classes under common pretrained classifiers. A guided
diffusion model for adversarial purification uses the difference between adversarial example and purified example as
a guidance (Wang et al., 2022) during purifying the adver-

*

Equal contribution 1 Tensor Learning Team, Center of Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, 1030027, JAPAN
2
Deep Learning Theory Team, Center of Advanced Intelligence
Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, 1030027, JAPAN 3 School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006,
CHINA 4 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Detection and the Internet
of Things in Manufacturing, Ministry of Education, Guangzhou,
510006, CHINA 5 Discipline of Business Analytics, The University of Sydney Business School, The University of Sydney,
Darlington, NSW, 2006, AUSTRALIA 6 Instituto Argentino de
Radioastronomı̀a, CONICET CCT La Plata/CIC-PBA/UNLP, V.
Elisa, 1894, ARGENTINA. Correspondence to: Qibin Zhao
<qibin.zhao@riken.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

