Delving into Differentially Private Transformer

Youlong Ding 1 2 Xueyang Wu 3 Yining Meng 4 Yonggang Luo 4 Hao Wang 5 Weike Pan 1

Abstract

ing algorithms without sacrificing too much utility (Tramèr
& Boneh, 2021; Sajadmanesh & Gatica-Perez, 2021; Kolluri
et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2023). Meanwhile, the Transformer
model (Vaswani et al., 2017) has emerged as a versatile and
effective architecture with broad applications. This paper
delves into the problem of training Transformer models with
differential privacy.

Deep learning with differential privacy (DP) has
garnered significant attention over the past years,
leading to the development of numerous methods
aimed at enhancing model accuracy and training
efficiency. This paper delves into the problem
of training Transformer models with differential
privacy. Our treatment is modular: the logic is
to ‘reduce’ the problem of training DP Transformer to the more basic problem of training DP
vanilla neural nets. The latter is better understood
and amenable to many model-agnostic methods.
Such ‘reduction’ is done by first identifying the
hardness unique to DP Transformer training: the
attention distraction phenomenon and a lack of
compatibility with existing techniques for efficient gradient clipping. To deal with these two
issues, we propose the Re-Attention Mechanism
and Phantom Clipping, respectively. We believe
that our work not only casts new light on training
DP Transformers but also promotes a modular
treatment to advance research in the field of differentially private deep learning.

more…
•
•
•

More data / Pre-train
Efficient grad clipping
…

DP Neural Nets
Focus of this work
•
•

Re-Attention (accuracy)
Phantom Clipping (efficiency)

DP Transformer

Figure 1. The modular treatment in this work, where the focus of
this work is on the first ‘reduction’.

Hardness of training DP neural nets. Let us first take a
step back to consider the hardness of training vanilla neural
nets with differential privacy in general1 , which encapsulates common challenges across neural network architectures. The empirical hardness of training neural nets with
differential privacy is indicated by a large body of recent
works, which rely heavily on the use of large pre-trained
models (Li et al., 2022b) or extensive training data (De et al.,
2022). On the theoretical side, such hardness is directly seen
and aligns well with the empirical results. Put informally,
differentially private machine learning, based on its sample
complexity (Dwork et al., 2009), necessitates a sufficiently
larger (than non-private version) volume of data to learn
patterns without resorting to the memorization of individual
data points (Carlini et al., 2019; Feldman, 2020).

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006; 2014) has been the
gold standard for quantitative and rigorous reasoning about
privacy leakage from the processing of private data. Applying differential privacy to machine learning (Song et al.,
2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016) is a longlasting challenge due to the dramatic reduction in the model
utility compared with the non-private version. This motivates numerous studies dedicated to designing private learn1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China 2 The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 3 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China 4 Changan Automobile;
Changan Technology Co., Ltd, Chongqing, China 5 Rutgers University, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Weike Pan <panweike@szu.edu.cn>.

While the paradigm of non-private pre-training and DP finetuning seems promising in the terms of model accuracy,
particularly in domains such as image classification (Tramer
& Boneh, 2021; Golatkar et al., 2022; De et al., 2022) and
natural language processing (Yu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022b;

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
For concreteness, throughout this paper, the reader can think
of ‘vanilla neural nets’ as models like MLPs.

1

