WISER: Weak Supervision and Supervised Representation Learning to Improve
Drug Response Prediction in Cancer

Kumar Shubham 1 Aishwarya Jayagopal 2 Syed Mohammed Danish 3 Prathosh AP 1 Vaibhav Rajan 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Cancer is a major cause of global morbidity and mortality (WHO, 2022). Cancer develops due to changes in our
genome, which enable cancer cells to gain a selective advantage over healthy cells, resulting in uncontrolled proliferation as a cancerous tumour. Significant variability in
treatment sensitivity and outcomes among patients makes
cancer treatment difficult (Bedard et al., 2013). Hence, cancer care is transitioning from a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach
to a more personalized strategy guided by patient-specific
genomic characteristics (Wahida et al., 2023).

Cancer, a leading cause of death globally, occurs
due to genomic changes and manifests heterogeneously across patients. To advance research on
personalized treatment strategies, the effectiveness of various drugs on cells derived from cancers (‘cell lines’) is experimentally determined in
laboratory settings. Nevertheless, variations in the
distribution of genomic data and drug responses
between cell lines and humans arise due to biological and environmental differences. Moreover,
while genomic profiles of many cancer patients
are readily available, the scarcity of corresponding drug response data limits the ability to train
machine learning models that can predict drug
response in patients effectively. Recent cancer
drug response prediction methods have largely
followed the paradigm of unsupervised domaininvariant representation learning followed by a
downstream drug response classification step. Introducing supervision in both stages is challenging due to heterogeneous patient response to drugs
and limited drug response data. This paper addresses these challenges through a novel representation learning method in the first phase and
weak supervision in the second. Experimental results on real patient data demonstrate the efficacy
of our method WISER (Weak supervISion and
supErvised Representation learning) over stateof-the-art alternatives on predicting personalized
drug response. Our implementation is available
at https://github.com/kyrs/WISER

To aid therapeutic development, there have been large-scale
global efforts, e.g., through The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) database (Hutter & Zenklusen, 2018), to catalog
high-dimensional genomic information (X ) of
pa cancer
di
tients. However,
patient
drug
response
data
Y
(X
)
for
t

drug di is scarce due to limited number of patients, with
only a few drugs administered on each patient (SharifiNoghabi et al., 2021). This has motivated researchers to explore preclinical datasets – e.g., cell lines, comprising cells
extracted from patient cancers, which can be cloned in a way
that the same genomic information is replicated across them.
Such clones can be exposed to different drugs to obtain drug
response information Ycdi (X ) for multiple di on the same
X . This data is immensely useful and cannot be directly
obtained from patients, who cannot be subjected to multiple drug regimens simultaneously. While such fine-grained
drug response data is only available for a limited number of
cell lines (∼ 1000) and drugs, it provides a valuable starting
point to build personalized drug response models based on
genomic information.
However, previous studies have shown that such cell linebased response models do not accurately predict drug efficacy in patients due to several reasons (Seyhan, 2019). Cell
line data (Xc ) is more homogeneous than patient cancer
cells (Xt ) and the environments in which they reside are
different. This results in differences in the distributions
(P ) of genomic information
across cell lines and patients

P (Xc ) ̸= P (Xt ) , and they can be considered as different
domains (See Appendix B). Further, within the human body,
in addition to the genomic structure, several other factors
(e.g., the immune system) play a role in drug response. Thus,

1
Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian
Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 2 Department of
Information Systems and Analytics, School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 Indian Institute of Technology, Patna, Bihar, India. Correspondence to: Kumar Shubham
<shubhamkuma3@iisc.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

