CasCast: Skillful High-resolution Precipitation Nowcasting via Cascaded
Modelling

Junchao Gong 1 2 Lei Bai 2 Peng Ye 2 Wanghan Xu 2 Na Liu 3 Jianhua Dai 4 Xiaokang Yang 1 Wanli Ouyang 2

Abstract
CNN/ViT /RNN
model

Precipitation nowcasting based on radar data
plays a crucial role in extreme weather prediction
and has broad implications for disaster management. Despite progress has been made based on
deep learning, two key challenges of precipitation
nowcasting are not well-solved: (i) the modeling of complex precipitation system evolutions
with different scales, and (ii) accurate forecasts
for extreme precipitation. In this work, we propose CasCast, a cascaded framework composed
of a deterministic and a probabilistic part to decouple the predictions for mesoscale precipitation distributions and small-scale patterns. Then,
we explore training the cascaded framework at
the high resolution and conducting the probabilistic modeling in a low dimensional latent space
with a frame-wise-guided diffusion transformer
for enhancing the optimization of extreme events
while reducing computational costs. Extensive
experiments on three benchmark radar precipitation datasets show that CasCast achieves competitive performance. Especially, CasCast significantly surpasses the baseline (up to +91.8%) for
regional extreme-precipitation nowcasting. The
code is available at https://github.com/
OpenEarthLab/CasCast.

GAN/Diffusion
model

𝑥

𝑥

𝑦′

𝑦′′

deterministic models

probabilistic models
𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒
latent space
E(𝑥)

CNN/ViT /
RNN

𝑥

E

E(𝑦′ )

Diffusion

D
𝑦′′

𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒

Our CasCast

Figure 1. Different precipitation nowcasting pipelines. Given context x, the prediction of deterministic models and probabilistic
models are y ′ and y ′′ , respectively. Our CasCast generates y ′′
conditional on x and y ′ in the latent space.

tion forecasting serves as a critical tool for warning and
mitigating disasters such as heavy rainfall and flooding. As
a result, achieving skillful precipitation nowcasting is of
utmost importance and has gained significant attention from
researchers.
Most precipitation events are caused by a combination of
atmospherical systems with different scales (Prein et al.,
2023). On one hand, the mesoscale precipitation system
evolves over spatial ranges of tens to hundreds of kilometers
and time scales of several hours, driven and constrained by
relatively stable large-scale circulation. On the other hand,
the small-scale system, evolving within a range of a few
kilometers and operating on time scales of minutes, is influenced by local processes such as heating, surface features,
and other physical factors, which introduce stochasticity and
unpredictability into its behavior. Thus, the combined influence of weather systems at multiple scales makes accurate
prediction of precipitation events very challenging.

1. Introduction
Precipitation nowcasting based on weather radar data plays
a vital role in predicting local weather conditions over a period of up to two hours (CLIMA & TE). These predictions
are essential for various social sectors, including energy
management and traffic scheduling. Moreover, precipita-

Deep learning methods have made significant contributions to precipitation nowcasting, with two broad categories
emerging, i.e., deterministic models and probabilistic models. Deterministic models aim to capture the overall motion
of the middle-scale precipitation system by providing a
single-value prediction of the future state. However, these
methods often encounter challenges related to blurriness and

1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
National Meteorological Information Center 4 Shanghai Meteorological Service. Correspondence to: Lei Bai <baisanshi@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

