Improving Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models
through Multiagent Debate

Yilun Du 1 Shuang Li 1 Antonio Torralba 1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 1 Igor Mordatch 2

Abstract

hallucinating facts or making implausible jumps in chains
of reasoning. An extensive body of recent work has focused
on improving factual accuracy and reasoning in language
models. These range from prompting models with few or
zero-shot chain-of-thought demonstrations, use of verification, self-consistency, or intermediate scratchpads.

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in language generation, understanding, and few-shot learning in
recent years. An extensive body of work has
explored how their performance may be further
improved through the tools of prompting, ranging from verification, self-consistency, or intermediate scratchpads. In this paper, we present a
complementary approach to improve language responses where multiple language model instances
propose and debate their individual responses and
reasoning processes over multiple rounds to arrive
at a common final answer. Our findings indicate
that this approach significantly enhances mathematical and strategic reasoning across a number of tasks. We also demonstrate that our approach improves the factual validity of generated
content, reducing fallacious answers and hallucinations that contemporary models are prone to.
Our approach may be directly applied to existing
black-box models and uses identical procedure
and prompts for all tasks we investigate. Overall,
our findings suggest that such "society of minds"
approach has the potential to significantly advance
the capabilities of LLMs and pave the way for further breakthroughs in language generation and
understanding.

We note that these techniques are applied over a single
model instance. Instead, we propose a complementary approach inspired by The Society of Mind (Minsky, 1988)
and multiagent settings, where multiple language model
instances (or agents) individually propose and jointly debate their responses and reasoning processes to arrive at a
common answer. More specifically, given a query, multiple instances of a language model first generate individual
candidate answers to a query. Then each individual model
instance reads and critiques the responses of all other models and uses this content to update its own answer. This
step is then repeated over several rounds. This process induces models to construct answers that are consistent with
both their internal critic as well as sensible in light of the
responses of other agents. The resulting quorum of models can hold and maintain multiple chains of reasoning and
possible answers simultaneously before proposing the final
answer.
We find that our debate approach outperforms single model
baselines such as zero-shot chain of thought (Kojima et al.,
2022) and reflection (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al.,
2023) on a variety of six reasoning, factuality, and questionanswering tasks. Using both multiple model agents and
multiple rounds of debate are important to achieve the best
performance. Given an initial query, we find that individual
model instances propose a diverse range of answers despite
being the same model class (although we also investigate
the case of mixing different model types, such as chatGPT
(OpenAI, 2022) and Bard (Pichai, 2023)). After debating
and examining the responses of other model instances, we
find that the population almost always converges on a single
and more accurate common answer. Debate results are also
less likely to include false facts that models are internally
uncertain of. This is because as the debate progresses, individual model instances tend to disagree on uncertain facts
and omit them from the answer (Figure 12). Lastly, we find

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable language generation, understanding, and few-shot learning capabilities in recent years. These methods are trained
on a massive corpus of text on the internet, where the quality and accuracy of extracted natural language may not be
ensured. Thus, current models may suffer from confidently
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT 2 Google Deepmind. Correspondence
to: Yilun Du <yilundu@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

