A Provably Effective Method for Pruning Experts in Fine-tuned Sparse
Mixture-of-Experts

Mohammed Nowaz Rabbani Chowdhury 1 Meng Wang 1 Kaoutar El Maghraoui 2 Naigang Wang 2
Pin-Yu Chen 2 Christopher Carothers 3

Abstract

approach has consistently achieved state-of-the-art results
in many application domains (Devlin et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022).
Notably, a larger pre-trained model usually leads to better
performance (Chen et al., 2022b; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
Dehghani et al., 2023). However, an increase in model size
typically leads to a proportional rise in the computational
resources required for training, scaling linearly with the
number of parameters.

The sparsely gated mixture of experts (MoE)
architecture sends different inputs to different
subnetworks (experts), through trainable routers.
MoE reduces the training computation significantly for large models, but its deployment can
be still memory/computation expensive for some
downstream tasks. Model pruning is a popular
approach to reduce inference computation, but its
application in MoE architecture is largely unexplored. To the best of our knowledge, this paper
provides the first provably efficient technique for
pruning experts in fine-tuned MoE models. We
theoretically prove that prioritizing the pruning of
the experts with a smaller change of the router’s l2
norm from the pre-trained model guarantees the
preservation of test accuracy, while significantly
reducing the model size and the computational requirements. Although our theoretical analysis is
centered on binary classification tasks on simplified MoE architecture, our expert pruning method
is verified on large vision MoE models such as
V-MoE and E3 -MoE fine-tuned on benchmark
datasets such as CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet.

The sparsely gated mixture of experts (MoE) has been introduced to reduce the training cost of large models (Shazeer
et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020). The MoE layer in a
Transformer encoder block replaces the single feed-forward
network (FFN) module with multiple FFN modules, referred
to as the experts. Each expert is associated with a trainable
router that selectively activates the expert based on the input tokens. The sparse computation over the tokens allows
for the expansion of the model size with only a sub-linear
increase in the training compute (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2022).
Due to their large model sizes, the deployment of MoE
models still needs significant memory requirements, and inference compute (Riquelme et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022),
which may restrict their applications in resource-constrained
environments. Because different experts often learn diverse
features (Lepikhin et al., 2020; Riquelme et al., 2021; Fedus
et al., 2022), and not all experts are essential for a particular downstream task (Riquelme et al. (2021), Figure 29),
pruning irrelevant and redundant experts may reduce the
inference compute and memory requirement of a fine-tuned
MoE model while maintaining the inference accuracy.

1. Introduction
In deep learning, a typical approach is to adapt the same
large pre-trained model (often based on the Transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017)) to a plethora of downstream tasks. This method circumvents the substantial cost
associated with training separate models for each task. This

Despite the extensive research on neural network pruning
(Han et al., 2015; 2016b;a; Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Li et al.,
2020a; Frantar & Alistarh, 2023), pruning experts in the
MoE architecture has not been much explored. To the best
of our knowledge, only recent work by Chen et al. (2022a)
and Koishekenov et al. (2023) prune non-essential experts,
which are identified by the total number of tokens received
by each expert throughout the fine-tuning stage or over the
validation set after fine-tuning. These pruning methods can
reduce memory requirements by reducing the number of

1
Department of Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA 2 IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA 3 Department of Computer Science,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Mohammed Nowaz Rabbani Chowdhury <chowdm2@rpi.edu>,
Meng Wang <wangm7@rpi.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

