Purify Unlearnable Examples via Rate-Constrained Variational Autoencoders

Yi Yu 1 2 Yufei Wang 2 Song Xia 2 Wenhan Yang † 3 Shijian Lu 4 Yap-Peng Tan 2 Alex C. Kot 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Unlearnable examples (UEs) seek to maximize
testing error by making subtle modifications to
training examples that are correctly labeled. Defenses against these poisoning attacks can be
categorized based on whether specific interventions are adopted during training. The first approach is training-time defense, such as adversarial training, which can mitigate poisoning effects
but is computationally intensive. The other approach is pre-training purification, e.g., image
short squeezing, which consists of several simple
compressions but often encounters challenges in
dealing with various UEs. Our work provides a
novel disentanglement mechanism to build an efficient pre-training purification method. Firstly,
we uncover rate-constrained variational autoencoders (VAEs), demonstrating a clear tendency
to suppress the perturbations in UEs. We subsequently conduct a theoretical analysis for this
phenomenon. Building upon these insights, we introduce a disentangle variational autoencoder (DVAE), capable of disentangling the perturbations
with learnable class-wise embeddings. Based on
this network, a two-stage purification approach
is naturally developed. The first stage focuses
on roughly eliminating perturbations, while the
second stage produces refined, poison-free results,
ensuring effectiveness and robustness across various scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate the remarkable performance of our method
across CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and a 100-class
ImageNet-subset. Code is available at https:
//github.com/yuyi-sd/D-VAE.

Although machine learning models often achieve impressive
performance on a range of challenging tasks, their effectiveness can significantly deteriorate in the presence of the gaps
between the training and testing data distributions. One of
the most widely studied types of these gaps is related to
the vulnerability of standard models to adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2022b; Xia et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024), posing a significant threat to the
inference phase. However, a destructive and often underestimated threat emerges from malicious perturbations at the
training phase, namely unlearnable examples, which seek
to maximize testing error by making subtle modifications of
correctly labeled training examples (Feng et al., 2019).
In the era of big data, vast amounts are freely collected from
the Internet, powering advances in DNNs (Schmidhuber,
2015). Nonetheless, it’s essential to note that online data
may contain proprietary or private information, raising concerns about unauthorized use. UEs are considered a promising route for data protection (Huang et al., 2021). Recently,
many efforts have emerged to add invisible perturbations to
images as shortcuts to disrupt the training process (Yu et al.,
2022a; Lin et al., 2024). On the other hand, data exploiters
perceive these protection techniques as potential threats to
a company’s commercial interests, leading to extensive research efforts in developing defenses. Previous research
has demonstrated that training-time defenses, such as adversarial training and adversarial augmentations, can alleviate
poisoning effects. However, their practicality is limited by
the massive computational costs. Recently, preprocessingbased defenses have gained attention with simple compressions like JPEG and grayscale demonstrating the advantages
over adversarial training in computational efficiency (Liu
et al., 2023). However, these methods lack universality, as
different compression techniques might be best suited for
various attacks. Pre-training purification has demonstrated
great potential in addressing the issue of UEs in both effectiveness and efficiency (Liu et al., 2023). This kind of
method doesn’t intervene in the model’s training but instead
concentrates on refining the data, which well aligns with the
recent theme of data-centric AI (DCAI) (Zha et al., 2023).
Focusing on fundamental data-related issues rather than
relying on untrusted or compromised data leads to more
reliable and effective machine learning models.

†
Corresponding author 1 Rapid-Rich Object Search Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3 PengCheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 4 School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yi Yu <yuyi0010@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Wenhan Yang
<yangwh@pcl.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

