Re-Dock: Towards Flexible and Realistic Molecular
Docking with Diffusion Bridge

Yufei Huang * 1 2 Odin Zhang * 1 3 Lirong Wu 1 2 Cheng Tan 1 2 Haitao Lin 1 2
Zhangyang Gao 1 2 Siyuan Li 1 2 Stan. Z. Li† 2

Abstract
Apo

Accurate prediction of protein-ligand binding
structures, a task known as molecular docking
is crucial for drug design but remains challenging. While deep learning has shown promise,
existing methods often depend on holo-protein
structures (docked, and not accessible in realistic tasks) or neglect pocket sidechain conformations, leading to limited practical utility and unrealistic conformation predictions. To fill these
gaps, we introduce an under-explored task, named
flexible docking to predict poses of ligand and
pocket sidechains simultaneously and introduce
Re-Dock, a novel diffusion bridge generative
model extended to geometric manifolds. Specifically, we propose energy-to-geometry mapping inspired by the Newton-Euler equation to co-model
the binding energy and conformations for reflecting the energy-constrained docking generative
process. Comprehensive experiments on designed
benchmark datasets including apo-dock and crossdock demonstrate our model’s superior effectiveness and efficiency over current methods.

flexible docking
induced fitting process
(realistic Docking Scenario)

Holo

priori leakage
fitting into docked pocket

Holo

current deep learning-based
docking protocol

(a) Flexible docking and priori leakage
(b) Steric clashes
Figure 1. The illustration of our motivation. (a) The dotted line
represents current protocols take docked pockets as input, which
are not accessible in realistic scenarios and provide hints or leakage
for ligand poses prediction. (b) The result of DiffDock (pdb id:
6nsv); the steric clashes are highlighted with red circles, where the
ligand overlaps with the protein surface (i.e., sidechains).

to ligand binding. Notably, the pocket’s sidechain atoms
exhibit the most significant flexibility (Clark et al., 2019).
Though important, accurately predicting the bound structures is highly challenging. Traditional docking methods (Eberhardt et al., 2021; Alhossary et al., 2015), using
empirical scoring functions and optimization algorithms,
struggle with the vast search space and complex calculations, often resulting in inaccurate and slow predictions. Recent deep learning approaches (Zhou et al., 2023; Liao et al.,
2019) focus on predicting ligand binding poses using bound
protein structures (holo-structures), which include ground
truth sidechain conformations (i.e. priori leakage). These
approaches, by introducing priori leakage (as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a)), oversimplify the problem and fail to mimic realistic docking scenarios. Other deep learning methods (Pei
et al., 2023; Corso et al., 2023) ignore sidechains for simplicity and implicit flexibility. This neglect often results
in unrealistic poses where ligands overlap with side chains,
i.e. steric clashes (as shown in Fig.1(b)). More accurate and
realistic binding pose predictions require explicit sidechain
modeling. Additionally, protein-molecule interaction is the
key to model the binding process. Current approaches learn
this interaction implicitly with neural networks while fail
to incorporate explicit modeling of interaction in 3D
coordinates for direct and accurate guidance.

1. Introduction
Proteins can have their biological functions (Huang et al.,
2023b;a; Wu et al., 2022b) altered by the binding of small
molecule ligands, such as drugs (Lin et al., 2022a; 2023a;
Hu et al., 2022). Molecular docking which reveals this
interaction, is critical in drug design and involves predicting the conformation of a protein-ligand complex. A key
challenge in molecular docking lies in the induced-fit mechanism (Sherman et al., 2006), where the protein’s binding
sites (pockets) are flexible, altering their poses in response
*
Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 2 AI Lab,
Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
3
University of Washington, Seattle. Correspondence to: Stan Z. Li
<cairi@westlake.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address these limitations, we introduce an under-explored
1

