Learning Decision Policies with Instrumental Variables
through Double Machine Learning

Daqian Shao 1 Ashkan Soleymani 2 Francesco Quinzan 1 Marta Kwiatkowska 1

Abstract

settings, but they often lack optimality guarantees. A common issue for learning from offline observational data is the
existence of spurious correlations, which are relationships
between variables that appear to be causal, but in fact are
not. For example, suppose we have aeroplane ticket sales
and pricing data in a ticket demand scenario (Hartford et al.,
2017), and we wish to learn a policy from this offline data
that maximises revenue. During holiday season, observational data may contain evidence of a concurrent surge in
both ticket sales and prices, which may result in the learning algorithm to learn an incorrect policy that higher ticket
prices will drive higher sales.

A common issue in learning decision-making policies in data-rich settings is spurious correlations
in the offline dataset, which can be caused by hidden confounders. Instrumental variable (IV) regression, which utilises a key unconfounded variable known as the instrument, is a standard technique for learning causal relationships between
confounded action, outcome, and context variables. Most recent IV regression algorithms use
a two-stage approach, where a deep neural network (DNN) estimator learnt in the first stage is
directly plugged into the second stage, in which
another DNN is used to estimate the causal effect.
Naively plugging the estimator can cause heavy
bias in the second stage, especially when regularisation bias is present in the first stage estimator.
We propose DML-IV, a non-linear IV regression
method that reduces the bias in two-stage IV regressions and effectively learns high-performing
policies. We derive a novel learning objective to
reduce bias and design the DML-IV algorithm
following the double/debiased machine learning
(DML) framework. The learnt DML-IV estimator
has strong convergence rate and O(N −1/2 ) suboptimality guarantees that match those when the
dataset is unconfounded. DML-IV outperforms
state-of-the-art IV regression methods on IV regression benchmarks and learns high-performing
policies in the presence of instruments.

Spurious correlations are often caused by hidden confounders (Pearl, 2000), which are unobserved variables that
influence both the actions (or interventions) and the outcome. In the aeroplane ticket example, the occurrence of
popular events and holidays serves as a hidden confounder
that raises both ticket prices (actions) and sales (outcome).
To properly account for these hidden confounders and understand the true causal effect of actions, we need to model
the causal (or structural) relationship between the action and
the outcome, which is expressed through a causal function.
However, learning the causal function in the presence of hidden confounders is known to be challenging and sometimes
infeasible (Shpitser & Pearl, 2008).
A popular approach to deal with hidden confounders is via
instrumental variables (IVs) (Wright, 1928), which are heterogeneous random variables that only affect the action, but
not the outcome. These IVs have been used extensively to
identify the causal effect of actions in many applications,
including econometrics (Reiersöl, 1945; Angrist & Pischke,
2009), drug testings (Angrist et al., 1996), and social sciences (Angrist, 1990). In the aeroplane ticket example, we
can employ supply cost-shifters (e.g., fuel price) as instrumental variables, as their variations are independent of the
demand for aeroplane tickets and affect sales solely via
ticket prices (Blundell et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning (DL) have greatly facilitated the learning of decision-making policies in data-rich
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA. Correspondence to:
Daqian Shao <daqian.shao@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
2

We focus on the problem of learning the causal function in
the presence of hidden confounders using IVs (known as
IV regression), in order to learn a decision policy that maximises the expected outcome in this setting (which we refer
to as the offline IV bandit problem, described in Section 2.3)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

