Position: Amazing Things Come From Having Many Good Models

Cynthia Rudin 1 * Chudi Zhong 1 Lesia Semenova 1 Margo Seltzer 2 Ronald Parr 1 Jiachang Liu 1
Srikar Katta 1 Jon Donnelly 1 Harry Chen 1 Zachery Boner 1

Abstract

think of the Rashomon Effect as a nuisance that prevents us
from getting at a single “true” understanding of the data due
to uncertainty, but from another perspective, the Rashomon
Effect unlocks a treasure trove of information about the relationship of real datasets to families of predictive models.
Harnessing this knowledge has massive practical implications, providing answers to some of the most fundamental
questions in machine learning, such as: Is there an accuracyinterpretability trade-off? Which algorithm(s) are suitable
for a given dataset? How can we easily (i.e., without solving
a difficult optimization problem) find a model that incorporates multiple objectives such as fairness or monotonicity?
How can we get stable variable importance estimates? The
Rashomon Effect provides surprising insight into all of these
questions – and more.

The Rashomon Effect, coined by Leo Breiman,
describes the phenomenon that there exist many
equally good predictive models for the same
dataset. This phenomenon happens for many real
datasets and when it does, it sparks both magic
and consternation, but mostly magic. In light of
the Rashomon Effect, this perspective piece proposes reshaping the way we think about machine
learning, particularly for tabular data problems
in the nondeterministic (noisy) setting. We address how the Rashomon Effect impacts (1) the
existence of simple-yet-accurate models, (2) flexibility to address user preferences, such as fairness
and monotonicity, without losing performance,
(3) uncertainty in predictions, fairness, and explanations, (4) reliable variable importance, (5) algorithm choice, specifically, providing advanced
knowledge of which algorithms might be suitable
for a given problem, and (6) public policy. We
also discuss a theory of when the Rashomon Effect occurs and why. Our goal is to illustrate how
the Rashomon Effect can have a massive impact
on the use of machine learning for complex problems in society.

The Rashomon Effect is often present in datasets generated
by processes that are nondeterministic, i.e., noisy or uncertain, including data used for bail and parole decisions,
healthcare, and financial loan decisions – high stakes applications. In fact, as we will discuss, it has been proven in
specific cases that datasets drawn from noisy processes tend
to exhibit a large Rashomon Effect in that there are many
approximately-equally accurate models (Semenova et al.,
2023). Furthermore, a large Rashomon Effect correlates
with the existence of simple-yet-accurate models (Semenova et al., 2022). Hence, there is no accuracy/interpretability
trade-off in many domains. The lack of a trade-off has been
well-established empirically for tabular data (e.g., see Holte,
1993; Lou et al., 2013; Angelino et al., 2018; McTavish
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b; McElfresh et al., 2023). This
knowledge has important policy implications, because it
explains that black box models have no performance advantage over interpretable models that are easier to administer
and use.

1. Introduction
Real-world datasets often admit many approximatelyequally-good models. Leo Breiman called this phenomenon
the Rashomon Effect, naming it after a Japanese movie in
which four different views of the same murder show no
single truth, just many reasonable explanations, for what
happened (Breiman, 2001b; Kurosawa, 1950). One might

Knowing that the Rashomon Effect exists – and the extent
to which it exists – changes the lens through which we view
just about everything in machine learning. The current machine learning paradigm solves problems by finding a single
good model. However, understanding that many good models differ dramatically – in terms of variable importance,
predictions on individual points, complexity, fairness, etc.
– changes how we approach the problem. For instance, we
cannot generally assume that any of the variables used heav-

∗

Authors, except the first, are listed in reverse alphabetical
order, since there are many good ways to list equally contributing authors. 1 Department of Computer Science, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Cynthia Rudin <cynthia@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

