DFD: Distilling the Feature Disparity Differently for Detectors

Kang Liu 1 2 Yingyi Zhang 3 Jingyun Zhang 2 Jinmin Li 2 Jun Wang 2 Shaoming Wang 2 Chun Yuan 1 †
Rizen Guo 2 †

1. Introduction

Abstract

The ongoing advancements in deep learning have prompted
increasingly deep and wide models to tackle progressively
complex tasks. Correspondingly, these larger models come
with an increase in the number of parameters and computational complexity. This results in more time consumption and memory usage, posing great challenges for realtime applications in various industries. Object detection is
a computationally intensive task that requires processing
large amounts of data in real-time, thus the inference speed
and size of the parameters are crucial. Knowledge distillation is an important technique to address these challenges.
By introducing additional supervision provided by a complex teacher model, the performance of the compact student
model will be improved with knowledge distillation. Many
approaches(Romero et al., 2014; Guo et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2022b; Cao et al., 2022) have achieved significant
improvements in detectors by supervising the student using
intermediate features from the teacher. These methods gen-

Knowledge distillation is a widely adopted model
compression technique that has been successfully
applied to object detection. In feature distillation,
it is common practice for the student model to
imitate the feature responses of the teacher model,
with the underlying objective of improving its
own abilities by reducing the disparity with the
teacher. However, it is crucial to recognize that
the disparities between the student and teacher
are inconsistent, highlighting their varying abilities. In this paper, we explore the inconsistency in
the disparity between teacher and student feature
maps and analyze their impact on the efficiency of
the distillation. We find that regions with varying
degrees of difference should be treated separately,
with different distillation constraints applied accordingly. We introduce our distillation method
called Disparity Feature Distillation(DFD). The
core idea behind DFD is to apply different treatments to regions with varying learning difficulties, simultaneously incorporating leniency and
strictness. It enables the student to better assimilate the teacher’s knowledge. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed DFD in achieving significant improvements. For instance, when applied
to detectors based on ResNet50 such as RetinaNet, FasterRCNN, and RepPoints, our method
enhances their mAP from 37.4%, 38.4%, 38.6%
to 41.7%, 42.4%, 42.7%, respectively. Our approach also demonstrates substantial improvements on YOLO and ViT-based models. The code
is available at https://github.com/luckin99/DFD.
1

2

Figure 1. Visualization of spatial attention. We use RetinaNet with
ResNeXt101 as the teacher model and RetinaNet with ResNet50
as the student model. We use a different color bar to visualize the
L1 distance between teacher’s and student’s spatial attention.

3

Tsinghua University Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33 Tencent
Youtu Lab. Work was done when Kang Liu was an intern at Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33. † Correspondence to:
Chun Yuan <yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Rizen Guo <rizenguo@tencent.com>.

erally enhance the performance of the student by enforcing
it to mimic the teacher’s feature. Hence, the difference in
feature responses is crucial for the effectiveness of feature
distillation. To investigate this issue, we visualize the spatial

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

