Finite Volume Features, Global Geometry Representations, and Residual
Training for Deep Learning-based CFD Simulation

Loh Sher En Jessica * 1 2 Naheed Anjum Arafat * 1 Wei Xian Lim 1 Wai Lee Chan 1 3 Adams Wai Kin Kong 1 2

Abstract

ent state-of-the-art GNN methods for CFD indicate that SV, DID, FVF and residual training
can effectively reduce the predictive error of current GNN-based methods by as much as 41%.
Our codes and datasets are available at https:
//github.com/toggled/FvFGeo

Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation
is an irreplaceable modelling step in many engineering designs, but it is often computationally
expensive. Some graph neural network (GNN)based CFD methods have been proposed. However, the current methods inherit the weakness
of traditional numerical simulators, as well as ignore the cell characteristics in the mesh used in
the finite volume method, a common method in
practical CFD applications. Specifically, the input
nodes in these GNN methods have very limited
information about any object immersed in the simulation domain and its surrounding environment.
Also, the cell characteristics of the mesh such as
cell volume, face surface area, and face centroid
are not included in the message-passing operations in the GNN methods. To address these weaknesses, this work proposes two novel geometric
representations: Shortest Vector (SV) and Directional Integrated Distance (DID). Extracted from
the mesh, the SV and DID provide global geometry perspective to each input node, thus removing the need to collect this information through
message-passing. This work also introduces the
use of Finite Volume Features (FVF) in the graph
convolutions as node and edge attributes, enabling
its message-passing operations to adjust to different nodes. Finally, this work extends the use
of residual training to improve flow field prediction for a GNN scenario with immersed object,
when low resolution data is available. Experimental results on two datasets with five differ-

1. Introduction
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is a branch of fluid
dynamics in which physical phenomena involving fluid flow
are modelled mathematically as partial differential equations (PDEs), like the Navier–Stokes (NS) equations, and
solved computationally via numerical analysis. CFD is
applied to a wide range of scientific and engineering problems that requires the flow of the fluid and its interaction
with surfaces to be simulated, including aircraft aerodynamic optimisation (Martins, 2022), combustion engine
design (Vijayashree & Ganesan, 2018), marine hydrodynamics prediction (Demirel, 2021), microfluidic device evaluation (Chaves et al., 2020), and urban planning (Zhang
et al., 2021). Despite its versatility, CFD simulation is generally slow and/or costly due to the need for both high spatial and temporal resolutions to solve the governing PDEs
accurately.
Researchers have exploited deep learning to accelerate CFD
simulation. Multilayer perceptron (MLPs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been considered. However, they both do not fit industrial requirements in many
cases because of their restrictions in the input fields and
architectures. MLPs cannot handle high dimensional input,
which would increase the number of training parameters
dramatically and cause overlearning. Thus, the current MLP
methods such as PINN consider each spatial location separately and ignore their relationship (Raissi et al., 2019). In
other words, they do not have an explicit scheme for information exchange between nodes. It should be emphasised
that flow of a fluid in a particular location would influence
that of a neighbour region. Although CNNs allow this information exchange, they can apply only to the flow field
represented on a fixed, regular grid. In many industrial simulations, the computational domain may contain objects with

*

Equal contribution 1 Rolls-Royce@NTU Corporate Lab,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 3 School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Adams Wai Kin Kong <adamskong@ntu.edu.sg>, Wai Lee Chan
<chan.wl@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

