Optimal Ridge Regularization for Out-of-Distribution Prediction

Pratik Patil 1 Jin-Hong Du 2 3 Ryan J. Tibshirani 1

Abstract
We study the behavior of optimal ridge regularization and optimal ridge risk for out-of-distribution
prediction, where the test distribution deviates
arbitrarily from the train distribution. We establish general conditions that determine the sign of
the optimal regularization level under covariate
and regression shifts. These conditions capture
the alignment between the covariance and signal
structures in the train and test data and reveal
stark differences compared to the in-distribution
setting. For example, a negative regularization
level can be optimal under covariate shift or regression shift, even when the training features are
isotropic or the design is underparameterized. Furthermore, we prove that the optimally tuned risk
is monotonic in the data aspect ratio, even in the
out-of-distribution setting and when optimizing
over negative regularization levels. In general, our
results do not make any modeling assumptions for
the train or the test distributions, except for moment bounds, and allow for arbitrary shifts and the
widest possible range of (negative) regularization
levels.

ized prediction models, which can be zero or even negative
in certain problems with moderate signal-to-noise ratio and
high dimensionality. This stands in contrast to the “typical”
behavior from classical low-dimensional learning theory.
With this motivation, our paper focuses on two key questions
for high-dimensional ridge regression:
(Q1) What is the behavior of the optimal ridge penalty, as a
function of parameters such as signal-to-noise ratio, data
aspect ratio, feature correlations, and signal structure?
(Q2) What is the behavior of the optimally tuned ridge risk,
as a function of these same problem parameters?
To set the notation, let (xi , yi ) for i ∈ [n] be i.i.d. observations in Rp × R representing the feature vector and response.
Denote the data matrix as X = [x1 , . . . , xn ]⊤ ∈ Rn×p and
the associated response vector as y = [y1 , . . . , yn ]⊤ ∈ Rn .
Given a ridge penalty λ > 0, recall the ridge regression fits:
βbλ = argmin ∥y − Xb∥22 /n + λ∥b∥22 .

(1)

b∈Rp

Ridge regression (Hoerl & Kennard, 1970a;b) has received
considerable recent attention, particularly in settings involving overparameterization, such as double descent (see, e.g.,
Belkin et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022; Muthukumar et al.,
2020, and references therein) and benign overfitting (Bartlett
et al., 2020; Koehler et al., 2021; Mallinar et al., 2022). This
interest in ridge regression, especially its “ridgeless” limit,
where λ → 0+ , owes to its peculiar double/multiple descent
risk behavior in overparameterized regimes, which (on the
surface) challenges the conventional understanding of the
role of regularization (Hastie, 2020). By defining the ridge
estimator as:

1. Introduction
Regularization plays a crucial role in statistical modeling
and is commonly incorporated into optimization-based models through a regularization term. Its effectiveness relies on
properly scaling the regularization term, which is controlled
by a penalty parameter that the data scientist needs to tune.
Recent work in machine learning (precise references given
shortly) has shed light on some rather surprising behavior exhibited by the optimal regularization level in overparameter-

βbλ = (X ⊤ X/n + λIp )† X ⊤ y/n,

(2)

where A† denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of A,
we simultaneously accommodate the case of λ > 0, in
which case (2) reduces to the unique ridge predictor obtained
using (1), and the case of λ = 0, in which case (2) becomes
the minimum ℓ2 -norm interpolator among many solutions
to problem (1) when p ≥ rank(X) = n. Note that the
above definition (2) is well defined even when λ < 0. For
more background on the formulation of ridge regression
with λ < 0, see Appendix B.

1

Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
3
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.. Correspondence to: Pratik Patil <pratikpatil@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

