ReLU Network with Width d + O(1) Can Achieve Optimal Approximation Rate

Chenghao Liu 1 Minghua Chen 1

Abstract

Lebesgue-integrable function over a compact domain to any
desired accuracy as the width goes to infinity.

The prevalent employment of narrow neural networks, characterized by their minimal parameter
count per layer, has led to a surge in research
exploring their potential as universal function approximators. A notable result in this field states
that networks with just a width of d + 1 can approximate any continuous function for input dimension d arbitrarily well. However, the optimal
approximation rate for these narrowest networks,
i.e., the optimal relation between the count of
tunable parameters and the approximation error,
remained unclear. In this paper, we address this
gap by proving that ReLU networks with width
d + 1 can achieve the optimal approximation rate
for continuous functions over the domain [0, 1]d
under Lp norm for p ∈ [1, ∞). We further show
that for the uniform norm, a width of d + 11 is
sufficient. We also extend the results to narrow
feed-forward networks with various activations,
confirming their capability to approximate at the
optimal rate. This work adds to the understanding
of universal approximation of narrow networks.

Since 2010, deep learning has experienced accelerated development, sparking increased interest in understanding the
expressive capabilities of neural networks. Although neural
networks are recognized for their universal approximation
capability, an essential question remains: what is the minimum number of parameters required for a neural network to
approximate a function adequately? To address this query,
researchers have primarily focused on establishing the upper and lower bounds for the size of both deep and shallow
networks in the approximation of certain functions (Eldan
& Shamir, 2016; Liang & Srikant, 2016; Telgarsky, 2016;
Yarotsky, 2017), consistently highlighting the benefits of
deeper architectures. Recently, (Yarotsky, 2018; Shen et al.,
2019a; Yarotsky & Zhevnerchuk, 2020; Shen et al., 2022b)
quantitatively characterizes the approximation capabilities
of ReLU FNNs with width O(N ) and depth O(L) by examining the approximation rate, that is, they show how fast the
error inf gN,L ∥f − gN,L ∥ will decay in terms of N and L
when approximating a given continuous or smooth function
f and finally they find the optimal rate.
Meanwhile, the use of narrow network structures has become increasingly prevalent in practice. Typically, the width
of a neural network is chosen to be near the input dimension, a preference driven by the reduced number of tunable
parameters in training. However, the upper bounds or approximation rate results discussed above can not apply to
these very narrow networks. For instance, it has been shown
that for a ReLU network constrained to a width not exceeding the input dimension d, there exists a continuous function
f from which the network cannot reduce its approximation error, regardless of the number of parameters (Hanin &
Sellke, 2017).

1. Introduction and Main Results
Neural networks have emerged as a key component in deep
learning, garnering considerable interest due to their remarkable success in practice. Meanwhile, understanding
the expressive power of neural networks is important for
deep learning, and boasts a rich and extensive history.
The study of the universal approximation property can at
least date back to the 1980s. The classical universal theorem
holds for wide and shallow networks. Specifically, in the
early years, researchers (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989;
Hornik, 1991; Leshno et al., 1993; Pinkus, 1999) show that
networks with reasonable activation with two hidden layers
can approximate any multivariate continuous function and

Thus, some researchers shifted their focus to understanding
the approximation capabilities of networks from the view
of width (Lu et al., 2017; Hanin & Sellke, 2017; Kidger
& Lyons, 2020; Park et al., 2020; Cai, 2022; Kim et al.,
2023; Duan et al., 2023). This line of work is concerned
with the minimal width required for a network to universally approximate a continuous mapping from a compact
domain in Rd to Rv . The goal of this research has been
the determination of the exact minimal width wmin neces-

1
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Minghua Chen <minghua.chen@cityu.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

