LaMAGIC: Language-Model-based Topology Generation
for Analog Integrated Circuits

Chen-Chia Chang 1 2 Yikang Shen 3 Shaoze Fan 4 Jing Li 4 Shun Zhang 3 Ningyuan Cao 5
Yiran Chen 2 Xin Zhang 1 3

Abstract

Manual analog design
Manual design

In the realm of electronic and electrical engineering, automation of analog circuit is increasingly
vital given the complexity and customized requirements of modern applications. However, existing
methods only develop search-based algorithms
that require many simulation iterations to design
a custom circuit topology, which is usually a timeconsuming process. To this end, we introduce
LaMAGIC, a pioneering language model-based
topology generation model that leverages supervised finetuning for automated analog circuit design. LaMAGIC can efficiently generate an optimized circuit design from the custom specification in a single pass. Our approach involves a
meticulous development and analysis of various
input and output formulations for circuit. These
formulations can ensure canonical representations
of circuits and align with the autoregressive nature
of LMs to effectively addressing the challenges
of representing analog circuits as graphs. The experimental results show that LaMAGIC achieves
a success rate of up to 96% under a strict tolerance of 0.01. We also examine the scalability
and adaptability of LaMAGIC, specifically testing
its performance on more complex circuits. Our
findings reveal the enhanced effectiveness of our
adjacency matrix-based circuit formulation with
floating-point input, suggesting its suitability for
handling intricate circuit designs. This research
not only demonstrates the potential of language
models in graph generation, but also builds a foundational framework for future explorations in automated analog circuit design.

Spend weeks!
Simulator
Specifications:
Available devices,
voltage conversion
ratio, efficiency

Previous RL search
Policy network
Spend 0.5k iterations!
No success guarantee
Simulator

Custom power converter
Switches
VIN
Inductor
VOUT
Capacitor

GND

LaMAGIC
Language model
One iteration!
Success rate = 96%

Figure 1. The scenario comparison between manual analog circuit
design, previous RL search method (Fan et al., 2021), and our
language model LaMAGIC.

1. Introduction
Analog circuit design, encompassing a broad range of applications, poses significant challenges due to its inherent complexity of the schematic and the precision of performance
required in its execution. This complexity is particularly
pronounced in the realm of power converters, which have
become ubiquitous in an array of electronic and electrical
devices. With the advent of diverse and customized electrical systems, such as electric vehicles, self-powered Internet
of Things devices, and wearable or implantable biosensors,
the demand for custom-designed power converters to meet
specific supply power standards has surged. These converters, each with unique design specifications including voltage
conversion ratio and power efficiency, exemplify the intricate and varied nature of analog circuit design. Traditional
design methodologies, largely depending on pre-existing
circuit topologies and extensive manual optimization, are increasingly inadequate in addressing the increasing needs of
these applications. This reliance on conventional approaches
not only prolongs the design process but also limits the potential for novel solutions in rapidly evolving domains. This
gap highlights a critical need for an automated circuit design
framework, capable of efficiently generating and optimizing
high-quality power converter topologies based on specific

1

IBM T. J. Watson Research Center 2 Duke University
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 4 New Jersey Institute of Technology 5 University of Notre Dame.
Correspondence to:
Chen-Chia Chang <chenchia.chang@duke.edu>, Xin Zhang
<xzhang@us.ibm.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

