Position: Scaling Simulation is Neither Necessary Nor Sufficient for In-The-Wild
Robot Manipulation

Homanga Bharadhwaj 1

Abstract

addition, it should perform the task while respecting human
preferences and without creating any unsafe intermediate
scenarios.

In this paper, we develop a structured critique
of robotic simulations for real-world manipulation, by arguing that scaling simulators is neither
necessary nor sufficient for making progress in
general-purpose real-world robotic manipulation
agents that are compliant with human preferences.
With the ubiquity of robotic simulators, and recent efforts to scale them for diverse tasks, and
at the same time the interest in generally capable
real-world manipulation systems, we believe it is
important to address the limitations of using simulation for real-world manipulation, so that as a
community, we can focus our collective resources,
energy, and time on approaches that have more
principled odds of success. We further demonstrate the unique challenges that real-world manipulation presents, and show through examples
and arguments why scaling simulation doesn’t get
us closer to solving these challenges required for
diverse real-world deployment.

Recent advances in machine learning and robot hardware
design has helped move the world described above from a
Utopian existence a couple of decades ago, to a practical
possibility in the near future. As very prominently witnessed in computer vision and natural language processing
(NLP), a number of advances including but not limited to
availability of large datasets, ubiquity of compute resources,
and improvements in deep learning based algorithms has
positively impacted all research areas where machine learning is widely used. The story of robot learning has been no
different. However, unlike computer vision and NLP, the
success stories of robot learning approaches, in particular
for manipulation have been significantly underwhelming.
Approaches that just work zero-shot in diverse unseen scenarios are far from being realized in manipulation, compared
to systems like Segment-Anything (Kirillov et al., 2023) and
GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) in vision and NLP.
Anecdotally, as observed by Jitendra Malik in a talk, until
recently, experiments in robot manipulation papers were in
such restrictive scenarios that just by looking at the background color of video results, one could form a reasonable
guess of where the paper is from - for example, green background for Berkeley and red for CMU (Levine et al., 2016;
Shaw et al., 2023; Maitin-Shepard et al., 2010). The lack
of generalization in robotics results should not come as a
surprise because most robotics tasks involve reasoning over
time horizons much longer than that of typical vision tasks,
and the state-space is much higher-dimensional than that
in NLP tasks. If this weren’t enough of a challenge, the
real world is also very dynamic, and in several practical
manipulation tasks, the environment might change during
execution of the task itself.

“The world is its own best model.”
- Rodney Brooks

1. Introduction
Imagine a world where robots are everywhere, interacting
with humans in the most basic everyday tasks like cooking and cleaning, while remaining compliant with human
preferences. In such a world, we would expect robot manipulators to exhibit out-of-the-box zero-shot generalization
capabilities. When prompted to do a task, the robot should
just do it!. It shouldn’t require any form of self-practice or
fine-tuning for the specific task it’s asked to perform. In

We consider two desiderata of widely usable real-world manipulation systems: 1) zero-shot deployability and 2) compliance with human preferences. Machine learning has the
potential to transform robot manipulation by helping learn
policies that can generalize across diverse real-world scenarios, and can adapt to human preferences. Hence the question
of how should machine learning be used for manipulation

1

The Robotics Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University. Correspondence to: Homanga Bharadhwaj
<hbharadh@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

