Transformers Learn Nonlinear Features In Context:
Nonconvex Mean-field Dynamics on the Attention Landscape

Juno Kim 1 2 Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract

previously unseen tasks based on demonstrative example
prompts without further tuning its parameters.

Large language models based on the Transformer
architecture have demonstrated impressive capabilities to learn in context. However, existing theoretical studies on how this phenomenon arises
are limited to the dynamics of a single layer of
attention trained on linear regression tasks. In this
paper, we study the optimization of a Transformer
consisting of a fully connected layer followed by a
linear attention layer. The MLP acts as a common
nonlinear representation or feature map, greatly
enhancing the power of in-context learning. We
prove in the mean-field and two-timescale limit
that the infinite-dimensional loss landscape for
the distribution of parameters, while highly nonconvex, becomes quite benign. We also analyze
the second-order stability of mean-field dynamics
and show that Wasserstein gradient flow almost
always avoids saddle points. Furthermore, we
establish novel methods for obtaining concrete
improvement rates both away from and near critical points. This represents the first saddle point
analysis of mean-field dynamics in general and
the techniques are of independent interest.

A vigorous line of research initiated by Garg et al. (2022)
has sought to understand the mechanism behind ICL from a
theoretical perspective, where prompts are real-valued inputoutput pairs (xi , f (xi ))ni=1 generated from some function
class T . Studies have shown that Transformers are capable
of implementing various statistical learning algorithms such
as gradient descent (GD) in context (von Oswald et al., 2023;
Akyürek et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023). In particular, Guo
et al. (2023) consider the realistic setting of learning with
representations where MLP layers act as transformations on
top of which ICL is performed, and show that such models
consistently achieve near-optimal performance.
While promising, these results are based on specific constructions which may not accurately reflect ICL in real models (Shen et al., 2023). Other works have analyzed how
ICL emerges from the training dynamics of Transformers
(Zhang et al., 2023a; Huang et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023a).
However, they are limited to models consisting of only a
single attention layer due to the dynamical complexity and
thus can only explain ICL of linear functions. Hence the
following central question at the intersection of the two
approaches remains unsolved:
How does in-context learning with nonlinear
representations (features) arise in Transformers with
MLP layers, optimized via gradient descent?

1. Introduction
Attention-based neural architectures such as Transformers
have revolutionized modern machine learning, from tasks
in natural language and computer vision to multi-modal
learning and beyond. Recently, interest has surged in the
remarkable ability of such large language models to learn
in context, leading to a major paradigm shift in how intelligence arises in artificial systems. In-context learning
(ICL) refers to the capacity of a pretrained model to solve

In this paper, we investigate the optimization dynamics of a
Transformer model consisting of a two-layer MLP followed
by a linear attention layer, pretrained on linear transformations of feature representations. Contrary to existing
approaches which attempt to solve for exact dynamics of
the attention matrices, we factor out the attention layer via a
two-timescale argument and study the geometric properties
of the loss landscape faced by an overparametrized MLP.
Our contributions are highlighted as follows.

1
Department of Mathematical Informatics, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN,
Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Juno Kim <junokim@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp>.

• We show that the MLP layer greatly increases the flexibility of ICL by extending the class of learnable functions to the Barron space and plays an essential role by
encoding task-common features during pretraining.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

