Non-Asymptotic Analysis for Single-Loop
(Natural) Actor-Critic with Compatible Function Approximation

Yudan Wang 1 Yue Wang 2 Yi Zhou 3 Shaofeng Zou 1 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Actor-Critic (AC) (Barto et al., 1983; Konda & Tsitsiklis,
2003) is a reinforcement learning algorithm that combines
the advantages of actor-only methods and critic-only methods by alternatively performing policy gradient update (actor) and action-value function estimation (critic) in an online
fashion. Specifically, the critic uses a parameterized function to estimate the value function of the current policy, e.g.,
temporal difference (TD) (Sutton, 1988) and Q-learning
(Watkins & Dayan, 1992). Then the actor updates the policy along an approximate gradient direction based on the
estimate from the critic using approaches such as policy
gradient (Sutton et al., 1999) and natural policy gradient
(Kakade, 2001). In contrast to critic-only methods, AC
methods, which are gradient based, usually have desirable
convergence properties when combined with the approach
of function approximation. However, critic-only methods
may not converge or even diverge when applied together
with function approximation (Baird, 1995; Gordon, 1996).
Moreover, AC methods also enjoy a reduced variance due
to the critic, and thus their convergence is typically more
stable and faster than actor only methods.

Actor-critic (AC) is a powerful method for learning an optimal policy in reinforcement learning,
where the critic uses algorithms, e.g., temporal
difference (TD) learning with function approximation, to evaluate the current policy and the actor
updates the policy along an approximate gradient
direction using information from the critic. This
paper provides the tightest non-asymptotic convergence bounds for both the AC and natural AC
(NAC) algorithms. Specifically, existing studies
show that AC converges to an ϵ + εcritic neighborhood of stationary points with the best known
sample complexity of O(ϵ−2 ) (up to a log fac√
tor), and NAC converges to an ϵ + εcritic + εactor
neighborhood of the global optimum with the best
known sample complexity of O(ϵ−3 ), where εcritic
is the approximation error of the critic and εactor
is the approximation error induced by the insufficient expressive power of the parameterized policy class. This paper analyzes the convergence
of both AC and NAC algorithms with compatible
function approximation. Our analysis eliminates
the term εcritic from the error bounds while still
achieving the best known sample complexities.
Moreover, we focus on the challenging singleloop setting with a single Markovian sample trajectory. Our major technical novelty lies in analyzing the stochastic bias due to policy-dependent
and time-varying compatible function approximation in the critic, and handling the non-ergodicity
of the MDP due to the single Markovian sample
trajectory. Numerical results are also provided in
the appendix.

While the asymptotic convergence for AC and NAC has
been well understood in the literature, e.g., (Bhatnagar et al.,
2009; Kakade, 2001; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2003; Suttle et al.,
2023), its non-asymptotic convergence analysis has been
largely open until very recently. The non-asymptotic analysis is of great practical importance as it answers the questions that how many samples are needed and how to appropriately choose the different learning rates for the actor and
the critic. Existing studies show that AC converges to an
ϵ + εcritic neighborhood of stationary points with the best
known sample complexity of O ϵ−2 (Chen et al., 2021;
Olshevsky & Gharesifard, 2023; Xu et al., 2020a), and NAC
√
converges to an ϵ + εcritic + εactor neighborhood of the
global optimum with the best known sample complexity of
O(ϵ−3 ) (Chen et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2020a), where εcritic
is the approximation error of the critic and εactor is the approximation error induced by the insufficient expressive
power of the parameterized policy class. In this paper, when
presenting sample complexity, we omit the log factors. In
these studies, the critic employs a fixed class of parameter-

1

Electrical Engineering, University at Buffalo 2 Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida 3 Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Utah 4 Computer Science & Engineering, University at Buffalo. Correspondence to:
Shaofeng Zou <szou3@buffalo.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

