Transformers Provably Learn Sparse Token Selection
While Fully-Connected Nets Cannot

Zixuan Wang 1 Stanley Wei 1 Daniel Hsu 2 Jason D. Lee 1

Abstract

et al., 2021; Nanda et al., 2023). However, few works have
presented rigorous mathematical evidence that substantiates
their superiority over alternative architectures.

The transformer architecture has prevailed in various deep learning settings due to its exceptional
capabilities to select and compose structural information. Motivated by these capabilities, Sanford et al. (2023) proposed the sparse token selection task, in which transformers excel while
fully-connected networks (FCNs) fail in the worst
case. Building upon that, we strengthen the FCN
lower bound to an average-case setting and establish an algorithmic separation of transformers
over FCNs. Specifically, a one-layer transformer
trained with gradient descent provably learns the
sparse token selection task and, surprisingly, exhibits strong out-of-distribution length generalization. We provide empirical simulations to justify
our theoretical findings.

In recent work, Sanford et al. (2023) introduced a simple
task known as the q-sparse averaging for an input context sequence, where the target output is an average of a q-subset of
the input tokens, specified in the input. When the input context length is T , the q-sparse average was demonstrated to
be effectively approximated using a O(log T )-dimensional
self-attention layer, whereas any fully-connected network
seeking to approximate this task requires a first-layer width
of at least Ω(T ) in the worst case. This crucial finding
implies that, in theory, the sparse-average task potentially
induces an exponential separation between transformer models from the fully-connected neural networks (FCNs) with
respect to the context length T , further reinforcing existing
empirical findings that the inductive bias of transformers
merits strength in approximating certain arithmetic tasks.
However, these results are limited to the expressive power of
transformers and do not inherently guarantee that transformers can be trained with standard gradient-based methods
to achieve such approximation capability as its expressive
power would suggest. Thus, a pertinent and natural question
beyond theoretical expressiveness arises:

1. Introduction
In modern deep learning, transformer networks have established themselves as a fundamental building block, showcasing their versatility across diverse tasks such as language
modeling (OpenAI, 2023), computer vision (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020), and reinforcement learning (Jumper et al.,
2021). At the core of transformers is the self-attention
layer (Vaswani et al., 2017), a critical component assigning
varying attention weights to different segments of the input
sequence by discerning relevance between tokens.

Q: Does the expressivity separation between transformers
and FCNs translate to learnability?
Our results provide an affirmative answer to this question.
In our work, we focus on the sparse token selection task
(STSq ). In this task, every token in the input sequence follows the standard Gaussian distribution, and a token subset
of size q is drawn uniformly at random. Importantly, we initiate an exploration into the training dynamics of a one-layer
transformer with softmax attention using GD for the STSq .
We first study the transformer’s training dynamics under GD,
where the goal is to minimize the expected loss over the
input distribution. Notably, we characterize the global convergence of the transformer with the stochastic positional
encoding introduced in Shen et al. (2023). Additionally,
we delve into the provable length generalization capacity
of the transformer learned with GD. We also establish new
lower bounds for the capacity of FCNs to approximate the

The success of transformers is closely tied to their representational capabilities in extracting structural information
encoded in token embeddings. Empirical observations reveal that transformers trained with GD-based algorithms
exhibit biases towards certain algorithmic solutions in some
arithmetic tasks (Edelman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Yao
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
Columbia University, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Zixuan Wang
<wangzx@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

