Online Matrix Completion: A Collaborative Approach with Hott Items

Dheeraj Baby * 1 Soumyabrata Pal * 2

Abstract

recommendation system can update its suggestions based
on the history of observed ratings from users. Thus, there
is a clear tension between exploration and exploitation the system needs to learn the user preferences accurately
through a diverse set of recommendations and yet recommend meaningful likeable items quickly. Recently, to study
the aforementioned exploration/exploitation dilemma theoretically, (Jain & Pal, 2023; Pal et al., 2023) have modelled
the problem on lines of online matrix completion that is
equivalent to the well-known Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
optimization (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) for multiple
agents (representing users) jointly over a common set of
items (representing arms).

We investigate the low rank matrix completion
problem in an online setting with M users, N
items, T rounds, and an unknown rank-r reward
matrix R ∈ RM×N . This problem has been wellstudied in the literature (Jain & Pal, 2023; Dadkhahi & Negahban, 2018; Sen et al., 2017; Zhou
et al., 2020) and has several applications in practice. In each round, we recommend S carefully
chosen distinct items to every user and observe
noisy rewards. In the regime where M, N ≫ T,
we propose two distinct computationally efficient
algorithms for recommending items to users and
analyze them under the benign hott items assumption 1) First, for S = 1, under additional incoherence/smoothness assumptions on R, we propose the phased algorithm P HASED C LUSTER ELIM . Our algorithm obtains a near-optimal peruser regret of e
O(NM−1 (∆−1 + ∆−2
hott )) where
∆hott , ∆ are problem-dependent gap parameters
with ∆hott ≫ ∆ almost always. 2) Second, we
consider a simplified setting with S = r where
we make significantly milder assumptions on R.
Here, we introduce another phased algorithm,
D ETERMINANT E LIM, to derive a regret guaranO(NM−1/r ∆−1
tee of e
det )) where ∆det is another
problem-dependent gap. Both algorithms crucially use collaboration among users to jointly
eliminate sub-optimal items for groups of users
successively in phases, but with distinctive and
novel approaches.

We consider the same setting of online matrix completion
under bandit feedback with M users, N items, T rounds, and
an associated low rank reward matrix R ∈ RM×N . This
setup was first studied theoretically in (Jain & Pal, 2023)
and a close variant in (Sen et al., 2017) - at each round,
one item is recommended to every user. Note that the recommended item in a particular round can be different for
each user and we only observe noisy rewards for the recommended item-user pairs. The main difficulty in obtaining optimal algorithms in this setting is the latent structure
which makes it challenging to characterize sharp confidence
widths on non-uniform sampling of items. On the other
hand, greedy algorithms exploiting the low rank of reward
matrix were proposed in (Jain & Pal, 2023),(Sen et al., 2017)
−1 −2
e
∆ ) where ∆
that achieved a regret guarantee of O(NM
is the minimum sub-optimality gap across users and items
(Definition 2). Exploiting collaboration among users i.e.
aggregating their feedback lead to a significantly smaller
effective number of items per user - O(NM−1 ). However,
because of the greedy nature, the achievable regret guarantee is sub-optimal in its dependence on the gap parameter
∆.

1. Introduction
Collaborative Filtering via matrix completion (Koren, 2008)
is a fundamental framework for large-scale recommendation systems that cater to millions of users and items jointly.
Usually collaborative filtering is an online problem since the

To alleviate this issue, an optimal algorithm with a regret
guarantee of e
O(NM−1 ∆−1 ) was proposed (Jain & Pal,
2023) only for rank-1 reward matrices. The key idea was
that for rank-1 setting, users can be partitioned into two
latent clusters - users in the same cluster have the same
preference ordering of items while users in different clusters
have the exact opposite preference ordering of items. While
this property was crucially used for algorithm design in
rank-1 case, it does not extend for higher rank. In fact, even

*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Computer Science, UC Santa
Barbara, California, United States 2 Adobe, Bangalore, India. Correspondence to: Dheeraj Baby <dheeraj@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

