PARDEN, Can You Repeat That? Defending against Jailbreaks via Repetition

Ziyang Zhang 1 Qizhen Zhang 2 Jakob Foerster 2

Abstract

1

We are currently experiencing a revolution in artificial
intelligence due to the rapid advancement of large language
models (LLMs) to a variety of applications, such as chatbots,
search engines and others (Kaddour et al., 2023; Jiang et al.,
2023; Ray, 2023) The current paradigm involves a two-step
process: initial pre-training step (Brown et al., 2020) on
extensive text corpora followed by alignment procedures
aimed at 1) teaching the model to follow instructions and
2) safeguarding the model against generating undesirable
outputs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Kaddour et al., 2023). Such
safeguards are crucial for two reasons: first, to shield users
from potentially harmful LLM outputs, and secondly, to
mitigate the risks of exploitation from malicious actors
(Bommasani et al., 2022). Recent studies have shown that
existing alignment techniques are easily circumvented by
“jailbreaks” (Zou et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023), which are
inputs that induce LLMs to produce undesirable outputs.
To make matters worse, many of these methods rely on
LLMs themselves to discover such jailbreaks (Chao et al.,
2023; Ganguli et al., 2022). As LLMs advance, so do the
capabilities of exploiters. Consequently, the effectiveness
of our safeguards must also evolve.

Large language models (LLMs) have shown
success in many natural language processing tasks.
Despite rigorous safety alignment processes,
supposedly safety-aligned LLMs like Llama 2
and Claude 2 are still susceptible to jailbreaks,
leading to security risks and abuse of the models.
One option to mitigate such risks is to augment
the LLM with a dedicated “safeguard”, which
checks the LLM’s inputs or outputs for undesired
behaviour. A promising approach is to use
the LLM itself as the safeguard. Nonetheless,
baseline methods, such as prompting the LLM to
self-classify toxic content, demonstrate limited
efficacy. We hypothesise that this is due to
domain shift: the alignment training imparts a
self-censoring behaviour to the model (“Sorry I
can’t do that”), while the self-classify approach
shifts it to a classification format (“Is this
prompt malicious”). In this work, we propose
PARDEN, which avoids this domain shift by
simply asking the model to repeat its own
outputs. PARDEN neither requires finetuning nor
white box access to the model. We empirically
verify the effectiveness of our method and show
that PARDEN significantly outperforms existing
jailbreak detection baselines for Llama-2 and
Claude-2. We find that PARDEN is particularly
powerful in the relevant regime of high True
Positive Rate (TPR) and low False Positive Rate
(FPR). For instance, for Llama2-7B, at TPR equal
to 90%, PARDEN accomplishes a roughly 11x
reduction in the FPR from 24.8% to 2.0% on the
harmful behaviours dataset. Code and data are
available at https://github.com/Ed-Zh/PARDEN.

1

University
of
Oxford
of Oxford.
Correspondence
<ziyang.zhang@sjc.ox.ac.uk>.

Introduction

It is therefore crucial to develop defence methods which also
use the LLMs themselves to prevent jailbreaks, which will
improve as the LLMs improve.
The first step of developing a safeguard is to understand
how jailbreaks are produced. Many attacks (Zhu et al.,
2023; Zou et al., 2023) exploit the so-called “auto-regressive
trap”, i.e. the fact that LLMs sample responses one token
at a time, without planning/anticipating what comes in the
farther future. As a result, the LLM can start sampling
the response “Sure let me help you with that.. ” (rather
than refusal), without “realising” that compliance with
the request ultimately results in a detailed instruction for
committing cyber-crime.
Hence, avoiding this “auto-regressive trap” offers a way to
mitigate such attacks. When the LLM is used as a separate
safety guard, it is provided with the entire output at once and
should thus be better able to classify content into harmful
and harmless correctly. This idea is explored by Helbling
et al. (2023) and turned the LLM into a zero-shot classifier.

2

FLAIR,
University
to:
Ziyang Zhang

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

