Feature Attribution with Necessity and Sufficiency
via Dual-stage Perturbation Test for Causal Explanation

Xuexin Chen 1 Ruichu Cai 1 2 Zhengting Huang 1 Yuxuan Zhu 1 Julien Horwood 3 Zhifeng Hao 4 Zijian Li 5
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 3

Abstract

where the absolute value of these weights denotes their contribution to a model’s prediction. Mathematically, suppose
we have a function f that denotes a trained ML model, a
target input xt =(xt1 , · · · , xtd ) to be explained, and a baseline x′ =(x′1 , · · · , x′d ) , where x′i is the approximate value
that feature xti would take if it were considered missing. An
attribution of the prediction at input xt relative to x′ is a
vector αf (xt , x′ )=(a1 , ..., ad ), where ai is the contribution
of xti to the prediction f (xt ).

We investigate the problem of explainability for
machine learning models, focusing on Feature
Attribution Methods (FAMs) that evaluate feature importance through perturbation tests. Despite their utility, FAMs struggle to distinguish
the contributions of different features, when their
prediction changes are similar after perturbation.
To enhance FAMs’ discriminative power, we introduce Feature Attribution with Necessity and
Sufficiency (FANS), which find a neighborhood
of the input such that perturbing samples within
this neighborhood have a high Probability of being Necessity and Sufficiency (PNS) cause for
the change in predictions, and use this PNS as
the importance of the feature. Specifically, FANS
compute this PNS via a heuristic strategy for estimating the neighborhood and a perturbation test
involving two stages (factual and interventional)
for counterfactual reasoning. To generate counterfactual samples, we use a resampling-based
approach on the observed samples to approximate the required conditional distribution. We
demonstrate that FANS outperforms existing attribution methods on six benchmarks. Please refer to
the source code via https://github.com/
DMIRLAB-Group/FANS.

Standard feature attribution methods (FAMs) measure the
contribution of each feature through a perturbation test,
i.e., comparing the difference in prediction under different
perturbations, e.g., Shapley Values (Shapley et al., 1953), or
before and after the perturbation, e.g., gradient or surrogatebased methods (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Sundararajan et al.,
2017), where a subset of the variables of X are set to their
baseline values.
However, this perturbation test may not accurately distinguish the contribution of different features to the prediction
when their changes in prediction are similar after perturbation. To better understand this phenomenon, we provide an
example as follows.
Example 1. Consider a binary classification model f
for X= (X1 , X2 , X3 ) ∈ R3 that is captured by a function Y =h(X1 , X2 , X3 )=I(X1 −X2 >1), where Y is a binary
variable representing true or false. Assume the baseline x′ =
(0, 0, 0) and the target input xt =(1, 1, 1).
The attribution scores for features xt1 and xt3 obtained from
the existing FAMs may both be 0, as the model’s predictions given xt under different perturbations relative to x′
are always equal to h(xt ), which may misleadingly suggest
that xt1 , xt3 contribute equally to h(xt ). Clearly, the contributions of xt1 , xt3 are not equal, since the value of h(xt )
is determined solely by the difference between xt1 and xt2
being less than 1, and is not influenced by xt3 . In other
words, the causes for the predictions for xt1 and xt3 remaining unchanged after perturbation are different. Based on this
key observation, we extend feature attribution by finding a
neighborhood of the input xt containing xt3 (or xt2 ) such that
perturbing samples within this neighborhood has the highest

1. Introduction
Feature attribution is a method for explaining machine learning (ML) models by assigning weights to input features,
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Guangdong
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China 3 Department of Engineering,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom
4
Shantou University, Shantou 515063, China 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Masdar City, Abu Dhabi.
Correspondence to: Ruichu Cai <cairuichu@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

