FightLadder: A Benchmark for Competitive
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Wenzhe Li 1 Zihan Ding 1 Seth Karten 1 Chi Jin 1

Abstract
Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL)
heavily rely on a variety of well-designed benchmarks, which provide environmental platforms
and consistent criteria to evaluate existing and
novel algorithms. Specifically, in multi-agent RL
(MARL), a plethora of benchmarks based on cooperative games have spurred the development of
algorithms that improve the scalability of cooperative multi-agent systems. However, for the competitive setting, a lightweight and open-sourced
benchmark with challenging gaming dynamics
and visual inputs has not yet been established. In
this work, we present FightLadder, a real-time
fighting game platform, to empower competitive
MARL research. Along with the platform, we provide implementations of state-of-the-art MARL
algorithms for competitive games, as well as a set
of evaluation metrics to characterize the performance and exploitability of agents. We demonstrate the feasibility of this platform by training
a general agent that consistently defeats 12 builtin characters in single-player mode, and expose
the difficulty of training a non-exploitable agent
without human knowledge and demonstrations in
two-player mode. FightLadder provides meticulously designed environments to address critical challenges in competitive MARL research,
aiming to catalyze a new era of discovery and
advancement in the field. Videos and code at
https://sites.google.com/view/fightladder/home.

Figure 1. FightLadder currently supports various cross-platform
video fighting games: Street Fighter II (Genesis platform), Street
Fighter III (Arcade platform), Fatal Fury 2 (Genesis platform),
Mortal Kombat (Genesis platform), and The King of Fighters ’97
(Neo Geo platform).

games (Silver et al., 2016; Li et al., 2020; Moravvcík et al.,
2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019), robotics
control (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Andrychowicz et al., 2020b;
Brohan et al., 2022), and large language models alignment (Ouyang et al., 2022). Underpinning these rapid advances are not only the development of sample-efficient RL
algorithms but also the availability of well-designed benchmarks. These benchmarks provide environmental platforms,
unify evaluation protocols, enable comparisons of state-ofthe-art methods, motivate improved solutions, and guide
practical applications. As an example, policy proximal
optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) demonstrates
its superior performance across different single-agent RL
benchmarks, hence being considered as one of the most
widely adopted single-agent RL algorithms (Andrychowicz
et al., 2020a). In the realm of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL), while a series of benchmarks have also
been proposed, most of them focus on fully cooperative
settings. For competitive environments, some platforms
simulate games with tabular representations and relatively
simple dynamics, such as board games, while others, based
on complex game engines, require significant computational
resources and expert knowledge, such as Starcraft II and
DOTA. To advance research on competitive multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) and transform game-theoretical
results into practical applications, a fully competitive game
platform that strikes the right balance between complexity,
efficiency, and generality is urgently needed.

1. Introduction
As an active branch of artificial intelligence (AI), deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved significant success
in various domains, including, but not limited to, strategic
1
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Wenzhe Li <wenzhe.li@princeton.edu>, Chi Jin <chij@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

