Merging Multi-Task Models via Weight-Ensembling Mixture of Experts

Anke Tang 1 2 * Li Shen 3 4 * Yong Luo 1 2 Nan Yin 5 Lefei Zhang 1 2 Dacheng Tao 6

Abstract

been initially trained on large-scale datasets, pre-trained
models have outstanding common sense and are adept at
recognizing and processing diverse data patterns (Radford
et al., 2019; He et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023). These models can then be fine-tuned on downstream tasks to acquire
task-specific knowledge (Chung et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2023; Cao et al., 2024). In this context, merging multiple
task-specific models into a single unified model has emerged
as an effective and scalable strategy for knowledge transfer
and multi-task learning (Li et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023).

Merging various task-specific Transformer-based
vision models trained on different tasks into a unified model can execute all the tasks concurrently.
Previous methods, exemplified by task arithmetic,
have proven to be both effective and scalable. Existing methods have primarily focused on seeking a static optimal solution within the original
model parameter space. A notable challenge is
mitigating the interference between parameters
of different models, which can substantially deteriorate performance. In this paper, we propose
to merge most of the parameters while upscaling
the MLP of the Transformer layers to a weightensembling mixture of experts (MoE) module,
which can dynamically integrate shared and taskspecific knowledge based on the input, thereby
providing a more flexible solution that can adapt
to the specific needs of each instance. Our key insight is that by identifying and separating shared
knowledge and task-specific knowledge, and then
dynamically integrating them, we can mitigate the
parameter interference problem to a great extent.
We conduct the conventional multi-task model
merging experiments and evaluate the generalization and robustness of our method. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness and provide a comprehensive understanding of our method.

There are several state-of-the-art algorithms for merging
models. A prominent example in this field is task arithmetic (Ilharco et al., 2023), which interpolates the parameters of models linearly. These methods excel in extracting
knowledge from various models and synthesizing a unified
model cheaply. Such approaches present a promising solution for constructing robust models (Izmailov et al., 2019;
Wortsman et al., 2022), especially in the scenarios where the
training data is decentralized, limited, or inaccessible due to
privacy constraints (Tang et al., 2023a; Jin et al., 2023).
Existing methods predominantly aim to find a static multitask optimal solution within the original parameter space.
These methods do not introduce any new parameters, thus
maintaining the original inference cost. This approach, however, imposes limitations on adaptability to the unique requirements of each instance, as the task-specific optimal
solution varies. Another significant challenge of merging
multi-task models is mitigating the interference between
parameters of different models, which can substantially deteriorate the average performance (Yadav et al., 2023; Yu
et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023b). Existing methods, while
effective in some scenarios, may not be flexible enough to
handle the dynamic nature of multi-task learning, where the
optimal solution can vary depending on the input.

1. Introduction
The swift advancement of deep learning has fostered a
shift towards fine-tuning large pre-trained models for downstream tasks, rather than training them from scratch. Having

To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach to
merge vision Transformers (ViTs). Our method merges most
of the parameters while upscaling the multilayer perceptron
(MLP) of the Transformer layers to a weight-ensembling
Mixture of Experts (MoE) module. This module can dynamically integrate shared and task-specific knowledge based on
the input sample, thereby providing a more flexible solution
that can adapt to the specific needs of each instance.

*

Equal contribution 1 National Engineering Research Center
for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan
University, China 2 Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China 3 Sun
Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China 4 JD Explore Academy, China
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, United
Arab Emirates 6 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Correspondence to: Yong Luo <luoyong@whu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our primary realization is that the issue of parameter inter1

