Federated Continual Learning via Prompt-based Dual Knowledge Transfer

Hongming Piao * 1 Yichen Wu * 1 Dapeng Wu 1 Ying Wei 2

(c) Federated Continual Learning

(a) Continual Learning
Forward/Backward Transfer
𝒯1

Forward/Backward Transfer

𝒯2
(Time Dimension)

𝑡

(b) Federated Learning
Spatial Transfer
Client 1

Client 2
Server

(Spatial Dimension)

(Spatial Dimension)

In Federated Continual Learning (FCL), the challenge lies in effectively facilitating knowledge
transfer and enhancing the performance across
various tasks on different clients. Current FCL
methods predominantly focus on avoiding interference between tasks, thereby overlooking the
potential for positive knowledge transfer across
tasks learned by different clients at separate time
intervals. To address this issue, we introduce
a Prompt-based knowledge transfer FCL algorithm, called Powder, designed to effectively
foster the transfer of knowledge encapsulated
in prompts between various sequentially learned
tasks and clients. Furthermore, we have devised a unique approach for prompt generation
and aggregation, intending to alleviate privacy
protection concerns and communication overhead, while still promoting knowledge transfer.
Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of our method in terms of reduction in communication costs, and enhancement of knowledge transfer. Code is available at
https://github.com/piaohongming/Powder.

Client1

Dual Transfer

Server

Client 2

𝒯12

𝒯11

𝒯21

𝒯22

Spatial Transfer

Abstract

𝒯23
𝑡

(Time Dimension)

Figure 1. Various knowledge transfer types in different settings,
where Tctc denotes the tc -th task on the c-th client.
Table 1. Transfer under different task correlation, measures by
overlapped level between tasks.
M ETHOD
F EDSPACE
F ED -CODAP
O URS

OVERLAPPED L EVEL
50%
70%
90%
-5.95 -3.11 -8.26
-1.18 -0.59 -0.73
6.04
6.40
6.68

the assumption that there is a stable data distribution on
clients, thus struggle to adapt to the continuous changes of
data distribution in the environment of clients. Meanwhile,
Clients running centralized continual learning cannot utilize
information from other clients under the premise of privacy
protection, facing issues of insufficient and biased data. To
address these problems, recent studies have begun focusing
on federated continual learning (FCL). Federated continual
learning retains the challenges of both federated learning
and continual learning: knowledge transfer, catastrophic
forgetting, privacy protection and communication overhead.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed training framework
that allows for learning from tasks on different clients without transmitting raw data, while continual learning (CL)
aims to enable a model to continuously learn new tasks
without catastrophic forgetting. From spatial dimension and
temporal dimension respectively, FL and CL try to tackle
the non independent and identically (non-iid) distribution
between tasks, which poses challenges to the model’s memory stability and knowledge transfer between tasks. However, existing federated learning algorithms are based on

Research in federated continual learning can be broadly
categorized into rehearsal-based and rehearsal-free approaches. rehearsal-based methods use a memory buffer to
save raw samples or prototypes of previous tasks, then replay
them with model decomposition such as FedWEIT (Yoon
et al., 2021), with knowledge distillation such as GLFC
(Dong et al., 2022) and CFeD (Ma et al., 2022b), or with regularization such as Fedspace (Shenaj et al., 2023). However,
memory buffer leads to additional storage overhead and privacy issue on clients, which are always edge devices with
limited resource. To alleviate this problem, rehearsal-free
methods such as TARGET (Zhang et al., 2023) and FedCIL (Qi et al., 2023) are proposed. They generate pseudo-

*
1
Equal contribution
City University of Hong Kong
Nanyang Technological University.
Correspondence to:
Hongming Piao <hpiao6-c@my.cityu.edu.hk>, Dapeng Wu
<dapengwu@cityu.edu.hk>, Ying Wei <ying.wei@ntu.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

