^GeminiFusion: Efficient Pixel-wise Multimodal Fusion for Vision Transformer
Ding Jia * 1 Jianyuan Guo * 2 Kai Han 3 Han Wu 2 Chao Zhang 1 Chang XuB 2 Xinghao ChenB 3
jiading@stu.pku.edu.cn; {jianyuan.guo,han.wu}@sydney.edu.au; kai.han@huawei.com; c.zhang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

sources has emerged as a pivotal catalyst for advancing artificial intelligence-driven perception in vision (Smith &
Gasser, 2005; Baltrušaitis et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2022a).
This approach has demonstrated remarkable potential, surpassing the unimodal paradigm across various downstream
tasks, including autonomous driving (Ha et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2022), semantic segmentation (Ye et al., 2019; Cao
et al., 2021), video captioning (Sun et al., 2019a; Lu et al.,
2019) and visual question answering (Antol et al., 2015;
Ben-Younes et al., 2017).

Cross-modal transformers have demonstrated superiority in various vision tasks by effectively
integrating different modalities. This paper first
critiques prior token exchange methods which replace less informative tokens with inter-modal
features, and demonstrate exchange based methods underperform cross-attention mechanisms,
while the computational demand of the latter inevitably restricts its use with longer sequences.
To surmount the computational challenges, we
propose GeminiFusion, a pixel-wise fusion approach that capitalizes on aligned cross-modal
representations. GeminiFusion elegantly combines intra-modal and inter-modal attentions, dynamically integrating complementary information
across modalities. We employ a layer-adaptive
noise to adaptively control their interplay on a
per-layer basis, thereby achieving a harmonized
fusion process. Notably, GeminiFusion maintains
linear complexity with respect to the number of
input tokens, ensuring this multimodal framework
operates with efficiency comparable to unimodal
networks. Comprehensive evaluations across multimodal image-to-image translation, 3D object
detection and arbitrary-modal semantic segmentation tasks, including RGB, depth, LiDAR, event
data, etc. demonstrate the superior performance
of our GeminiFusion against leading-edge techniques. The PyTorch code is available here.

In the current literature, dominant paradigms for the multimodal fusion can be categorized into two ad-hoc schemes,
i.e., interaction-based fusion (Shvetsova et al., 2022; Nagrani et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023a) and exchange-based
fusion (Wang et al., 2020c; 2022b; Zhu et al., 2023). In early
interaction-based methods, a common practice involved directly concatenating tokens from different modalities (Su
et al., 2019). This straightforward fusion approach neglects
inter-modal interactions and sometimes leads to a poorer
performance than single-modal counterparts (Wang et al.,
2020b; 2022b). While cross-attention mechanisms are introduced as a solution, the quadratic complexity of the full
attention with an increasing number of input tokens challenges the feasibility of cross-modal models. To tackle this
issue, a simple strategy is to confine cross-modal interaction
to later layers, often referred to as late-fusion (Nagrani et al.,
2021). However, this method restricts the ability of the
network’s shallow layers to access valuable features from
another modality, diminishing the original goal of facilitating mutual assistance between modalities and hindering
overall model performance.
Exchange-based fusion provides a parameter-free solution (Wang et al., 2022b; 2020c) to the computational
overhead by leveraging the inherent alignment of different modalities in vision tasks. For instance, world-space
data like LiDAR and point clouds can be projected to pixels
on the paired image plane. This method entails dynamically
predicting the significance of each input token and subsequently replacing less crucial tokens from one modality with
those from another.

1. Introduction
In light of the increasing availability of low-cost sensors, multimodal fusion which leverages data from various
*
Equal contribution 1 Peking University. 2 The University
of Sydney. 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.. Correspondence
to: Chang Xu <c.xu@sydney.edu.au>, Xinghao Chen <xinghao.chen@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our investigation into the prune-then-substitute technique,
as outlined in the TokenFusion (Wang et al., 2022b), reveals
1

