Beyond Point Prediction: Score Matching-based Pseudolikelihood Estimation of
Neural Marked Spatio-Temporal Point Process

Zichong Li 1 Qunzhi Xu 1 Zhenghao Xu 1 Yajun Mei 1 Tuo Zhao 1 Hongyuan Zha 2

Abstract

tial features. STPPs are widely used in various fields, including ecology (González et al., 2016), physiology (Tagliazucchi et al., 2012), and epidemiology (Li et al., 2021),
to model complex event sequences such as earthquakes,
brain activities, and disease outbreaks. Classical STPPs
(Diggle, 2006; González et al., 2016) capture relatively simple spatio-temporal patterns through combining a temporal
point process model, such as Poisson process (Kingman,
1992) and self-excitation process (Hawkes, 1971), with a
pre-specified spatial distribution estimator. With the advent
of neural networks, flexible and expressive neural STPPs
have been developed to model much more complicated event
dynamics, see Zhou et al. (2022); Dong et al. (2023); Yuan
et al. (2023); Okawa et al. (2019); Zhu et al. (2022).

Spatio-temporal point processes (STPPs) are potent mathematical tools for modeling and predicting events with both temporal and spatial
features. Despite their versatility, most existing
methods for learning STPPs either assume a restricted form of the spatio-temporal distribution,
or suffer from inaccurate approximations of the
intractable integral in the likelihood training objective. These issues typically arise from the normalization term of the probability density function. Moreover, existing works only provide point
prediction for events without quantifying their
uncertainty, such as confidence intervals for the
event’s arrival time and confidence regions for
the event’s location, which is crucial given the
considerable randomness of the data. To tackle
these challenges, we introduce SMASH: a Score
MAtching-based pSeudolikeliHood estimator for
learning marked STPPs. Specifically, our framework adopts a normalization-free objective by estimating the pseudolikelihood of marked STPPs
through score-matching and predicts confidence
intervals/regions for event time and location by
generating samples through a score-based sampling algorithm. The superior performance of our
proposed framework is demonstrated through extensive experiments on both point and confidence
interval/region prediction of events.

In neural STPPs, event distributions are typically characterized through intensity functions parametrized by the neural
network, which model the influence of past events on present
occurrences. Current methods predominantly estimate parameters by maximizing the log-likelihood of event time and
location. However, computing such a likelihood involves
integrating the intensity function over time and space, which
is usually intractable due to the intricate form of the neural
network. Therefore, they resort to numerical approximation
methods such as Monte Carlo integration (González et al.,
2016; Zhu et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2023), which inevitably
introduce approximation errors that compromise prediction
accuracy. Various works have sought solutions for this complication. For instance, Chen et al. (2021) utilize ODE with
the continuous-time normalizing flow (CNFs) to model continuous transformation of the distribution, but they need to
integrate over the ODE trajectory by inefficient numerical
ODE solver. Jia and Benson (2019); Zhou et al. (2022)
bypass the approximation of the integral by assuming restricted forms of the distribution such as Gaussian mixture
models, but failing to capture complex spatio-temporal dynamics. Yuan et al. (2023) propose a diffusion-based STPP
model to avoid integrals and flexibly learn event distributions. However, they suffer from inefficient training and
non-trivial hyperparameter configuration.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal point processes (STPPs) are stochastic processes that model event occurrences in time and space,
where each event is associated with both temporal and spa1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China. Correspondence to: Zichong Li <zichongli@gatech.edu>, Tuo Zhao
<tourzhao@gatech.edu>.

Another limitation of neural STPPs is the absence of confidence interval prediction. Given the huge inherent randomness of event times and locations, the variance of data points

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

