A Connection between Tempering and Entropic Mirror Descent

Nicolas Chopin 1 Francesca Crucinio 1 Anna Korba 1

Abstract

tions with bounded second moments equipped with the
Wasserstein-2 distance (Ambrosio et al., 2008). The latter
is equipped with a rich Riemannian structure (Otto and Villani, 2000), which makes it possible to define Wasserstein-2
gradient flows, i.e. paths of distributions decreasing the
objective functional of steepest descent according to this
metric. It is well-known that the Wasserstein gradient flow
of the KL can be implemented by a Langevin diffusion on
the ambient space (Jordan et al., 1998) and easily discretized
in time, resulting for instance in the Langevin Monte Carlo
(or Unadjusted Langevin) algorithm (Roberts and Tweedie,
1996). The latter is one of the most famous Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms - maybe the most canonical - that generate Markov chains in the ambient space,
whose law approximates the target distribution for a large
time horizon. It is known to converge fast when the target distribution has a smooth and strongly convex potential
(Durmus et al., 2019), or is satisfies a relaxed log-Sobolev
assumption (Vempala and Wibisono, 2019). Alternative
time discretizations of the KL Wasserstein gradient flow
(Salim et al., 2020; Mou et al., 2021) or its gradient flow
with respect to similar optimal transport geometries have
been considered in the literature to propose alternative algorithms (Liu, 2017; Garbuno-Inigo et al., 2020), but their
convergence also depends strongly on the log-concavity of
the target.

This paper explores the connections between tempering (for Sequential Monte Carlo; SMC) and
entropic mirror descent to sample from a target
probability distribution whose unnormalized density is known. We establish that tempering SMC
corresponds to entropic mirror descent applied
to the reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
and obtain convergence rates for the tempering
iterates. Our result motivates the tempering iterates from an optimization point of view, showing
that tempering can be seen as a descent scheme
of the KL divergence with respect to the FisherRao geometry, in contrast to Langevin dynamics
that perform descent of the KL with respect to
the Wasserstein-2 geometry. We exploit the connection between tempering and mirror descent
iterates to justify common practices in SMC and
derive adaptive tempering rules that improve over
other alternative benchmarks in the literature.

1. Introduction
Sampling from a target probability distribution whose density is known up to a normalization constant is a fundamental task in computational statistics and machine learning.
It can be naturally formulated as optimizing a functional
measuring the dissimilarity to the target probability distribution, typically the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. From
there, it is natural to consider optimization schemes over
the space of probability distributions, to design a sequence
of distributions approximating the target one. Depending
on the chosen geometry over the search space and the time
discretization, one may obtain different schemes.

Another possible framework is to cast the space of probability distributions as a subset of a normed space of measures
(such as L2 ), and to consider the duality of measures with
continuous functions and the mirror descent algorithm that
relies on Bregman divergences geometry, as recently considered in Ying (2020); Chizat (2022); Aubin-Frankowski
et al. (2022). While both frameworks yield optimization algorithms on measure spaces, the geometries and algorithms
are very different (in particular notions of gradients and convexity). Mirror descent produces multiplicative ("vertical")
updates on measures allowing for change of mass, while
Wasserstein flows corresponds to displacement of fixed mass
particles supporting the measures ("horizontal" updates).
Moreover, as recently highlighted in Aubin-Frankowski
et al. (2022), the (reverse) KL as an objective loss for sampling is actually strongly convex and smooth whatever the
target π in a mirror descent geometry induced by the KL
as a Bregman divergence. In contrast, it is known that

For instance, one possible framework is to restrict the search
space to the Wasserstein space, i.e. probability distribu1
ENSAE, CREST, Institut Polytechnique de Paris. Correspondence to: Nicolas Chopin <Nicolas.Chopin@ensae.fr>, Francesca
Crucinio <francesca_romana.crucinio@kcl.ac.uk>, Anna Korba
<anna.korba@ensae.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

