SPADE: Sparsity-Guided Debugging for Deep Neural Networks

Arshia Soltani Moakhar * 1 Eugenia Iofinova * 1 Elias Frantar 1 Dan Alistarh 1 2

Abstract

a lot of interest, there is also work questioning the validity of localized explanations with respect to the model’s
true decision process, pointing out confounders across current explainability methods and metrics (Shetty et al., 2019;
Rebuffi et al., 2020; Casper et al., 2023).

It is known that sparsity can improve interpretability for deep neural networks. However, existing
methods in the area either require networks that
are pre-trained with sparsity constraints, or impose sparsity after the fact, altering the network’s
general behavior. In this paper, we demonstrate,
for the first time, that sparsity can instead be incorporated into the interpretation process itself, as
a sample-specific preprocessing step. Unlike previous work, this approach, which we call SPADE,
does not place constraints on the trained model
and does not affect its behavior during inference
on the sample. Given a trained model and a target sample, SPADE uses sample-targeted pruning to provide a “trace” of the network’s execution on the sample, reducing the network to the
most important connections prior to computing
an interpretation. We demonstrate that preprocessing with SPADE significantly increases the
accuracy of image saliency maps across several
interpretability methods. Additionally, SPADE
improves the usefulness of neuron visualizations,
aiding humans in reasoning about network behavior. Our code is available at https://github.
com/IST-DASLab/SPADE.

One key confounder for interpretability is the fact the neurons of a trained, accurate DNN often respond to many
different types of features, which may be unrelated (Nguyen
et al., 2016; Olah et al., 2020; 2017). For example, Olah
et al. (2017) finds a neuron equally likely to respond to car
shields and cat paws, and with the same intensity. This
phenomenon directly impacts interpretability methods, such
as visualizations of inputs that maximize a neuron’s activation: the resulting representative input superimposes salient
features, and is therefore hard to interpret. Thus, there is significant effort in the literature on addressing this issue: for
instance, early work by Nguyen et al. (2016) proposed retraining the network with specialized regularizers which promote feature “disentanglement,” whereas Wong et al. (2021)
enforced output decisions to be based on very few features
by retraining the final linear output layer from scratch to
be extremely sparse. Yet, one key limitation of this line
of work is that generating a “debuggable” model with dis-

Dense Model

Input Image

1. Introduction
Neural network interpretability seeks mechanisms for understanding why and how deep neural networks (DNNs)
make decisions, and ranges from approaches which seek
to link abstract concepts to structural network components,
such as specific neurons, e.g., (Erhan et al., 2009; Yosinski
et al.; Mordvintsev et al.; Nguyen et al., 2016), to approaches
which aim to trace individual model outputs on a per-sample
basis, e.g., (Simonyan et al., 2013). While this area is seeing

SPADE
Image
Augmentation

Interpretability
Method

Input Trace
(Subnetwork)
Image Specific
Model Pruning

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA) 2 NeuralMagic. Correspondence to: Eugenia Iofinova <eugenia.iofinova@ista.ac.at>, Dan Alistarh
<dan.alistarh@ista.ac.at>.

Neuron
Saliency
Visualization
Map

Figure 1: Given an input image and model, SPADE prunes
the model using image augmentations. The resulting trace
(subnetwork) can be used with existing interpretability methods to increase their usefulness and accuracy.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

