Conformal prediction for multi-dimensional time series by ellipsoidal sets

Chen Xu * 1 Hanyang Jiang * 1 Yao Xie 1

Abstract

and the predictor model would contain all potential outputs
that are conforming to the past.

Conformal prediction (CP) has been a popular
method for uncertainty quantification because it
is distribution-free, model-agnostic, and theoretically sound. For forecasting problems in supervised learning, most CP methods focus on building prediction intervals for univariate responses.
In this work, we develop a sequential CP method
called MultiDimSPCI that builds prediction regions for a multivariate response, especially in
the context of multivariate time series, which
are not exchangeable. Theoretically, we estimate
finite-sample high-probability bounds on the conditional coverage gap. Empirically, we demonstrate that MultiDimSPCI maintains valid coverage on a wide range of multivariate time series
while producing smaller prediction regions than
CP and non-CP baselines.

Most successful applications of CP have considered Y as
an univariate variable. In the regression setting (Kim et al.,
2020), CP methods thus output prediction intervals while
in the classification setting (Romano et al., 2020), these
methods produce prediction sets. With mild assumptions,
such as assuming that data (X, Y ) are exchangeable, these
one-dimensional uncertainty sets can theoretically guarantee
high coverage probability. Recent works have also extended
such guarantees to non-exchangeable observations and either quantify the coverage gap in finite training samples
(Barber et al., 2023) or show asymptotic coverage convergence (Xu & Xie, 2023b).
Despite the success of CP on scalar outputs Y , effective
use of CP on multi-dimensional outputs is considerably less
studied, especially when data are non-exchangeable as in
the case of multivariate time-series forecasting. Moreover,
there can be complex dependence between the multiple
dimensions of the time series, making the problem more
interesting and important. Specifically, the goal is not just
to provide a prediction interval for each dimension of Y
but to produce an uncertainty region that captures the correlation within Y and jointly contains all coordinates of Y .
While uncertainty quantification methods for this problem
have existed outside CP, as in vector auto-regressive models
(Salinas et al., 2020), these approaches often have strong
modeling or data assumption and lack rigorous theoretical
justifications. On the other hand, various multi-dimensional
CP methods have been proposed. Yet, they are either repeated use of one-dimensional CP methods (Stankevičiūtė
et al., 2021) or fail to work beyond exchangeability (Messoudi et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Conformal prediction (CP) has been a popular distributionfree technique to quantify uncertainty in modern machine
learning (Volkhonskiy et al., 2017). In building predictive
algorithms, CP can enhance trained machine learning estimators to output not just point estimates but also provide
uncertainty sets that contain the unobserved ground truth
with user-specified high probability. As a result, CP has
been applied successfully to many applications, such as
anomaly detection (Xu & Xie, 2021a), classification (Angelopoulos et al., 2021; Xu & Xie, 2022), regression (Barber
et al., 2021), and so on. In a nutshell, CP methods work as
wrappers that take in three components: a black-box predictive model f , an input feature X, and a potential output
Y . Then, it designs a so-called “non-conformity” score that
measures how non-conforming the potential output is. Naturally, the uncertainty set conditioning on the input feature

We highlight the differences against copula-based CP methods, which have been developed for multi-dimensional forecasting. The initial approach developed in (Messoudi et al.,
2021) assumed exchangeability, which is unsuitable for
time series. The recent development by (Sun & Yu, 2024)
proposes copula CP for multi-step time-series forecasting.
However, their theory assumed that each data sample of an
entire time series is drawn i.i.d. from an unknown distribution, hence ignoring temporal dependency. We further
introduce copula and its use in CP in Section 3.2, with

*

Equal contribution 1 H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial
and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Yao Xie <yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

