Causal Representation Learning from Multiple Distributions: A General Setting

Kun Zhang * 1 2 Shaoan Xie * 1 Ignavier Ng * 1 Yujia Zheng 1

Abstract

variables. This assumption, however reasonable, falls short
in complex scenarios involving indirect measurements, such
as electronic signals, image pixels, and linguistic tokens.
Moreover, there are usually changes on the causal mechanisms in real-world, such as the heterogeneous or nonstationary data. Identifying the latent causal variables and their
structures together with the change of the causal mechanism
is in pressing need to understand the complicated real-world
causal process. This has been recently known as causal
representation learning (Schölkopf et al., 2021).

In many problems, the measured variables (e.g.,
image pixels) are just mathematical functions of
the latent causal variables (e.g., the underlying
concepts or objects). For the purpose of making predictions in changing environments or making proper changes to the system, it is helpful to
recover the latent causal variables Zi and their
causal relations represented by graph GZ . This
problem has recently been known as causal representation learning. This paper is concerned
with a general, completely nonparametric setting
of causal representation learning from multiple
distributions (arising from heterogeneous data
or nonstationary time series), without assuming
hard interventions behind distribution changes.
We aim to develop general solutions in this fundamental case; as a by product, this helps see
the unique benefit offered by other assumptions
such as parametric causal models or hard interventions. We show that under the sparsity constraint
on the recovered graph over the latent variables
and suitable sufficient change conditions on the
causal influences, interestingly, one can recover
the moralized graph of the underlying directed
acyclic graph, and the recovered latent variables
and their relations are related to the underlying
causal model in a specific, nontrivial way. In
some cases, most latent variables can even be recovered up to component-wise transformations.
Experimental results verify our theoretical claims.

It is worth noting that identifying only the latent causal
variables but not the structure among them, is already a
considerable challenge. In the i.i.d. case, different latent
representations can explain the same observations equally
well, while not all of them are consistent with the true causal
process. For instance, nonlinear independent component
analysis (ICA), where a set of observed variables X is represented as a mixture of independent latent variables Z, i.e,
X = g(Z), is known to be unidentifiable without additional
assumptions (Comon, 1994). While being a strictly easier
task since there are no relations among latent variables, the
identifiability of nonlinear ICA often relies on conditions
on distributional assumptions (non-i.i.d. data) (Hyvärinen &
Morioka, 2016; 2017; Hyvärinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem
et al., 2020a; Sorrenson et al., 2020; Lachapelle et al., 2022;
Hälvä & Hyvärinen, 2020; Hälvä et al., 2021; Yao et al.,
2022) or specific functional constraints (Comon, 1994;
Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999; Taleb & Jutten, 1999; Buchholz et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022; Zheng & Zhang, 2023).
To generalize beyond the independent latent variables
and achieve causal representation learning (recovering
the latent variables and their causal structure), recent
advances either introduce additional experiments in the
forms of interventional or counterfactual data, or place
more restrictive parametric or graphical assumptions on
the latent causal model. For observational data, various
graphical conditions have been proposed together with
parametric assumptions such as linearity (Silva et al., 2006;
Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; 2022; Adams et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2022) and discreteness (Kivva et al., 2021).
For interventional data, single-node interventions have
been considered together with parametric assumptions (e.g.,
linearity) on the mixing function (Varici et al., 2023; Ahuja
et al., 2023; Buchholz et al., 2022) or also on the latent

1. Introduction
Causal representation learning holds paramount significance
across numerous fields, offering insights into intricate relationships within datasets. Most traditional methodologies
(e.g., causal discovery) assume the observation of causal
*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

