On the Expressive Power of Spectral Invariant Graph Neural Networks

Bohang Zhang 1 Lingxiao Zhao 2 Haggai Maron 3 4

Abstract

tional and structural encodings in Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) and Graph Transformers (GTs) (Dwivedi et al.,
2020; Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Rampasek et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022). These spectral features
encapsulate valuable information about graph connectivity,
inter-node distances, node clustering patterns, and more.
When using eigenvectors as inputs for machine learning
models, a major challenge arises due to the inherent eigenespace symmetry (Lim et al., 2023) — eigenvectors are not
unique. Specifically, for any eigenvector v, −v is also a
valid eigenvector. The ambiguity becomes worse in the case
of repeated eigenvalues; here, any orthogonal transformation of the basis vectors in a particular eigenspace yields
alternative but equivalent input representations.

Incorporating spectral information to enhance
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has shown
promising results but raises a fundamental challenge due to the inherent ambiguity of eigenvectors. Various architectures have been proposed
to address this ambiguity, referred to as spectral
invariant architectures. Notable examples include
GNNs and Graph Transformers that use spectral
distances, spectral projection matrices, or other
invariant spectral features. However, the potential expressive power of these spectral invariant
architectures remains largely unclear. The goal
of this work is to gain a deep theoretical understanding of the expressive power obtainable when
using spectral features. We first introduce a unified message-passing framework for designing
spectral invariant GNNs, called Eigenspace Projection GNN (EPNN). A comprehensive analysis
shows that EPNN essentially unifies all prior spectral invariant architectures, in that they are either
strictly less expressive or equivalent to EPNN. A
fine-grained expressiveness hierarchy among different architectures is also established. On the
other hand, we prove that EPNN itself is bounded
by a recently proposed class of Subgraph GNNs,
implying that all these spectral invariant architectures are strictly less expressive than 3-WL.
Finally, we discuss whether using spectral features can gain additional expressiveness when
combined with more expressive GNNs.

To address the ambiguity problem, a major line of recent
works leverages invariant features derived from eigenvectors and eigenvalues to design spectral invariant architectures. Popular choices for such features include eigenspace
projection matrices1 (Lim et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024),
spectral node distances (e.g., those associated with random
walks or graph diffusion) (Li et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2023b; Feldman et al., 2023), or other invariant spectral
characteristics (Wang et al., 2022). All of these features can
be easily integrated into GNNs to enhance edge features or
function as relative positional encoding of GTs. However,
on the theoretical side, while the expressive power of GNNs
has been studied extensively (Xu et al., 2019; Maron et al.,
2019a; Morris et al., 2021; Geerts & Reutter, 2022; Zhang
et al., 2024), there remains little understanding of the important category represented by spectral invariant GNNs/GTs.
Current work. The goal of this work is to gain deep insights
into the expressive power of spectral invariant architectures
and establish a complete expressiveness hierarchy. We begin by presenting Eigenspace Projection GNN (EPNN),
a novel GNN framework that unifies the study of all the
aforementioned spectral invariant methods. EPNN is very
simple: it encodes all spectral information for a node pair
(u, v) as a set containing the values of all projection matrices on that node pair, along with the associated eigenvalues.
It then computes and refines node representations using
the spectral information as edge features within a standard
message-passing framework on a fully connected graph.

1. Introduction
Recent works have demonstrated the promise of using spectral graph features, particularly the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian or functions thereof, as posi1

Peking University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Technion
NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to: Bohang Zhang <zhangbohang@pku.edu.cn>, Haggai Maron <hmaron@nvidia.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

See Section 3 for a formal definition of projection matrices.

