MultiMax: Sparse and Multi-Modal Attention Learning

Yuxuan Zhou 1 2 Mario Fritz 2 Margret Keuper 1 3

Abstract

reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Rummery
& Niranjan, 1994; Williams, 1992). It can be regarded as a
differentiable approximation of the Argmax operation and
projects the input onto the probability simplex, which allocates most of the probability mass to large entries. From
the perspective of optimization, the SoftMax function allows for a reasonable trade-off between exploitation and
exploration (White & Sofge, 1992), i.e., important positions
are emphasized while every position has a chance of being
explored. This trade-off can be controlled by a scale factor,
which is often referred to as temperature.

SoftMax is a ubiquitous ingredient of modern
machine learning algorithms. It maps an input
vector onto a probability simplex and reweights
the input by concentrating the probability mass
at large entries. Yet, as a smooth approximation to the Argmax function, a significant amount
of probability mass is distributed to other, residual entries, leading to poor interpretability and
noise. Although sparsity can be achieved by a
family of SoftMax variants, they often require
an alternative loss function and do not preserve
multi-modality. We show that this trade-off between multi-modality and sparsity limits the expressivity of SoftMax as well as its variants.
We provide a solution to this tension between
objectives by proposing a piece-wise differentiable function, termed MultiMax, which adaptively modulates the output distribution according to input entry range. Through comprehensive analysis and evaluation, we show that MultiMax successfully produces a distribution that supresses irrelevant entries while preserving multimodality, with benefits in image classification,
language modeling and machine translation. The
code is available at https://github.com/
ZhouYuxuanYX/MultiMax.

However, the expressivity of SoftMax is severely limited by
the following dilemma: a high temperature leads to oversmoothing and reduces the efficiency of the optimization,
whereas a small temperature collapses multi-modality and
makes training unstable. In attention layers for example, a
small temperature will cause relevant positions except the
peak to be overlooked, whereas a large temperature will
“waste” a non-negligible portion of attention on irrelevant
keys. Therefore, temperature is often set to one by default
in attention layer. As shown later, such a compromise also
results in the recently observed over-smoothing issue in both
vision (Gong et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2022c) and language
(Shi et al., 2022) transformers. Moreover, transformer-based
Large Language Models are shown to be prone to the interference of irrelevant context (Shi et al., 2023; Jia & Liang,
2017), which is also highly related to the portion of attention
on irrelevant tokens (Weston & Sukhbaatar, 2023).
To overcome the issue, previous works have proposed sparse
SoftMax alternatives, which allow to completely ignore
small entries below a threshold. These sparse SoftMax variants have been studied in diverse contexts, e.g., generative
modeling (Chen et al., 2021), output activations of multiclass classifiers, and/or attention mechanisms (Peters et al.,
2019; Martins & Astudillo, 2016; Gupta et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The SoftMax has remained in wide use in modern machine
learning methods and finds its application in a variety of
algorithms such as multi-class classification (LeCun et al.,
2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016; Bishop & Nasrabadi, 2006),
attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017; Veličković
et al., 2017; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Gehring et al., 2016) and

However, such methods often suffer from poor gradient
signal, which leads to instability during training. Moreover,
the number of non-sparse dimensions is often treated as
empirically selected hyperparameter.

1

University of Mannheim, Germany 2 CISPA Helmholz Center for Information Security, Germany 3 Max Planck Institute for
Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany. Correspondence to: Mario Fritz <fritz@cispa.de>, Margret Keuper
<keuper@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.

In contrast to sparsity, multi-modality has been less discussed in the previous studies. Since attention is not supposed to be exclusive in most cases, the vanilla SoftMax,
as an approximation of Argmax, does not easily comply

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

