Large Language Models are Geographically Biased

Rohin Manvi 1 Samar Khanna 1 Marshall Burke 1 David Lobell 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract

scientific research (Bommasani et al., 2021; Zhao et al.,
2023). With millions engaging directly and many more
impacted by their usage, the influence of LLMs is rapidly
expanding (Dash et al., 2023). This growth in impact makes
it crucial to assess potential harms, particularly those stemming from biases inherent in their training data, which is
often sourced from unprocessed internet content (Del’etang
et al., 2023; Dodge et al., 2021). Such biases, if unchecked,
risk perpetuating societal harm (Gallegos et al., 2023).

Large Language Models (LLMs) inherently carry
the biases contained in their training corpora,
which can lead to the perpetuation of societal
harm. As the impact of these foundation models grows, understanding and evaluating their biases becomes crucial to achieving fairness and
accuracy. We propose to study what LLMs know
about the world we live in through the lens of
geography. This approach is particularly powerful as there is ground truth for the numerous
aspects of human life that are meaningfully projected onto geographic space such as culture, race,
language, politics, and religion. We show various
problematic geographic biases, which we define
as systemic errors in geospatial predictions. Initially, we demonstrate that LLMs are capable of
making accurate zero-shot geospatial predictions
in the form of ratings that show strong monotonic correlation with ground truth (Spearman’s
ρ of up to 0.89). We then show that LLMs exhibit common biases across a range of objective
and subjective topics. In particular, LLMs are
clearly biased against locations with lower socioeconomic conditions (e.g. most of Africa) on a
variety of sensitive subjective topics such as attractiveness, morality, and intelligence (Spearman’s ρ
of up to 0.70). Finally, we introduce a bias score
to quantify this and find that there is significant
variation in the magnitude of bias across existing
LLMs. Code is available on the project website:
https://rohinmanvi.github.io/GeoLLM

The biases of LLMs are evaluated across various dimensions. For instance, the Bias in Open-Ended Language
Generation Dataset (BOLD) (Dhamala et al., 2021) examines bias in profession, gender, race, religion, and political
ideology, while the Bias Benchmark for QA (BBQ) (Parrish et al., 2021) assesses bias across age, disability status,
gender, nationality, physical appearance, race, religion, and
socioeconomic status. These datasets assess different social
biases, a notion related to group fairness (Hardt et al., 2016;
Kamiran & Calders, 2012) and is broadly used to refer to
disparate treatment or outcomes between social groups (Gallegos et al., 2023). Our paper evaluates geographic bias,
where social groups are distinguished by location and bias
is defined as systemic errors in geospatial predictions.
Abstractly, evaluating the biases of LLMs on any topic
through the lens of geography is very powerful. This is
because numerous aspects of human life—such as culture,
race, language, economics, politics, and religion—are meaningfully projected onto geographic space. The biases, or
systemic errors, are relative to the target distribution of the
topic in consideration and can be interpreted in different
ways. For example, biases on objective topics such as population density can be interpreted as misrepresentations, and
biases on sensitive subjective topics such as attractiveness
can be interpreted as stereotypes. This approach is inclusive of all people on Earth and any biases can be easily be
attributed to specific social groups based on where they live.
Furthermore, it facilitates the examination of correlations between these biases and various anchoring bias distributions.
For example, if one expects LLMs to be biased towards
urban locations or socioeconomic conditions, they can verify if the predictions are correlated with proxies such as
population density or infant survival rate respectively.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), as foundational models,
have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness across diverse
domains such as healthcare, education, law, finance, and
1
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Rohin Manvi <rohinm@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This assessment of geographic biases assumes that LLMs

1

