Cross-Domain Policy Adaptation by Capturing Representation Mismatch

Jiafei Lyu 1 Chenjia Bai 2 Jingwen Yang 3 Zongqing Lu 4 5 Xiu Li 1

Abstract

used before. She expertly uses new cookware soon. As this
example conveys, human beings are able to quickly transfer
the learned policies to similar tasks. Such capability is also
expected in reinforcement learning (RL) agents. Unfortunately, RL algorithms are known to require a vast number of
interactions to learn meaningful policies (Silver et al., 2016;
Lyu et al., 2023). A bare fact is that sometimes only limited
interactions with the environment (target domain) are feasible because it may be expensive and time-consuming for a
large number of interactions in scenarios like robotics (Cutler & How, 2015; Kober et al., 2013), autonomous driving
(Kiran et al., 2020; Osinski et al., 2019), etc. Nevertheless,
we may simultaneously have access to another structurally
similar source domain where the experience is cheaper to
gather, e.g., a simulator. Since the source domain can be
biased, a dynamics mismatch between the two domains may
persist. It then necessitates developing algorithms that have
good performance in the target domain, given the source
domain with some dynamics discrepancies.

It is vital to learn effective policies that can be
transferred to different domains with dynamics
discrepancies in reinforcement learning (RL). In
this paper, we consider dynamics adaptation settings where there exists dynamics mismatch between the source domain and the target domain,
and one can get access to sufficient source domain data, while can only have limited interactions with the target domain. Existing methods
address this problem by learning domain classifiers, performing data filtering from a value
discrepancy perspective, etc. Instead, we tackle
this challenge from a decoupled representation
learning perspective. We perform representation learning only in the target domain and measure the representation deviations on the transitions from the source domain, which we show
can be a signal of dynamics mismatch. We also
show that representation deviation upper bounds
performance difference of a given policy in the
source domain and target domain, which motivates us to adopt representation deviation as a
reward penalty. The produced representations are
not involved in either policy or value function,
but only serve as a reward penalizer. We conduct
extensive experiments on environments with kinematic and morphology mismatch, and the results
show that our method exhibits strong performance
on many tasks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/dmksjfl/PAR.

Note that there are numerous studies concerning policy adaptation, such as system identification (Yu et al., 2017; Clavera
et al., 2018) and domain randomization (Slaoui et al., 2019;
Tobin et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2017). These methods often
rely on demonstrations from the target domain (Kim et al.,
2019), the distributions from which the simulator parameters are sampled, a manipulable simulator (Chebotar et al.,
2018), etc. We lift these requirements and consider learning
policies with sufficient source domain data (either online
or offline) and limited online interactions with the target
domain. This setting is also referred to as off-dynamics RL
(Eysenbach et al., 2021) or online dynamics adaptation (Xu
et al., 2023). Existing methods tackle this problem by learning domain classifiers (Eysenbach et al., 2021), filtering
source domain data that share similar value estimates with
target domain data (Xu et al., 2023), etc.

1. Introduction
Alice is interested in learning cooking. She bought a new
set of cookware recently that is different from the one she

In this paper, we study the cross-domain policy adaptation
problem where only transition dynamics between the source
domain and the target domain differ. The state space, action
space, as well as the reward function, are kept unchanged.
Unlike prior works, we address this issue from a representation learning perspective. Our motivation is that the
dynamics mismatch between the source domain and the target domain can be captured by representation deviations of
transitions from the two domains, which is grounded by our

1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Tencent
IEG 4 School of Computer Science, Peking University 5 Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Xiu Li
<li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

