Block Acceleration Without Momentum:
On Optimal Stepsizes of Block Gradient Descent for Least-Squares

Liangzu Peng 1 * Wotao Yin 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
Block coordinate descent is a powerful algorithmic template suitable for big data optimization.
This template admits a lot of variants including
block gradient descent (BGD), which performs
gradient descent on a selected block of variables,
while keeping other variables fixed. For a very
long time, the stepsize for each block has tacitly
been set to one divided by the block-wise Lipschitz smoothness constant, imitating the vanilla
stepsize rule for gradient descent (GD). However,
such a choice for BGD has not yet been able to theoretically justify its empirical superiority over GD,
as existing convergence rates for BGD have worse
constants than GD in the deterministic cases.

Block coordinate descent refers to a family of algorithms
selecting and updating one block of variables at a time. In
the span of more than six decades since its early appearance (Hildreth, 1957), many variants of block coordinate
descent have been proposed, analyzed, and recently tested
on big data scenarios (Nesterov, 2012; Xu & Yin, 2013;
Wright, 2015; Shi et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2023). Despite
the abundance of these exciting developments, one might
ponder when one should prefer block coordinate descent to
vanilla gradient descent (GD). Intuitively, block coordinate
descent might be advantageous if the optimization variables
admit a natural partition into blocks, which is the case in
many applications (Peng & Vidal, 2023); or if the variable
dimension is too high to fit the memory, in which case one is
forced to optimize in a block-wise manner (Nesterov, 2012);
or if the given optimization problem is coordinate-friendly
(Peng et al., 2016), meaning that minimizing over one block
of coordinates while fixing others is computationally easy.

To discover such theoretical justification, we set
up a simple environment where we consider BGD
applied to least-squares with two blocks of variables. Assuming the data matrix corresponding
to each block is orthogonal, we find optimal stepsizes of BGD in closed form, which provably lead
to asymptotic convergence rates twice as fast as
GD with Polyak’s momentum; this means, under
that orthogonality assumption, one can accelerate
BGD by just tuning stepsizes and without adding
any momentum. An application that satisfies this
assumption is generalized alternating projection
between two subspaces, and applying our stepsizes to it improves the prior convergence rate
that was once claimed, slightly inaccurately, to be
optimal. The main proof idea is to minimize, in
stepsize variables, the spectral radius of a matrix
that controls convergence rates.

Developing convergence theory to support the above intuition, however, is challenging. For example, consider block
gradient descent (BGD), a method that runs GD at every
iteration on a selected block of variables. Nesterov was
concerned that, if selecting blocks in a greedy fashion (e.g.,
using the famous Gauss–Southwell rule), then, following
standard reasoning, one obtains a bound on convergence
rates that might have a worse constant than that of GD
(Nesterov, 2012). This concern led him to a BGD variant
that randomly selects blocks, whose convergence rate is
proved to be better than GD. While theoretically appealing
and having attracted a sequence of follow-up works, such
a randomized variant ensures convergence only in expectation; this is perhaps why it is empirically slower1 for the
least-squares problem than cyclic BGD, a BGD variant that
selects blocks in a cyclic fashion, see Tables 3.1 & 3.2 of
Beck & Tetruashvili (2013). We focus on the cyclic rule,
and for short, we write BGD for cyclic BGD in the sequel.

*

Work done during a summer internship at Alibaba US DAMO
Academy. 1 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
2
Decision Intelligence Lab, DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group US,
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA. Correspondence to: Liangzu Peng
<lpenn@seas.upenn.edu>, Wotao Yin <wotao.yin@alibabainc.com>.

In the deterministic setting, the BGD versus GD dilemma
persists: BGD is empirically faster, but its current bound on

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
It is also shown that this randomized variant is in many cases
empirically slower than the greedy version (Nutini et al., 2015).

1

