Neuro-Symbolic Temporal Point Processes

Yang Yang 1 Chao Yang 1 Boyang Li 1 Yinghao Fu 1 Shuang Li 1

Abstract

temporal logic rules. The discovered rules can contribute
to the sharing of clinical experiences and aid in the improvement of the treatment strategy. They can also provide
specific explanations for the occurrence of an event. For
example, the following clinical report

Our goal is to efficiently discover a compact set
of temporal logic rules to explain irregular events
of interest. We introduce a neural-symbolic rule
induction framework within the temporal point
process model. The negative log-likelihood is
the loss that guides the learning, where the explanatory logic rules and their weights are learned
end-to-end in a differentiable way. Specifically,
predicates and logic rules are represented as vector embeddings, where the predicate embeddings
are fixed and the rule embeddings are trained via
gradient descent to obtain the most appropriate
compositional representations of the predicate embeddings. To make the rule learning process more
efficient and flexible, we adopt a sequential covering algorithm, which progressively adds rules
to the model and removes the event sequences
that have been explained until all event sequences
have been covered. All the found rules will be fed
back to the models for a final rule embedding and
weight refinement. Our approach showcases notable efficiency and accuracy across synthetic and
real datasets, surpassing state-of-the-art baselines
by a wide margin in terms of efficiency.

“A 50-year-old patient, with a chronic lung disease since 5
years ago, took the booster vaccine shot on March 1st. The
patient got exposed to the COVID-19 virus around May 12th,
and afterward within a week began to have a mild cough
and nasal congestion. The patient received treatment as
soon as the symptoms appeared. After intravenous infusions
at a healthcare facility for around 3 consecutive days, the
patient recovered...”
contains many clinical events with timestamps recorded. It
sounds appealing to distill compact human-readable temporal logic rules from these noisy event data to aid diagnoses
and treatment planning. In this paper, we present an efficient neural-symbolic rule induction algorithm capable of
automatically learning universal rules from sequences of irregular event data. These universal rules act as summarized
laws that effectively elucidate the dynamics of the events,
offering valuable insights for clinical decision-making.
From modeling perspective, we design a neural-symbolic
temporal point process (NS-TPP) that strikes the balance between model flexibility and interpretability. The occurrence
rate (i.e., intensity) of events is a function of the neural predicate embeddings, where the functional form is determined
by the logic rules that are uncovered from the data. Traditional parametric temporal point process (TPP) models like
the Hawkes process offer interpretability, but their simplicity limits flexibility. Conversely, neural-based models, such
as RMTPP (Du et al., 2016) and Transformer Hawkes (Zuo
et al., 2020), provide expressiveness but are often criticized
for their black-box nature and hinder their applications in
high-stakes scenarios. Our NS-TPP strives to harness the
strengths of both paradigms.

1. Introduction
Explaining critical events, such as sudden health changes
or unusual transactions, is essential in high-stakes domains
like healthcare and finance. The dynamics of these events
are typically governed by temporal logic rules, and automatically uncovering these rules from data holds significant
scientific and practical value.
For example, in healthcare, it is desirable to compress and
summarize medical knowledge or clinical experiences regarding disease phenotypes and therapies to a collection of

To enable efficient and differentiable rule learning, we propose a neural-symbolic rule induction framework for TPP,
which aims to learn rule embeddings to identify the rule
formula. In our model, predicates, or logic variables, are
represented as fixed vector embeddings, either pre-trained
or specified beforehand. Each rule embedding acts as a
learnable filter, selecting the most relevant predicates and

1

School of Data Science, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong (Shenzhen). Correspondence to: Shuang Li
<lishuang@cuhk.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

