Memory Consolidation Enables Long-Context Video Understanding

Ivana Balažević * 1 Yuge Shi * 1 Pinelopi Papalampidi * 1
Rahma Chaabouni 1 Skanda Koppula 1 Olivier J. Hénaff 1
Number of parameters
203M
1B
424M

Abstract
Most transformer-based video encoders are limited to short temporal contexts due to their
quadratic complexity. While various attempts
have been made to extend this context, this has
often come at the cost of both conceptual and
computational complexity. Instead, we propose to
re-purpose existing pretrained video transformers
by simply fine-tuning them to attend to memories
derived non-parametrically from past activations.
By leveraging redundancy reduction, our memoryconsolidated vision transformer (MC-ViT) effortlessly extends its context far into the past and
exhibits excellent scaling behavior when learning from longer videos. In doing so, MC-ViT
sets a new state-of-the-art in long-context video
understanding on EgoSchema, Perception Test,
and Diving48, outperforming methods that benefit from orders of magnitude more parameters.

4B

>4B

MC-ViT-L

48

MC-ViT-B

Perception Test VQA accuracy

SeViLA
LongViViT

46
44

Bard + PALI
ShortViViT

42

Bard + ShortViViT

40

ImageViT

38

Bard + ImageViT
25

30
35
EgoSchema VQA accuracy

40

45

Figure 1. Long-context video understanding on EgoSchema
and Perception Test. The proposed Memory-Consolidated Vision Transformer (MC-ViT-{B,L}, shown in bold) surpasses both
public and large-scale proprietary models, despite using orders of
magnitude fewer parameters and requiring only short fine-tuning
schedules on top of standard pretrained models.

1. Introduction
Humans and animals reason about events extending over
days, weeks, and years (Tulving, 1985), yet current artificial
vision systems live largely in the present. While architectures that model the dynamics of natural videos have grown
ever more sophisticated (Carreira & Zisserman, 2017; Feichtenhofer et al., 2019; Arnab et al., 2021), the temporal
extent over which they reason has typically been limited to a
small number of frames. In particular, transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) which power most applications
in vision and language do not scale to the vast number of
tokens present in natural videos due to their quadratic complexity. For example, 30 minutes of video sampled at standard rates may contain half a million tokens— more than
what current state-of-the-art architectures using optimized

attention algorithms (e.g. Dao et al., 2022) can process. Several attempts have been made to extend the temporal context
of video transformers, including masking, attention approximations, and parametric memory modules (e.g. Wu et al.,
2022; Piergiovanni et al., 2024). However, these approaches
often introduce additional complexity, requiring specialized
architectures and training paradigms.
In this work, we question whether such modifications are
indeed necessary to enable long-context modeling. Starting
from standard pretrained video transformers (Arnab et al.,
2021), we process videos in a streaming setting in order
to bound their complexity by the length of short segments
(Dai et al., 2019). Crucially, we process individual segments in relation to a memory bank which is populated nonparametrically with the consolidated activations from past
segments. This allows us to re-purpose pretrained video
transformers for long-context understanding without any
architectural modification, by simply fine-tuning them to
attend to this memory with short training schedules.

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Ivana Balažević <balazevic@google.com>, Olivier J. Hénaff
<henaff@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

