A Primal-Dual Algorithm for Offline Constrained Reinforcement Learning
with Linear MDPs
Kihyuk Hong 1 Ambuj Tewari 1

Abstract

for applications with safety concerns (Wang et al., 2019;
Brunke et al., 2022).

We study offline reinforcement learning (RL) with
linear MDPs under the infinite-horizon discounted
setting which aims to learn a policy that maximizes the expected discounted cumulative reward
using a pre-collected dataset. Existing algorithms
for this setting either require a uniform data coverage assumptions or are computationally inefficient for finding an ϵ-optimal policy with O(ϵ−2 )
sample complexity. In this paper, we propose
a primal dual algorithm for offline RL with linear MDPs in the infinite-horizon discounted setting. Our algorithm is the first computationally
efficient algorithm in this setting that achieves
sample complexity of O(ϵ−2 ) with partial data
coverage assumption. Our work is an improvement upon a recent work that requires O(ϵ−4 )
samples. Moreover, we extend our algorithm to
work in the offline constrained RL setting that
enforces constraints on additional reward signals.

A challenge in offline RL is distribution shift (Levine et al.,
2020), a mismatch of the state-action distribution in the
offline dataset to the state-action distributions induced by
candidate policies. For sample-efficient learning, offline
RL requires the data distribution of the target policy to be
covered by the offline dataset (Chen & Jiang, 2019). A
uniform data coverage assumption (Antos et al., 2007) is a
convenient, but a strong assumption that requires the offline
dataset to cover state-action distributions induced by all
policies. Recent works study offline RL with partial data
coverage assumption that only requires the offline dataset
to cover state-action distribution induced by a single target
policy (Jin et al., 2021).
Another challenge in offline RL, which is also a challenge
in online RL, is that many practical problems have large
state spaces, making sample efficient learning difficult. For
sample efficient learning in large state space, we need to
assume a structure in the problem. In this paper, we study
the linear MDP setting (Jin et al., 2020) that assumes the
transition probability matrix and the reward function have
linear structures. This setting ensures the value function is
linear in a low-dimensional representation of state-action
pairs, allowing sample-efficient learning. To the best of our
knowledge, none of the previous works on offline RL for
linear MDPs provides with partial data coverage provide
a computationally efficient algorithm with O(ϵ−2 ) sample
complexity. In this paper, we introduce a novel algorithm
that achieves this. Furthermore, we extend to the offline
constrained RL setting that allows specifying constraints on
additional reward signals.

1. Introduction
We study the offline constrained reinforcement learning (RL)
setting where a dataset of trajectories collected previously is
given and the goal is to learn a decision making policy that
performs well with respect to a reward signal while satisfying constraints on additional reward signals. The setting is
applicable to real-world problems that have safety concerns.
Learning from a previously collected dataset without interacting with the environment, a key property of offline RL
(Levine et al., 2020), is useful in real-world problems where
interacting with the environment is expensive or dangerous
(Kumar et al., 2021; Tang & Wiens, 2021; Levine et al.,
2018). Enforcing constraints on additional reward signals,
a key property of constrained RL (Altman, 2021), is useful

1.1. Related Work
In Table 1, we compare our work to previous works. The
column N shows how the sample complexity bound scales
with the error tolerance ϵ. The first five algorithms are for
offline RL with general function approximation. The algorithms can be reduced to the linear function approximation
setting by taking a value function class consisting of linear functions. The sixth algorithm is for offline RL with
linear function approximation. The last two algorithms are

1

Department of Statistics, University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Kihyuk Hong <kihyukh@umich.edu>, Ambuj Tewari
<tewaria@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

