UP2ME: Univariate Pre-training to Multivariate Fine-tuning as
a General-purpose Framework for Multivariate Time Series Analysis

Yunhao Zhang 1 Minghao Liu 1 Shengyang Zhou 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

Univariate
Pre-training

Multivariate
Fine-tuning

Pre-trained Model

Pre-training
Task-agnostic

FineTuning (FT)
Mode

Fine-tuned Models

Optimized Solutions

Fine-tuning
Forecasting
Predict length:192

Dataset

Despite the success of self-supervised pre-training
in texts and images, applying it to multivariate
time series (MTS) falls behind tailored methods
for tasks like forecasting, imputation and anomaly
detection. We propose a general-purpose framework, named UP2ME (Univariate Pre-training
to Multivariate Fine-tuning). It conducts taskagnostic pre-training when downstream tasks are
unspecified. Once the task and setting (e.g. forecasting length) are determined, it gives sensible solutions with frozen pre-trained parameters,
which has not been achieved before. UP2ME is
further refined by fine-tuning. A univariate-tomultivariate paradigm is devised to address the
heterogeneity of temporal and cross-channel dependencies. In univariate pre-training, univariate instances with diverse lengths are generated
for Masked AutoEncoder (MAE) pre-training,
discarding cross-channel dependency. The pretrained model handles downstream tasks by formulating them into specific mask-reconstruction
problems. In multivariate fine-tuning, it constructs a dependency graph among channels using
the pre-trained encoder to enhance cross-channel
dependency capture. Experiments on eight realworld datasets show its SOTA performance in
forecasting and imputation, approaching taskspecific performance in anomaly detection. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
Thinklab-SJTU/UP2ME.

Immediate
Reaction (IR) Mode
Forecasting
Predict length:192

Imputation
Anomaly Detection
Missing ratio:25% Observe length: 200

Fine-tuning
Imputation
Missing ratio:25%

Fine-tuning
Anomaly Detection
Observe length: 200
Initial Solutions

Figure 1: UP2ME Workflow: Given the dataset, UP2ME
performs task-agnostic univariate pre-training. The resulting pre-trained model can execute immediate forecasting,
imputation and anomaly detection across various settings
without parameter modifications. Once the downstream task
and its setting are determined, multivariate fine-tuning tailors UP2ME to the specific task for more accurate solutions.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning for multivariate time series (MTS)
analysis has developed rapidly and has been applied to
many tasks, such as forecasting, imputation and anomaly
detection. Among these methods, task-specific ones tailored to tasks’ characteristics constitute the most significant proportion. For example, models have been developed
based on trend-season decomposition for forecasting (Wu
et al., 2021), conditional diffusion for imputation (Tashiro
et al., 2021) and association discrepancy for anomaly detection (Xu et al., 2022). Despite the effectiveness, selecting
proper task-specific methods for different tasks can be exhausting. Even within the same task, when the setting (e.g.
the forecasting length) changes, the model often needs to be
retrained (Bi et al., 2023).
Until recently, a few MTS backbones emerged towards the
goal of general-purpose analysis (Wu et al., 2023). While
the same main architecture (except the output layer) is
shared within tasks, the parameters need to be trained from
scratch for each task and its corresponding setting.

1

School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer
Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Self-supervised pre-training, which pre-trains a model on
downstream agnostic tasks and then fine-tunes it for spe1

