Theoretical Insights for Diffusion Guidance:
A Case Study for Gaussian Mixture Models

Yuchen Wu 1 Minshuo Chen 2 Zihao Li 2 Mengdi Wang 2 Yuting Wei 1

Abstract

pretrained and various natural language processing (NLP)
tasks are performed based on human prompts without retraining — often demonstrate remarkable in-context learning abilities (); Text-to-image models contribute to major
successes in image generators like DALL·E 2, Stable Diffusion and Imagen (Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022), which offer remarkable platforms for
users to generate vivid images by typing in a text prompt.
However, it has been observed that these models can oftentimes generate unrealistic or biased content, or not follow
the users’ instructions (Bommasani et al., 2021; Lučić et al.,
2019; Weidinger et al., 2021). For this reason, various
guided techniques have been developed to enhance the sampling qualities in accordance with users’ intention (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans,
2022). Despite the significant empirical improvements that
are observed using these guidance approaches, parameters
and models are trained mainly in a trial-and-error manner.
The theoretical underpinnings of these methods are still far
from being mature.

Diffusion models benefit from instillation of taskspecific information into the score function to
steer the sample generation towards desired properties. Such information is coined as guidance.
For example, in text-to-image synthesis, text input is encoded as guidance to generate semantically aligned images. Proper guidance inputs
are closely tied to the performance of diffusion
models. A common observation is that strong
guidance promotes a tight alignment to the taskspecific information, while reducing the diversity of the generated samples. In this paper, we
provide the first theoretical study towards understanding the influence of guidance on diffusion
models in the context of Gaussian mixture models.
Under mild conditions, we prove that incorporating diffusion guidance not only boosts classification confidence but also diminishes distribution
diversity, leading to a reduction in the differential
entropy of the output distribution. Our analysis
covers the widely adopted sampling schemes including those based on the SDE and ODE reverse
processes, and leverages comparison inequalities
for differential equations as well as the FokkerPlanck equation that characterizes the evolution
of probability density function, which may be of
independent theoretical interest.

1

1.1

Training with guidance for diffusion models

To uncover the unreasonable power of these guided approaches and better assist practice, this paper takes the first
step towards this goal in the context of diffusion models. Diffusion models, which convert noise into new data instances
by learning to reverse a Markov diffusion process, have
become a cornerstone in contemporary generative modeling
(Song et al., 2020b; Ho et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2023). Compared to alternative generative models, such as variational
autoencoder or generative adversarial network, diffusion
models are known to be more stable, and generate highquality samples based on learning the gradient of the logdensity function (also known as the score function). When
data is multi-modal, namely, it potentially comes from multiple classes, a natural question is how to make use of these
class labels for conditional synthesis. Towards this direction,
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) put forward the idea of classifier
guidance — an approach to enhance the sample quality with
the aid of an extra trained classifier. The classifier guidance approach combines an unconditional diffusion model’s
score estimate with the gradient of the log probability of a
classifier. Subsequently, (Ho & Salimans, 2022) presented

Introduction

Understanding and designing algorithms for generative models that adapt to certain constraints play a crucial role in
modern machine learning applications. For example, contemporary large language models — where a large model is
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Yuchen Wu <wuyc14@wharton.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

