Solving Hierarchical Information-Sharing Dec-POMDPs:
An Extensive-Form Game Approach

Johan Peralez 1 Aurélien Delage 1 Olivier Buffet 2 Jilles S. Dibangoye 3

Abstract

This so-called silent coordination dilemma provides a partial explanation of the worst-case complexity results—i.e.,
infinite-horizon cases are undecidable, finite-horizon ones
are NEXP-hard, and finding ϵ-approximations remains hard
(Bernstein et al., 2002; Rabinovich et al., 2003). Methods
for Dec-POMDPs are split between local and global, each
with strengths and weaknesses.

A recent theory shows that a multi-player decentralized partially observable Markov decision process can be transformed into an equivalent singleplayer game, enabling the application of Bellman’s principle of optimality to solve the singleplayer game by breaking it down into singlestage subgames. However, this approach entangles the decision variables of all players at
each single-stage subgame, resulting in backups
with a double-exponential complexity. This paper
demonstrates how to disentangle these decision
variables while maintaining optimality under hierarchical information sharing, a prominent management style in our society. To achieve this,
we apply the principle of optimality to solve any
single-stage subgame by breaking it down further into smaller subgames, enabling us to make
single-player decisions at a time. Our approach reveals that extensive-form games always exist with
solutions to a single-stage subgame, significantly
reducing time complexity. Our experimental results show that the algorithms leveraging these
findings can scale up to much larger multi-player
games without compromising optimality.

Local methods trade global optima, or ϵ-approximations
for weaker solution concepts, e.g., local optima, Nash equilibria, or any arbitrary feasible solution. While they share
core ideas with global methods, their primary focus is on
solving relaxations of the original multi-player game, e.g.,
independent planners reason in isolation, policy gradient
targets first-order solutions of non-convex functions (Tan,
1998; Peshkin et al., 2001; Bono et al., 2018). Of particular
attention, local methods using deep neural networks can
apply effectively to virtually any non-critical application,
e.g., online services, logistics, or board games (Lowe et al.,
2017; Foerster et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018).
On the other hand, in many critical and high-stakes applications, e.g., search and rescue, security, and healthcare,
global methods can find solutions with the required theoretical guarantees, but scalability remains a significant issue.
These algorithms recast the original multi-player game into
an equivalent single-player one, which overcomes the silent
coordination dilemma and allows the principle of optimality
to apply. Intuitively, this principle decomposes the singleplayer game into single-stage subgames and solves them
recursively. Yet, doing so, in return, virtually entangles
decision variables of all players at each single-stage subgame, resulting in double-exponential complexity. Because
they update decision variables of all players in sync at every single-stage subgame, even a single update can be prohibitively expensive (Szer & Charpillet, 2005; MacDermed
& Isbell, 2013; Nayyar et al., 2013; Oliehoek, 2013). To
somewhat mitigate this burden, branch-and-bound search
algorithms and mixed-integer linear programs were introduced, but the limitation remains (Oliehoek et al., 2010;
Dibangoye et al., 2009; 2013; 2016). In many cases, however, real-world environments contain significant structure
that can be exploited (Amato et al., 2013).

The multi-player decentralized partially observable Markov
decision process (Dec-POMDP) is a general game-theoretic
setting for decision-making by a team of collaborative players (Amato et al., 2013). In this multi-player game, players
must coordinate while they can neither see the actual state
of the world nor explicitly share what they see or do with
each other due to communication costs, latency, or noise.
1

Université de Lyon, INSA Lyon and Inria, CITI, F-69000 Lyon
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, INRIA, LORIA, F-54000 Nancy
3
Bernoulli Institute, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, NL9747 AG Groningen, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Jilles S.
Dibangoye <j.s.dibangoye@rug.nl>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Indeed, several forms of structure have been investigated in
1

