Can Gaussian Sketching Converge Faster on a Preconditioned Landscape?

Yilong Wang 1 2 Haishan Ye 1 3 Guang Dai 3 Ivor W. Tsang 4 5

Abstract

may be non-differentiable. There is a large class of machine
learning models that can be presented as Eq. (1) such as
the elastic net (Zou & Hastie, 2005) and sparse logistic
regression (Xiao & Zhang, 2014).

This paper focuses on the large-scale optimization
which is very popular in the big data era. The gradient sketching is an important technique in the
large-scale optimization. Specifically, the random
coordinate descent algorithm is a kind of gradient sketching method with the random sampling
matrix as the sketching matrix. In this paper, we
propose a novel gradient sketching called GSGD
(Gaussian Sketched Gradient Descent). Compared with the classical gradient sketching methods such as the random coordinate descent and
SEGA (Hanzely et al., 2018), our GSGD does not
require the importance sampling but can achieve
a fast convergence rate matching the ones of these
methods with importance sampling. Furthermore,
if the objective function has a non-smooth regularization term, our GSGD can also exploit the
implicit structure information of the regularization term to achieve a fast convergence rate. Finally, our experimental results substantiate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our algorithm.

Optimization problems related machine learning models
often are of high complexity and dimension because of the
rapid development of data science and the accelerated accumulation of industry data. Thus, the large-scale optimization
has become an important research topic in machine learning
and has attracted great research interest. Because of the high
dimension, that is, d is very large, the gradient sketching
method has become an important technique to conquer the
dilemma of large-scale optimization. Specifically, the classical random coordinate gradient descent is a kind of gradient
sketching method.
In order to facilitate the following description, we first explain the following definition. The meaning of the separability of φ is that the regularization term can be written as a
finite sum of all coordinates or block coordinates. In most
cases, the inseparable regularization term is a generalized
indicator function.
When the regularization term φ is separable, the classical random coordinate gradient descent methods can effectively and efficiently solve the problem (1) (Nesterov,
2012; Wright, 2015). These methods can achieve linear
convergence rates. Because of fast convergence rates and
low computation costs for each iteration, random coordinate
gradient descent methods have been used in practical applications for many years, and their popularity continues to
grow because they are useful in data analysis and machine
learning.

1. Introduction
Optimization is an important pillar of modern machine learning because it needs optimization algorithms to train machine learning models. In this paper, we consider the following composite optimization problem:
def

min F (x) = f (x) + φ(x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where function f : Rd → R is µ-strongly convex and
differentiable, while the regularization term φ is convex but

However, if the regularization term φ is not separable, the
corresponding random coordinate gradient will incur an inherent non-zero variance at the optimum. Thus, in this case,
the linear convergence rate of random coordinate descent
is not achievable (Richtárik & Takáč, 2014). To conquer
this dilemma, Hanzely et al. (2018) propose SEGA algorithm and SVRCD algorithm (Hanzely & Richtárik, 2019b)
which base on the variance reduction. These two algorithms
modify the random coordinate descent algorithms to reduce
the variance incurred by the random coordinate gradient.
Accordingly, both SEGA and SVRCD can achieve linear
convergence rates. If the regularization term φ = 0, then

1
Center for Intelligent Decision-Making and Machine Learning,
School of Management, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. 2 This
work was completed during the internship at SGIT AI Lab, State
Grid Corporation of China. 3 SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation
of China. 4 CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 5 College of Computing and
Data Science, NTU, Singapore.. Correspondence to: Haishan Ye
<yehaishan@xjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

