Understanding the Learning Dynamics of Alignment with Human Feedback

Shawn Im 1 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract

guage model policy for high reward through reinforcement
learning. Despite the empirical success and wide adoption
in real-world systems (OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023), theoretical understanding of alignment
with human preferences is still in its infancy.

Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human intentions has become a critical task for
safely deploying models in real-world systems.
While existing alignment approaches have seen
empirical success, theoretically understanding
how these methods affect model behavior remains
an open question. Our work provides an initial attempt to theoretically analyze the learning dynamics of human preference alignment. We formally
show how the distribution of preference datasets
influences the rate of model updates and provide rigorous guarantees on the training accuracy.
Our theory also reveals an intricate phenomenon
where the optimization is prone to prioritizing
certain behaviors with higher preference distinguishability. We empirically validate our findings
on contemporary LLMs and alignment tasks, reinforcing our theoretical insights and shedding light
on considerations for future alignment approaches.
Disclaimer: This paper contains potentially offensive text; reader discretion is advised.

In particular, analyzing the learning dynamics of RLHF
theoretically is a challenging task, as it requires understanding both the learned reward model and how it guides the
policy learned during reinforcement learning. Moreover,
the computational expense associated with RLHF, involving multiple models, adds to the complexity. Recently, a
reparameterization of RLHF called Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) has emerged as a
promising alternative, which directly optimizes the policy
to best satisfy preferences and circumvents the need for
RL training. Rafailov et al. (2023) showed that under mild
assumptions, the optimal policy under the DPO objective
is the same as the optimal policy using RLHF. The equivalence makes rigorously analyzing how models change when
learning human preferences more tractable. With DPO, it
is sufficient to consider the relationship between the policy
and the dataset.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of how DPO
dynamics change based on the distributional properties of
the preference dataset. We characterize the data distributions through the lens of preference distinguishability, which
refers to how far apart the distributions for the preferred
and non-preferred responses are. Based on this notion, we
provide learning guarantees on how preference distinguishability impacts the rate of weight parameter updates under
the DPO objective (Theorem 4.1), along with a lower bound
for the accuracy (Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 4.3). Our theorem indicates that, under the same training configuration,
higher distinguishability leads to a faster rate of change in
weight parameters and a more rapid decrease of loss. Our
theoretical insight has practical implications for alignment
training on diverse preference datasets encompassing various topics and behaviors of differing distinguishability. In
particular, we reveal an intricate prioritization effect, where
DPO is prone to prioritize learning behaviors with higher
distinguishability and as a result, may deprioritize the less
distinguishable yet crucial ones. Such an effect can manifest
in real systems, where for example, certain political views or
ideological beliefs may be prioritized in the learning process

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable abilities to generate human-like text and acquire diverse capabilities (Brown et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022;
Anil et al., 2023). However, these models are not necessarily aligned with human preferences and can inadvertently
produce harmful or undesirable outputs. Thus, aligning
language models with human preferences has become an
important problem, which ensures that these models exhibit
safe and desirable behavior. Existing alignment approaches
share the basis of reinforcement learning from human preferences (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019b;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022a), which involves fitting
a reward model to the preference data and optimizing a lan1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison.
Correspondence to:
Shawn Im
<shawnim@cs.wisc.edu>, Yixuan Li <sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

