The Computational Complexity of Finding Second-Order Stationary Points

Andreas Kontogiannis * 1 2 Vasilis Pollatos * 2 Sotiris Kanellopoulos 1 2
Panayotis Mertikopoulos 3 Aris Pagourtzis 1 2 Ioannis Panageas 4

Abstract

where X , the problem’s search domain, is a subset of ℝ𝑑
(often ℝ𝑑 itself) and 𝑓 : X → ℝ is the problem’s objective
function. In many – if not most – applications, 𝑓 is highdimensional and innately non-convex, thus giving rise to a
very rich, diverse and challenging optimization landscape,
often with an exponential number of saddle points and other
spurious solutions.

Non-convex minimization problems are universally considered hard, and even guaranteeing
that a computed solution is locally minimizing
is known to be NP-hard. In this general context,
our paper focuses on the problem of finding stationary points that satisfy an approximate secondorder optimality condition, which serves to exclude strict saddles and other non-minimizing stationary points. Our main result is that the problem
of finding approximate second-order stationary
points (SOSPs) is PLS-complete, i.e., of the same
complexity as the problem of finding first-order
stationary points (FOSPs), thus resolving an open
question in the field. In particular, our results imply that, under the widely believed complexity
conjecture that PLS ≠ FNP, finding approximate
SOSPs in unconstrained domains is easier than
in constrained domains, which is known to be
NP-hard. This comes in stark contrast with earlier results which implied that, unless PLS = CLS,
finding approximate FOSPs in unconstrained domains is harder than in constrained domains.

1

The central question in the field is the design and analysis
of optimization algorithms that can solve (Opt) efficiently.
However, since finding even a local minimum of 𝑓 is wellknown to be nondetermistic polynomial time (NP)-hard
[27], the focus of most optimization algorithms is to reach a
critical point of 𝑓 , or even an approximation thereof. Here,
depending on the gradient information available to the optimizer, standard gradient methods with black-box access
to a first-order oracle output an 𝜀-approximate critical point
in time which ranges between O(1/𝜀 2 ) and O(1/𝜀 4 ) in the
deterministic and stochastic cases respectively, and with
a polynomial dependence on the dimension, cf. [21] and
references therein.
A key obstacle in the above is the existence of stationary
points of negative curvature, i.e., points where the Hessian
has at least one negative eigenvalue. Such points are commonly referred to as (strict) saddle points, and they have
long been regarded as a major obstacle for solving nonconvex optimization problems in continuous domains. In
fact, in many applications and cases of practical interest,
it is well known that the number of saddle points significantly exceeds the number of local minimizers [33], and
solutions associated with worst-case saddle points are considerably worse than those associated with worst-case local
minima [30]. And, even though it has been shown that gradient descent with random initialization or injected random
noise can provably avoid saddle points [15, 19, 23], the computational complexity of finding stationary points that do
not have negative curvature – i.e., second-order stationary
points (SOSPs) – remains unknown.

Introduction

Background and motivation. The vast majority of machine learning models (from logistic regression to empirical
risk minimization and training deep neural networks) ultimately boils down to solving a continuous optimization
problem of the form
minimize 𝑓 (𝑥)
𝑥 ∈X

(Opt)

* Equal contribution 1 National Technical University of Athens,

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Athens, Greece.
2 Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece. 3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS,
Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France. 4 University of
California, Irvine, USA. Correspondence to: Andreas Kontogiannis <a.kontogiannis@athenarc.gr>.

We are thus led to the following natural question, which is
the overarching motivation of our work:

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

What is the computational complexity of
finding a second-order stationary point?
1

