Sliding Down the Stairs: How Correlated Latent Variables
Accelerate Learning with Neural Networks

Lorenzo Bardone 1 Sebastian Goldt 1

Abstract

HOCs from the training distribution incurs a drop in test
accuracy of up to 65 % for DenseNets, ResNets, and Vision
transformers (Refinetti et al., 2023).

Neural networks extract features from data using
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). In particular,
higher-order input cumulants (HOCs) are crucial
for their performance. However, extracting information from the pth cumulant of d-dimensional
inputs is computationally hard: the number of
samples required to recover a single direction
from an order-p tensor (tensor PCA) using online
SGD grows as dp−1 , which is prohibitive for highdimensional inputs. This result raises the question
of how neural networks extract relevant directions
from the HOCs of their inputs efficiently. Here,
we show that correlations between latent variables
along the directions encoded in different input
cumulants speed up learning from higher-order
correlations. We show this effect analytically by
deriving nearly sharp thresholds for the number
of samples required by a single neuron to weaklyrecover these directions using online SGD from a
random start in high dimensions. Our analytical
results are confirmed in simulations of two-layer
neural networks and unveil a new mechanism for
hierarchical learning in neural networks.

While HOCs are important for the performance of neural networks, extracting information from HOCs with stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) is computationally hard. Take the
simple case of tensor PCA (Richard & Montanari, 2014),
where one aims to recover a “spike” u ∈ Rd from an order-p
tensor T , which could be the order-p cumulant of the inputs.
Modelling the tensor as T = βu⊗p +Z, with signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) β > 0 and noise tensor Z with i.i.d. entries of
mean zero and variance 1, Ben Arous et al. (2021) showed
that online SGD with a single neuron requires a number of
samples n ≳ dp−1 to recover u. While smoothing the loss
landscape can reduce to n ≳ dp/2 , as suggested by Correlational Statistical Query bounds (CSQ) (Damian et al.,
2022; Abbé et al., 2023), a sample complexity that is exponential in p is too expensive for high-dimensional inputs
like images. For supervised learning, Székely et al. (2023)
showed that the number of samples required to strongly distinguish two classes of inputs x ∈ Rd whose distributions
have the same mean and covariance, but different fourthand higher-order cumulants, scales as n ≳ d2 for the wide
class of polynomial-time algorithms covered by the lowdegree conjecture (Barak et al., 2019; Hopkins et al., 2017;
Hopkins & Steurer, 2017; Hopkins, 2018). Their numerical experiments confirmed that two-layer neural networks
indeed require quadratic sample complexity to learn this
binary classification task.

1. Introduction
Neural networks excel at learning rich representations of
their data, but which parts of a data set are actually important
for them? From a statistical point of view, we can decompose the data distribution into cumulants, which capture
correlations between groups of variables. The first cumulant
is the mean, the second describes pair-wise correlations,
and higher-order cumulants (HOCs) encode correlations
between three or more variables. In image classification,
HOCs are particularly important: on CIFAR10, removing

The theoretical difficulty of learning from HOCs is in apparent contradiction to the importance of HOCs for the
performance of neural networks, and the speed with which
neural networks pick them up (Ingrosso & Goldt, 2022; Refinetti et al., 2023; Merger et al., 2023; Belrose et al., 2024),
lead us to the following question:
How do neural networks extract information from
higher-order input correlations efficiently?

1

International School of Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy.
Correspondence to: Lorenzo Bardone <lbardone@sissa.it>, Sebastian Goldt <sgoldt@sissa.it>.

In this paper, we show that neural networks can learn efficiently from higher-order cumulants by exploiting correlations between the latent variables of type u · x corresponding to input cumulants of different orders.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

