Differentiability and Optimization of Multiparameter Persistent Homology

Luis Scoccola * 1 Siddharth Setlur * 2 David Loiseaux 3 Mathieu Carrière 3 Steve Oudot 4

Abstract

1

Introduction

Context. Persistent homology (PH), the main tool of topological data analysis (TDA), produces a descriptor in the
form of a barcode for real-valued filtering functions, i.e.,
real-valued functions on graphs (more generally, simplicial complexes) that assign higher values to edges than to
their vertices (more generally, monotonic with respect to
the face order). PH has found a variety of applications in
machine learning (ML), notably: as a featurization technique encoding complementary information to traditional
descriptors (see, e.g., (Hensel et al., 2021) for a survey),
offering stability guarantees with respect to perturbations of
the data (Cohen-Steiner et al., 2007), and the possibility for
end-to-end feature learning (Hofer et al., 2020b; Carrière
et al., 2021); as a topological regularizer for constraining
models to follow some prescribed topology in order to avoid,
e.g., overfitting (Chen et al., 2019; Moor et al., 2020); and
as a topological layer in neural networks for enhancing network performance (Carrière et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020a;
Kim et al., 2020). A sound mathematical foundation for
this type of applications, and for barcode optimization in
general, was developed in (Carrière et al., 2021).

Real-valued functions on geometric data—such
as node attributes on a graph—can be optimized
using descriptors from persistent homology, allowing the user to incorporate topological terms in
the loss function. When optimizing a single realvalued function (the one-parameter setting), there
is a canonical choice of descriptor for persistent
homology: the barcode. The operation mapping
a real-valued function to its barcode is differentiable almost everywhere, and the convergence
of gradient descent for losses using barcodes is
relatively well understood. When optimizing a
vector-valued function (the multiparameter setting), there is no unique choice of descriptor for
multiparameter persistent homology, and many
distinct descriptors have been proposed. This calls
for the development of a general framework for
differentiability and optimization that applies to
a wide range of multiparameter homological descriptors. In this article, we develop such a framework and show that it encompasses well-known
descriptors of different flavors, such as signed
barcodes and the multiparameter persistence landscape. We complement the theory with numerical
experiments supporting the idea that optimizing
multiparameter homological descriptors can lead
to improved performances compared to optimizing one-parameter descriptors, even when using
the simplest and most efficiently computable multiparameter descriptors.

Recent contributions in the area of TDA for ML have demonstrated empirically the added value, in terms of learning
performances, of replacing real-valued filtering functions
by Rn -valued filtering functions in the pipelines involving PH; see, e.g., (Carrière & Blumberg, 2020; Demir et al.,
2022; Loiseaux et al., 2023b; Chen et al., 2023). However,
in contrast to the usual real-valued setting, there does not
exist—and, due to fundamental algebraic reasons, there cannot exist (Carlsson & Zomorodian, 2009; Bauer & Scoccola,
2023)—any discrete descriptor like the barcode that completely encodes the PH of Rn -valued filtering functions. As
a consequence, the aforementioned contributions resorted to
a variety of incomplete descriptors, such as multiparameter
persistence landscapes (Vipond, 2020) and generalizations
(Xin et al., 2023), signed barcodes as measures (Loiseaux
et al., 2023b), multiparameter persistent images (Carrière &
Blumberg, 2020; Loiseaux et al., 2023a), or multiparameter
persistence kernels (Corbet et al., 2019).

*

1
Equal contribution
Mathematical Institute, Univer2
sity of Oxford, UK Department of Mathematics, ETH
Zürich, Switzerland 3 DataShape, Centre Inria d’Université
Côte d’Azur, France 4 GeomeriX, Inria Saclay and École
polytechnique, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Luis
Scoccola <luis.scoccola@maths.ox.ac.uk>, Siddharth Setlur
<ssetlur@student.ethz.ch>.

In order to generalize the use of these incomplete descriptors
to other applications in machine learning, it is necessary to
extend the existing optimization framework to them. To

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

