Minimally Modifying a Markov Game to Achieve Any Nash Equilibrium and
Value
Young Wu 1 Jeremy McMahan 1 Yiding Chen 2 Yudong Chen 1 Xiaojin Zhu 1 Qiaomin Xie 3

Abstract

with a different MPE and/or game value. For instance, a
benevolent third party may want to achieve fairness. Many
games are unfair in that v ˝ ‰ 0 (an example, two-finger
Morra, is given in the experiment section). The third party
can modify the payoffs R˝ into R such that the new game
given to the players is fair with value v “ 0. Similarly,
many games have non-intuitive MPEs, and players with
bounded rationality (e.g., average people) may fail to find
or implement them. For the benefit of such players, the
third party may seek a new game whose MPE pp, qq is an
intuitive strategy profile, such as uniform randomization
among a set of actions.

We study the game modification problem, where
a benevolent game designer or a malevolent adversary modifies the reward function of a zerosum Markov game so that a target deterministic
or stochastic policy profile becomes the unique
Markov perfect Nash equilibrium and has a value
within a target range, in a way that minimizes the
modification cost. We characterize the set of policy profiles that can be installed as the unique equilibrium of a game and establish sufficient and necessary conditions for successful installation. We
propose an efficient algorithm that solves a convex optimization problem with linear constraints
and then performs random perturbation to obtain
a modification plan with a near-optimal cost.

In addition, one often desires an MPE consisting of stochastic policies (i.e., a mixed strategy equilibrium). If actions
represent resources (roads, advertisement slots, etc.), the
game designer might want all resources to be utilized; if
actions represent customers, requests, or demands, the designer might want all of them to be served; if a board/video
game is concerned, the designer might want the agents to
take diverse actions so that the game is more entertaining.
Conversely, a malicious third party may want to trick the
players into playing an MPE pp, qq of its choice. As most
games have mixed equilibria, the players may get suspicious
if the modified game turns out to have a pure strategy MPE,
whereas a mixed equilibrium is harder to detect. Furthermore, the adversary may want to control the game value
v to favor one player over the other—this is the analog of
adversarial attacks in supervised learning.

1. Introduction
Consider a two-player zero-sum Markov game G˝ “
pR˝ , P ˝ q with payoff matrices R˝ and transition probability
matrices P ˝ . Let S be the finite state space, Ai the finite
set of actions for player i P t1, 2u, and H is the horizon.
It is well known that such a game has at least one Markov
Perfect (Nash) Equilibrium (MPE) pp˝ , q˝ q, where p˝ is
the Markov policy for player 1 and q˝ for player 2 (Maskin
& Tirole, 2001). Furthermore, all the MPEs of G˝ have the
same game value v ˝ , corresponding to the expected payoff
for player 1 and loss for player 2 at equilibrium. In the
special case with H “ 1 stage, the Markov game reduces to
a matrix normal form game and the MPE reduces to a Nash
Equilibrium (NE).

Regardless of intention, game modification typically incurs
a cost to the third party, who seeks to minimize it. We
assume that the cost is measured by some loss function
ℓpR, R˝ q depending on the new and original games R and
R˝ . For example, one may consider ℓpR, R˝ q “ }R ´ R˝ }
for some norm } ¨ }.

There may be reasons for a third party to prefer an outcome
1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin–
Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States 2 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States
3
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of
Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States. Correspondence to: Young Wu <yw@cs.wisc.edu>.

The Game Modification Problem It is important to understand when efficient modification is possible and to understand malicious attacks so as to develop an effective
defense. This motivates us to study the following Game
Modification problem, specified by the tuple

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

pR˝ , P ˝ , b, pp, qq, rv, vs, ℓq.
1

