Implicit Compressibility of Overparametrized Neural Networks
Trained with Heavy-Tailed SGD

Yijun Wan * 1 Melih Barsbey * 2 Abdellatif Zaidi 1 3 Umut Şimşekli 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Obtaining compressible neural networks has become an increasingly important task in the last decade, and it has essential implications from both practical and theoretical perspectives. From a practical point of view, as the modern network
architectures might contain an excessive number of parameters, compression has a crucial role in terms of deployment of such networks in resource-limited environments
(O’Neill, 2020; Blalock et al., 2020). On the other hand,
from a theoretical perspective, several studies have shown
that compressible neural networks should achieve a better
generalization performance due to their lower-dimensional
structure (Arora et al., 2018; Suzuki et al., 2020a;b; Hsu
et al., 2021; Barsbey et al., 2021; Sefidgaran et al., 2022).

Neural network compression has been an increasingly important subject, not only due to its practical relevance, but also due to its theoretical implications, as there is an explicit connection between
compressibility and generalization error. Recent
studies have shown that the choice of the hyperparameters of stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
can have an effect on the compressibility of the
learned parameter vector. These results, however,
rely on unverifiable assumptions and the resulting
theory does not provide a practical guideline due
to its implicitness. In this study, we propose a
simple modification for SGD, such that the outputs of the algorithm will be provably compressible without making any nontrivial assumptions.
We consider a one-hidden-layer neural network
trained with SGD, and show that if we inject additive heavy-tailed noise to the iterates at each
iteration, for any compression rate, there exists
a level of overparametrization such that the output of the algorithm will be compressible with
high probability. To achieve this result, we make
two main technical contributions: (i) we prove a
“propagation of chaos” result for a class of heavytailed stochastic differential equations, and (ii) we
derive error estimates for their Euler discretization. Our experiments suggest that the proposed
approach not only achieves increased compressibility with various models and datasets, but also
leads to robust test performance under pruning,
even in more realistic architectures that lie beyond
our theoretical setting.

Despite their evident benefits, it is still not yet clear how to
obtain compressible networks with provable guarantees. In
an empirical study, Frankle & Carbin (2018) introduced the
“lottery ticket hypothesis”, which indicated that a randomly
initialized neural network will have a sub-network that can
achieve a performance that is comparable to the original
network; hence, the original network can be compressed to
the smaller sub-network. This empirical study has formed
a fertile ground for subsequent theoretical research, which
showed that such a sub-network can indeed exist (see e.g.,
Malach et al., 2020; Burkholz et al., 2021; da Cunha et al.,
2022). However, it is not clear how to develop an algorithm
that can find it in a feasible amount of time.
Another line of research has developed methods to enforce
compressibility of neural networks by using sparsity enforcing regularizers (see e.g., Papyan et al., 2018; Aytekin
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Lederer, 2023; Kengne &
Wade, 2023). While they have led to interesting algorithms,
these typically require higher computational resources due
to the increased complexity of the problem. On the other
hand, due to the nonconvexity of the overall objective, it
is also not trivial to provide theoretical guarantees for the
compressibility of the resulting network weights.

*
Equal contribution 1 Paris Research Center, Huawei Technologies France 2 Boğaziçi University, İstanbul, Turkey 3 Université
Gustave Eiffel, France 4 Inria, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
PSL Research University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Yijun Wan <yijun.wan@hotmail.com>, Melih Barsbey <melih.barsbey@boun.edu.tr>.

Recently it has been shown that the training dynamics can
have an influence on the compressibility of the algorithm
output. In particular, motivated by the research that produced empirical and theoretical evidence that heavy tails

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

