Disentangled Graph Self-supervised Learning for Out-of-Distribution
Generalization
Haoyang Li 1 Xin Wang 1 Zeyang Zhang 1 Haibo Chen 1 Ziwei Zhang 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract

to show that our model can learn disentangled
graph representations and achieve OOD generalization. Extensive experiments on real-world
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our model
against state-of-the-art baselines under distribution shifts for graph classification tasks.

Graph out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization,
aiming to generalize graph neural networks
(GNNs) under distribution shifts between training and testing environments, has attracted everincreasing attention recently. However, existing literature heavily relies on sufficient taskdependent graph labels, which are often scarce
or even unavailable, limiting their applications in
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we study the
self-supervised graph OOD generalization problem, i.e., learning GNNs capable of achieving
relatively stable performances under distribution
shifts without graph labels. However, the problem remains largely unexplored, with the critical
challenge that the invariant and variant information are highly entangled in graphs. To solve this
problem, we propose an OOD generalized disentangled graph contrastive learning model (OODGCL), which is capable of learning disentangled
graph-level representations with self-supervision
that can handle distribution shifts between training and testing graph data. Specifically, we first
introduce a disentangled graph encoder to map
each input graph into the factorized graph representation. Then we propose a tailored disentangled invariant self-supervised learning module to
maximize predictive ability of the representations
and make sure the representations other than from
one specific channel are invariant to the environments partitioned by this latent factor for excluding the information corresponding to this latent
factor for disentanglement. Finally, the disentangled graph representations are fed into a linear
predictor and finetuned for the downstream tasks.
We provide comprehensive theoretical analyses

1. Introduction
Graph structured data is ubiquitous in the real world, such
as social networks (Qiu et al., 2018), traffic networks (Yu
et al., 2017), financial networks (Yang et al., 2021), chemical molecules (Hu et al., 2020), etc. In the last decade, graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Veličković
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019) have been a central topic in
graph machine learning and made great progress in both
academia and industry. Most of the existing literature is
built upon the in-distribution (I.D.) hypothesis that assumes
the testing and training graph data are from the identical
distribution. However, in the real world, distribution shifts
between testing and training graphs widely and inevitably
exist, where the performance of existing GNNs drops significantly due to lacking out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization capacity (Li et al., 2022b).

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Despite the notable success of graph OOD generalization
methods, the existing literature relies on sufficient taskdependent annotated labels to learn OOD generalized graph
representations, which could be extremely scarce, or even
unavailable in practice. For example, in the context of drug
discovery, it necessitates high costs and substantial human
labor in clinical tests to obtain labeled data for training
OOD generalized graph models in a supervised manner, if
we want to predict the invariant properties of molecules under distribution shifts (Paul et al., 2021). Since the existing
approaches heavily rely on supervised labels, they will fail
to learn invariant representations and model truly predictive
relations with labels under distribution shifts for OOD generalization, when graph labels are scarce or not available,
leading to severe performance degeneration.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we study the self-supervised graph OOD generalization problem, i.e., learning GNNs capable of achieving relatively stable performances under distribution shifts
1

