Online Learning and Information Exponents:
The Importance of Batch Size & Time / Complexity Tradeoffs

Luca Arnaboldi 1 Yatin Dandi 1 2 Florent Krzakala 1 Bruno Loureiro 3 Luca Pesce 1 Ludovic Stephan 1

Abstract

key focus in the field. Recent progress has been particularly
noteworthy in the realm of shallow neural networks. A sequence of works demonstrated that optimizing large width
two-layer neural networks can be mapped into a convex optimization problem over the space of probability measures of
weights, the so-called mean-field analysis (Mei et al., 2018;
Chizat and Bach, 2018; Rotskoff and Vanden-Eijnden, 2022;
Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2020). Following this breakthrough, a large part of the theoretical effort has shifted to
describing what class of functions can be efficiently learned
by SGD, i.e. time and computational complexities required
to learn a given class of functions. This has been, in particular, thoroughly analyzed in a series of recent works focusing
on isotropic distributions (e.g. Gaussian, spherical or in the
hypercube) and targets depending only on a few relevant directions (a.k.a. multi-index models). A key result from this
literature is that the time complexity of SGD scales with the
covariates dimension according to the so-called information
exponent (Ben Arous et al., 2021) for single-index and leap
complexity (Abbe et al., 2021; 2023) for multi-index targets,
sparking increasing interest from the theoretical machine
learning community over the last few months (Damian et al.,
2022; 2024; Dandi et al., 2023; Bietti et al., 2023; Ba et al.,
2024; Moniri et al., 2023; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023;
Zweig and Bruna, 2023).

We study the impact of the batch size nb on the
iteration time T of training two-layer neural networks with one-pass stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) on multi-index target functions of isotropic
covariates. We characterize the optimal batch size
minimizing the iteration time as a function of the
hardness of the target, as characterized by the information exponents. We show that performing
ℓ
gradient updates with large batches nb ≲ d /2 minimizes the training time without changing the total sample complexity, where ℓ is the information
exponent of the target to be learned (Ben Arous
et al., 2021) and d is the input dimension. Howℓ
ever, larger batch sizes than nb ≫ d /2 are detrimental for improving the time complexity of SGD.
We provably overcome this fundamental limitation via a different training protocol, Correlation
loss SGD, which suppresses the auto-correlation
terms in the loss function. We show that one
can track the training progress by a system of
low-dimensional ordinary differential equations
(ODEs). Finally, we validate our theoretical results with numerical experiments.

Our work follows this thread, focusing instead on the effect
of batch size nb , parallelization, and sample-splitting into
the overall complexity required to learn a multi-index target.
Instead of looking at data one-by-one, as is common in
theoretical studies, we investigate the finite nb problem, and
characterize the time/complexity tradeoff when learning
with one-pass SGD. Our central goal is to paint a complete
picture of how fast generalized linear models and two-layer
neural networks adapt to the features of training data as a
function of nb , and the structure of the target function.

1. Introduction
Descent-based algorithms, such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variations, are the backbone of contemporary machine learning. Their simplicity in implementation, efficiency in operation, and notably effective
performance in practice highlight their importance. A mathematical understanding of SGD’s effectiveness remains a
1

Information Learning and Physics Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 2 Statistical Physics
Of Computation Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (EPFL) 3 Département d’Informatique, École Normale
Supérieure, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Luca Arnaboldi
<luca.arnaboldi@epfl.ch>.

Our analysis sheds light on a fundamental limitation of onepass (or online) SGD, namely that for batch sizes larger
than the input dimension, the dynamics of the training algorithm is dominated by negative feedback terms that do
not permit to reduce the time iterations needed to learn the
target. Therefore, we provide a rigorous solution to this fundamental limitation of SGD by considering gradient updates

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

