Online conformal prediction with decaying step sizes

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos * 1 Rina Foygel Barber * 2 Stephen Bates * 3

Abstract

Xt ). After predicting, we observe Yt , and the next timestep ensues. Note that we have not made any assumptions
yet about the data points and their dependencies.

We introduce a method for online conformal prediction with decaying step sizes. Like previous
methods, ours possesses a retrospective guarantee of coverage for arbitrary sequences. However, unlike previous methods, we can simultaneously estimate a population quantile when it
exists. Our theory and experiments indicate substantially improved practical properties: in particular, when the distribution is stable, the coverage is close to the desired level for every time
point, not just on average over the observed sequence.

This paper introduces a method for constructing the prediction sets Ct that has simultaneous best-case and worstcase guarantees—that is, a “best of both worlds” property. We will describe the method shortly in Section 1.1.
Broadly speaking, the method can gracefully handle both
arbitrary adversarial sequences data points and also independent and identically distributed (I.I.D.) sequences. In
the former case, our method will remain robust, ensuring
that the historical fraction of miscovered labels converges
to the desired error rate, α ∈ (0, 1). In the latter case,
our method will converge, eventually producing the optimal prediction sets. We summarize our results below:

1. Introduction
1. Worst-case guarantee (Theorem 1): When the data
points are arbitrary, our algorithm achieves

We study the problem of online uncertainty quantification, such as that encountered in time-series forecasting.
Our goal is to produce a prediction set at each time,
based on all previous information, that contain the true
label with a specified coverage probability. Such prediction sets are useful to the point of being requirements in
many sequential problems, including medicine (Robinson,
1978), robotics (Lindemann et al., 2023), finance (Mykland, 2003), and epidemiology (Cramer et al., 2022). Given
this broad utility, it comes as no surprise that prediction
sets have been studied for approximately one hundred years
(and possibly more; see Section 1.1 of Tian et al. (2022)).

T

1X
1Y ∈C (X ) ∈
T t=1 t t t


1−α±

C



T 1/2−ϵ

,

(1)

for a constant C and any fixed ϵ > 0. We call this a
long-run coverage guarantee.
2. Best-case guarantee (Theorem 3): When the data
points are I.I.D., our algorithm achieves
lim P (YT ∈ CT (XT )) → 1 − α.

T →∞

Formally, consider a sequence of data points (Xt , Yt ) ∈
X ×Y, for t = 1, 2, . . . . At each time t, we observe Xt and
seek to cover Yt with a set Ct (Xt ), which depends on a base
model trained on all past data (as well as the current feature

(2)

We call this a convergence guarantee.
Our algorithm is the first to satisfy both guarantees simultaneously. Moreover, the decaying step size yields more
stable behavior than prior methods, as we will see in experiments. See Section 1.2 for a discussion of the relationship with other methods, such as those of Gibbs & Candes
(2021), Angelopoulos et al. (2023), and Xu & Xie (2021).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley CA USA 2 Department of Statistics, University
of Chicago, Chicago IL USA 3 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge MA USA. Correspondence to: Anastasios N. Angelopoulos <angelopoulos@berkeley.edu>, Rina
Foygel Barber <rina@uchicago.edu>, Stephen Bates <stephenbates@mit.edu>.

1.1. Method and Setup
We now describe our prediction set construction. Borrowing from conformal prediction, consider a bounded conformal score function st : X ×Y → [0, B], at each time t. This
score st = st (Xt , Yt ) is large when the predictions of the

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

