OXY G ENERATOR: Reconstructing Global Ocean Deoxygenation
Over a Century with Deep Learning

Bin Lu 1 Ze Zhao 1 Luyu Han 2 Xiaoying Gan 1 Yuntao Zhou 2 Lei Zhou 2 Luoyi Fu 3 Xinbing Wang 1 3
Chenghu Zhou 4 Jing Zhang 2

Abstract

concentration of dissolved oxygen (DO) in the ocean has
been steadily decreasing over the past 50 years, indicating
the acceleration of global ocean deoxygenation. “Breathless
ocean” has led to large-scale death of fish, seriously affecting the marine ecosystem (Cheung et al., 2013; Breitburg
et al., 2018). Moreover, global warming and human activities further intensify the expansion of oxygen minimum
zones in the ocean. What is the evolution of global ocean
deoxygenation? Oceanographers eagerly seek a precise
understanding of its changes and underlying patterns.

Accurately reconstructing the global ocean deoxygenation over a century is crucial for assessing and protecting marine ecosystem. Existing
expert-dominated numerical simulations fail to
catch up with the dynamic variation caused by
global warming and human activities. Besides,
due to the high-cost data collection, the historical
observations are severely sparse, leading to big
challenge for precise reconstruction. In this work,
we propose OXY G ENERATOR, the first deep learning based model, to reconstruct the global ocean
deoxygenation from 1920 to 2023. Specifically,
to address the heterogeneity across large temporal and spatial scales, we propose zoning-varying
graph message-passing to capture the complex
oceanographic correlations between missing values and sparse observations. Additionally, to further calibrate the uncertainty, we incorporate inductive bias from dissolved oxygen (DO) variations and chemical effects. Compared with in-situ
DO observations, OXY G ENERATOR significantly
outperforms CMIP6 numerical simulations, reducing MAPE by 38.77%, demonstrating a promising
potential to understand the “breathless ocean” in
data-driven manner.

In recent years, due to the advancement of ocean observation
technologies and international ocean discovery programs, a
lot of in-situ observation data has been accumulated. Some
data-driven studies have analyzed the occurrence of ocean
deoxygenation in regions such as Atlantic Canada (Hussain et al., 2021), Southern Ocean (Giglio et al., 2018), and
Ganga River (Pant et al., 2023). However, these studies are
confined to a local region with short-term observations, typically spanning only several decades. The lack of research on
long-term global ocean deoxygenation lies in the severely
sparse historical observations of DO due to the high-cost
and high-risk marine scientific expeditions. For example,
the World Ocean Database (WOD) (Boyer et al., 2018) is
world’s largest and widely-used collection of publicly available ocean profile data2 , and we are extremely surprised to
find that more than 96.265% dissolved oxygen observation
data are missing in the past 100 years, largely higher than
the missing rate of existing data imputation studies (Miao
et al., 2023; Adhikari et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Prior Works. To quantitatively understand and predict
the long-term trend of global ocean deoxygenation from
sparse observations, existing works are mainly categorized
into two ways: (1) Numerical Simulation Models. These
methods simulate the DO concentration based on climate
models without utilizing in-situ DO observations. Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) (Eyring
et al., 2016), a world-wide simulation compasrion project,
includes different expert-dominated DO simulation over a

Oxygen is fundamentally essential for all life. Unfortunately,
recent research (Schmidtko et al., 2017) has shown that the
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China 2 School of Oceanography, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 3 Department of Computer
Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 4 Institute
of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiaoying Gan <ganxiaoying@sjtu.edu.cn>.

2
We follow the same method of data gridding in (He et al.,
2019) with 1◦ × 1◦ spatial resolution, 1-year temporal resolution
and 0-5500 meters (33 depth levels) of the global ocean.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

