Trust Regions for Explanations via
Black-Box Probabilistic Certification
Amit Dhurandhar 1 Swagatam Haldar 2 Dennis Wei 1 Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy 1

Abstract

of how stable and widely applicable the explanations are
likely to be. One typically has to find explanations independently for each individual example of interest by invoking
these methods as many times. This situation motivates the
following question considered in our work: Given a blackbox model with only query access, an explanation for an
example and a quality metric (viz. fidelity, stability), can
we find the largest hypercube (i.e. ℓ∞ ball) centered at the
example such that when the explanation is applied to all
examples within the hypercube, (with high probability) a
quality criterion is met (viz. fidelity > than some value)?
Answering this question affirmatively has benefits such as:
i) providing insight into the behavior of the model over a region with a quality guarantee, a.k.a. a trust region that could
aid in recourse; ii) ascertaining stability of explanations,
which has recently been shown to be important (Liao et al.,
2022) for stakeholders performing model improvement, domain learning, adapting control and capability assessment;
iii) explanation reuse, which can save on queries leading to
savings in time, energy and even money (Dhurandhar et al.,
2019); and iv) serving as a possible meta-metric to compare
explanation methods. We demonstrate the last three benefits
in Section 7.

Given the black-box nature of machine learning
models, a plethora of explainability methods have
been developed to decipher the factors behind individual decisions. In this paper, we introduce a
novel problem of black-box (probabilistic) explanation certification. We ask the question: Given
a black-box model with only query access, an
explanation for an example and a quality metric
(viz. fidelity, stability), can we find the largest
hypercube (i.e., ℓ∞ ball) centered at the example
such that when the explanation is applied to all examples within the hypercube, (with high probability) a quality criterion is met (viz. fidelity greater
than some value)? Being able to efficiently find
such a trust region has multiple benefits: i) insight
into model behavior in a region, with a guarantee; ii) ascertained stability of the explanation; iii)
explanation reuse, which can save time, energy
and money by not having to find explanations for
every example; and iv) a possible meta-metric to
compare explanation methods. Our contributions
include formalizing this problem, proposing solutions, providing theoretical guarantees for these
solutions that are computable, and experimentally
showing their efficacy on synthetic and real data.

Since we assume only query access to the black-box model,
the setting is model agnostic and hence quite general. Furthermore, note that the explanation methods being certified
could be model agnostic or white-box. Our certification
methods require only that the explanation method can compute explanations for different examples, with no assumptions regarding its internal mechanism. We discuss general
applicability in Appendix F. As such, our contributions are
the following: 1) We formalize the problem of explanation
certification. 2) We propose an approach called Explanation
certify (Ecertify) with three strategies of increasing complexity. 3) We theoretically analyze the whole approach by
providing finite sample exponentially decaying bounds that
can be estimated in practice, along with asymptotic bounds
and further analysis of special cases. 4) We empirically
evaluate the quality of the proposed approach on synthetic
and real data, demonstrating its utility.

1. Introduction
Numerous feature based local explanation methods have
been proposed (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017;
Simonyan et al., 2013; Lapuschkin et al., 2016; Selvaraju
et al., 2016; Dhurandhar et al., 2022; Ramamurthy et al.,
2020; Dhurandhar et al., 2023) to explain individual decisions of black-box models (Goodfellow et al., 2016). However, these methods in general do not come with guarantees
*

Equal contribution 1 IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY,
USA 2 Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Amit Dhurandhar <adhuran@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

