RIME: Robust Preference-based Reinforcement Learning with Noisy Preferences

Jie Cheng 1 2 Gang Xiong 1 2 Xingyuan Dai 1 2 Qinghai Miao 2 Yisheng Lv 1 2 Fei-Yue Wang 1 2

Abstract

PbRL adopts a human-in-the-loop paradigm, where human
teachers provide preferences over distinct agent behaviors
as the reward signal.

Preference-based Reinforcement Learning
(PbRL) circumvents the need for reward engineering by harnessing human preferences as the
reward signal. However, current PbRL methods
excessively depend on high-quality feedback
from domain experts, which results in a lack
of robustness. In this paper, we present RIME,
a robust PbRL algorithm for effective reward
learning from noisy preferences. Our method
utilizes a sample selection-based discriminator
to dynamically filter out noise and ensure robust
training. To counteract the cumulative error
stemming from incorrect selection, we suggest
a warm start for the reward model, which additionally bridges the performance gap during the
transition from pre-training to online training in
PbRL. Our experiments on robotic manipulation
and locomotion tasks demonstrate that RIME
significantly enhances the robustness of the
state-of-the-art PbRL method. Code is available
at https://github.com/CJReinforce/
RIME_ICML2024.

Nevertheless, existing works in PbRL have primarily focused on enhancing feedback-efficiency, aiming to maximize the expected return with few feedback queries. This
focus induces a substantial reliance on high-quality feedback, typically assuming expertise on the teachers (Liu
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022). However, humans are
prone to errors (Christiano et al., 2017). In broader applications, feedback is often sourced from non-expert users
or crowd-sourcing platforms, where the quality can be inconsistent and noisy. Further complicating the matter, Lee et al.
(2021a) showed that even a mere 10% corruption rate in
preference labels can dramatically degrade the performance.
Therefore, the lack of robustness to noisy preference labels
hinders the wide applicability of PbRL.
Meanwhile, learning from noisy labels, also known as robust training, is a rising concern in deep learning, since such
labels severely degrade the generalization performance of
deep neural networks. Song et al. (2022) classifies robust
training methods into four key categories: robust architecture (Cheng et al., 2020), robust regularization (Xia et al.,
2020), robust loss design (Lyu & Tsang, 2019), and sample selection (Li et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021). However,
it is challenging to effectively incorporate these advanced
methods for robust training in PbRL. This complexity arises
from the pursuit of feedback-efficiency and cost reduction,
necessitating access to a limited amount of feedback. Simultaneously, the distribution shift problem during RL training
undermines the assumption of i.i.d input data, a core principle that supports robust training methods in deep learning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable
performance in various domains, including gameplay (Perolat et al., 2022; Kaufmann et al., 2023), robotics (Chen et al.,
2022), autonomous systems (Bellemare et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2020), multimodal (Yue et al., 2024), etc. The success
of RL frequently relies on the meticulous crafting of reward
functions, a process that can be both time-consuming and
susceptible to errors. In this context, Preference-Based RL
(PbRL) (Akrour et al., 2011; Cheng et al., 2011; Christiano
et al., 2017) emerges as a valuable alternative, eliminating
the requirement for manually designed reward functions.

In this work, we aim to improve the robustness of preferencebased RL methods on noisy and quantitatively limited preferences. To this end, we present RIME: Robust preferencebased reInforcement learning via warM-start dEnoising
discriminator. RIME modifies the training paradigm of the
reward model in the widely-adopted two-phase (i.e.,pretraining and online training phases) pipeline of PbRL. Figure 1 shows an overview of RIME. In particular, to empower robust learning from noisy preferences, we introduce
a denoising discriminator. It utilizes dynamic lower and
predefined upper bounds on the Kullback–Leibler (KL) di-

1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence
Systems, CASIA 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, the University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Yisheng Lv
<yisheng.lv@ia.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

