G ROUP C OVER: A Secure, Efficient and Scalable Inference Framework for
On-device Model Protection based on TEEs
Zheng Zhang 1 Na Wang 1 Ziqi Zhang 2 Yao Zhang 3 Tianyi Zhang 1 Jianwei Liu 1 Ye Wu 3

Abstract

devices. These edge devices are usually equipped with highperformance accelerators such as GPUs, NPUs (Tan & Cao,
2022), etc. Deploying DNN to edge devices is particularly
prevalent in applications like autonomous driving (Hu et al.,
2019) and Internet of Things (IoT) monitoring (Hameed
et al., 2022). However, putting model weights onto edge
devices introduces a new threat to model owners: the untrusted device owners may steal the intellectual property of
DNN models (Sun et al., 2021; 2023; Zhang et al., 2024).

Due to the high cost of training DNN models,
how to protect the intellectual property of DNN
models, especially when the models are deployed
to users’ devices, is becoming an important topic.
One practical solution is to use Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) and researchers have
proposed various model obfuscation solutions to
make full use of the high-security guarantee of
TEEs and the high performance of collocated
GPUs. In this paper, we first identify a common vulnerability, namely the fragility of randomness, that is shared by existing TEE-based
model obfuscation solutions. This vulnerability
benefits model-stealing attacks and allows the adversary to recover about 97% of the secret model.
To improve the security of TEE-shielded DNN
models, we further propose a new model obfuscation approach G ROUP C OVER, which uses sufficient randomization and mutual covering obfuscation to protect model weights. Experimental results demonstrate that G ROUP C OVER can achieve
a comparable security level as the upper-bound
(black-box protection), which is remarkably over
3× compared with existing solutions. Besides,
G ROUP C OVER introduces 19% overhead and negligible accuracy loss compared to model unprotected scheme.

Existing solutions to protect on-device DNN models can
be categorized into two types: cryptographic solutions (AlRubaie & Chang, 2019) and Trusted Execution Environment
(TEE)-based (Sagar & Keke, 2021) solutions. Both solutions can be augmented by GPUs. Among the two solutions,
the TEE-based approach is more practical for real-world
applications with high-performance requirements because
it introduces acceptable computational overhead is less than
10× (Tramer & Boneh, 2019) and no accuracy loss. On
the contrary, cryptographic solutions introduce significant
overhead (up to 1000× (Ng & Chow, 2021)) and may cause
an accuracy drop. In this paper, we aim to further improve
TEE-based solutions.
Specifically, we focus on the model obfuscation technique
that can utilize both the security of TEE and the highperformance of GPUs. The motivation for this technique is
to securely offload the inference of computation-intensive
layers (e.g. linear and convolutional layers) from TEE to
GPUs. For each layer, given the computation operands (inputs and layer weights), TEE first obfuscates the operands
and sends the obfuscated operands to the GPU. GPU computes the obfuscated layer output, sends the output back
to TEE, and TEE recovers the authentic layer output. In
this way, the untrusted world outside TEE (e.g. OS and
GPU) can not directly access valuable model weights and
the model secrets are protected. Existing obfuscation techniques include minimal split (Zhou et al., 2023; Hou et al.,
2021), weight scale (Shen et al., 2022) and matrix permutation (Sun et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
With the evolution of deep learning techniques, machine
learning as a service (MLaaS), especially DNN-based services, has become an important paradigm. Given that cloudbased MLaaS has large latency and high instability, manufacturers prefer to deploy model inference services to edge
1
Beihang University 2 Peking University 3 Douyin Vision Co.,
Ltd., Beijing, China. Work was done when Zheng Zhang was an
intern at Douyin Vision Co., Ltd.. Correspondence to: Na Wang
<nawang@buaa.edu.cn>.

We analyze the security of existing model obfuscation techniques and find a common drawback: the fragility of randomness, which is reflected in the fixed obfuscation strategy
and preserving partial statistical features. Due to this draw-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

