Density-Softmax: Efficient Test-time Model for Uncertainty Estimation and
Robustness under Distribution Shifts
Ha Manh Bui 1 Anqi Liu 1

Abstract
Sampling-based methods, e.g., Deep Ensembles
and Bayesian Neural Nets have become promising approaches to improve the quality of uncertainty estimation and robust generalization. However, they suffer from a large model size and high
latency at test time, which limits the scalability
needed for low-resource devices and real-time applications. To resolve these computational issues,
we propose Density-Softmax, a sampling-free deterministic framework via combining a density
function built on a Lipschitz-constrained feature
extractor with the softmax layer. Theoretically,
we show that our model is the solution of minimax
uncertainty risk and is distance-aware on feature
space, thus reducing the over-confidence of the
standard softmax under distribution shifts. Empirically, our method enjoys competitive results with
state-of-the-art techniques in terms of uncertainty
and robustness, while having a lower number of
model parameters and a lower latency at test time.

Method

Uncertainty
quality

Robustness
quality

Test-time
efficiency

Without prior
requirement

Deterministic
Bayesian
Ensembles
Ours

✗
✓
✓
✓

✗
✗
✓
✓

✓
✓
✗
✓

✓
✗
✓
✓

Table 1. A comparison between methods regarding uncertainty,
robustness quality, test-time efficiency (lightweight & fast), and
whether pre-defined prior hyper-parameters are required.

high computational resources in development. However, at
test time, inefficiency is a critical issue for users when the
model needs to be deployed on low-resource devices and in
real-time applications (Hinton et al., 2015).
Deterministic Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1998) model nowadays can be efficient due to being
sampling-free with O(1) sample complexity, i.e., it only
needs a single forward pass with a single DNN model to
produce the softmax probability. However, it often struggles
with over-confidence and over-fitting. This poor performance usually occurs when the test data is far and does not
come from the same distribution as the training set (Minderer et al., 2021; Bui et al., 2021; Bui & Maifeld-Carucci,
2022; Ovadia et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
The ability of models to produce high-quality uncertainty
estimation and robustness is crucial for reliable Deep Neural
Network (DNN) in high-stake applications (e.g., healthcare,
finance, decision-making, etc.). In principle, a reliable
model permits graceful failure, signaling when it is likely to
be wrong (uncertainty), and also generalizes better under
distribution shifts (robustness) (Tran et al., 2022). Additionally, to be widely used in real-world scenarios, the reliable
DNN model also necessarily needs to be fast and lightweight
(efficiency). This efficiency criterion can be considered in
two phases, training time and test time. At training time,
an inefficient DNN model might be acceptable given the

To improve uncertainty estimation and robustness under
distribution shifts, recent sampling-based approaches with
O(M ) sample complexity, where M is the number of sampling times, have shown promising results (Collier et al.,
2021; Dusenberry et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2020). Among
these works, the best performance in practice so far is based
on Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Tran
et al., 2022; Nado et al., 2021). However, this approach suffers from a heavy computational burden as it requires more
model parameters and multiple forward passes, leading to
inefficiency at test time. To tackle this challenge, samplingfree methods (Mukhoti et al., 2023; Charpentier et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2020a; Havasi et al., 2021), and lightweight
sampling-based models (Wen et al., 2020; Dusenberry et al.,
2020) have been recently proposed. Nevertheless, besides
generally performing worse than Deep Ensembles, these
methods are also less computationally efficient than Deterministic ERM (Nado et al., 2021) (e.g., Tab. 1).

1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A. Correspondence to: Ha Manh Bui
<hb.buimanhha@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

