Diagnosing the Compositional Knowledge of Vision Language Models from a
Game-Theoretic View
Jin Wang 1 Shichao Dong 4 Yapeng Zhu 4 Kelu Yao 3 Weidong Zhao 3 Chao Li 3 Ping Luo 2 1

Abstract

to correctly comprehend the subtle differences between “the
horse is eating the grass” and “the grass is eating the horse”
(Yuksekgonul et al., 2022). Given the fundamental status of
compositionality in human intelligence (Cresswell, 1973),
this lack of compositional knowledge has hindered the further development of vision language models.

Compositional reasoning capabilities are usually
considered as fundamental skills to characterize
human perception. Recent studies show that current Vision Language Models (VLMs) surprisingly lack sufficient knowledge with respect to
such capabilities. To this end, we propose to thoroughly diagnose the composition representations
encoded by VLMs, systematically revealing the
potential cause for this weakness. Specifically, we
propose evaluation methods from a novel gametheoretic view to assess the vulnerability of VLMs
on different aspects of compositional understanding, e.g., relations and attributes. Extensive experimental results demonstrate and validate several
insights to understand the incapabilities of VLMs
on compositional reasoning, which provide useful and reliable guidance for future studies. The
deliverables will be updated here.

Previous studies on the compositionality of VLMs mainly
focused on two perspectives. Some studies proposed to
evaluate the compositional reasoning capabilities of VLMs
in a black-box probing manner (Yuksekgonul et al., 2022;
Thrush et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2023; Hsieh et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2022). They usually measured the accuracy performance on whether VLMs correctly retrieved the matching
text for a given image between two captions with minimal
changes. Other studies proposed to improve the compositionality of VLMs in an empirical manner by introducing
the supervision of scene graphs (Herzig et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2023b) or curated hard-negative samples (Yuksekgonul et al., 2022; Doveh et al., 2023). However, there still
lack in-depth analyses to thoroughly diagnose the internal
compositional representations of VLMs, which can help us
understand the essential cause of this weakness and provide
reliable guidance for future studies.

1. Introduction
Recently, Vision Language Models (VLMs) (Radford et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b; Singh et al., 2022;
Goel et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2021) have made remarkable
strides, which significantly advance a wide range of unimodal and multimodal applications, e.g., object detection
(Gu et al., 2021; Du et al., 2022; Zang et al., 2022), semantic
segmentation (Zhou et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022a; Xu et al.,
2022) and text-to-image generation (Rombach et al., 2022;
Ramesh et al., 2022). However, recent studies have unveiled
a surprising weakness of state-of-the-art VLMs: they struggle with compositional reasoning capabilities (Yuksekgonul
et al., 2022; Thrush et al., 2022), such as object relations and
object attributes. For instance, BLIP (Li et al., 2022b) failed

Therefore, in this paper, we propose to take a further step
and conduct detailed analyses on the potential causes of
VLMs’ poor compositional reasoning capabilities. Since a
VLM usually contains an image encoder and a text encoder
as a whole, we propose to comprehensively evaluate VLMs
by firstly focusing on the compositional knowledge of each
unimodal encoder separately and then the multimodal compositional knowledge jointly. Under this scheme, we expect
to answer the following questions.
• Question 1. Does the text encoder of a VLM understand
texts compositionally?
• Question 2. Does the image encoder of a VLM understand images compositionally?

1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, China 3 Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou, China 4 Baidu Inc, Beijing, China
. Correspondence to: Ping Luo <pluo@cs.hku.hk>, Chao Li
<lichao@zhejianglab.com>.

• Question 3. Do the text encoder and the image encoder of a VLM have mutually-matching knowledge on
compositionality?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this way, such a disentangled representation dissection
scheme can help us obtain a more meticulous and fine1

