Position: Towards Implicit Prompt For Text-To-Image Models

Yue Yang 1 2 Yuqi Lin 2 Hong Liu 3 Wenqi Shao 2 Runjian Chen 2 4 Hailong Shang 5 Yu Wang 1 2 Yu Qiao 2
Kaipeng Zhang 2 Ping Luo 2 4

Abstract

<Explicit Prompt>
Eiffel Tower

Recent text-to-image (T2I) models have had great
success, and many benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate their performance and safety.
However, they only consider explicit prompts
while neglecting implicit prompts (hint at a target
without explicitly mentioning it). These prompts
may get rid of safety constraints and pose potential threats to the applications of these models.
This position paper highlights the current state of
T2I models toward implicit prompts. We present a
benchmark named ImplicitBench and conduct an
investigation on the performance and impacts of
implicit prompts with popular T2I models. Specifically, we design and collect more than 2,000
implicit prompts of three aspects: General Symbols, Celebrity Privacy, and Not-Safe-For-Work
(NSFW) Issues, and evaluate six well-known T2I
models’ capabilities under these implicit prompts.
Experiment results show that (1) T2I models are
able to accurately create various target symbols indicated by implicit prompts; (2) Implicit prompts
bring potential risks of privacy leakage for T2I
models. (3) Constraints of NSFW in most of the
evaluated T2I models can be bypassed with implicit prompts. We call for increased attention
to the potential and risks of implicit prompts in
the T2I community and further investigation into
the capabilities and impacts of implicit prompts,
advocating for a balanced approach that harnesses
their benefits while mitigating their risks.

Michael Jackson

a bloody man

I'm unable to create or provide images
of specific public figures, including
Michael Jackson, as it goes against
our content policy.

I cannot create or provide images
that depict violence or gore, as it
goes against our content policy.

<Implicit Prompt>
Located in France, an iconic
iron lattice tower, symbolizing
the romance of Paris and
French engineering prowess.

jackets and single glittering
glo"King of Pop," known for his
iconic Moonwalk and "Thriller,"
the best-selling album.

butcher artwork by ben
templesmith.

General Symbols

Celebrity Privacy

NSFW Issues

Figure 1. Implicit prompts have the capacity to generate imagery
akin to that produced by explicit prompts but also possess potential risks to create content that would be restricted by the policy
constraints applicable to explicit prompts.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation via arbitrary human-written
prompts attracts widespread attention and gains unprecedented popularity due to the fantastic creativity and functionality. The flourish of T2I community comes with numerous remarkable T2I models. Open-source models like
Stable Diffusions (Rombach et al., 2022) are well adopted
by researchers, leading to plenty of variants (Saharia et al.,
2022; Schramowski et al., 2023; Gafni et al., 2022; Gal
et al., 2022) and inspiring some communities like Civitai (Civitai, 2024) for customized generative models. Meanwhile, closed-source APIs like DALL-E (Ramesh et al.,
2021; 2022; Betker et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) and Midjounery (Midjourney, 2023) attract a lot of art creators and
show great business revenue prospects.

1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Shanghai
AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China 3 Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
4
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 5 Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Kaipeng Zhang <zhangkaipeng@pjlab.org.cn>,
Ping Luo <pluo@cs.hku.hk>.

With the rapid development of the T2I generation and the
growing influence of AI-generated content, our demand to
explore the overall performance and potential concerns of
T2I models is becoming increasingly urgent. There exists a
vast corpus of works (Lee et al., 2023; Saharia et al., 2022;
Hessel et al., 2021; Petsiuk et al., 2022) to evaluate T2I
models and gain a comprehensive understanding of their
generation capabilities and potential risks. As for generation

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

