Outlier-Efficient Hopfield Layers for Large Transformer-Based Models

Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu * 1 Pei-Hsuan Chang * 2 Haozheng Luo * 1 Hong-Yu Chen 2 Weijian Li 1 Wei-Po Wang 2
Han Liu 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

We introduce an Outlier-Efficient Modern Hopfield Model (termed OutEffHop) and use it to
address the outlier inefficiency problem of training gigantic transformer-based models. Our main
contribution is a novel associative memory model
facilitating outlier-efficient associative memory
retrievals. Interestingly, this memory model manifests a model-based interpretation of an outlierefficient attention mechanism (Softmax1 ): it is
an approximation of the memory retrieval process
of OutEffHop. Methodologically, this allows us
to introduce novel outlier-efficient Hopfield layers as powerful alternatives to traditional attention mechanisms, with superior post-quantization
performance. Theoretically, the Outlier-Efficient
Modern Hopfield Model retains and improves
the desirable properties of standard modern Hopfield models, including fixed point convergence
and exponential storage capacity. Empirically,
we demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed
model across large-scale transformer-based and
Hopfield-based models (including BERT, OPT,
ViT, and STanHop-Net), benchmarking against
state-of-the-art methods like ClippedS oftmax
and GatedA ttention. Notably, OutEffHop
achieves an average reduction of 22+% in average
kurtosis and 26+% in the maximum infinity norm
of model outputs across four models. Code is
available at GitHub; future updates are on arXiv.

We address the outlier-inefficient problem in large
Transformer-based models by debuting a novel outlierefficient modern Hopfield model. This problem is of practical importance in the era of Large Foundation Models (Bommasani et al., 2021), i.e. huge transformer-based models,
pretrained on massive datasets. They play a central role not
only in machine learning but also in a wide range of scientific domains, such as ChatGPT (Brown et al., 2020; Floridi
and Chiriatti, 2020) for natural language, BloombergGPT
(Wu et al., 2023) for finance, DNABERT (Zhou et al., 2024;
2023; Ji et al., 2021) for genomics, and many others. Specifically, the problem of outlier inefficiency in these large models stems from their tendency to allocate attention to less
informative tokens (the “no-op” outliers), including delimiters and punctuation marks. This tendency arises because
these large models assign non-zero attention probabilities
to low-information tokens, diluting the overall effectiveness
of the attention mechanism (Bondarenko et al., 2023, Section 3). As training progresses, the influence of these “no-op”
outliers magnifies due to the softmax function’s inability to
assign zero probability. Consequently, it leads to a scenario
where even irrelevant tokens contribute to the model’s outputs. Besides, it makes the model need unnecessarily large
GPU memory space to host due to the extra bits that outliers
take. This hampers the model’s processing efficiency and
potential accuracy.
To combat this, we take a route from the deep learning compatible modern Hopfield models (Wu et al., 2024a;b; Hu
et al., 2024a;b; 2023; Ramsauer et al., 2020). Through the associative memory model interpretation of transformer attention, we introduce a novel outlier-efficient modern Hopfield
model. This model’s memory retrieval dynamics approximate an outlier-efficient attention mechanism (Softmax1 )
(Miller, 2023). This allows us to debut novel outlier-efficient
Hopfield layers as outlier-efficient alternatives for vanilla attention (Vaswani et al., 2017). The fundamental idea of our
model is to add one extra “no-op classification” dimension
into state/configuration space of the Hopfield energy function. This dimension classifies whether a stored memory pattern is a “no-op” outlier, see Figure 1 for a visualization. We
regard the “no-op” outliers as distinct or rare patterns with
no similarity to other memory patterns. Then, we present an

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, USA 2 Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 3 Department of Statistics
and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, USA. Correspondence to: Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu <jhu@u.northwestern.edu>,
Pei-Hsuan
Chang
<b09202022@ntu.edu.tw>,
Haozheng
Luo
<robinluo2022@u.northwestern.edu>,
Hong-Yu
Chen
<b0976960890@gmail.com>,
Weijian
Li
<weijianli@u.northwestern.edu>,
Wei-Po
Wang
<b09202009@ntu.edu.tw>,
Han
Liu
<hanliu@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

