Learning to Play Atari in a World of Tokens

Pranav Agarwal 1 2 Sheldon Andrews 1 3 Samira Ebrahimi Kahou 4 2 5

Abstract

actions are taken (Moerland et al., 2023a). This method is
more efficient because the agent can train in its imagination
without requiring direct interaction with an external simulator or the real environment. (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018).
Additionally, the learned model allows the agent for safe and
accurate decision-making by utilizing different look-ahead
search algorithms for planning its action (Hamrick et al.,
2020).

Model-based reinforcement learning agents utilizing transformers have shown improved sample
efficiency due to their ability to model extended
context, resulting in more accurate world models.
However, for complex reasoning and planning
tasks, these methods primarily rely on continuous
representations. This complicates modeling of discrete properties of the real world such as disjoint
object classes between which interpolation is not
plausible. In this work, we introduce discrete abstract representations for transformer-based learning (DART), a sample-efficient method utilizing
discrete representations for modeling both the
world and learning behavior. We incorporate
a transformer-decoder for auto-regressive world
modeling and a transformer-encoder for learning
behavior by attending to task-relevant cues in the
discrete representation of the world model. For
handling partial observability, we aggregate information from past time steps as memory tokens.
DART outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods that do not use look-ahead search on the Atari
100k sample efficiency benchmark with a median
human-normalized score of 0.790 and beats humans in 9 out of 26 games. We release our code
at https://pranaval.github.io/DART/.

Most MBRL methods commonly follow a structured threestep approach: 1) Representation Learning ϕ : S → Rn , the
agents capture a simplified representation Rn of the high
dimensional environment state S; 2) Dynamics and Reward
Learning f : S × A → S ′ , ψ : S × A × S ′ → R, where the
agent learns the dynamics of the environment, predicting the
next state s′ given the current state s and action a, as well
as the reward associated with transitioning from s to s′ ; and
3) Policy Learning π : S → P(A), the agent determines
the optimal actions needed to achieve its goals. Dreamer is
a family of MBRL agents that follow a similar structured
three-step approach.
DreamerV1 (Hafner et al., 2020) employed a recurrent state
space model (RSSM) (Doerr et al., 2018) to learn the world
model. DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2021), an improved version of DreamerV1, offers better sample efficiency and scalability by incorporating a discrete latent space for modeling
the dynamics. Building on the advancements of DreamerV2,
DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2023) takes a similar approach
with additions involving the use of symlog predictions and
various regularisation techniques aimed at stabilizing learning across diverse environments. Notably, DreamerV3 surpasses the performance of past models across a wide range
of tasks, while using fixed hyperparameters.

1. Introduction
A reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm usually takes millions of trajectories to master a task, and the training can
take days or even weeks, especially when using complex
simulators. This is where model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) comes in handy (Sutton, 1991). With MBRL,
the agent learns the dynamics of the environment, understanding how the environment state changes when different

Although Dreamer variants are among the most popular MBRL approaches, they suffer from sampleinefficiency (Yin et al., 2022; Svidchenko & Shpilman,
2021). The training of Dreamer models can require an
impractical amount of gameplay time, ranging from months
to thousands of years, depending on the complexity of the
game (Micheli et al., 2023). This inefficiency can be primarily attributed to inaccuracies in the learned world model,
which tend to propagate errors into the policy learning process, resulting in compounding error problems (Xiao et al.,
2019). This challenge is largely associated with the use of

1
École de Technologie Supérieure, Canada 2 Mila
Roblox, USA 4 University of Calgary, Canada 5 Canada
CIFAR AI Chair.
Correspondence to: Pranav Agarwal
<pranav.agarwal.1@ens.etsmtl.ca>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

