Achieving Lossless Gradient Sparsification via
Mapping to Alternative Space in Federated Learning

Do-Yeon Kim 1 Dong-Jun Han 2 Jun Seo 3 Jaekyun Moon 1

Abstract

et al., 2020a; Zhu et al., 2021). Due to its effectiveness, FL
has been extensively deployed in many privacy-sensitive applications, such as healthcare system, financial services, and
autonomous driving (Antunes et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021b;
Aurna et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021).
During FL training, the participating nodes repeatedly communicate their weight updates with the server instead of
directly transmitting their individual data. However, uploading the gradients to the server every round can potentially
impose a significant communication burden, particularly on
resource-constrained network edges, such as mobile phones,
drones, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices.

Handling the substantial communication burden
in federated learning (FL) still remains a significant challenge. Although recent studies have attempted to compress the local gradients to address
this issue, they typically perform compression
only within the original parameter space, which
may potentially limit the fundamental compression rate of the gradient. In this paper, instead of
restricting our scope to a fixed traditional space,
we consider an alternative space that provides an
improved compressibility of the gradient. To this
end, we utilize the structures of input activation
and output gradient in designing our mapping
function to a new space, which enables lossless
gradient sparsification, i.e., mapping the gradient
to our new space induces a greater number of nearzero elements without any loss of information. In
light of this attribute, employing sparsificationbased compressors in our new space allows for
more aggressive compression with minimal information loss than the baselines. More surprisingly,
our model even reaches higher accuracies than the
full gradient uploading strategy in some cases, an
extra benefit for utilizing the new space. We also
theoretically confirm that our approach does not
alter the existing, best known convergence rate
of FL thanks to the orthogonal transformation
properties of our mapping.

To reduce the communication load during the uplink transmission, previous works have attempted to compress the
local updates based on various types of approaches including
quantization, sparsification, low-rank compression, to name
a few (Li et al., 2021a; Hyeon-Woo et al., 2022; Rothchild
et al., 2020). Quantization-based methods compress the
gradients by representing them with low bit-width (e.g. 1 ∼
4 bits), resulting in a smaller communication burden compared to full precision of floating point (Alistarh et al., 2017;
Reisizadeh et al., 2020; Jhunjhunwala et al., 2021). Sparsification, or the Top-k algorithm, selects the largest k elements
based on their magnitudes and let the remaining ones zero
(Wangni et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019). Some works employed both Top-k and quantization (Sattler et al., 2019;
Li & Li, 2023) in pursuit of more aggressive compression
during each communication round.
Motivation. Despite the numerous prior efforts that have
been made on minimizing communication overheads, majority of such endeavors have tended to consider only the
original parameter space. Specifically, most existing methods compressed the weight updates only within the space
where the gradient vector originally lies in. However, limiting the scope to a fixed, certain space may potentially
restrict the fundamental compression rate of the gradient.
In this paper, we turn our focus on exploring an alternative
space in which we can endow the gradient with higher compressibility. In short, our goal in this work boils down to
answering the following questions:

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a well-established approach based
on which a large number of clients collaborate to construct
a global prediction model while keeping their local data
private (McMahan et al., 2017; Bonawitz et al., 2019; Li
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Purdue University 3 LG AI Research. Correspondence to: DongJun Han <han762@purdue.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Is there any alternative space suitable for more aggressive
yet reliable compression beyond the original space? If
1

