Diffusive Gibbs Sampling

Wenlin Chen * 1 2 Mingtian Zhang * 3 Brooks Paige 3 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1 David Barber 3
R
Z = exp(−E(x)) dx is the (intractable) normalization
constant. We aim to draw independent samples x ∼ p(x)
from the target distribution
R and estimate expectations of
functions Ep(x) [h(x)] = h(x)p(x) dx under the target
distribution p(x).

Abstract
The inadequate mixing of conventional Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods for multimodal distributions presents a significant challenge in practical applications such as Bayesian inference and molecular dynamics. Addressing this,
we propose Diffusive Gibbs Sampling (DiGS), an
innovative family of sampling methods designed
for effective sampling from distributions characterized by distant and disconnected modes. DiGS
integrates recent developments in diffusion models, leveraging Gaussian convolution to create an
auxiliary noisy distribution that bridges isolated
modes in the original space and applying Gibbs
sampling to alternately draw samples from both
spaces. A novel Metropolis-within-Gibbs scheme
is proposed to enhance mixing in the denoising
sampling step. DiGS exhibits a better mixing
property for sampling multi-modal distributions
than state-of-the-art methods such as parallel tempering, attaining substantially improved performance across various tasks, including mixtures of
Gaussians, Bayesian neural networks and molecular dynamics.

The gradient of the log density of the target distribution is
known as the score function:
∇x log p(x) = −∇x E(x),

which is independent of Z. The score function can be evaluated at any location x since E is assumed to be differentiable. This assumption is commonly satisfied in various
practical applications, such as posteriors in Bayesian inference (Welling & Teh, 2011), score/energy networks in
generative image modelling (Song & Ermon, 2019), and
Boltzmann distributions in statistical mechanics (Noé et al.,
2019). Below, we introduce score-based methods for sampling from unnormalized distributions.
1.1. Score-Based MCMC Methods
Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) (Grenander &
Miller, 1994; Roberts & Tweedie, 1996) follows the transition rule given by a discrete-time Langevin SDE:
p
xk+1 = xk + η∇x log p(xk ) + 2ηϵk ,
(3)

1. Introduction

where ϵk ∼ N (0, I). For an infinitesimal step size η, the
Markov chain converges to the target p(x) as k → ∞.

Generating samples from complex unnormalized probability
distributions is an important problem in machine learning,
statistics and natural sciences. Consider an unnormalized
target distribution of the form
p(x) =

exp(−E(x))
,
Z

(2)

Metropolis-adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA) (Roberts
& Tweedie, 1996; Roberts & Stramer, 2002) defines a proposal xk+1 using the ULA update rule and additionally corrects the bias according to the transition probability given
by the Metropolis-Hasting (MH) algorithm:


exp(−E(xk+1 ))q(xk |xk+1 )
aMALA ≡ min 1,
, (4)
exp(−E(xk ))q(xk+1 |xk )

(1)

where x ∈ Rd is the variable of interest, E : Rd → R
is a lower-bounded differentiable energy function, and

where the proposal distribution is given by

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen,
Germany 3 University College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Wenlin Chen <wc337@cam.ac.uk>, Mingtian Zhang
<m.zhang@cs.ucl.ac.uk>.

q(x′ |x) = N (x′ |x + η∇x log p(x), 2ηI).

(5)

Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987; Neal
et al., 2011) augments the original variable x with an auxiliary momentum variable v, which defines a joint distribution

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

p(x, v) = p(x)p(v) ∝ e−E(x)−K(v) ,
1

(6)

