Rotational Equilibrium: How Weight Decay
Balances Learning Across Neural Networks

Atli Kosson 1 * Bettina Messmer 1 * Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract
E[∥ωt ∥]

This study investigates how weight decay affects
the update behavior of individual neurons in deep
neural networks through a combination of applied
analysis and experimentation. Weight decay can
cause the expected magnitude and angular updates
of a neuron’s weight vector to converge to a steady
state we call rotational equilibrium. These states
can be highly homogeneous, effectively balancing the average rotation—a proxy for the effective
learning rate—across different layers and neurons.
Our work analyzes these dynamics across optimizers like Adam, Lion, and SGD with momentum,
offering a new simple perspective on training that
elucidates the efficacy of widely used but poorly
understood methods in deep learning. We demonstrate how balanced rotation plays a key role in the
effectiveness of normalization like Weight Standardization, as well as that of AdamW over Adam
with ℓ2 -regularization. Finally, we show that explicitly controlling the rotation provides the benefits of weight decay while substantially reducing
the need for learning rate warmup.

E[∠(ωt , ωt+1 )]

fast rotation

t

balanced rotation

slow rotation
transient phase equilibrium

t

Figure 1: Conceptual figure of the norm (left) and angular
updates (right) of the weight vector ωt for different neurons
(each line color) over time t with a constant learning rate.
Weight decay modulates and stabilizes both metrics.
2019; Li & Arora, 2020; Wan et al., 2021). We explore
this idea further, aiming to describe the effects of weight decay on the optimization dynamics of modern neural network
(NN) training through applied analysis and experimentation.
We specifically examine the update dynamics of individual
neurons. A neuron computes a scalar feature by comparing
a learnable weight vector ωt ∈ RC with an incoming activation vector xt ∈ RC , followed by a non-linear activation
function φ and an optional learnable bias bt ∈ R:
φ(⟨ωt , xt ⟩ + bt ) = φ(∥ωt ∥∥xt ∥ cos(∠(ωt , xt )) + bt ) (1)
Here ⟨·⟩ denotes a dot product which can be rewritten with
a cosine similarity, showing that the direction of ωt determines which “patterns” in xt the neuron responds to. We
describe the neuronal update dynamics through the expected
weight norm E[∥ωt ∥], root-mean-square (RMS) update
size ηg for the bias, and expected angular update size ηr :
p
ηg := E[(bt+1 − bt )2 ]
(2)
h

i
⟨ωt ,ωt+1 ⟩
ηr := E[∠(ωt , ωt+1 )] = E arccos ∥ωt ∥∥ωt+1 ∥
(3)

1. Introduction
The use of weight decay or ℓ2 -regularization has become ubiquitous in deep learning optimization. Although
originally proposed as an explicit regularization method,
Van Laarhoven (2017) showed that this interpretation does
not hold for modern networks with normalization layers.
This is because normalization can make a weight vector
scale-invariant, meaning that the network output is unaffected by the magnitude of the vector (see §2). For scaleinvariant vectors, weight decay instead acts as a scaling
factor for some notation of an “effective” learning rate with
varying definitions (Van Laarhoven, 2017; Zhang et al.,

where the expectation accounts for noise from randomly
sampled minibatches (e.g., data shuffling). We assume
weight decay is only applied to ω, not b or other parameters, which is common and good practice (Jia et al., 2018).

*

Primary contributor 1 EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: <atli.kosson@epfl.ch>.

Figure 1 shows how the weight norm and angular updates
(ηr ) of different neurons could behave over time in a typical
case. This behavior is caused by Spherical Motion Dynamics (Wan et al., 2021) which arise from the interaction of

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

