Stability and Generalization for Stochastic Recursive Momentum-based
Algorithms for (Strongly-)Convex One to K-Level Stochastic Optimizations

Xiaokang Pan 1 Xingyu Li 2 Jin Liu 1 Tao Sun 3 Kai Sun 4 Lixing Chen 5 Zhe Qu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
STOchastic Recursive Momentum (STORM)based algorithms have been widely developed to
solve one to K-level (K ≥ 3) stochastic optimization problems. Specifically, they use estimators
to mitigate the biased gradient issue and achieve
near-optimal convergence results. However, there
is relatively little work on understanding their generalization performance, particularly evident during the transition from one to K-level optimization contexts. This paper provides a comprehensive generalization analysis of three representative
STORM-based algorithms: STORM, COVER,
and SVMR, for one, two, and K-level stochastic
optimizations under both convex and strongly convex settings based on algorithmic stability. Firstly,
we define stability for K-level optimizations and
link it to generalization. Then, we detail the stability results for three prominent STORM-based
algorithms. Finally, we derive their excess risk
bounds by balancing stability results with optimization errors. Our theoretical results provide
strong evidence to complete STORM-based algorithms: (1) Each estimator may decrease their
stability due to variance with its estimation target. (2) Every additional level might escalate the
generalization error, influenced by the stability
and the variance between its cumulative stochastic gradient and the true gradient. (3) Increasing
the batch size for the initial computation of estimators presents a favorable trade-off, enhancing
the generalization performance.

In stochastic optimization problems, variance reduction techniques (Fang et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2018;
Qi et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019; 2024) can significantly mitigate the negative impact of inherent variance due to the
stochastic gradients. In particular, Stochastic Recursive Momentum (STORM) (Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019) stands out
for its simple implementation and near-optimal convergence
results. STORM carefully designs momentum-based estimators for model updating, which can dynamically adapt to the
optimization challenge without a large batch or checkpoint
gradient computations. Due to these advantages, STORM
has been extensively used in various practical applications:
reinforcement learning (Hu et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2022),
model-agnostic meta-learning (Ji et al., 2022; Qu et al.,
2023a), risk-averse portfolio optimization (Tran Dinh et al.,
2020; Jiang et al., 2022), and deep AUC maximization (Yuan
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2024).
Subsequently, various STORM-based algorithms (Hu et al.,
2019; Yuan et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2023a) have extended this methodology to address
stochastic two-level and K-level (where K ≥ 3) optimization problems. In their definitions, two-level stochastic
optimizations are equivalent to stochastic compositional optimizations and similar to K-level stochastic optimizations
(Wang et al., 2017; Ghadimi et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021),
which pose a challenge in obtaining a biased estimate of the
objective function and gradients (Dann et al., 2014; Wang
et al., 2017). By leveraging the high-precision estimations,
STORM-based algorithms have successfully addressed the
corresponding challenge.
In particular, in two-level optimizations, one of the most
popular STORM-based algorithms COVER (Qi et al., 2021)
employs estimators for both the value of the inner function
and the value of the gradient. When increasing to K-level
optimizations, inherent variances can be magnified, leading
to significant gradient deviations and potential explosions.
To mitigate this, the near-optimal algorithm SVMR (Jiang
et al., 2022) employs estimators for all function values and
gradients, except the outer function value, and applies gradient projection techniques to the function gradient estimator.

1

Hunan Provincial Key Lab on Bioinformatics, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China 2 Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, New Orleans, USA 3 College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China 4 School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China 5 Institute of Cyber Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: X. Li
<xli82@tulane.edu>, Z. Qu <zhe qu@csu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

