Disparate Impact on Group Accuracy of Linearization for Private Inference

Saswat Das * 1 Marco Romanelli * 2 Ferdinando Fioretto 1

Abstract
Ensuring privacy-preserving inference on cryptographically secure data is a well-known computational challenge. To alleviate the bottleneck of
costly cryptographic computations in non-linear
activations, recent methods have suggested linearizing a targeted portion of these activations in
neural networks. This technique results in significantly reduced runtimes with often negligible impacts on accuracy. In this paper, we demonstrate
that such computational benefits may lead to increased fairness costs. Specifically, we find that
reducing the number of ReLU activations disproportionately decreases the accuracy for minority
groups compared to majority groups. To explain
these observations, we provide a mathematical
interpretation under restricted assumptions about
the nature of the decision boundary, while also
showing the prevalence of this problem across
widely used datasets and architectures. Finally,
we show how a simple procedure altering the finetuning step for linearized models can serve as an
effective mitigation strategy.

Figure 1. ResNet18 accuracy on UTKFaces across various ReLU
linearization budgets using SNL (Cho et al., 2022). 100% ReLUs
corresponds to the original model. Subgroup sample sizes are
shown above the corresponding bars. The accuracy for the majority
group remains almost unchanged while other groups, in particular
the minority one, are diversely impacted.

mary cause of this computational burden (Cho et al., 2022;
Jha et al., 2021; Kundu et al., 2023).
To address this challenge, various approaches have proposed
to approximate these non-linear activations using linear surrogates. The objective is to develop a new model that minimizes the number of ReLU activations while maintaining
the highest possible accuracy. Over time, the proposed
frameworks have evolved in sophistication—it has been
demonstrated that not only the quantity of ReLU activations
matters (Jha et al., 2021), but their placement within the
network is also crucial (Cho et al., 2022). Recent methods
have advanced to the point where they can manage both
the ReLU budget and the distribution of linearized neurons
across the network, resulting in faster inference times with
minimal sacrifice in accuracy (Kundu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Private Inference is the process of performing inference
tasks on encrypted or private data, ensuring that the data
remains confidential throughout the process. It has found
application in ML settings where sensitive data is required
for inference but should not be revealed to the model, for instance, when the model is owned by a cloud service provider
and is not necessarily trusted. Although promising, cryptographic computations are notoriously computationally expensive when applied to nonlinear functions (Mishra et al.,
2020), and, in the context of ML inference, Rectifier Linear
Function (ReLU) activations are often identified as the pri-

This paper builds on this body of work and observes that
while these methods are indeed effective at trading run-time
reduction for marginal global accuracy losses, these accuracy decreases are unevenly distributed among different
subgroups. We find that the accuracy loss is more pronounced for underrepresented subgroups and that this impact intensifies as more ReLUs are linearized. This effect
is depicted in Figure 1, which shows the accuracy impact
across age groups on a facial recognition task. Remarkably,
while the majority group (left-most) remains relatively un-

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA, USA 2 New York University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Saswat Das <saswatdas@email.virginia.edu>, Marco
Romanelli <mr6852@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

