Improved Generalization of Weight Space Networks via Augmentations

Aviv Shamsian 1 Aviv Navon 1 David W. Zhang 2 Yan Zhang 3
Ethan Fetaya 1 Gal Chechik 1 4 Haggai Maron 5 4

Abstract

Architectures for weight spaces benefit significantly from
taking this complex structure into account (Navon et al.,
2023a; Zhou et al., 2023a;b; Zhang et al., 2023; Lim et al.,
2023). However, these methods often run into overfitting
and generalization issues. Standard techniques to reduce
overfitting are difficult to apply due to the complex structure, or failing to improve results entirely. Alleviating this
problem is the core goal of this paper.

Learning in deep weight spaces (DWS), where
neural networks process the weights of other neural networks, is an emerging research direction,
with applications to 2D and 3D neural fields
(INRs, NeRFs), as well as making inferences
about other types of neural networks. Unfortunately, weight space models tend to suffer from
substantial overfitting. We empirically analyze
the reasons for this overfitting and find that a key
reason is the lack of diversity in DWS datasets.
While a given object can be represented by many
different weight configurations, typical INR training sets fail to capture variability across INRs that
represent the same object. To address this, we
explore strategies for data augmentation in weight
spaces and propose a MixUp method adapted for
weight spaces. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of these methods in two setups. In classification,
they improve performance similarly to having up
to 10 times more data. In self-supervised contrastive learning, they yield substantial 5-10%
gains in downstream classification.

To illustrate these generalization difficulties, consider the
the problem of using a deep model to process an Implicit
Neural Representation (INR) (Mescheder et al., 2019; Park
et al., 2019; Mildenhall et al., 2021) – a neural network
that represents an image or a 3D shape (Figure 2). Training
a classifier over the weights of INRs performs far worse
than training standard CNNs or MLPs on the original raw
data. As a concrete example, current state-of-the-art for 3D
shape classification by processing weights of INRs achieves
only 16% accuracy on ModelNet40 (Wu et al., 2015) (see
Figure 1), compared to 90% achieved by applying neural
networks directly to point cloud representation of the same
shapes (Atzmon et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). The reasons
for this performance gap are still not well understood.
Here, we study the causes for that generalization gap and
propose ways to mitigate them. We argue that typical training workflows in DWS fail to represent the variability across
different weight representations of the same object well. In
particular, a single object can be represented by a huge number of different weight space representations, which we call
neural views, but DWS datasets often only use a single view
for each object. This lack of cross-view diversity confounds
two different generalization problems that DWS learning
needs to address: generalization to new neural views and
generalization to new objects.

1. Introduction
Learning in deep weight spaces (DWS) is the task of training
models that take the weights of other deep neural networks
as input (Eilertsen et al., 2020; Unterthiner et al., 2020; Andreis et al., 2023). It provides a way to infer properties of
neural networks themselves, for tasks like ranking models
by their predicted performance without applying them to a
test set. Deep weight spaces have a complex geometrical
structure thanks to the various symmetries of the weights
and biases in deep learning models (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990).

To address this issue, we first empirically study the effects of
neural views on generalization to new objects and gain a key
insight (Section 3): training with multiple neural views
improves generalization to unseen objects. At first look, it
appears that this insight can be leveraged by augmenting any
object with many neural views to represent it, for example
by varying weight initialization. Unfortunately, this naı̈ve
approach is not practical since it involves training a large

1
Bar-Ilan University 2 University of Amsterdam 3 Samsung SAIT AI Lab, Montreal 4 NVIDIA Research 5 Technion. Correspondence to: Aviv Shamsian <aviv.shamsian@biu.ac.il>, Aviv
Navon <aviv.navon@biu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

