GRATH: Gradual Self-Truthifying for Large Language Models

Weixin Chen 1 Dawn Song 2 Bo Li 1 3

Abstract
Truthfulness is paramount for large language models (LLMs) as they are increasingly deployed
in real-world applications. However, existing
LLMs still struggle with generating truthful content, as evidenced by their modest performance
on benchmarks like TruthfulQA. To address this
issue, we propose GRAdual self-truTHifying
(GRATH), a novel post-processing method to enhance truthfulness of LLMs. GRATH utilizes
out-of-domain question prompts to generate pairwise truthfulness training data with each pair containing a question and its correct and incorrect
answers, and then optimizes the model via direct preference optimization (DPO) to learn from
the truthfulness difference between answer pairs.
GRATH iteratively refines truthfulness data and
updates the model, leading to a gradual improvement in model truthfulness in a self-supervised
manner. Empirically, we evaluate GRATH using different 7B-LLMs and compare with LLMs
with similar or even larger sizes on benchmark
datasets. Our results show that GRATH effectively improves LLMs’ truthfulness without
compromising other core capabilities. Notably,
GRATH achieves state-of-the-art performance on
TruthfulQA, with MC1 accuracy of 54.71% and
MC2 accuracy of 69.10%, which even surpass
those on 70B-LLMs. The code is available at
https://github.com/chenweixin107/GRATH.

Figure 1. Accuracy of pretrained models, DPO, and GRATH on
TruthfulQA’s MC1 and MC2 tasks. We evaluate DPO and GRATH
on two pretrained models, Llama2-Chat-7B and Zephyr, based on
an OOD training dataset—ARC-Challenge. GRATH effectively
improves MC1 and MC2 accuracy of Llama2-Chat-7B(Zephyr) by
24.5%(11.6%) and 23.8%(8.9%). DPO enhances MC1 and MC2
accuracy of Llama2-Chat-7B by 6.5% and 6.8% while decreasing
those on Zephyr by 4.2% and 2.6%. The performance of DPO
compared to GRATH indicates its vulnerability to OOD data.

tion, i.e., generate factually incorrect content. The hallucination phenomenon could cause great harm, especially in
safety-critical applications (Wang et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023a), underscoring the critical importance of ensuring the
models produce truthful outputs. TruthfulQA (Lin et al.,
2022) has been considered as a mainstream benchmark for
measuring the truthfulness of the model answers to the questions that provoke imitative falsehoods. In particular, MC1
is distinguished as the most challenging task among those
built on this benchmark, since even state-of-the-art LLMs
could only achieve modest accuracy levels (e.g., the MC1 accuracy of Llama2-Chat-70B (Touvron et al., 2023) is merely
31.09%). These challenges reveal the urgent demand for
enhancing the truthfulness of models’ outputs.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of large language models
(LLMs), they have been deployed in a wide range of applications (Bommarito II & Katz, 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Lo,
2023). Yet, there is evidence (Bang et al., 2023) showing
that LLMs may not answer truthfully, leading to hallucina-

Existing work (Chuang et al., 2023; Burns et al., 2023)
proposes to seek the truthfulness direction within LLMs and
shift the model representations along the direction, which
leads to truthful outputs. Such process often relies on indomain data sourced from TruthfulQA (Chen et al., 2023b;
Li et al., 2023b). Whereas, in real-world scenarios, it is
common to encounter a broad spectrum of data that falls
outside the intended testing domain, i.e., out-of-domain
(OOD) questions. On the other hand, annotating answers
to this extensive range of questions can be prohibitively

1
UIUC 2 UC Berkeley 3 UChicago. Correspondence to: Weixin
Chen <weixinc2@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <bol@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

