On Universally Optimal Algorithms for A/B Testing

Po-An Wang § 1 2 Kaito Ariu 2 Alexandre Proutiere 1

Abstract

rewards of the arms are initially unknown. The learner
has a fixed budget of T ∈ N pulls or samples, and after
gathering these samples, she has to return what she believes to be the arm with the highest mean reward. For
any k ∈ [K] := {1, . . . , K}, we denote by µk ∈ (0, 1)
the unknown mean reward of arm k. We assume that the
best arm is unique and define the parameter set of the mean
rewards as Λ = {µ ∈ (0, 1)K : ∃k : µk > µj , ∀j ̸= k}.
A strategy for fixed-budget best-arm identification consists
of a sampling rule and a decision rule. The sampling rule
determines the arm At ∈ [K] to be explored in round t,
based on past observations. The corresponding observed
reward is Xt ∈ {0, 1}. The arm At selected in round t is
Ft measurable where Ft demotes the σ-algebra generated
by the set of random variables {A1 , X1 , . . . , At−1 , Xt−1 }.
After T rounds, the decision rule returns an answer ı̂ ∈ [K],
which is FT measurable. The goal is to identifiy a strategy
that minimizes the error probability defined as

We study the problem of best-arm identification
with fixed budget in stochastic multi-armed bandits with Bernoulli rewards. For the problem with
two arms, also known as the A/B testing problem, we prove that there is no algorithm that (i)
performs as well as the algorithm sampling each
arm equally (referred to as the uniform sampling
algorithm) in all instances, and that (ii) strictly
outperforms uniform sampling on at least one instance. In short, there is no algorithm better than
the uniform sampling algorithm. To establish this
result, we first introduce the natural class of consistent and stable algorithms, and show that any
algorithm that performs as well as the uniform
sampling algorithm in all instances belongs to
this class. The proof then proceeds by deriving
a lower bound on the error rate satisfied by any
consistent and stable algorithm, and by showing
that the uniform sampling algorithm matches this
lower bound. Our results provide a solution to the
two open problems presented in (Qin, 2022). For
the general problem with more than two arms, we
provide a first set of results. We characterize the
asymptotic error rate of the celebrated Successive
Rejects (SR) algorithm (Audibert et al., 2010) and
show that, surprisingly, the uniform sampling algorithm outperforms the SR algorithm in some
instances.

pµ,T := Pµ [ı̂ ̸= 1(µ)] ,
where 1(µ) := arg maxk µk denotes the unique best arm
under the instance µ.
A naive strategy consists in allocating a fixed fraction of the
budget to sample each arm. Once the budget is exhausted,
the strategy then returns the arm with the highest empirical
mean. We refer to such a strategy as a static algorithm (in
contrast to adaptive algorithms that may select the arm to
pull next based on the rewards observed so far). An example of a static strategy is the uniform sampling strategy that
allocates the budget fairly among arms. Static algorithms
are well-understood and in particular, their asymptotic error
rates are known (Glynn & Juneja, 2004). Many adaptive
sampling algorithms have been designed, see, e.g., (Audibert et al., 2010; Gabillon et al., 2012; Karnin et al., 2013;
Russo, 2020; Komiyama et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023),
with the hope of an improved performance compared to
static algorithms. It is still unclear whether this hope can
actually be fulfilled.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of Fixed-Budget Best-Arm Identification (FB-BAI) in stochastic multi-armed bandits with
Bernoulli rewards. In this problem, the learner sequentially
pulls an arm and observes a random reward generated according to the corresponding distribution. The expected
§Work initiated during the internship at CyberAgent.
EECS and Digital Futures, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
2
CyberAgent, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Po-An Wang
<wang9@kth.se>.

1

Despite recent research efforts, the FB-BAI problem remains largely open (Qin, 2022). This contrasts with the two
other classical learning tasks in stochastic bandits, namely
regret minimization (Lai & Robbins, 1985) and best arm
identification with fixed confidence (Garivier & Kaufmann,
2016). Indeed, for these tasks, asymptotic instance-specific

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

