Self-attention Networks Localize When QK-eigenspectrum Concentrates

Han Bao 1 Ryuichiro Hataya 2 Ryo Karakida 3

Abstract

tures of input data. After the fully-attention-based language
model has appeared (Brown et al., 2020), the research community gets interested in the functionality and benefits of the
attention. To mention a few, transformers implicitly prefer
hierarchical interpretations of input sequences (Kharitonov
& Chaabouni, 2021); store relational knowledge in MLP
layers as an associative memory (Meng et al., 2022); its computational graphs tend to be tree-structured (Murty et al.,
2023b); suddenly capture tree structures of inputs after long
training epochs (Murty et al., 2023a). Theoretically, training
dynamics analysis explains how to learn spatially correlated
patches by vision transformers (ViT) (Jelassi et al., 2022),
select dominant tokens (Tian et al., 2023a), store information as an associative memory (Bietti et al., 2023), and select
max-margin tokens (Tarzanagh et al., 2023b), whereas Xie
et al. (2022) explains the in-context learning as a process of
concept learning in Bayesian inference.

The self-attention mechanism prevails in modern
machine learning. It has an interesting functionality of adaptively selecting tokens from an input
sequence by modulating the degree of attention
localization, which many researchers speculate
is the basis of the powerful model performance
but complicates the underlying mechanism of the
learning dynamics. In recent years, mainly two arguments have connected attention localization to
the model performances. One is the rank collapse,
where the embedded tokens by a self-attention
block become very similar across different tokens,
leading to a less expressive network. The other is
the entropy collapse, where the attention probability approaches non-uniform and entails low entropy, making the learning dynamics more likely
to be trapped in plateaus. These two failure modes
may apparently contradict each other because the
rank and entropy collapses are relevant to uniform and non-uniform attention, respectively. To
this end, we characterize the notion of attention
localization by the eigenspectrum of query-key
parameter matrices and reveal that a small eigenspectrum variance leads attention to be localized.
Interestingly, the small eigenspectrum variance
can prevent both rank and entropy collapses, leading to better model expressivity and trainability.

Among many aspects of attention, we specifically focus on
localization—for a query token, self-attention can select a
few relevant tokens only (which we call localized attention)
or select many tokens uniformly. As attention can be regarded as a token mixer, it plays a pivotal role in studying
how it selects tokens to reveal the characteristics of the token
embeddings. To this end, we have the following research
questions: (Q1) When is self-attention localized or uniform?
(Q2) How does localization affect model performances?
Along this line, previous studies mainly investigated from
the model expressivity and training stability perspectives.
On the one hand, Dong et al. (2021) and Noci et al. (2022)
initiated the discussion of attention localization and theoretically showed that a network with self-attention layers
without skip connections exponentially loses the rank of
hidden layers; the fact indicates that the model expressivity
shall be immediately lost with more self-attention layers
being stacked. On the other hand, Zhai et al. (2023) empirically found that attention entropy—averaged Shannon
entropy of an attention probability matrix—correlates with
the training stability. Specifically, a training loss curve
tends to fall into a plateau when the attention entropy is
low. Since higher entropy indicates near-uniform attention
weights, their finding apparently suggests that localized attention may lead the learning dynamics to a plateau. Up
until now, these two failure modes have been discussed
independently with slightly different notions of attention

1. Introduction
Transformers have been widely adopted in language modeling (Vaswani et al., 2017), vision tasks (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021), and speech recognition (Likhomanenko et al., 2021). A crucial building block
in transformers is the attention mechanism, dating back
to Graves (2013), which was initially designed to capture
long-range signals in sequential inputs by mixing individual
tokens but has also been leveraged to capture general struc*
Equal contribution 1 Kyoto University 2 RIKEN AIP 3 AIST.
Correspondence to: Han Bao <bao@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

