A Neural-Guided Dynamic Symbolic Network for Exploring Mathematical
Expressions from Data

Wenqiang Li 1 2 3 Weijun Li 1 2 3 4 * Lina Yu 1 2 3 Min Wu 1 2 3 Linjun Sun 1 2 3 Jingyi Liu 1 2 3 Yanjie Li 1 2 3
Shu Wei 1 2 3 Yusong Deng 1 2 3 Meilan Hao 1 2 3

Abstract

learning technique that involves discovering mathematical
expressions that describe a dataset with accuracy. Unlike
polynomial or neural network-based regression, SR aims
to unveil the fundamental principles underlying the data
generation process. This method is analogous to how physicists use explicit mathematical models to explain physical
phenomena. For instance, Isaac Newton’s laws of motion
provided a mathematical framework for describing object
motion, while Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity introduced new equations to explain the behavior of objects in
motion. More specifically, given a dataset (X, y), where
each feature Xi ∈ Rn and target yi ∈ R, the goal of SR is
to identify a function f (i.e., y ≈ f (X) : Rn → R) that best
fits the dataset, where the functional form of f is a short
closed-form mathematical expression.

Symbolic regression (SR) is a powerful technique
for discovering the underlying mathematical expressions from observed data. Inspired by the
success of deep learning, recent deep generative
SR methods have shown promising results. However, these methods face difficulties in processing high-dimensional problems and learning constants due to the large search space, and they
don’t scale well to unseen problems. In this work,
we propose DY S YM N ET, a novel neural-guided
Dynamic Symbolic Network for SR. Instead of
searching for expressions within a large search
space, we explore symbolic networks with various structures, guided by reinforcement learning,
and optimize them to identify expressions that
better-fitting the data. Based on extensive numerical experiments on low-dimensional public standard benchmarks and the well-known SRBench
with more variables, DY S YM N ET shows clear
superiority over several representative baseline
models. Open source code is available at https:
//github.com/AILWQ/DySymNet.

SR is a challenging task because the search space of expressions grows exponentially with the length of the expression,
while the position and value of numeric further exacerbate
its difficulty. The traditional SR methods mainly involve
heuristic search methods based on genetic programming
(GP) (Forrest, 1993; Koza, 1994; Schmidt & Lipson, 2009;
Staelens et al., 2013; Arnaldo et al., 2015; Bładek & Krawiec, 2019). They represent the expression as a binary tree
and find high-fitness solutions through iterative evolutions in
the large functional search space. While GP-based SR methods have the capability to solve nonlinear problems, they
often yield complex expressions and are computationally
expensive. Moreover, these methods are known to exhibit
high sensitivity to hyperparameters, which can complicate
the optimization process.

1. Introduction
Numerous phenomena in the natural world, such as physical
laws, can be precisely described using mathematical expressions. Symbolic regression (SR) is an effective machine-

A more recent line of research has made use of the neural
network to tackle the aforementioned shortcomings. Sahoo
et al. (2018) proposed an equation learner (EQL), a fullyconnected network where elementary functions are used
as activation functions. They try to constrain the search
space by optimizing a pre-defined network. The limitation
of EQL is that the pre-defined architecture of the network
limits the complexity of the predicted expression and is
not flexible for different specific problems. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL)-based methods (Petersen et al.,
2020; Mundhenk et al., 2021) for SR have shown promising

*Corresponding author. 1 AnnLab, Institute of Semiconductors,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering & School of
Integrated Circuits, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China 3 Beijing Key Laboratory of Semiconductor Neural
Network Intelligent Sensing and Computing Technology, Beijing,
China 4 Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Weijun Li <wjli@semi.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

