Conformal Validity Guarantees Exist for Any Data Distribution
(and How to Find Them)

Drew Prinster∗ 1 Samuel Stanton∗ 2 Anqi Liu 1 Suchi Saria 1

Abstract

thus especially crucial in real-world scenarios where AI/ML
systems are used to inform high-stakes decisions, or where
they may even act autonomously. Unfortunately, it is precisely when uncertainty estimation is most vital when it is
often most difficult to quantify reliably. For a prime example, consider the increasingly common setting where
AI systems are able to take actions of their own, thereby
transforming them from passive observers into active agents:
common instances include active learning, black-box optimization, and reinforcement learning. In all these cases,
merely enabling an AI model to explore by actively selecting the next datapoint induces feedback-loop shifts in the
data distribution, which can accumulate over time and cause
standard UQ methods to deteriorate or break down entirely.

As artificial intelligence (AI) / machine learning (ML) gain widespread adoption, practitioners are increasingly seeking means to quantify
and control the risk these systems incur. This
challenge is especially salient when such systems
have autonomy to collect their own data, such
as in black-box optimization and active learning,
where their actions induce sequential feedbackloop shifts in the data distribution. Conformal
prediction is a promising approach to uncertainty
and risk quantification, but prior variants’ validity
guarantees have assumed some form of “quasiexchangeability” on the data distribution, thereby
excluding many types of sequential shifts. In this
paper we prove that conformal prediction can theoretically be extended to any joint data distribution, not just exchangeable or quasi-exchangeable
ones. Although the most general case is exceedingly impractical to compute, for concrete practical applications we outline a procedure for deriving specific conformal algorithms for any data
distribution, and we use this procedure to derive
tractable algorithms for a series of AI/ML-agentinduced covariate shifts. We evaluate the proposed algorithms empirically on synthetic blackbox optimization and active learning tasks.

Conformal prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005) is an increasingly popular UQ framework because it provides coverage
guarantees without knowledge of the exact distributional
form of the data. Even so, standard CP methods do make one
very strong assumption about the data distribution: namely,
that the data are exchangeable (IID is a special case). Informally, for time-series data, exchangeability means the
distribution is “time invariant”; meanwhile in a batch setting,
it means the distribution remains constant between training
and test batches. Exchangeability thus excludes many realworld settings such as dynamic time series or data generated
from (or queried by) active AI agents, which can exhibit
stark time-dependent or batch-dependent distribution shifts.
This work builds on that of Tibshirani et al. (2019), who
introduced a weighted generalization of CP where the traditional exchangeability requirement is relaxed to a condition
called weighted exchangeability. For instance, data that
are independent but not identically distributed are weighted
exchangeable. However, the conventional wisdom is still
that conformal prediction methods require some notion of
“quasi-exchangeability” to achieve a valid coverage guarantee.1 We challenge this common perception via the following theoretical and practical contributions:

1. Introduction
Quantifying the uncertainty of predictions from artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) models is often
imperative to managing the risks associated with their downstream use. Principled uncertainty quantification (UQ) is
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A. 2 Prescient Design,
Genentech, New York City, NY, U.S.A.. Correspondence to:
Drew Prinster <drew@cs.jhu.edu>, Samuel Stanton <stanton.samuel@gene.com>.

• Our main theoretical contribution is to present a general view of (weighted) conformal prediction, drawing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

For instance, Fannjiang et al. (2022) introduced a similar
assumption called “pseudo-exchangeability” to study data shifts
with limited dependencies of the test point on the observed data.

1

