Online Algorithms with Uncertainty-Quantified Predictions

Bo Sun 1 Jerry Huang 2 Nicolas Christianson 2 Mohammad Hajiesmaili 3 Adam Wierman 2 Raouf Boutaba 1

Abstract

2020; Lykouris & Vassilvitskii, 2021; Purohit et al., 2018).
In this line of research, an algorithm is given additional information on the problem instance in the form of predictions
or “advice”, possibly from a machine learning model. Notably, it is typically the case that no assumptions are made
on predictions’ quality. Thus, algorithms must treat them as
“untrusted”, seeking to exploit them when they are accurate
while ensuring worst-case guarantees when they are not.

The burgeoning field of algorithms with predictions studies the problem of using possibly imperfect machine learning predictions to improve
online algorithm performance. While nearly
all existing algorithms in this framework make
no assumptions on prediction quality, a number
of methods providing uncertainty quantification
(UQ) on machine learning models have been developed in recent years, which could enable additional information about prediction quality at decision time. In this work, we investigate the problem of optimally utilizing uncertainty-quantified
predictions in the design of online algorithms. In
particular, we study two classic online problems,
ski rental and online search, where the decisionmaker is provided predictions augmented with
UQ describing the likelihood of the ground truth
falling within a particular range of values. We
demonstrate that non-trivial modifications to algorithm design are needed to fully leverage the UQ
predictions. Moreover, we consider how to utilize
more general forms of UQ, proposing an online
learning framework that learns to exploit UQ to
make decisions in multi-instance settings.

Driven by safety-critical applications, uncertainty quantification (UQ) has recently become a prominent field of research
in machine learning. UQ aims to provide quantitative measurements on machine learning models’ uncertainty about
their predictions. One of the state-of-the-art methods for UQ
is conformal inference (Vovk et al., 1999; 2005; Papadopoulos et al., 2002), which can transform the predictions of any
black-box algorithm into a prediction interval (or prediction set) that contains the true value with high probability.
Although UQ has been widely used for general decisionmaking under uncertainty, as in (Vovk & Bendtsen, 2018;
Marusich et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023), there has been limited study on its use for online problems. Thus, the key
question we aim to answer in this paper is:
How can we incorporate uncertainty-quantified predictions
into the design of competitive online algorithms?
To address the above question, we require a new design
objective that interpolates between worst-case analysis and
average-case analysis for online algorithms. Algorithms
augmented with UQ predictions have access to both predictions of future inputs and the associated prediction quality,
which can be leveraged to improve upon worst-case performance; however, UQ predictions often cannot exactly reconstruct distributional information to enable typical averagecase guarantees. As such, we design algorithms to minimize
a new performance metric, which we term distributionallyrobust competitive ratio (DRCR): we seek algorithms that
perform well on the worst-case distribution drawn from the
ambiguity set determined by a given UQ.

1. Introduction
Classic online algorithms are designed to ensure worst-case
performance guarantees. However, such algorithms are often overly pessimistic and perform poorly in real-world
applications since worst-case instances rarely occur. To
address the pessimism of these algorithms, a recent surge
of work has investigated the design of algorithms utilizing
machine-learned predictions (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii,
1
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. 2 Computing + Mathematical Sciences Department, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
USA. 3 Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Sun <bo.sun@uwaterloo.ca>.

In particular, this paper makes contributions in threefold for
designing online algorithms that leverage UQ predictions.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Optimal online algorithms under distributionally-robust
analysis We frame the online algorithms with UQ predic1

