Pruner-Zero: Evolving Symbolic Pruning Metric from scratch for Large
Language Models

Peijie Dong 1 * Lujun Li 2 * Zhenheng Tang 3 1 Xiang Liu 1 Xinglin Pan 1 Qiang Wang 4 Xiaowen Chu 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2024) have revolutionized the field of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks, enabling remarkable
progress across a wide spectrum of tasks, including both
Natural Language Understanding and Natural Language
Generation. A key differentiator of LLMs from prior
convolution-based models is their unprecedented scale.
With billions of parameters, LLMs can effectively manage
complex tasks and have exhibited exceptional performance.
However, the vast number of parameters that these models
possess necessitates substantial computational resources,
highlighting a critical challenge in their deployment. For
instance, deploying models like GPT-3, with its 175
billion parameters, underscores the intense computational
demands, necessitating advanced GPU technologies.

Despite the remarkable capabilities, Large Language Models (LLMs) face deployment challenges due to their extensive size. Pruning methods drop a subset of weights to accelerate, but
many of them require retraining, which is prohibitively expensive and computationally demanding. Recently, post-training pruning approaches
introduced novel metrics, enabling the pruning of
LLMs without retraining. However, these metrics require the involvement of human experts and
tedious trial and error. To efficiently identify superior pruning metrics, we develop an automatic
framework for searching symbolic pruning metrics using genetic programming. In particular,
we devise an elaborate search space encompassing the existing pruning metrics to discover the
potential symbolic pruning metric. We propose
an opposing operation simplification strategy to
increase the diversity of the population. In this
way, Pruner-Zero allows auto-generation of symbolic pruning metrics. Based on the searched results, we explore the correlation between pruning
metrics and performance after pruning and summarize some principles. Extensive experiments
on LLaMA and LLaMA-2 on language modeling
and zero-shot tasks demonstrate that our PrunerZero obtains superior performance than SOTA
post-training pruning methods. Code at: https:
//github.com/pprp/Pruner-Zero.

Several model compression techniques are developed to
solve these problems, such as model quantization (Frantar
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Yao et al., 2022), model sparsing (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023; Sun et al., 2024), and knowledge distillation (Xiaolong et al., 2023; Li & Jin, 2022; Li,
2022). Model sparsing compresses the model by identifying
and eliminating redundant elements in the weight matrix.
Model sparsing is one of the most promising techniques for
model deployment due to its flexibility. Previous research
works on model sparsing require training from random initialization (Hoang et al., 2023; Sreenivasan et al., 2022;
Louizos et al., 2018), retraining process (Liu et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2023) or extensive iterative pruning (Chijiwa
et al., 2021; Tanaka et al., 2020). However, the inherent
complexities, along with the substantial computational and
data requirements of LLMs, present significant challenges
that render these conventional sparse strategies less feasible.
Given the extensive data corpus and substantial model dimensions required by LLMs, post-training pruning has
become an increasingly crucial methodology. Due to its
minimal resource demands, this approach is highly advantageous, offering a cost-efficient alternative for optimizing LLMs. The development of the post-training pruning
method, as highlighted in recent studies (Lu et al., 2022;
Frantar & Alistarh, 2023; Sun et al., 2024), marks a significant advancement in this field. These methods streamline
the pruning process, further reducing the resource requirements and making LLMs more democratized and accessible.
SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023) is proposed to con-

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in Large Language Models
(LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Abdin
*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou) 2 The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 3 Hong Kong Baptist Univeristy 4 Harbin Institude of Technology, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Qiang Wang
<qiang.wang@hit.edu.cn>, Xiaowen Chu <xwchu@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

