How Graph Neural Networks Learn: Lessons from Training Dynamics

Chenxiao Yang 1 * Qitian Wu 1 David Wipf 2 Ruoyu Sun 3 4 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

relations and interactions. In addition to their empirical
success, the pursuit of theoretical understanding has also led
researchers to dissect GNNs in terms of their representation
powers (a.k.a. expressiveness) (Maron et al., 2019; Xu et al.,
2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2019; Chen et al., 2019), which aim
to answer what families of functions GNNs can represent
or approximate. However, beyond these studies, it remains
unclear whether GNNs will indeed learn the desired function
during the training process. Filling this gap calls for more
attention to the optimization of GNNs and effects of graph
structures that implicitly bias the learning process towards
certain solutions. In this paper, we analyze the training
dynamics of GNNs in function space, aiming to answer

A long-standing goal in deep learning has been
to characterize the learning behavior of black-box
models in a more interpretable manner. For graph
neural networks (GNNs), considerable advances
have been made in formalizing what functions
they can represent, but whether GNNs will learn
desired functions during the optimization process
remains less clear. To fill this gap, we study their
training dynamics in function space. In particular,
we find that the gradient descent optimization of
GNNs implicitly leverages the graph structure to
update the learned function, as can be quantified
by a phenomenon which we call kernel-graph
alignment. We provide theoretical explanations
for the emergence of this phenomenon in the overparameterized regime and empirically validate it
on real-world GNNs. This finding offers new interpretable insights into when and why the learned
GNN functions generalize, highlighting their limitations in heterophilic graphs. Practically, we
propose a parameter-free algorithm that directly
uses a sparse matrix (i.e. graph adjacency) to update the learned function. We demonstrate that
this embarrassingly simple approach can be as effective as GNNs while being orders-of-magnitude
faster.

Do GNNs indeed learn the desired function that can generalize during the training process, and if so, how?
We note that the exact mathematical characterization of the
optimization of neural networks, even for shallow ones, is
prohibitive or even impossible due to their non-linearity. Existing work thus resorts to simplifications, such as removing
activations (e.g., Xu et al. (2021a) for GNNs) or training a
single neuron (e.g., Bai & Lee (2020); Frei et al. (2020)).
Moreover, even with these simplifications, there is generally
no single straightforward answer to the above question; only
insights from different angles exist for illuminating certain
mechanisms in this complex process (e.g., Cao et al. (2019);
Papyan et al. (2020); He & Su (2020)). In this work, we
provide initial answers to this open question by studying the
role of graph structures in the training process. Particularly,
we have the following informal statement:

1. Introduction

The optimization of GNNs implicitly leverages the graph
structure, as is quantified by kernel-graph alignment, to
learn functions that can generalize.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli
et al., 2008; Bruna et al., 2014; Kipf & Welling, 2017)
represent network architectures for learning on entities with

More formally, the so-called Kernel-Graph Alignment characterizes such a graph implicit bias during training, where
the so-called Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al.,
2018) that controls the evolution of the learned GNN function tends to align with the message passing matrix (typically implemented as graph adjacency) used in GNNs’ forward pass. This result is not only useful for understanding
the optimization of GNNs but also allows us to explain a
series of previously unresolved theoretical questions and
develop practically useful algorithms in a principled manner.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

∗

Work was partially done during an internship at Amazon Web
Services. 1 School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University 2 Amazon Web Services 3 School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 Shenzhen International Center for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Shenzhen
Research Institute of Big Data. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

