Contrastive Predict-and-Search for Mixed Integer Linear Programs

Taoan Huang 1 Aaron Ferber 2 Arman Zharmagambetov 3 Yuandong Tian 3 Bistra Dilkina 1

Abstract

SCIP (Maher et al., 2017), Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization,
LLC, 2022) and CPLEX (Cplex, 2009). The backbones of
these solvers are Branch-and-Bound (BnB) (Land & Doig,
2010), Branch-and-Cut (Mitchell, 2002) or Branch-Cut-andPrice (Desrosiers & Lübbecke, 2011), which are optimal
tree search algorithms enhanced by a group of heuristics.

Mixed integer linear programs (MILP) are flexible and powerful tools for modeling and solving
many difficult real-world combinatorial optimization problems. In this paper, we propose a novel
machine learning (ML)-based framework ConPaS that learns to predict solutions to MILPs with
contrastive learning. For training, we collect highquality solutions as positive samples. We also
collect low-quality or infeasible solutions as negative samples using novel optimization-based or
sampling approaches. We then learn to make discriminative predictions by contrasting the positive
and negative samples. During testing, we predict
and fix the assignments for a subset of integer variables and then solve the resulting reduced MILP
to find high-quality solutions. Empirically, ConPaS achieves state-of-the-art results compared to
other ML-based approaches in terms of the quality
of and the speed at which solutions are found.

MILPs from the same application domain often share similar structures and characteristics in many real-world settings.
The performance of MILP solvers crucially depends on how
effective the heuristics are for that application. Recently,
there has been an increased interest in data-driven heuristic designs for MILP for various decision-making in BnB
(see Section 3.2 for a summary). Another line of research
focuses on heuristics that generate high-quality solutions
for MILPs. In particular, it focuses on generating partial
assignments of high-quality feasible solutions. Previously,
Nair et al. (2020) propose Neural Diving (ND), where they
learn to partially assign values to integer variables and delegate the reduced sub-MILP to a MILP solver, e.g., SCIP.
The fraction of variables to assign values to is controlled by
a hyperparameter called the coverage rate. A SelectiveNet
(Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2019) is trained for each coverage
rate that jointly decides which variables to fix and the values to fix to during testing. The main two disadvantages
of ND are that (1) enforcing variables to fixed values leads
to low-quality or infeasible solutions if the predictions are
not accurate enough and (2) it requires training multiple
SelectiveNet to obtain the appropriate coverage rate, which
is computationally expensive. To mitigate these issues, Han
et al. (2022) propose a Predict-and-Search (PaS) framework
that deploys a search inspired by the trust region method.
Instead of fixing variables, PaS searches for high-quality
solutions within a pre-defined proximity of the predicted
partial assignment, which allows better feasibility and finding higher-quality solutions than ND. For both ND and PaS,
the effectiveness (i.e., the quality of the solution found) and
efficiency (i.e., the speed at which high-quality solutions
are found) depend on the accuracy of the machine learning
(ML) prediction and the number of variables (controlled by
hyperparameters) whose values to fix.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) concerns a wide variety of
real-world problems, including resource allocation (Manne,
1960), traffic management (Luathep et al., 2011), network
design (Huang & Dilkina, 2020) and production planning
(Pochet & Wolsey, 2006) problems, and the majority of
them are NP-hard. Therefore, designing efficient and effective CO algorithms is important and challenging. Mixed
integer linear programs (MILP) can flexibly encode and
solve a broad family of CO. A MILP is a mathematical
program that optimizes a linear objective subject to linear
constraints, with some of the variables constrained to take
integer values. Significant research and engineering effort
has been dedicated to developing MILP solvers, such as
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 3 AI at Meta (FAIR),
Menlo Park, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Taoan Huang <taoanhua@usc.edu>, Bistra Dilkina <dilkina@usc.edu>.

In this paper, we propose a novel ML-based framework
ConPaS, Contrastive Predict-and-Search for MILPs. Inspired by the recent success in contrastive learning (CL) for
refining solutions with large neighborhood search (LNS)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

