Reparameterized Importance Sampling for
Robust Variational Bayesian Neural Networks

Yunfei Long * 1 Zilin Tian * 1 Liguo Zhang 1 2 Huosheng Xu 1

Abstract

network weights and then inferring a posterior distribution
using Bayes’ rule. This characteristic empowers BNNs to
estimate the level of uncertainty in their predictions, which
is a crucial consideration, especially in safety-critical systems. However, due to the computational intractability of
exact inference for posteriors, approximate methods are
commonly employed in practice. Mean-field variational
inference (MFVI) (Blundell et al., 2015; Graves, 2011;
Kingma et al., 2015; Dusenberry et al., 2020; Coker et al.,
2022) stands out as a powerful paradigm for approximating the Bayesian posterior with flexible variational distributions. The optimization of this approximation revolves
around minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the variational distribution and the actual posterior.
To review, let W = {wi } represent network weights, D
represent the data, and place prior p (W) on weights W.
MFVI introduces a variational distribution Q with variational parameters Θ = {θi } to approximate the posterior
distribution p (W|D).QThis variational distribution is factorized, Q (W|Θ) = i q (wi |θi ), and the values of Θ are
optimized by minimizing the following objective function.

Mean-field variational inference (MFVI) methods provide computationally cheap approximations to the posterior of Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) when compared to alternatives
like MCMC. However, applying MFVI to BNNs
encounters limitations due to the Monte Carlo
sampling problem. This problem stems from two
main issues. First, most samples do not accurately
represent the most probable weights. Second,
random sampling from variational distributions
introduces high variance in gradient estimates,
which can hinder the optimization process, leading to slow convergence or even failure. In this paper, we introduce a novel sampling method called
Reparameterized Importance Sampling (RIS) to
estimate the first moment in neural networks, reducing variance during feed-forward propagation.
We begin by analyzing the generalized form of
the optimal proposal distribution and presenting
an inexpensive approximation. Next, we describe
the sampling process from the proposal distribution as a transformation that combines exogenous
randomness with the variational parameters. Our
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed RIS method in three critical aspects: improved convergence, enhanced predictive performance, and successful uncertainty estimation for out-of-distribution data.

L (D, Θ) =EQ [log Q (W|Θ) − log p (W)]
− EQ [log p (D|W)]

(1)

where the first term serves as a regularizer, penalizing solutions where the posterior deviates from the prior, while
the second term represents a model-fitting component. It is
straightforward to verify that analytic results are available
for the KL term between the Q and p (W). However, due
to the nonlinearity inherent in neural networks, computing
the exact expectation of log-likelihood is unfeasible. MFVI
employs Monte Carlo samplingPto approximate this expectaM
1
(m)
tion, EQ [log p (D|W)] ≈ M
, M repm=1 p D|W
(m)
resent the sample size, W
denotes the m-th Monte Carlo
sample drawn from the variational posterior Q (W|Θ). Unfortunately, despite the advantages related to computational
tractability, training BNNs using MFVI can be challenging primarily due to the Monte Carlo sampling problem.
Firstly, the majority of weights sampled from variational
distributions tend to fall in edge regions, far from the most
probable weight. Secondly, variational BNNs optimize Θ
using stochastic gradient descent methods that rely on the
gradient of the Monte Carlo L estimate with respect to Θ.

1. Introduction
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) can perform probabilistic predictions by incorporating a prior distribution on the
*
Equal contribution 1 College Of Computer Science And Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, Heilongjiang,
China 2 Modeling and Emulation in E-Government National Engineering Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, China. Correspondence to: Liguo Zhang <zhangliguo@hrbeu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

