Noise-Aware Algorithm for
Heterogeneous Differentially Private Federated Learning

Saber Malekmohammadi 1 2 Yaoliang Yu 1 2 Yang Cao 3

Abstract

party (Hitaj et al., 2017; Rigaki & Garcı́a, 2020; Wang et al.,
2019b; Zhu et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020). Differential
Privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b;a; Dwork, 2011; Dwork &
Roth, 2014) has been used in DPFL systems to achieve
such formal privacy guarantees. When there is a trusted
server in the system, FL with central differential privacy
(CDP), which is operated by the server by adding controlled
noise to the aggregation of clients’ updates, is a solution
(McMahan et al., 2018; Geyer et al., 2017). When there is
no trusted server, which is more common, FL with local
differential privacy (LDP), where each client randomizes
its updates locally is also a solution (Zhao et al., 2021).
However, LDP is limited in the sense that achieving privacy
while preserving model utility is challenging, due to clients’
independent noise additions. Some solutions have been
proposed for improving utility in LDP, e.g., using a trusted
shuffler system (Liu et al., 2021b; Girgis et al., 2021), which
may be difficult to establish if the server itself is not trusted.

High utility and rigorous data privacy are of the
main goals of a federated learning (FL) system,
which learns a model from the data distributed
among some clients. The latter has been tried
to achieve by using differential privacy in FL
(DPFL). There is often heterogeneity in clients’
privacy requirements, and existing DPFL works
either assume uniform privacy requirements for
clients or are not applicable when server is not
fully trusted (our setting). Furthermore, there is
often heterogeneity in batch and/or dataset size
of clients, which as shown, results in extra variation in the DP noise level across clients’ model
updates. With these sources of heterogeneity,
straightforward aggregation strategies, e.g., assigning clients’ aggregation weights proportional
to their privacy parameters (ϵ) will lead to lower
utility. We propose Robust-HDP, which efficiently
estimates the true noise level in clients’ model
updates and reduces the noise-level in the aggregated model updates considerably. Robust-HDP
improves utility and convergence speed, while being safe to the clients that may maliciously send
falsified privacy parameter ϵ to server. Extensive
experimental results on multiple datasets and our
theoretical analysis confirm the effectiveness of
Robust-HDP. Our code can be found here.

Clients often have heterogeneous privacy preferences coming from their varying privacy policies. Furthermore, dataset
size usually varies a lot across clients. Additionally, depending on their computational budgets, some clients may use
relatively smaller batch sizes locally for running DPSGD
algorithm (Abadi et al., 2016). As we will show, a small
privacy parameter (ϵ) and/or a small batch size lead to a fast
increment of the noise level in a client’s model update. Existing heterogeneous DPFL works mostly either depend on
a trusted server, i.e., CDP (Chathoth et al., 2022; Zhou et al.,
2022), or suffer from suboptimal and vulnerable aggregation
strategies on an untrusted server (i.e., LDP) based on clients’
privacy parameters (Liu et al., 2021a). We consider local
heterogeneous DPFL systems with an untrusted server and
propose an efficient algorithm, which is aware of the noise
level in each client’s model update. We propose to employ
Robust PCA (RPCA) algorithm (Candes et al., 2009) by the
untrusted server to estimate the amount of noise in clients’
model updates, which we show depends strongly on multiple factors (e.g., their privacy parameter and their batch
size ratio), and assign their aggregation weights accordingly.
The use of this efficient strategy on the server, which is
independent of clients sending any privacy parameters to
the server or not, improves model utility and convergence
speed while being robust to potential falsifying clients. The

1. Introduction
In the presence of sensitive information in the train data, FL
algorithms must be able to provide rigorous data privacy
guarantees against a potentially curious server or any third
1

School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Saber Malekmohammadi
<saber.malekmohammadi@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

