Privacy-Preserving Data Release Leveraging Optimal Transport
and Particle Gradient Descent
Konstantin Donhauser * 1 Javier Abad * 1 Neha Hulkund 2 Fanny Yang 1

Abstract

constraints. Any further task performed on these “private”
copies is thus guaranteed to comply with these constraints.

We present a novel approach for differentially private data synthesis of protected tabular datasets, a
relevant task in highly sensitive domains such as
healthcare and government. Current state-of-theart methods predominantly use marginal-based
approaches, where a dataset is generated from private estimates of the marginals. In this paper, we
introduce PrivPGD, a new generation method for
marginal-based private data synthesis, leveraging
tools from optimal transport and particle gradient descent. Our algorithm outperforms existing
methods on a large range of datasets while being
highly scalable and offering the flexibility to incorporate additional domain-specific constraints.

Numerous differential privacy methods have emerged to
synthesize tabular datasets with privacy guarantees while
preserving relevant statistics from the original dataset (Tao
et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2024). Marginal-based approaches
are among the preferred methods, dominant in NIST challenges (McKenna et al., 2021) and consistently top-ranked
in benchmarks (Tao et al., 2021). These approaches select a
set of marginals and perturb them in a DP-compliant manner.
Subsequently, a synthetic dataset is generated from these
noisy marginals through a generation method.
In this paper, we introduce PrivPGD1 , a novel DP-data generation method based on particle gradient descent (Chizat &
Bach, 2018; Chizat, 2022). PrivPGD leverages an optimal
transport-based divergence between the privatized and particle marginal distributions (Section 2.2) to integrate marginal
information during gradient descent. This divergence can be
efficiently approximated through parallel GPU processing,
which is crucial for handling large datasets. Our approach
has several important characteristics:

1. Introduction
Distributing sensitive datasets is crucial for data-driven
decision-making and methodological research in many
fields, including healthcare and government. For example,
epidemiologists and biostatisticians have relied on tools like
SAS to analyze personal health data for decades (Dankar
& El Emam, 2012; DiMaggio, 2013). However, there are
significant concerns among patients about the use and disclosure of their information, especially among vulnerable
groups (El Emam, 2011).

• State-of-the-art performance. PrivPGD outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in a large benchmark comparison (9 datasets) across a wide range of metrics,
including downstream task performance (Section 4).
• Scalability. PrivPGD leverages a highly optimized gradient computation that can be parallelized on GPU,
enabling the algorithm to efficiently construct large
datasets with over 100,000 data points while accommodating many marginals, e.g., all 2-Way marginals.

Differential privacy (DP) has gained prominence as a vital
approach to mitigate privacy concerns. Its adoption extends
well beyond theoretical frameworks, finding practical utility
across industries and government organizations (Johnson
et al., 2018; Abowd, 2018; Aktay et al., 2020). In this paper,
we target the problem of differentially private tabular data
synthesis, a promising approach for creating high-quality
copies of protected tabular datasets that adhere to privacy

• Geometry preservation. Many datasets contain features with inherent geometry, such as continuous features and some categorical features like age, which
have rankings that should be retained in the synthetic
data. Unlike state-of-the-art methods (see Section 4.2),
PrivPGD preserves this geometric structure, aligning
more naturally with the nuances of real-world datasets.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH,
Zurich, Switzerland 2 MIT CSAIL, Boston, USA. Correspondence
to: Konstantin Donhauser <konstantin.donhauser@ai.ethz.ch>,
Javier Abad <javier.abadmartinez@ai.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
See our GitHub repository for the source code: https://
github.com/jaabmar/private-pgd.

1

