LongRoPE: Extending LLM Context Window Beyond 2 Million Tokens

Yiran Ding 1 2 Li Lyna Zhang 1 † Chengruidong Zhang 1 Yuanyuan Xu 1 3 Ning Shang 1 Jiahang Xu 1
Fan Yang 1 Mao Yang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), despite remarkable success on various tasks (OpenAI et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023), often suffer from limited context window size, e.g.,
LLaMA2’s 4096 token limit (Touvron et al., 2023). Beyond
the context window, LLM’s performance declines due to the
additional positions that the model has not been trained on.
This poses challenges in important scenarios like in-context
learning with numerous examples (Huang et al., 2023) and
LLM agents (Park et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023).

Large context window is a desirable feature in
large language models (LLMs). However, due
to high fine-tuning costs, scarcity of long texts,
and catastrophic values introduced by new token
positions, current extended context windows are
limited to around 128k tokens. This paper introduces LongRoPE that, for the first time, extends the context window of pre-trained LLMs to
an impressive 2048k tokens, with up to only 1k
fine-tuning steps at within 256k training lengths,
while maintaining performance at the original
short context window. This is achieved by three
key innovations: (i) we identify and exploit two
forms of non-uniformities in positional interpolation through an efficient search, providing a better
initialization for fine-tuning and enabling an 8×
extension in non-fine-tuning scenarios; (ii) we
introduce a progressive extension strategy that
first fine-tunes a 256k length LLM and then conducts a second positional interpolation on the
fine-tuned extended LLM to achieve a 2048k context window; (iii) we readjust LongRoPE on 8k
length to recover the short context window performance. Extensive experiments on LLaMA2
and Mistral across various tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Models extended via
LongRoPE retain the original architecture with
minor modifications to the positional embedding,
and can reuse most pre-existing optimizations.
Code is available at https://github.com/
microsoft/LongRoPE

Recent works show that a pre-trained LLM context window
can be extended to around 128k by fine-tuning on longer
texts (Chen et al., 2023b;a; Peng et al., 2023; Zhang et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2023). There are three major obstacles
to further extend the context window. First, untrained new
position indices introduce many catastrophic values, leading
to out-of-distribution issues and making fine-tuning difficult to converge (Chen et al., 2023a). This is particularly
challenging when an extension from 4k to >1000k introduces more than 90% new positions. Second, fine-tuning
usually requires texts of corresponding lengths. However,
long texts in current datasets, especially those exceeding
1000k, are limited. Moreover, training on extra-long texts
is computationally expensive, requiring prohibitively extensive training hours and GPU resources. Third, when
extending to extremely long context windows, the attention
becomes dispersed as it’s spread thinly across numerous token positions, degrading performance on the original short
context (Chen et al., 2023a).
One approach to mitigate the first challenge is to interpolate
RoPE positional embedding (Su et al., 2021; Chen et al.,
2023a), which downscales new position indices to the pretrained range, as shown in Fig.1. Position Interpolation
(PI) (Chen et al., 2023a) linearly interpolates RoPE’s rotary angles by the extension ratio. NTK (LocalLLaMA,
2023b;a) advocates unequal interpolation and extrapolation
across RoPE dimensions. YaRN (Peng et al., 2023) categorizes RoPE dimensions into three frequency-based groups
and applies extrapolation, NTK, and linear interpolations,
respectively. However, positional embedding exhibits complex non-uniform information entropy in the Transformer
architecture. Such subtle non-uniformity is not effectively

1
Microsoft Research 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University 3 University
of Science and Technology of China; Yiran Ding and Yuanyuan
Xu did this work during the internship at MSRA. Correspondence
to: Li Lyna Zhang <lzhani@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

