A Near-Linear Time Approximation Algorithm for Beyond-Worst-Case Graph
Clustering

Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Tommaso d’Orsi * 1 2 Aida Mousavifar * 1

Abstract

algorithmic techniques, from the seminal paper of Leighton
and Rao (Leighton & Rao, 1988) up to the results of Arora,
Rao, and Vazirani (Arora et al., 2004) and Sherman (Sherman, 2009). On the other hand, they are models for graph
partitioning problems in various data mining and unsupervised machine learning applications and have thus inspired
widely-used heuristics in more applied fields.

We consider the semi-random graph model of
(Makarychev et al., 2012), where, given a random
bipartite graph with α edges and an unknown
bipartition (A, B) of the vertex set, an adversary can add arbitrary edges inside each community and remove arbitrary edges from the cut
(A, B) (i.e. all adversarial changes are monotone with respect to the bipartition). For this
model, a polynomial time algorithm is known
to approximate the Balanced Cut problem up to
value O(α) (Makarychev et al., 2012) as long as
the cut (A, B) has size Ω(α). However, it consists
of slow subroutines requiring optimal solutions
for logarithmically many semidefinite programs.
We study the fine-grained complexity of the problem and present the first near-linear time algorithm that achieves similar performances to that of
(Makarychev et al., 2012). Our algorithm runs in
time O(|V (G)|1+o(1) + |E(G)|1+o(1) ) and finds
a balanced cut of value O(α) . Our approach appears easily extendible to related problem, such as
Sparsest Cut, and also yields an near-linear time
O(1)-approximation to Dagupta’s objective function for hierarchical clustering (Dasgupta, 2016)
for the semi-random hierarchical stochastic block
model inputs of (Cohen-Addad et al., 2019).

Beyond worst-case instances A frustrating gap exists
between the impressive theoretical results obtained over
the last three decades and the success of heuristics used
in practice. While poly-logarithmic approximation algorithms have been developed for balanced cut and sparsest
cut (and related problem such as minimum bisection (Räcke,
2008), multicut (Garg et al., 1996), min uncut (Goemans
& Williamson, 1995; Agarwal et al., 2005)), the algorithm
design community has had little success in obtaining constant factor approximation algorithms for these problems.
In fact, the Unique Games Conjecture even suggests that
such bounds may be very hard to obtain (Khot et al., 2007;
Khot & Vishnoi, 2015; Raghavendra, 2008; Raghavendra
et al., 2012). Thus, to be able to show good approximation
bounds and design algorithms that are tailored to real-world
instances, one must shift the focus from the worst-case to
the so called beyond-worst-case complexity of the problems.
This conclusion has seeded a long line of work aimed at
modeling average instances encountered in practice and
designing algorithms for these models (Dyer & Frieze, 1986;
Bui et al., 1987; Boppana, 1987; Feige & Kilian, 2001;
McSherry, 2001) (or analyzing existing algorithms in these
models (Jerrum & Sorkin, 1993; Dimitriou & Impagliazzo,
1998; Bilu & Linial, 2012b)). For the model to be relevant
it should forbid pathological instances that are extremely
unlikely in practice while capturing the essence of the realworld instances without oversimplifying them.

1. Introduction
Graph clustering and partitioning problems are central in
combinatorial optimization. Their study has led to a large
variety of key results, leading to new fundamental ideas and
impactful practical outcomes. The sparsest cut and balanced
cut problems are iconic examples: On the one hand, they
have served as a testbed for designing new breakthrough

While there has been a significant amount of work on inference in random and semi-random graph models, the work of
Makarychev, Makarychev and Vijayaraghavan (Makarychev
et al., 2012) is among the first to analyze the approximability and complexity of the graph partitioning objectives
mentioned above for extremely general families of semirandom graphs. In their settings, the input is generated from

*

1
Equal contribution
Google Research 2 BIDSA, Bocconi.
Correspondence to:
Tommaso d’Orsi
<tommaso.dorsi@unibocconi.it>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

