Coarse-To-Fine Tensor Trains for Compact Visual Representations

Sebastian Loeschcke 1 2 Dan Wang 1 Christian Leth-Espensen 3
Serge Belongie 1 Michael J. Kastoryano 1 Sagie Benaim 4

Abstract

search within neural field representations (Chen et al., 2022;
Obukhov et al., 2022; Müller et al., 2022) has directed its
focus towards the sparsity and efficiency of tensor networks,
hinting at the potential gains in the compactness and quality of such representations. In particular, TensoRF (Chen
et al., 2022) applied low-rank tensor decomposition of radiance fields to achieve substantial efficiency gains. This
approach was further extended by TT-NF (Obukhov et al.,
2022), which utilized a tensor train representation to improve compression. Indeed, tensor trains, as well as more
complex tensor networks (Orús, 2014; Vidal, 2007), are
known to allow substantial improvements in compression.

The ability to learn compact, high-quality, and
easy-to-optimize representations for visual data
is paramount to many applications such as novel
view synthesis and 3D reconstruction. Recent
work has shown substantial success in using tensor networks to design such compact and highquality representations. However, the ability to
optimize tensor-based representations, and in particular, the highly compact tensor train representation, is still lacking. This has prevented practitioners from deploying the full potential of tensor networks for visual data. To this end, we
propose ‘Prolongation Upsampling Tensor Train
(PuTT)’, a novel method for learning tensor train
representations in a coarse-to-fine manner. Our
method involves the prolonging or ‘upsampling’
of a learned tensor train representation, creating
a sequence of ‘coarse-to-fine’ tensor trains that
are incrementally refined. We evaluate our representation along three axes: (1). compression,
(2). denoising capability, and (3). image completion capability. To assess these axes, we consider
the tasks of image fitting, 3D fitting, and novel
view synthesis, where our method shows an improved performance compared to state-of-the-art
tensor-based methods.

However, despite encouraging progress, the full realization
of tensor networks for compact and efficient representations is still lacking. The main obstacles of current tensorbased representations are: (1). Optimization using current
gradient-based schemes often gets stuck in local minima and
falls short of the ultimate compression limit of the tensor
train format. In particular, TensoRF (Chen et al., 2022) can
only handle small tensors and does not enjoy the significant parameter efficiency of tensor trains. TT-NF (Obukhov
et al., 2022) highlights the capacity of tensor trains to model
larger tensors using significantly fewer parameters compared to TensoRF, offering, in principle, a more scalable
approach. However, TT-NF lacks efficient optimization
strategies aligned to TensoRF. TT-NF often reaches a local
minimum in optimization and cannot model the full potential of tensor trains, resulting in poorer performance. (2).
They often struggle with noisy and incomplete data.

https://github.com/sebulo/PuTT

Toward resolving these obstacles, we propose a novel,
coarse-to-fine, tensor-train-based representation called ‘Prolongation Upsampling Tensor Train (PuTT)’ and an associated gradient-based optimization strategy. Our strategy
involves the prolonging or ‘upsampling’ of a learned tensor
train representation in a coarse-to-fine manner, creating a
sequence of ‘coarse-to-fine’ tensor trains that are incrementally refined. The coarse-to-fine operations are performed
directly in the tensor train format, circumventing the need to
process individual data points, as is customary in linear interpolation. This allows for efficient sampling and for PuTT to
be applied to extremely fine grids and to fit high-resolution
data at limited additional memory and computational cost.

1. Introduction
Building a compact, easy-to-fit, and high-quality visual data
representation is paramount for many computer vision and
graphics applications, such as novel view synthesis, 3D fitting, and generation (Xie et al., 2022). To this end, recent re1

University of Copenhagen 2 IT University of Copenhagen 3 Aarhus
University 4 Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Correspondence to:
Sebastian Loeschcke <sbl@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

