Candidate Pseudolabel Learning: Enhancing Vision-Language Models by
Prompt Tuning with Unlabeled Data

Jiahan Zhang * 1 Qi Wei * 2 Feng Liu 3 Lei Feng 1

Abstract

0

Fine-tuning vision-language models (VLMs) with
abundant unlabeled data recently has attracted increasing attention. Existing methods that resort
to the pseudolabeling strategy would suffer from
heavily incorrect hard pseudolabels when VLMs
exhibit low zero-shot performance in downstream
tasks. To alleviate this issue, we propose a
Candidate Pseudolabel Learning method, termed
CPL, to fine-tune VLMs with suitable candidate
pseudolabels of unlabeled data in downstream
tasks. The core of our method lies in the generation strategy of candidate pseudolabels, which
progressively generates refined candidate pseudolabels by both intra- and inter-instance label
selection, based on a confidence score matrix for
all unlabeled data. This strategy can result in better performance in true label inclusion and classbalanced instance selection. In this way, we can
directly apply existing loss functions to learn with
generated candidate psueudolabels. Extensive experiments on nine benchmark datasets with three
learning paradigms demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method. Our code can be found here.

1

2

Predicted Label
3
4
5
6

7

8

9

VLMs
Output

Ground Truth

True label

Hard pseudolabel

True label
is selected!
Candidate pseudolabel

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Confusion matrix between true labels and
hard pseudolabels of dataset EuroSAT, where incorrect and
imbalanced pseudolabels are always generated. (b) An example illustration of a set of candidate pseudolabels, which
consists of classes with the top-2 highest confidence scores.

labeled data is hard to obtain.
In response to this challenge, recent studies (Menghini et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2022; Lai et al., 2023; Tanwisuth et al.,
2023; Shu et al., 2022) have shifted their focus towards
scenarios with abundant unlabeled data, aiming to exploit
the inherent zero-shot ability of VLMs. These studies can
reduce the dependency on labeled data for adapting VLMs
to downstream tasks. Besides, previous studies also showed
that fine-tuning VLMs with pseudolabels generated by the
zero-shot ability of VLMs is an effective approach for exploiting unlabeled data (Huang et al., 2022; Menghini et al.,
2023; Mirza et al., 2023). However, the performance of
existing methods heavily relies on the accuracy of the generated hard pseudolabels. When VLMs exhibit diminished
zero-shot abilities in certain downstream tasks, the performance of these methods would significantly deteriorate.

1. Introduction
Recent studies in large pre-trained vision-language models
(VLMs) (Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Yuan et al.,
2021) have demonstrated promising zero-shot performance.
Nonetheless, previous research (Zhou et al., 2022a;b; Zhang
et al., 2024) indicated that substantial labeled data is still
necessary to further improve the performance of VLMs for
adaptation on various downstream tasks. This requirement
for adaptation would cause considerable labeling costs, as

To illustrate this issue, we conducted a pilot experiment to
empirically demonstrate the deficiency of hard pseudolabels.
Specifically, we leveraged CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to
generate hard pseudolabels on the EuroSAT dataset (Helber et al., 2019) and subsequently calculated the confusion
matrix between the ground-truth labels and predicted class
labels. The results, as shown in Figure 1(a), reveal that a

*
Equal contribution 1 Singapore University of Technology and
Design, Singapore 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
University of Melbourne, Australia. Correspondence to: Lei Feng
<feng lei@sutd.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

