Learning Adaptive and View-Invariant Vision Transformer for Real-Time UAV
Tracking

Yongxin Li * 1 Mengyuan Liu * 1 You Wu * 1 Xucheng Wang 1 Xiangyang Yang 1 Shuiwang Li 1

Abstract
Harnessing transformer-based models, visual
tracking has made substantial strides. However,
the sluggish performance of current trackers limits
their practicality on devices with constrained computational capabilities, especially for real-time
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) tracking. Addressing this challenge, we introduce AVTrack,
an adaptive computation framework tailored to selectively activate transformer blocks for real-time
UAV tracking in this work. Our novel Activation Module (AM) dynamically optimizes ViT
architecture, selectively engaging relevant components and enhancing inference efficiency without compromising much tracking performance.
Moreover, we bolster the effectiveness of ViTs,
particularly in addressing challenges arising from
extreme changes in viewing angles commonly
encountered in UAV tracking, by learning viewinvariant representations through mutual information maximization. Extensive experiments on
five tracking benchmarks affirm the effectiveness
and versatility of our approach, positioning it
as a state-of-the-art solution in visual tracking.
Code is released at: https://github.com/
wuyou3474/AVTrack.

Figure 1. Compared with state-of-the-art UAV tracking algorithms
on VisDrone2018. Our AVTrack-DeiT sets a new record with
0.860 precision and still runs efficiently at approximately 220 FPS.

the efficiency of UAV tracking is paramount, given the limited battery capacity and computing resources inherent to
UAVs (Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023;
Liu et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2020b). Researchers and practitioners are actively exploring innovative approaches to
refine tracking algorithms, accuracy, and efficiency to meet
the unique demands of UAV applications.
Although discriminative correlation filters (DCF)-based
trackers dominate the filed of UAV tracking for their high
efficiency, they hardly match deep learning (DL)-based
methods in tracking precision. Especially notable is the
growing trend in the DL-based methods towards the adoption of single-stream architectures, seamlessly integrating
feature extraction and fusion through pre-trained Vision
Transformer (ViT) backbone networks. The success of
recent approaches like OSTRack (Ye et al., 2022a), SimTrack (Chen et al., 2022), Mixformer (Cui et al., 2022), and
DropMAE (Wu et al., 2023) exemplifies the effectiveness
of this paradigm shift. Inspired by this, Aba-VTrack (Li
et al., 2023) delivers an lightweight DL-based tracker based
on this framework with an adaptive and background-aware
token computation method to reduce inference time, and
shows remarkable precision and speed for real-time UAV
tracking. Nonetheless, the utilization of a variable number
of tokens in this approach leads to a significant time cost,
primarily arising from unstructured access operations.

1. Introduction
As unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) continue to evolve and
diversify in their applications, the field of UAV tracking
has become increasingly critical. UAV tracking involves
assessing and predicting the positions of arbitrary targets
within continuous aerial imagery, and presents unique challenges, including handling extreme view angle, mitigating
motion blur, and overcoming severe occlusion. In addition,
*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science and Engineering, Guilin University of Technology, Guilin, China. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Li <lishuiwang0721@163.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

