A Unified Linear Programming Framework for Offline Reward Learning
from Human Demonstrations and Feedback
Kihyun Kim * 1 Jiawei Zhang * 1 Asuman Ozdaglar 1 Pablo Parrilo 1

Abstract

methodologies in reward learning, applied in various sequential decision-making tasks such as games (MacGlashan
et al., 2017; Christiano et al., 2017; Ibarz et al., 2018),
robotics (Finn et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2019; Shin et al.,
2023), and language models (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2023).s Particularly in the recent drastic development of
large language models (LLMs), RLHF has played a crucial role in fine-tuning models to better align with human
preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, despite the
notable empirical success of these algorithms, a significant
gap remains in the theoretical analysis of IRL and RLHF,
limiting us to guarantee their reliability. This work aims to
bridge this gap by proposing a novel theoretical framework
for offline IRL and RLHF.

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) are pivotal methodologies in reward
learning, which involve inferring and shaping
the underlying reward function of sequential
decision-making problems based on observed human demonstrations and feedback. Most prior
work in reward learning has relied on prior knowledge or assumptions about decision or preference
models, potentially leading to robustness issues.
In response, this paper introduces a novel linear
programming (LP) framework tailored for offline
reward learning. Utilizing pre-collected trajectories without online exploration, this framework
estimates a feasible reward set from the primaldual optimality conditions of a suitably designed
LP, and offers an optimality guarantee with provable sample efficiency. Our LP framework also
enables aligning the reward functions with human
feedback, such as pairwise trajectory comparison
data, while maintaining computational tractability and sample efficiency. We demonstrate that
our framework potentially achieves better performance compared to the conventional maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) approach through
analytical examples and numerical experiments.

IRL aims to infer a reward function that aligns with an expert behavior from demonstrations (Ng & Russell, 2000;
Abbeel & Ng, 2004). Typical IRL algorithms employ a
bi-level optimization framework within the context of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). In this framework, the
inner optimization evaluates the policy based on the current
reward parameters, while the outer optimization updates
these parameters to better match observed expert behavior.
These algorithms have been extensively explored in the literature (Ziebart et al., 2008; Wulfmeier et al., 2015; Zhou
et al., 2017; Zeng et al., 2022; 2023), and their convergence
is studied in both online settings (Zeng et al., 2022) and
offline settings (Zeng et al., 2023).
Building upon IRL, RLHF recovers a reward function from
human feedback data, which is commonly given by pairwise or K-wise trajectory comparisons. Despite growing
interest in RLHF, only a few algorithms provide optimality
guarantees with sample complexity bound. Most existing
approaches adopt an MLE framework, assuming that human
evaluators follow a presupposed preference model, such
as the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model. The reward parameters are then fine-tuned to maximize the log-likelihood
of the collected offline preference data (Christiano et al.,
2017). Recently, (Zhu et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2023) have proposed offline RLHF algorithms with
optimality guarantees by adopting a pessimistic mechanism
from offline reinforcement learning (RL) theory. (Park et al.,
2024) further suggested a personalized setting that learns

1. Introduction
Reward learning involves inferring and shaping the underlying reward function from observed human demonstrations
and feedback. Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) and
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF, also
known as preference-based reinforcement learning) are key
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Kihyun Kim <kihyun@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

