Diffusion Posterior Sampling is Computationally Intractable

Shivam Gupta * 1 Ajil Jalal * 2 Aditya Parulekar * 1 Eric Price * 1 Zhiyang Xun * 1
with N (0, σ 2 I). These have corresponding smoothed scores
sσ (x) := ∇ log pσ (x). Given the smoothed scores, the distribution p can be sampled using an SDE (Ho et al., 2020) or
an ODE (Song et al., 2021). Moreover, the smoothed score
is the minimizer of what is known as the score-matching
objective, which can be estimated from samples.

Abstract
Diffusion models are a remarkably effective way
of learning and sampling from a distribution p(x).
In posterior sampling, one is also given a measurement model p(y | x) and a measurement y,
and would like to sample from p(x | y). Posterior
sampling is useful for tasks such as inpainting,
super-resolution, and MRI reconstruction, so a
number of recent works have given algorithms to
heuristically approximate it; but none are known
to converge to the correct distribution in polynomial time. In this paper we show that posterior sampling is computationally intractable: under the most basic assumption in cryptography—
that one-way functions exist—there are instances
for which every algorithm takes superpolynomial
time, even though unconditional sampling is provably fast. We also show that the exponential-time
rejection sampling algorithm is essentially optimal under the stronger plausible assumption that
there are one-way functions that take exponential
time to invert.

Sampling via diffusion models is fairly well understood
from a theoretical perspective. The sampling SDE and ODE
are both fast (polynomial time) and robust (tolerating L2
error in the estimation of the smoothed score). Moreover,
with polynomial training samples of the distribution, the
empirical risk minimizer (ERM) of the score matching objective will have bounded L2 error, leading to accurate samples (Block et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2023). So diffusion
models give fast and robust unconditional samples.
But sampling from the original distribution is not the main
utility of diffusion models: that comes from using the models to solve downstream tasks. A natural goal is to sample from the posterior: the distribution gives a prior p(x)
over images, so given a noisy measurement y of x with
known measurement model p(y | x), we can in principle
use Bayes’ rule to compute and sample from p(x | y). Often
(such as for inpainting, superresolution, MRI reconstruction)
the measurement process is the noisy linear measurement
model, with measurement y = Ax+η for a known measurement matrix A ∈ Rm×d with m < d, and Gaussian noise
η = βN (0, Im ); we will focus on such linear measurements
in this paper.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, diffusion models have emerged as a
powerful way for representing distributions of images. Such
models, such as Dall-E (Ramesh et al., 2022) and Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), are very effective at learning and sampling from distributions. These models can then
be used as priors for a wide variety of downstream tasks,
including inpainting, superresolution, and MRI reconstruction.

Posterior sampling has many appealing properties for image
reconstruction tasks. For example, if you want to identify
x precisely, posterior sampling is within a factor 2 of the
minimum error possible for every measurement model and
every error metric (Jalal et al., 2021a). When ambiguities do
arise, posterior sampling has appealing fairness guarantees
with respect to sensitive attributes (Jalal et al., 2021b).

Diffusion models are based on representing the smoothed
scores of the desired distribution. For a distribution p(x),
we define the smoothed distribution pσ (x) to be p convolved

Given the appeal of posterior sampling, the natural question is: is efficient posterior sampling possible given approximate smoothed scores? A large number of recent papers (Jalal et al., 2021a; Chung et al., 2023; Kawar et al.,
2021; Trippe et al., 2023a; Song et al., 2023; Kawar et al.,
2022; Dou & Song, 2024) have studied algorithms for posterior sampling, with promising empirical results. But all
these fail on some inputs; can we find a better posterior

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Zhiyang Xun <zxun@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

