Rate-Optimal Policy Optimization for Linear Markov Decision Processes

Uri Sherman 1 Alon Cohen 1 2 Tomer Koren 1 2 Yishay Mansour 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2023b; Zhong & Zhang, 2023) in the function approximation setting with linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020) assumptions fall short of establishing the optimal dependence
on the number of episodes 𝐾; arguably, the most important
problem parameter.

We study regret minimization in online episodic
linear Markov Decision Processes, and propose
a policy optimization algorithm that is computa√
e( 𝐾)
tionally efficient, and obtains rate optimal 𝑂
regret where 𝐾 denotes the number of episodes.
Our work is the first to establish the optimal rate
(in terms of 𝐾) of convergence in the stochastic
setting with bandit feedback using a policy optimization based approach, and the first to establish the optimal rate in the adversarial setup with
full information feedback, for which no algorithm
with an optimal rate guarantee was previously
known.

In this work, we establish that an optimistic variant of the
classic natural policy gradient 1 (NPG; Kakade,√2001) obe( 𝐾) regret
tains the optimal (up to logarithmic factors) 𝑂
when combined with a short reward free warmup period
and a suitable bonus update schedule. Our results hold for
adversarial losses when the learner is given full information
feedback, and for stochastic losses when given bandit feedback. Thus our algorithm is also the first (and currently, the
only) method to obtain rate optimal regret (be it by PO or
any other approach) for adversarial losses with full feedback
in the linear MDP setup.

1. Introduction
1.1. Summary of contributions

Policy Optimization (PO) algorithms are a class of methods in Reinforcement Learning (RL; Sutton & Barto, 2018;
Mannor et al., 2022) where the agent’s policy is iteratively
updated according to the (possibly preconditioned) gradient
of the value function w.r.t. policy parameters. From a theoretical perspective, framing the optimization process as one
that follows Mirror Descent (Nemirovskij & Yudin, 1983;
Beck & Teboulle, 2003) updates leads to strong online guarantees that go beyond stationary or stochastic rewards, and
apply more generally for any (possibly adversarial) reward
sequence (Shani et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021). Furthermore,
PO methods are easy to implement in practice and (perhaps, one could say, somewhat in line with theory) exhibit
favorable robustness properties when applied to real world
problems ranging from robotics (Levine & Koltun, 2013;
Schulman et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018), computer
games (Schulman et al., 2017), and more recently training
of large language models (Ouyang et al., 2022).

We consider online learning in a finite horizon episodic linear MDP, where an agent interacts with the environment over
the course of 𝐾 episodes. In each episode 𝑘 ∈ [𝐾],the agent
interacts with the MDP M 𝑘 = (S, A, 𝐻, {ℙℎ } , ℓℎ𝑘 , 𝑠1 ),
that shares all elements with MDPs of other episodes except
for the loss functions. Our central structural assumption
is that the dynamics and losses are linear; that there exist
feature embeddings 𝜙, 𝜓1 , . . . , 𝜓 𝐻 such that ℙℎ (𝑠′ |𝑠, 𝑎) =
𝜙(𝑠, 𝑎) ⊤ 𝜓 ℎ (𝑠′ ), and 𝔼[ℓℎ𝑘 (𝑠, 𝑎)|𝑠, 𝑎] = 𝜙(𝑠, 𝑎) ⊤ 𝑔 ℎ,𝑘 , for
some 𝑔 ℎ,𝑘 ∈ ℝ𝑑 . The objective of the agent is to minimize
her regret, defined by the sum of value functions (namely,
the expected cumulative loss) of the agent minus the sum of
values of the best policy in hindsight.
Our main contribution in this paper is a computationally
efficient policy optimization
algorithm (see Algorithm 1),
√
e( 𝐾) regret bound under either of the
that guarantees an 𝑂
following two conditions:

Notwithstanding their popularity and theoretical appeal, current results (Agarwal et al., 2020; Zanette et al., 2021; Liu

• For any (possibly adversarial) loss sequence 𝑔 ℎ,𝑘 ,
when given full feedback, meaning the agent observes
𝑔1,𝑘 , . . . , 𝑔 𝐻,𝑘 after each episode 𝑘.

1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University,

Tel Aviv, Israel 2 Google Research, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Uri Sherman <urisherman@mail.tau.ac.il>.

1 To be precise, our algorithm is the classic NPG with soft-

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

max parametrization equipped with an optimistic linear function
approximation routine for action-value estimates.

1

