Improved Dimensionality Dependence for Zeroth-Order Optimisation over
Cross-Polytopes

Weijia Shao 1

Abstract

dimensionality-dependent. For the d-dimensional problem
with convex and Lipschitz continuous objective functions,
Duchi et al. have proved aplower bound of the iteration
complexity depending on d(log d)−1 and provided an
algorithm
with a convergence upper bound depending on
√
d log d if the objectives are smooth. For bandit convex
optimisation with non-smooth loss functions, Shamir has
proposed
an algorithm with a regret upper bounded
by
√
√
O( T d log d), which has been improved to O( T d log d)
by Akhavan et al..

This work proposes an algorithm improving the
dimensionality dependence for gradient-free optimisation over cross-polytopes, which has many
applications such as adversarial attacks, explainable AI and sparse regression. For bandit convex
optimisation with two-point feedback over crosspolytopes, the state-of-the-art algorithms
√ have
a dimensionality dependence of O( d log d),
while
p the known lower bound is of the form
Ω( d(log d)−1 ). We propose a mirror descent
algorithm equipped with a symmetric version of
the negative 12 -Tsallis entropy. Combined with an
ℓ1 -ellipsoidal smoothing-based gradient estimator,
the proposed algorithm√
guarantees a dimensionality dependence on O( d), which improves
√ the
state-of-the-art algorithms by a factor of log d.
The idea can be further applied to optimising nonsmooth and non-convex functions. We propose
an algorithm with a convergence depending on
O(d), which is the best-known dimensionality
dependence.

The algorithms described above are based on the idea of
exploiting the geometry of the maximum normed space
(Rd , ∥·∥∞ ). By combining gradient estimators with error
bounded by O(d) and mirror descent (MD) with performance depending on O(log d) (Duchi et al., 2015; Shamir,
2017; Akhavan et al., 2022), these algorithms can efficiently
search the decision variables in the negative gradient direction in (Rd , ∥·∥∞ ). This idea has also been applied to
optimising nonconvex but smooth objective functions in
(Shao & Albayrak, 2023; Shao et al., 2022). It is impossible to further improve the gradient estimator (Kornowski
& Shamir, 2023) or the searching strategy in (Rd , ∥·∥∞ )
(Orabona & Pál, 2015). Therefore, it is doubtful that the
gap between the upper and lower bounds of the optimisation
problem can be closed by following this idea.

1. Introduction

This work is inspired by the Implicitly Normalised Forecaster (INF) (Audibert & Bubeck, 2010), which improves
the dimensionality-dependence of the
√ multi√ adversarial
armed bandit (MAB) problem from d log d to d. For
each arm a in the action set and the probability pa of choosing the arm, the importance-weighted estimator employed
in INF is an unbiased estimator of the loss vector with a
per-arm variance proportional to p1a , which has a strong
dependence on the size of the action set. The exploitation
strategy of INF, which is MD with negative 12 -Tsallis entropy (Audibert & Bubeck, 2010) and used to update pa
at each iteration, can normalise the variance to reduce the
dimensionality dependence. Our idea is based on the similarity between the importance-weighted estimator and the
ℓ1 -smoothing based two-point gradient estimator (Akhavan
et al., 2022). By extending the randomisation over the ℓ1 ball to the randomisation over the ℓ1 -ellipsoid, we construct

Gradient-free optimisation with two-point feedback (Agarwal et al., 2010) has attracted significant attention from
the machine learning community. We are interested in the
problem with decision set contained in the cross-polytopes,
which is usually considered as a relaxation of the sparse constraint and has many applications, such as adversarial attack
(Chen et al., 2018), explainable machine learning (Natesan Ramamurthy et al., 2020) and sparse cox regression (Liu
et al., 2018). Decision sets contained in a cross-polytope
define low-dimensional structures, making the problem less
1
Unit 2.6 Workplaces, Safety of Machinery, Operational Safety, Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, Dresden, Germany. Correspondence to: Weijia Shao
<Shao.Weijia@baua.bund.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

