Causal Discovery with Fewer Conditional Independence Tests

Kirankumar Shiragur * 1 Jiaqi Zhang * 1 2 Caroline Uhler 2

Abstract

Friedman et al., 2000; Robins et al., 2000; Spirtes et al.,
2000; Pearl, 2003). Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) stand
out as a popular choice for representing causal relations,
with edge directions signifying the flow of information between variables. The core objective of causal discovery is to
identify both the edges and their orientations based on available data. While certain structures can be recovered from
observational data (Verma & Pearl, 1990), orienting the full
graph often requires additional experiments or interventions.

Many questions in science center around the
fundamental problem of understanding causal
relationships. However, most constraint-based
causal discovery algorithms, including the wellcelebrated PC algorithm, often incur an exponential number of conditional independence (CI)
tests, posing limitations in various applications.
Addressing this, our work focuses on characterizing what can be learned about the underlying
causal graph with a reduced number of CI tests.
We show that it is possible to a learn a coarser
representation of the hidden causal graph with
a polynomial number of tests. This coarser representation, named Causal Consistent Partition
Graph (CCPG), comprises of a partition of the
vertices and a directed graph defined over its components. CCPG satisfies consistency of orientations and additional constraints which favor finer
partitions. Furthermore, it reduces to the underlying causal graph when the causal graph is identifiable. As a consequence, our results offer the
first efficient algorithm for recovering the true
causal graph with a polynomial number of tests,
in special cases where the causal graph is fully
identifiable through observational data and potentially additional interventions.

Research on causal structure learning from observational
data dates back to the 1990s (Verma & Pearl, 1990; Spirtes
et al., 1989). As a pioneering work in this direction, the
PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000), named after the authors
Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour, still remains one of most
popular and widely used algorithms. It recovers the structure
using observational data through conditional independence
(CI) tests, with the number of tests being exponential in the
degree of the graph. Following this, many causal discovery
algorithms emerged (Kalisch & Bühlman, 2007; Brenner
& Sontag, 2013; Alonso-Barba et al., 2013; Schulte et al.,
2010), accommodating diverse and more general settings, including the presence of latent variables (Spirtes et al., 1999;
2013) and interventional data (Eberhardt et al., 2005; 2006).
However, a common challenge shared by these algorithms is
their reliance, to different extents, on an exponential number
of CI tests in certain graph parameters. This inherent dependence on an exponential number of tests poses practical
challenges, making them unsuitable for many real-world
scenarios. Moreover, it suggests that achieving exact causal
structure learning can be highly challenging.

1. Introduction

As performing exponential number of tests is limited in
many applications, it motivates us to study the following
question:

Causal discovery is a fundamental task in various scientific
disciplines including biology, economics, and sociology
(King et al., 2004; Cho et al., 2016; Tian, 2016; Sverchkov
& Craven, 2017; Rotmensch et al., 2017; Pingault et al.,
2018; de Campos et al., 2019; Reichenbach, 1956; Woodward, 2005; Eberhardt & Scheines, 2007; Hoover, 1990;

What useful information about the underlying causal graph
can be inferred with fewer conditional independence tests?

*

Equal contribution; alphabetic order 1 Eric and Wendy Schmidt
Center, Broad Institute 2 Laboratory for Information & Decision
Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence
to: Kirankumar Shiragur <kshiragu@broadinstitute.org>, Jiaqi
Zhang <viczhang@mit.edu>.

Aligned with this motivation, our work also explores the
role of interventions in the structure learning process.
In our work, we study these questions under standard
Markov, faithfulness and causal sufficiency assumptions
(Lauritzen, 1996; Spirtes et al., 2000). The primary contribution of our work is an efficient algorithm that uses a
polynomial number of CI tests and recovers a representation

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

