More Flexible PAC-Bayesian Meta-Learning by Learning Learning Algorithms

Hossein Zakerinia 1 Amin Behjati 2 Christoph H. Lampert 1

Abstract

share knowledge between related learning tasks (Schmidhuber, 1987; Thrun & Pratt, 1998). Instead of learning individual models for each task, a meta-learner learns a mechanism,
a learning algorithm, that sets the model parameters given a
(usually small) amount of training data.

We introduce a new framework for studying metalearning methods using PAC-Bayesian theory. Its
main advantage over previous work is that it allows for more flexibility in how the transfer of
knowledge between tasks is realized. For previous
approaches, this could only happen indirectly, by
means of learning prior distributions over models.
In contrast, the new generalization bounds that we
prove express the process of meta-learning much
more directly as learning the learning algorithm
that should be used for future tasks. The flexibility of our framework makes it suitable to analyze
a wide range of meta-learning mechanisms and
even design new mechanisms. Other than our theoretical contributions we also show empirically
that our framework improves the prediction quality in practical meta-learning mechanisms.

In practice, there are numerous possibilities to realize this
step. Model-based approaches to meta-learning learn prototypical models which can efficiently be adjusted (e.g. finetuned) to specific tasks (Finn et al., 2017; Nichol et al.,
2018). Relatedly, regularization-based approaches learn
regularization terms that prevent future tasks from overfitting even if trained on little data (Denevi et al., 2019). Hypernetwork-based approaches learn secondary networks that
output the weights of task-specific models (Zhao et al., 2020;
Scott et al., 2024). Representation-based approaches learn
(often low-dimensional) feature representations in which
learning can be performed with less training data than in the
original input space (Maurer, 2009; Maurer et al., 2016; Lee
et al., 2019). Optimization-based approaches learn the steps
or (hyper)parameters of an optimization procedure (Hochreiter et al., 2001; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017; Li et al., 2017).

1. Introduction

All meta-learning methods strive for generalization between
previously seen tasks and future ones. Unfortunately, most
of the above methods are only understood in terms of their
empirical performance on example tasks, but they lack theoretical guarantees on their generalization abilities.

Machine learning systems have remarkable success in solving complex tasks when they are trained on large amounts
of data. However, their success is still limited when only
little data is available for a task. One reason for this is that
common machine learning algorithms, such as minimizing
training loss through gradient-based optimization, are very
generic. Tailored to be applicable across a wide range of
data sources and target tasks, the underlying models need
to have many degrees of freedom, and they require a lot
of training data to adjust these suitably. In contrast to this,
natural learning systems can learn new tasks from little taskspecific data. They achieve this by transferring and reusing
information from their past experience to new tasks, instead
of learning a new model from scratch every time.

Meta-learning theory studies the theoretical properties of
meta-learning method. In particular, it aims at providing
quantitative generalization guarantees for them, in the form
of high-probability upper bounds on the quality of models
learned on future tasks, even before data for these tasks
is available. Historically, the first attempts to do so had
the form of classical PAC guarantees, which were dataindependent and had to be derived individually for each
method (Baxter, 2000; Maurer, 2009). However, starting
with Pentina & Lampert (2014), most recent works exploit
PAC-Bayesian theory, which proved to be more flexible
and powerful. Not only does it allow deriving bounds that
can be instantiated for different meta-learning methods, but
the generalization guarantees are also data-dependent, and
interpreting them as learning objectives can inspire new
meta-learning methods (Amit & Meir, 2018; Rothfuss et al.,
2021). Unfortunately, existing theoretical results still apply

Meta-learning (also called learning-to-learn) is a principled
way of also giving machine learning systems the ability to
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA) 2 Sharif
University of Technology. Correspondence to: Hossein Zakerinia
<Hossein.Zakerinia@ist.ac.at>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

