What Would Gauss Say About Representations?
Probing Pretrained Image Models using Synthetic Gaussian Benchmarks

Ching-Yun Ko 1 2 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Payel Das 2 Jeet Mohapatra 1 Luca Daniel 1

Abstract

generic representations of the input data, which we call
pretrained representations for simplicity. The pretrained
representations are then used as a foundation (Bommasani
et al., 2021) to solve downstream tasks. Prevalent ways
include training a linear head (i.e., linear probing) on the
representations with the labels provided by a downstream
dataset, or simply employing zero-shot inference.

Recent years have witnessed a paradigm shift
in deep learning from task-centric model design
to task-agnostic representation learning and taskspecific fine-tuning. Pretrained model representations are commonly evaluated extensively across
various real-world tasks and used as a foundation for different downstream tasks. This paper
proposes a solution for assessing the quality of
representations in a task-agnostic way. To circumvent the need for real-world data in evaluation, we
explore the use of synthetic binary classification
tasks with Gaussian mixtures to probe pretrained
models and compare the robustness-accuracy performance on pretrained representations with an
idealized reference. Our approach offers a holistic
evaluation, revealing intrinsic model capabilities
and reducing the dependency on real-life data for
model evaluation. Evaluated with various pretrained image models, the experimental results
confirm that our task-agnostic evaluation correlates with actual linear probing performance on
downstream tasks and can also guide parameter
choice in robust linear probing to achieve a better
robustness-accuracy trade-off.

When gauging the usefulness of a pretrained model, it
is a convention to conduct evaluations on selected public
datasets. For example, ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) reports accuracy on 25 tasks, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) on
27 datasets, and PLEX (Tran et al., 2022) on over 40 datasets
to systematically evaluate different reliability dimensions
on both vision and language domains. However, this convention has several drawbacks. For example, the evaluation
process evidently poses significant computational overhead
on the model trainer and raises data privacy concerns, setting a high bar for new model designs and large-scale AI
governance. More importantly, the evaluation result is dependent on specific evaluation datasets. Thus the nominal
evaluation score can be inconclusive if the evaluation data
are biased or under-representative. For instance, ViT-L/16
is reportedly performing better than ViT-B/16 on 23 out of
27 linear probing tasks according to (Radford et al., 2021,
Table 10), but worse than ViT-B/16 on FoodSeg103 (Wu
et al., 2021, Table 8), X-ray images (Okolo et al., 2022, Table 4-8), and magnetic resonance imaging (Tummala et al.,
2022, Table 2-3) tasks. Fundamentally, a poor probing result might come from either (1) evaluation data bias, (2)
true model deficiency, or both. In this paper, we attempt to
disentangle the effect of the two and focus on designing wellposed sanity checks for the latter. We utilize synthetic data
generated from class-conditional data prior, whose optimal
classification strategy is known, and compare the optimal
strategy with representations’ linear separability. For example, Fisher’s linear discriminant rule (Johnson et al., 2002;
Petridis & Perantonis, 2004) decides the optimal strategy
for Gaussian distribution. If the data can be separated with
90% accuracy in the raw input space and 60% in the representation space, then the pretrained model has an intrinsic
deficiency. Building on that, the trending practice of pretraining and fine-tuning also signifies immediate damage to
all adapted applications if the foundation model has hidden

1. Introduction
In recent years, the use of large pretrained neural networks
for efficient fine-tuning on downstream tasks has prevailed
in many domains such as vision, language, and speech. Instead of designing task-dependent neural network architectures for different downstream tasks, the current methodology focuses on the principle of task-agnostic pretraining and
task-specific finetuning. This methodology uses a neural
network pretrained on a large-scale broad dataset to extract
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
MIT, Cambridge, USA 2 IBM Research, Yorktown, USA. Correspondence to: Ching-Yun Ko <cyko@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

