MAGD I: Structured Distillation of Multi-Agent Interaction Graphs
Improves Reasoning in Smaller Language Models

Justin Chih-Yao Chen * 1 Swarnadeep Saha * 1 Elias Stengel-Eskin 1 Mohit Bansal 1

Abstract

A football team
played 22 games.
They won 8 more
than they lost.
How many did
they win?
(Gold Answer: 15)

Multi-agent interactions between Large Language
Model (LLM) agents have shown major improvements on diverse reasoning tasks. However, these
involve long generations from multiple models
across several rounds, making them expensive.
Moreover, these multi-agent approaches fail to
provide a final, single model for efficient inference. To address this, we introduce MAGD I, a
new method for structured distillation of the reasoning interactions between multiple LLMs into
smaller LMs. MAGD I teaches smaller models by
representing multi-agent interactions as graphs,
augmenting a base student model with a graph
encoder, and distilling knowledge using three objective functions: next-token prediction, a contrastive loss between correct and incorrect reasoning, and a graph-based objective to model the interaction structure. Experiments on seven widelyused commonsense and math reasoning benchmarks show that MAGD I improves the reasoning capabilities of smaller models, outperforming
several methods that distill from a single teacher
and multiple teachers. Moreover, MAGD I also
demonstrates an order of magnitude higher efficiency over its teachers. We conduct extensive
analyses to show that MAGD I (1) enhances the
generalizability to out-of-domain tasks, (2) scales
positively with the size and strength of the base
student model, and (3) obtains larger improvements (via our multi-teacher training) when applying self-consistency – an inference technique
that relies on model diversity.1

Multi-Round
Teacher Discussion

Multi-Agent
Interaction Graph (MAG)

Let L be the number
of losses… so the
team won 14 games.

MAGDI

… L+(L+8)=22.
Hence, they won L+8
= 7+8 = 15 games.

Base Model

+ 10.71%

MAGDI-Distilled Model

Figure 1. Overview of our distillation method. Given a reasoning
problem, multiple teacher-LLMs engage in a multi-round discussion, leading to the generation of a multi-agent interaction graph
(MAG). Then our structured distillation method, MAGD I distills
reasoning knowledge from these graphs into a base student model.

1. Introduction
Debate and dialogue are natural ways to improve reasoning:
we form our best ideas not in isolation, but by refining and
discussing them with others. Similarly, we can improve
Large Language Models (LLMs) – which often exhibit impressive multi-step reasoning capabilities (Wei et al., 2022;
Kojima et al., 2022) – by allowing multiple LLM instances
to interact in a discussion (Du et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023b; Wu et al., 2023). These interactive frameworks
enable each agent to iteratively refine its reasoning by obtaining feedback from others, thereby leading to a better
consensus at the end of multiple interaction rounds.

Equal contribution 1 UNC Chapel Hill. Correspondence to:
Justin Chih-Yao Chen <cyaochen@cs.unc.edu>.

Discussion frameworks are typically built on top of proprietary models, e.g., GPT-4, Bard, Claude, etc., which can
act as general conversational agents, handle long contexts,
and follow instructions (Bubeck et al., 2023). However,
these models are also computationally and monetarily expensive, especially when used in multi-round interactions,
which require numerous long-token length inference calls
to the underlying LLMs.2 Moreover, these frameworks do
not result in a final, joint model that can then be directly
used for inference and instead require invoking all inter-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code/data: https://github.com/dinobby/MAGDi.

2
For example, one such multi-LLM interaction method, ReConcile (Chen et al., 2023b) uses around 1900 tokens per sample on
a math reasoning task, with other discussion-based methods (e.g.,
Du et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2023)) using even larger token budgets.

*

1

