ERQ: Error Reduction for Post-Training Quantization of Vision Transformers

Yunshan Zhong 1 2 Jiawei Hu 2 3 You Huang 2 3 Yuxin Zhang 2 3 Rongrong Ji 1 2 3 4 *

Abstract

Activation quantization error reduction (Aqer)
Ridge Regression

Post-training quantization (PTQ) for vision transformers (ViTs) has garnered significant attention
due to its efficiency in compressing models. However, existing methods typically overlook the intricate interdependence between quantized weight
and activation, leading to considerable quantization error. In this paper, we propose ERQ, a
two-step PTQ approach meticulously crafted to
sequentially reduce the quantization error arising
from activation and weight quantization. ERQ
first introduces Activation quantization error reduction (Aqer) that strategically formulates the
minimization of activation quantization error as
a Ridge Regression problem, tackling it by updating weights with full-precision. Subsequently,
ERQ introduces Weight quantization error reduction (Wqer) that adopts an iterative approach to
mitigate the quantization error induced by weight
quantization. In each iteration, an empirically
derived, efficient proxy is employed to refine the
rounding directions of quantized weights, coupled
with a Ridge Regression solver to curtail weight
quantization error. Experimental results attest to
the effectiveness of our approach. Notably, ERQ
surpasses the state-of-the-art GPTQ by 22.36% in
accuracy for W3A4 ViT-S.

(

𝐖

+

𝜹𝐖 ∗

Error
Reduction
) × ( 𝐱 + 𝜹𝐱 )

𝐖

× 𝐱

𝐖

× 𝐱

𝐱

[ 𝐖 𝒔 + 𝜹𝐖 𝒔 , 𝐖 𝒓 + 𝛿𝐖 𝒓∗ ] ×

Rounding Refinement

𝐖

𝜹𝐖 𝒔

Error
𝐱 𝒔 Reduction
𝐱𝒓
Ridge Regression

Weight quantization error reduction (Wqer)
Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed ERQ.

among image patches, demonstrating impressive progress in
a variety of vision tasks (Touvron et al., 2021; Carion et al.,
2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Arnab et al., 2021).
However, great power comes with considerable complexity. The inherent architectural intricacies of ViTs result in
high computational demands and substantial memory requirements, posing challenges for deployments in resourceconstrained environments (Tang et al., 2022; Hou & Kung,
2022; Zheng et al., 2023). To mitigate this dilemma, model
quantization has garnered sustained attention from both industry and academia (Krishnamoorthi, 2018). Quantization
reduces model complexity by enabling low-bit representation of weight and activation, offering a promising pathway
for efficient deployments. Recently, researchers have been
gravitating towards post-training quantization (PTQ) for
ViTs, which seeks to quantize models with a tiny calibration
dataset and minor costs (Li et al., 2022b; Lin et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2023b; Frumkin et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) have
significantly challenged the convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), emerging as a new paradigm in the field of
computer vision. ViTs leverage multi-head self-attention
(MHSA) mechanics to capture long-range relationships
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University. 2 Key
Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University.
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University. 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory.. Correspondence to:
Rongrong Ji <rrji@xmu.edu.cn>.

Various PTQ methods have been explored to accommodate
the ViTs’ unique structure. For example, for
√ handling longtail post-Softmax activation, the log2/log 2 quantizer (Li
et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2022) and the twin uniform quantizer (Yuan et al., 2022) are introduced. To manage high

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

