Leveraging Self-Consistency for Data-Efficient Amortized Bayesian Inference

Marvin Schmitt 1 Desi R. Ivanova 2 Daniel Habermann 3 Ullrich Köthe 4 Paul-Christian Bürkner 3
Stefan T. Radev 5
2021). For complex models, the marginal
R likelihood p(Y)
is a high-dimensional integral, p(Y) = p(θ) p(Y | θ)dθ,
rendering the posterior analytically intractable in general.

Abstract
We propose a method to improve the efficiency
and accuracy of amortized Bayesian inference by
leveraging universal symmetries in the joint probabilistic model p(θ, Y) of parameters θ and data
Y. In a nutshell, we invert Bayes’ theorem and
estimate the marginal likelihood based on approximate representations of the joint model. Upon
perfect approximation, the marginal likelihood
is constant across all parameter values by definition. However, errors in approximate inference
lead to undesirable variance in the marginal likelihood estimates across different parameter values.
We penalize violations of this symmetry with a
self-consistency loss which significantly improves
the quality of approximate inference in low data
regimes and can be used to augment the training
of popular neural density estimators. We apply
our method to a number of synthetic problems and
realistic scientific models, discovering notable advantages in the context of both neural posterior
and likelihood approximation.

In likelihood-based inference, the likelihood is explicitly
available as a probability density function p(Y | θ), giving
rise to a family of likelihood-based algorithms to approximate the posterior distribution. Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods sample from the unnormalized posterior
by exploring the parameter space through a Markov chain,
with state-of-the-art samplers such as Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (Neal, 2011), as implemented in the probabilistic
programming language Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017). Variational inference approximates the posterior via tractable
analytic distributions, with consistent progress towards more
trustworthy variational methods (Blei et al., 2017).
Different from likelihood-based inference, simulation-based
inference (SBI) circumvents explicit likelihood evaluation
and relies only on random samples from a simulation program Y ∼ p(Y, Z | θ) with latent program states or “outsourced” noise Z (Cranmer et al., 2020). The execution
paths of the simulation
program define an implicit likelihood
R
p(Y | θ) = p(Y, Z | θ)dZ, which is computationally intractable for any simulation program of practical interest.
However, we have access to samples (θ, Y) of parameterdata tuples by executing the simulation program repeatedly.
In the face of analytically intractable simulators, previous
research has explored other properties of such programs
for learning surrogate likelihood functions or the likelihood
ratio (Brehmer et al., 2018; 2020b;a).

1. Introduction
Computer simulations are ubiquitous in today’s world, and
their widespread application in the sciences has heralded
a new era of simulation intelligence (Lavin et al., 2021).
Typically, scientific simulators define a mapping from latent
parameters θ to observable data Y. This forward problem is
probabilistically described by the likelihood p(Y | θ). The
inverse problem of reasoning about the unknown parameters θ given observed data Y and a prior p(θ) is captured
by the posterior p(θ | Y) = p(θ) p(Y | θ)/p(Y), which
represents a coherent way to combine all available information in a probabilistic system (Gelman et al., 2013) and
quantify epistemic uncertainty (Hüllermeier & Waegeman,

As a general perspective on simulation intelligence, amortized Bayesian inference (ABI) is concerned with enabling
fully probabilistic SBI in real-time (Radev et al., 2020;
Gonçalves et al., 2020; Avecilla et al., 2022). A core principle of ABI lies in tackling probabilistic problems (forward,
inverse, or both) with neural networks. By re-casting an
intractable probabilistic problem as forward passes through
a trained generative neural network, the required computational time reduces from hours (MCMC) to just a few
seconds (ABI). Yet, there is rarely a free lunch, and neural
ABI algorithms require an upfront training phase. The associated effort is subsequently repaid with real-time inference
on new data sets, thereby amortizing the initial training time.

1
University of Stuttgart, Germany 2 University of Oxford, UK
TU Dortmund University, Germany 4 Heidelberg University, Germany 5 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA. Correspondence to:
Marvin Schmitt <mail.marvinschmitt@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

