Faithfulness Measurable Masked Language Models

Andreas Madsen 1 2 Siva Reddy 1 3 4 Sarath Chandar 1 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
As machine learning models are increasingly being deployed, the demand for interpretability to ensure safe operation increases (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). In NLP, importance measures such as attention or integrated gradient
are a popular way of explaining which input tokens are important for making a prediction (Bhatt et al., 2019). These
explanations are not only used directly to explain models
but are also used in other explanations such as contrastive
(Yin & Neubig, 2022), counterfactuals (Ross et al., 2021),
and adversarial explanations (Ebrahimi et al., 2018).

A common approach to explaining NLP models is to use importance measures that express
which tokens are important for a prediction. Unfortunately, such explanations are often wrong
despite being persuasive. Therefore, it is essential to measure their faithfulness. One such metric is if tokens are truly important, then masking them should result in worse model performance. However, token masking introduces outof-distribution issues, and existing solutions that
address this are computationally expensive and
employ proxy models. Furthermore, other metrics are very limited in scope. This work proposes
an inherently faithfulness measurable model that
addresses these challenges. This is achieved using a novel fine-tuning method that incorporates
masking, such that masking tokens become indistribution by design. This differs from existing
approaches, which are completely model-agnostic
but are inapplicable in practice. We demonstrate
the generality of our approach by applying it to
16 different datasets and validate it using statistical in-distribution tests. The faithfulness is then
measured with 9 different importance measures.
Because masking is in-distribution, importance
measures that themselves use masking become
consistently more faithful. Additionally, because
the model makes faithfulness cheap to measure,
we can optimize explanations towards maximal
faithfulness; thus, our model becomes indirectly
inherently explainable.

Unfortunately, importance measures (IMs) are often found
to provide false explanations despite being persuasive (Jain
& Wallace, 2019; Hooker et al., 2019). For example, a given
IMs might not be better at revealing important tokens than
pointing at random tokens (Madsen et al., 2022a). This
presents a risk, as false but persuasive explanations can lead
to unsupported confidence in a model. Therefore, it’s important to measure faithfulness. Jacovi & Goldberg (2020)
defines faithfulness as: “how accurately it (explanation) reflects the true reasoning process of the model”. In this work,
we propose a methodology that enables existing models to
support measuring faithfulness by design.
Measuring faithfulness is challenging, as there is generally
no known ground-truth for the correct explanation. Instead,
faithfulness metrics have to use proxies. One such proxy
is the erasure-metric by Samek et al. (2017): if tokens are
truly important, then masking them should result in worse
model performance compared to masking random tokens.
However, masking tokens can create out-of-distribution issues. This can be solved by retraining the model after allegedly important tokens have been masked (Hooker et al.,
2019; Madsen et al., 2022a). Unfortunately, this is computationally expensive, leaks the gold label, and the measured
model is now different from the model of interest.

1
Mila, Montreal, Canada 2 Computer Engineering and
Software Engineering Department, Polytechnique Montreal, Montreal, Canada 3 Computer Science and Linguistics,
McGill University, Montreal, Canada 4 Facebook CIFAR
AI Chair 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair.
Correspondence
to:
Andreas Madsen <andreas.madsen@mila.quebec>,
Siva Reddy <siva.reddy@mila.quebec>, Sarath Chandar
<sarath.chandar@mila.quebec>.

In general, the cost of proxies has been some combination
of incorrect assumptions, expensive computations, or using
a proxy-model (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Bastings et al., 2022;
Madsen et al., 2022a). Based on previous work, we propose
the following desirable, which to the best of our knowledge,
no previous method satisfies in all aspects, but we satisfy:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

