Inexact Newton-type Methods for Optimisation with Nonnegativity Constraints

Oscar Smee 1 Fred Roosta 1 2

Abstract

applications in science, engineering, and machine learning
(ML). Typical examples in ML include nonnegative formulations of least-squares and matrix factorisation (Lee & Seung,
1999; 2000; Gillis, 2020). Additionally, problems involving sparsity inducing regularisation such as ℓ1 norm, which
are typically non-smooth, can be reformulated into a differentiable objective with nonnegativity constraints (Schmidt
et al., 2007).

We consider solving large scale nonconvex optimisation problems with nonnegativity constraints.
Such problems arise frequently in machine learning, such as nonnegative least-squares, nonnegative matrix factorisation, as well as problems
with sparsity-inducing regularisation. In such settings, first-order methods, despite their simplicity, can be prohibitively slow on ill-conditioned
problems or become trapped near saddle regions,
while most second-order alternatives involve nontrivially challenging subproblems. The twometric projection framework, initially proposed
by Bertsekas (1982), alleviates these issues and
achieves the best of both worlds by combining
projected gradient steps at the boundary of the
feasible region with Newton steps in the interior
in such a way that feasibility can be maintained
by simple projection onto the nonnegative orthant.
We develop extensions of the two-metric projection framework, which by inexactly solving the
subproblems as well as employing non-positive
curvature directions, are suitable for large scale
and nonconvex settings. We obtain state-of-theart convergence rates for various classes of nonconvex problems and demonstrate competitive
practical performance on a variety of problems.

Many methods have been developed to solve (1). First-order
methods (Lan, 2020), such as projected gradient descent,
can be very simple to implement and as such are popular
in ML. However, they come with well-known deficiencies,
including relatively-slow convergence on ill-conditioned
problems, sensitivity to hyper-parameter settings such as
learning rate, and difficulty in escaping flat regions and saddle points. On the other hand, general purpose second-order
algorithms, e.g., projected Newton method (Schmidt et al.,
2011; Lee et al., 2014) and interior point methods (Nocedal
& Wright, 2006), alleviate some of these issues such as
susceptibility to ill-conditioning and/or stagnation near flat
regions. However, due to not leveraging the simplicity of the
constraint, this advantages come at the cost of introducing
highly non-trivial and challenging subproblems.
By exploiting the structure of the constraint in (1), Bertsekas
(1982) proposed the two-metric projection framework as
a natural and simple adaptation of the classical Newton’s
method for unconstrained problems. By judicious modification of the Hessian matrix, this framework can be effectively
seen as projecting Newton’s step onto the nonnegative orthant. This allows for the best of both worlds, blending the
efficiency of classical Newton’s method with the simplicity
of projected gradient descent. Indeed, similar to the classical Newton’s method, the subproblem amounts to solving
a linear system, while like projected gradient-descent, the
projection step is straightforward.

1. Introduction
We consider high-dimensional problems of the form
min f (x),

x∈Rd

subject to

x ≥ 0,

(1)

where d ≫ 1 and f : Rd → R is twice continuously differentiable and possibly nonconvex function. Despite the
simplicity of its formulation, such problems arise in many

Contribution. In this paper, we design, theoretically analyse, and empirically evaluate novel two-metric projection
type algorithms (Algorithms 1 and 2) with desirable complexity guarantees for solving large scale and nonconvex
optimisation problems with nonnegativity constraints (1).
Both Algorithms 1 and 2 are Hessian-free in that the subproblems are solved inexactly using the minimum residual
(MINRES) method (Paige & Saunders, 1975) and only re-

1
School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 2 ARC Training Centre for Information
Resilience, Brisbane, Australia. Correspondence to: Oscar Smee
<o.smee@uq.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

