Do Topological Characteristics Help in Knowledge Distillation?

Jungeun Kim * 1 Junwon You * 2 Dongjin Lee * 3 Ha Young Kim 1 4 Jae-Hun Jung 2 3

Abstract
Input

Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to transfer
knowledge from larger (teacher) to smaller (student) networks. Previous studies focus on pointto-point or pairwise relationships in embedding
features as knowledge and struggle to efficiently
transfer relationships of complex latent spaces. To
tackle this issue, we propose a novel KD method
called TopKD, which considers the global topology of the latent spaces. We define global topology knowledge using the persistence diagram (PD)
that captures comprehensive geometric structures
such as shape of distribution, multiscale structure and connectivity, and the topology distillation loss for teaching this knowledge. To make
the PD transferable within reasonable computational time, we employ approximated persistence
images of PDs. Through experiments, we support
the benefits of using global topology as knowledge and demonstrate the potential of TopKD.
Code is available at https://github.com/
jekim5418/TopKD

Featurizer
Output

Vanilla KD

Relation-based KD

Topology-informed KD

Figure 1: Topology-informed knowledge distillation. The
proposed approach transfers the global topology of the entire
embedding features from the teacher to the student model.
teacher (Hinton et al., 2015).
The most critical part of KD is determining which teacher
knowledge to transfer. In the initial study, vanilla KD (Hinton et al., 2015) uses soft logits of the teacher network as the
knowledge. To better imitate the teacher network, featurebased KD methods were introduced to mimic the internal
feature representations. For instance, FitNet (Romero et al.,
2015) improved performance by matching the feature values
of the intermediate layers between the teacher and student
networks in a point-to-point manner using the L2 loss. This
leads to excessively large loss values, making effective guidance challenging.

1. Introduction
Large-scale deep learning models with numerous training
parameters have recently demonstrated outstanding performance. However, the massive computational demands pose
limitations for on-device applications (Chen et al., 2021b;c).
Thus, model compression has become an active research
field. A primary approach in this field, knowledge distillation (KD), aims to improve the performance of a smaller
network, referred to as a student, by transferring knowledge
acquired from a well-trained larger network, known as a

Meanwhile, relation-based KD methods aim to identify intricate relationships across embedding features (Peng et al.,
2019; Park et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2022). Determining these relationships mainly involves defining similarity
measures between distinct embedding features (Peng et al.,
2019; Huang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022a) or assessing
the structure between two or three pairs of embedding features within the latent space (Yim et al., 2017; Park et al.,
2019). RKD (Park et al., 2019) defined the structure of the
embedding features based on the distance and angle. These
methods teach the model the full relationship via interactions between a few embedding features; however, relying
on partial information to understand the entire structure
is limited. Therefore, transferable knowledge that teaches
the broader context of relationships between all embedding

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of AI, Yonsei University,
Seoul, South Korea 2 Department of Mathematics, POSTECH,
Pohang, South Korea 3 Graduate School of AI, POSTECH,
Pohang, South Korea 4 Graduate School of Information, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.
Correspondence to:
Ha Young Kim <hayoung.kim@yonsei.ac.kr>, Jae-Hun Jung
<jung153@postech.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

