Policy Evaluation for Variance in Average Reward Reinforcement Learning

Shubhada Agrawal 1 Prashanth L. A. 2 Siva Theja Maguluri 1

Abstract

one can consider the portfolio optimization problem, where
the objective is to find an investment strategy that maximizes
the return (expected value), while keeping the variability
under control through a constraint. This motivates the study
of risk-sensitive RL, where a risk measure is incorporated
either in the objective or as a constraint, see L.A. & Fu
(2022) for a recent survey.

We consider an average reward reinforcement
learning (RL) problem and work with asymptotic
variance as a risk measure to model safety-critical
applications. We design a temporal-difference
(TD) type algorithm tailored for policy evaluation in this context. Our algorithm is based on
linear stochastic approximation of an equivalent
formulation of the asymptotic variance in terms of
the solution of the Poisson equation. We consider
both the tabular and linear function approximation
settings, and establish Õ(1/k) finite time convergence rate, where k is the number of steps of the
algorithm. Our work paves the way for developing actor-critic style algorithms for varianceconstrained RL. To the best of our knowledge,
our result provides the first sequential estimator
for asymptotic variance of a Markov chain with
provable finite sample guarantees, which is of
independent interest.

Within the domain of risk-sensitive MDPs, several risk
measures have been considered, namely variance (Sobel,
1982; Filar et al., 1989), conditional value-at-risk (Chow &
Ghavamzadeh, 2014), exponential utility (Whittle, 1990),
the general class of coherent risk measures (Tamar et al.,
2015), and cumulative prospect theory (Prashanth et al.,
2016), which is not coherent. The choice of the risk measure
largely depends on the application at hand. Nevertheless,
variance is a popular risk measure that has been studied
extensively in the literature.
Several previous works incorporate variance as a risk measure in a constrained setting, where the goal is to maximize
the average reward (which is an expectation), while ensuring a certain bound on the variance. This is the so-called
“mean-variance tradeoff”, considered in the seminal work
of Markowitz (Markowitz, 1952), and later in MDP contexts, cf. (Mandl, 1971; Sobel, 1982; Filar et al., 1989). An
alternative to such a formulation is to consider the exponential utility formulation, see (Arrow, 1971; Howard &
Matheson, 1972), where one optimizes the exponential. The
constrained formulation is preferred over the exponential
utility for two reasons. First, the mean-variance tradeoff can
be controlled directly through a parameter that is a bound
on the variance, while this trade-off is implicit in an exponential utility formulation. Second, the algorithms for the
latter formulation do not extend easily when one considers
feature-based representations and function approximation,
see L.A. & Fu (2022, Section 7.2) for a detailed discussion.

1. Introduction
We consider an average reward Markov decision process
(MDP) (Bertsekas, 2012; Puterman, 1994). We operate
in a reinforcement learning (RL) (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis,
1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018) framework, where the transition dynamics of the underlying MDP are unknown. The RL
algorithm can obtain a sample of the MDP under any given
policy, which specifies how actions are chosen in a given
state. The traditional goal in an average reward RL problem is to find a policy that maximizes the long run average
reward. While the need to optimize over average reward is
well motivated, applications in safety-critical domains, for
example, healthcare or finance, it is also crucial to control
adverse outcomes. As an example in the financial domain,

We consider variance as the risk measure in a average reward
RL framework. Broadly, for a given policy, two different notions of variance are suggested for an average reward MDP
in (Filar et al., 1989). The first notion is the asymptotic
variance, while the second one is the per-period stationary
variance. The latter has been studied in an RL setting in
(Prashanth & Ghavamzadeh, 2016), while the former has
hardly been investigated in the literature, to the best of our

1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. 2 Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India. Correspondence to: Shubhada Agrawal
<sagrawal362@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

