Data Poisoning Attacks against Conformal Prediction

Yangyi Li * 1 Aobo Chen * 1 Wei Qian 1 Chenxu Zhao 1 Divya Lidder 1 Mengdi Huai 1

Abstract

Among different uncertainty quantification techniques, conformal prediction (CP), pioneered by Vovk et al. (2005),
has become a popular distribution-free technique to perform uncertainty quantification (Ndiaye, 2022; Fisch et al.,
2022; Stutz et al., 2021; Fisch et al., 2021; Qian et al.,
2024). The model-agnostic and distribution-free nature
of CP makes it particularly suitable for large neural networks. Concretely, we are mainly interested in a conformal set prediction setting where we are given n examples
(Xi , Yi ) ∈ X × Y, i = 1, · · · , n as calibration data, that
are drawn exchangeably from some underlying distribution P (Humbert et al., 2023; Fisch et al., 2022; Lin et al.,
2022; Teng et al., 2022). Let Xn+1 ∈ X be a new exchangeable test example for which we would like to predict
∗
Yn+1
= f (Xn+1 ; θ) ∈ Y, where θ ∈ Θ is a well-trained
model. CP aims to construct a conformal prediction set, i.e.,
∗
Cε (xn+1 ; θ), that contains Yn+1
with marginal coverage at
a significance level ε ∈ (0, 1), i.e.,

The efficient and theoretically sound uncertainty
quantification is crucial for building trust in deep
learning models. This has spurred a growing
interest in conformal prediction (CP), a powerful technique that provides a model-agnostic and
distribution-free method for obtaining conformal
prediction sets with theoretical guarantees. However, the vulnerabilities of such CP methods with
regard to dedicated data poisoning attacks have
not been studied previously. To bridge this gap,
for the first time, we in this paper propose a new
class of black-box data poisoning attacks against
CP, where the adversary aims to cause the desired
manipulations of some specific examples’ prediction uncertainty results (instead of misclassifications). Additionally, we design novel optimization
frameworks for our proposed attacks. Further, we
conduct extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of our attacks on various settings (e.g.,
the full and split CP settings). Notably, our extensive experiments show that our attacks are more
effective in manipulating uncertainty results than
traditional poisoning attacks that aim at inducing
misclassifications, and existing defenses against
conventional attacks are ineffective against our
proposed attacks.

∗
P(Yn+1
∈ Cε (Xn+1 ; θ)) ≥ 1 − ε.

(1)

A conformal model is considered to be valid if the frequency
∗
of error, Yn+1
∈
/ Cε (Xn+1 ; θ), remains below the threshold
ε. CP offers straightforward uncertainty estimates, where
larger conformal sets C generally convey higher uncertainty.
Although CP is being increasingly used in safety-critical
and security related applications, there’s still a gap in understanding the effects of poisoning attacks on CP, an area
that remains largely unexplored. In practice, the risk of data
poisoning attacks (Yang et al., 2023; Jagielski et al., 2021;
Qian et al., 2023) intensifies in DNNs, since they rely on
large and diverse datasets and their size makes it difficult
to guarantee the trustworthiness of the training data. As a
result, models trained on such datasets are susceptible to
data poisoning attacks, wherein an adversary places specifically constructed poisoned examples into the training data
with harmful intentions (e.g., leading to unequalized and
unfair coverage outcomes). In Schwarzschild et al. (2021),
industry practitioners have identified data poisoning as the
most significant concern among various threats.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in recent years. Although deep learning models
work well in numerous fields, deploying such models in realworld applications often requires to appropriately quantify
the uncertainty of their predictions. To tackle uncertainty
issues, people have developed different uncertainty quantification techniques, including Bayesian neural networks
(Trinh et al., 2022; Hobbhahn et al., 2022).
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Iowa
State University, United States. Correspondence to: Mengdi Huai
<mdhuai@iastate.edu>.

In this work, we perform the first study on data poisoning attacks against CP, where the adversary aims to undermine the
use of CP techniques by manipulating conformal prediction
sets while ensuring label correctness. Consider a scenario

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

