Amortizing Pragmatic Program Synthesis with Rankings

Yewen Pu 1 Saujas Vaduguru 2 Priyan Vaithilingam 3 Elena Glassman 3 Daniel Fried 2

Abstract
The usage of Rational Speech Acts (RSA) framework has been successful in building pragmatic
program synthesizers that return programs which,
in addition to being logically consistent with usergenerated examples, account for the fact that a
user chooses their examples informatively. We
present a general method of amortizing the slow,
exact RSA synthesizer. Our method first query
the exact RSA synthesizer to compile a communication dataset. The dataset contains a number
of example-dependent rankings of subsets of programs. It then distills a single global ranking of
all programs as an approximation to every ranking in the dataset. This global ranking is then
used at inference time to rank multiple logically
consistent candidate programs generated from a
fast, non-pragmatic synthesizer. Experiments on
two program synthesis domains using our ranking
method resulted in orders of magnitudes of speed
ups compared to the exact RSA synthesizer, while
being more accurate than a non-pragmatic synthesizer when communicating with humans. Finally,
we prove that in the special case of synthesis from
a single example, this approximation is exact.

Figure 1. (left) Directly using the exact RSA algorithm in a pragmatic synthesizer L1 is slow. (right) Our approach uses RSA to
generate a simulated communication dataset between the informative speaker S1 and the pragmatic synthesizer L1 , and stores
the responses of L1 as example-dependent rankings of subsets
of programs. We then distill the dataset into a single exampleagnostic global ranking of all programs σ[w]. This global ranking
is then used to build a fast pragmatic synthesizer Lσ , by using
the examples only to filter out consistent programs, then using the
global ranking to sort them. This amortized synthesizer performs
similar selections of programs as an exact RSA synthesizer, while
being orders of magnetudes faster.

Equal contribution 1 Autodesk AI Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Harvard SEAS. Correspondence to: Yewen Pu
<yewen.pu@autodesk.com>.

the system, via recursive Bayesian reasoning. Given several
competing responses, for instance regex1 = \d{3}-\d{4}
and regex2 = Σ∗ , RSA would reason that it is more likely
that an informative user would use the example 123-7890
to describe regex1 over regex2 , allowing it to prefer the
intended regex. Recent works (Pu et al., 2020; Vaithilingam
et al., 2023) have leveraged the RSA algorithm to build
pragmatic program synthesizers – interactive systems that
take in user given examples (e.g. strings) and return programs (e.g. regexes) that are both logically consistent and
take into account the informativity of the chosen examples.
Their algorithm, which we refer to as RSA, is applicable
to any program synthesis domain where programs can be
efficiently enumerated (Feser et al., 2015; Solar-Lezama,
2008; Gulwani, 2011), and produces a pragmatic synthesizer which interacts well with humans, while requiring no
labeled human data.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The RSA algorithm marginalizes across all possible examples (e.g. all strings) and programs (e.g. all regexes) multiple times. This makes it difficult to scale RSA to large

1. Introduction
For intelligent systems to be accessible to end users, it is important that they can infer the user’s intent under ambiguity.
Imagine a person asking an AI assistant to generate a regular expression that matches the string 123-7890. It would
be unhelpful if the AI assistant simply returned the regular expression Σ∗ – the expression that matches all strings
– although it is technically correct. The rational speech
acts model (RSA) of pragmatics (Frank & Goodman, 2012)
gives an algorithm for resolving ambiguities by modeling
the user as a speaker that chooses informative examples for
*

1

