Degeneration-free Policy Optimization:
RL Fine-Tuning for Language Models without Degeneration

Youngsoo Jang 1 Geon-Hyeong Kim 1 Byoungjip Kim 1 Yu Jin Kim 1 Honglak Lee 1 Moontae Lee 1 2

Abstract

2020; Nakano et al., 2022), fine-tuning LMs on downstream
tasks is essential to achieve higher task scores. Since the
pre-training and supervised fine-tuning objectives (e.g., next
token prediction (Radford et al., 2019)) of LMs are inherently not maximizing the task scores, LMs fail to learn
an optimal behavior. One of the promising approaches to
fine-tune the LMs is reinforcement learning (RL) (Christiano et al., 2017). Recently, reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Liang
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023; Ouyang et al., 2022) methods, which learn a reward model from human feedback and
then fine-tune LMs through reinforcement learning, has successfully achieved to fine-tune the LMs using RL (Ouyang
et al., 2022; Glaese et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Stiennon
et al., 2020; Nakano et al., 2022). However, optimizing LMs
against a given reward model through RL is yet challenging
due to the degeneration problem which generates unnatural
responses diverging from human language.

As the pre-training objectives (e.g., next token prediction) of language models (LMs) are inherently
not aligned with task scores, optimizing LMs to
achieve higher downstream task scores is essential. One of the promising approaches is to finetune LMs through reinforcement learning (RL).
However, conventional RL methods based on PPO
and a penalty of KL divergence are vulnerable
to text degeneration where LMs do not generate
natural texts anymore after RL fine-tuning. To
address this problem, we provide Degenerationfree Policy Optimization (DfPO) that can finetune LMs to generate texts that achieve improved
downstream task scores, while preserving the ability to generate natural texts. To achieve this, we
introduce KL-masking which masks out the actions that potentially cause deviation from the
reference policy when its likelihood is increased
or decreased. Then, we devise truncated advantage functions for separately performing likelihood maximization and minimization to improve
the task performance. In the experiments, we provide the results of DfPO and baseline algorithms
on various generative NLP tasks including text
continuation, text detoxification, and commonsense generation. Our experiments demonstrate
that DfPO successfully improves the downstream
task scores while preserving the ability to generate natural texts, without requiring additional
hyperparameter search.

When optimizing LMs through RL, most of the existing online RL methods mainly use PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) for
optimizing an LM policy, and a penalty of KL divergence
between the reference LM and an optimized LM for preserving the ability to generate natural texts (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Ramamurthy et al., 2023). However, conventional
RL methods based on PPO and a KL divergence penalty are
vulnerable to the text degeneration problem that LMs do
not generate natural texts anymore after RL fine-tuning. As
illustrated in Figure 1, we can observe the text degeneration
problem through the diverging perplexity as the sentiment
score increases. We carefully conjecture that a penalty of KL
divergence often does not work with respect to the penalty
ratio β, since PPO is a simplified algorithm from TRPO
(Schulman et al., 2015) that guarantees to maximize target
task rewards. In other words, it is important to balance two
different objectives: (1) maximizing task rewards and (2)
minimizing the KL divergence (i.e. preserving the ability to
generate natural texts), while preventing one objective from
dominating the overall quantity. Especially in language
generation tasks, confining the probability distribution of
LMs within a certain level is more important than simply
maximizing the task rewards.

1. Introduction
Although pre-trained language models (LMs) have achieved
remarkable success in various NLP tasks (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Glaese et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Stiennon et al.,
1
LG AI Research 2 University of Illinois Chicago. Correspondence to: Moontae Lee <moontae.lee@lgresearch.ai>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address this problem, we present Degeneration-free

1

