RVI-SAC:
Average Reward Off-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yukinari Hisaki 1 Isao Ono 1

Abstract

dimensional continuous action spaces, methods such as
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017), DDPG (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2019),
TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), and SAC (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a;b) are well-known. These methods utilize the discounted reward criterion, which is applicable to a variety
of MDP-formulated tasks (Puterman, 1994). In particular,
for continuing tasks where there is no natural breakpoint
in episodes, such as in robot locomotion (Todorov et al.,
2012) or Access Control Queuing Tasks(Sutton & Barto,
2018), where the interaction between an agent and an environment can continue indeﬁnitely, the discount rate plays a
role in keeping the inﬁnite horizon return bounded. However, discounting introduces an undesirable effect in continuing tasks by prioritizing rewards closer to the current
time over those in the future. An approach to mitigate this
effect is to bring the discount rate closer to 1, but it is commonly known that a large discount rate can lead to instability and slower convergence(Fujimoto et al., 2018; Dewanto
& Gallagher, 2021).

In this paper, we propose an off-policy deep reinforcement learning (DRL) method utilizing the
average reward criterion. While most existing
DRL methods employ the discounted reward criterion, this can potentially lead to a discrepancy
between the training objective and performance
metrics in continuing tasks, making the average
reward criterion a recommended alternative. We
introduce RVI-SAC, an extension of the stateof-the-art off-policy DRL method, Soft ActorCritic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018a;b), to the
average reward criterion. Our proposal consists
of (1) Critic updates based on RVI Q-learning
(Abounadi et al., 2001), (2) Actor updates introduced by the average reward soft policy improvement theorem, and (3) automatic adjustment of Reset Cost enabling the average reward
reinforcement learning to be applied to tasks
with termination. We apply our method to the
Gymnasium’s Mujoco tasks, a subset of locomotion tasks, and demonstrate that RVI-SAC shows
competitive performance compared to existing
methods.

In recent years, the average reward criterion has begun to
gain attention as an alternative to the discounted reward
criterion. Reinforcement learning using the average reward criterion aims to maximize the time average of the
inﬁnite horizon return in continuing tasks. In continuing
tasks, the average reward criterion is considered more natural than the discounted reward criterion. Even within the
realm of DRL with continuous action space, although few,
there have been proposals for methods that utilize the average reward criterion. Notably, ATRPO (Zhang & Ross,
2021) and APO (Ma et al., 2021), which are extensions
of the state-of-the-art on-policy DRL methods, TRPO and
PPO, to the average reward criterion, have been reported to
demonstrate performance on par with or superior to methods using the discounted reward criterion in Mujoco tasks
(Todorov et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning aims to acquire optimal
policies through interaction with the environment. Particularly, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), which approximates functions such as policy or value using Neural Networks, has seen rapid development in recent years.
This advancement has enabled solving tasks with highdimensional continuous action spaces, such as those in
OpenAI Gym’s Mujoco tasks (Todorov et al., 2012). In
the realm of DRL methods applicable to tasks with high-

Research combining the average reward criterion with offpolicy methods, generally known for their higher sample efﬁciency than on-policy approaches, remains limited.
There are several theoretical and tabular approaches to offpolicy methods using the average reward criterion, including R-learning (Schwartz, 1993; Singh, 1994), RVI Q-

1

Tokyo Institute of Technology Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
Correspondence to:
Yukinari Hisaki
<hiskai.y@ic.c.titech.ac.jp>, Isao Ono <isao@c.titech.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

