Machine Vision Therapy: Multimodal Large Language Models Can Enhance
Visual Robustness via Denoising In-Context Learning

Zhuo Huang * 1 Chang Liu 2 Yinpeng Dong 3 Hang Su 3 Shibao Zheng 2 Tongliang Liu 1
Fine-Tuning via Machine Vision Therapy

Common Fine-Tuning

Abstract

pre-train

Although pre-trained models such as Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP) show impressive generalization results, their robustness
is still limited under Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
scenarios. Instead of undesirably leveraging human annotation as commonly done, it is possible to leverage the visual understanding power of
Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs).
However, MLLMs struggle with vision problems
due to task incompatibility, thus hindering their
effectiveness. In this paper, we propose to effectively leverage MLLMs via Machine Vision
Therapy which aims to rectify erroneous predictions of specific vision models. By supervising
vision models using MLLM predictions, visual
robustness can be boosted in a nearly unsupervised manner. Moreover, we propose a Denoising In-Context Learning (DICL) strategy to solve
the incompatibility issue. Concretely, by examining the noise probability of each example through
a transition matrix, we construct an instruction
containing a correct exemplar and a probable erroneous one, which enables MLLMs to detect
and rectify the incorrect predictions of vision
models. Under mild assumptions, we theoretically show that our DICL method is guaranteed
to find the ground truth. Through extensive experiments on various OOD datasets, our method
demonstrates powerful capabilities for enhancing
visual robustness under many OOD scenarios.

CV model

OOD tasks

human
annotation

pre-train

deploy

Common MLLM Solution to Vision Tasks
(A beagle)

CV model

bloodhound

noise prob.

: Maybe basset hound (Wrong).

deploy

Denoising In-Context Learning

walker hound
Afghan Hound

MLLM
denoising

exemplars

basset hound

is a

basset
hound

? Answer: True;

is a

basset
hound

? Answer: False;

is a

basset
hound

? Answer: output

beagle

Which class is
this image from?

OOD tasks

query

: It’s different from basset hound,
so the output is: False!

Figure 1. Illustration of our methodology: Upper row: Comparison between common fine-tuning process and fine-tuning via Machine Vision Therapy. Our method potentially eliminates the necessity for human-annotation by leveraging the knowledge from
MLLMs. Lower row: Comparison between previous MLLM solution to vision tasks and Denoising In-Context Learning strategy.
Instead of considering all classes, our method make predictions by
presenting a pair of positive and negative exemplars.

1. Introduction
Pre-trained vision models such as Vision Transformers
(ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021) with Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) (Chen et al., 2023a; Radford et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2021; 2022; Wang et al., 2024b; Zheng et al., 2023a)
have been widely used thanks to their strong generalization performance meanwhile effectively avoiding training
vision models from scratch. But when deployed to Outof-Distribution (OOD) scenarios (Dong et al., 2023; Kong
et al., 2023; Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016; Hong et al.,
2024; Peng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2019; Zhu et al.,
2023b), their recognition performance could be seriously
degraded (Shu et al., 2023). Downstream fine-tuning
has been a common practice to regain the generalizability (Goyal et al., 2023; Wortsman et al., 2022), but it requires additional label acquisition through human labor,
which is undesirable for large-scale applications.

*
Work done when visiting Tsinghua University, code is available at this link. 1 Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 2 Institute of Image Communication and
Network Engineering, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai,
China 3 Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. Correspondence to:
Tongliang Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.

Fortunately, the thriving Multi-modal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) (Alayrac et al., 2022; Awadalla et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2024; Gong et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023c;b; Liu et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023a),
which take advantage of the few-shot learning ability of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

