Kernel Debiased Plug-in Estimation: Simultaneous, Automated Debiasing
without Influence Functions for Many Target Parameters

Brian Cho 1 Yaroslav Mukhin 2 Kyra Gan 1 Ivana Malenica 3

Abstract

Modern estimation methods rely on the plug-in principle
(van der Vaart, 2000), which substitutes unknown parameters of the underlying data-generating process with estimated empirical counterparts (e.g., the sample mean is the
average of observations over the empirical distribution Pn
defined by the dataset). Flexible, machine learning (ML)
estimation methods have further exploited the plug-in approach. Meta-learners in the causal inference literature use
random forests and neural networks to estimate empirical
conditional density/regression functions for the downstream
task of estimating target parameters such as potential outcome means and treatment effects (Künzel et al., 2019).
The use of highly adaptive, complex ML algorithms, however, induces plug-in bias (first-order bias) that impacts the
downstream estimate.

When estimating target parameters in nonparametric models with nuisance parameters, substituting
the unknown nuisances with nonparametric estimators can introduce “plug-in bias.” Traditional
methods addressing this suboptimal bias-variance
trade-off rely on the influence function (IF) of the
target parameter. When estimating multiple target
parameters, these methods require debiasing the
nuisance parameter multiple times using the corresponding IFs, which poses analytical and computational challenges. In this work, we leverage the
targeted maximum likelihood estimation (TMLE)
framework to propose a novel method named kernel debiased plug-in estimation (KDPE). KDPE
refines an initial estimate through regularized likelihood maximization steps, employing a nonparametric model based on reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces. We show that KDPE: (i) simultaneously
debiases all pathwise differentiable target parameters that satisfy our regularity conditions, (ii) does
not require the IF for implementation, and (iii)
remains computationally tractable. We numerically illustrate the use of KDPE and validate our
theoretical results.

Estimators such as double machine learning (DML) (Chernozhukov et al., 2017), targeted maximum likelihood estimation (van der Laan and Rubin, 2006), and the one-step
correction (Bickel et al., 1998) remove plug-in bias and
achieve efficiency (i.e., lowest possible asymptotic variance) within the class of regular and asymptotically linear
(RAL) estimators. However, these methods typically require
knowledge of the influence function or the efficient influence function (EIF)1 of the target parameter. Deriving and
computing these functions analytically is often challenging
for practitioners (Carone et al., 2018; Jordan et al., 2022;
Kennedy, 2022) due to their dependence on both the statistical functional of interest and the statistical model (e.g.,
assumptions on the DGP). For example, even seemingly innocuous target parameters, such as the average density value,
require specialized knowledge to study with conventional
techniques (Carone et al., 2018). Further, the knowledge of
the IF/EIF is specific to a single target parameter under a
particular statistical model. When estimating multiple target
parameters, existing methods require the derivation of the
IF/EIF for each target parameter, hindering the adoption of
these techniques in practice (Hines et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Estimating a target parameter ψ(P ) from n independent
samples of an unknown distribution P is a fundamental and
rapidly evolving statistical field. Driven by data-adaptive
machine learning methods and efficiency theory, modern
approaches to estimation can achieve optimal performance
under minimal assumptions on the true data-generating process (DGP). These statistical learning advancements enable
researchers to obtain strong theoretical guarantees and empirical performance while avoiding unrealistic assumptions.
1
Department of ORIE, Cornell Tech, NY, USA 2 Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Department of
Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Brian Cho <bmc233@cornell.edu>.

Contributions We propose a generic approach for constructing efficient RAL estimators that combines the TMLE

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

The notation of EIF arises when we are in the semi-parametric
setting where the directions in which we can perturb the data
generating distribution are restricted. Otherwise, IF is the EIF.

1

