Collapse-Aware Triplet Decoupling for Adversarially Robust Image Retrieval

Qiwei Tian 1 Chenhao Lin 1 Zhengyu Zhao 1 Qian Li 1 Chao Shen 1

Abstract
Adversarial training has achieved substantial performance in defending image retrieval against
adversarial examples. However, existing studies in deep metric learning (DML) still suffer
from two major limitations: weak adversary and
model collapse. In this paper, we address these
two limitations by proposing Collapse-Aware
TRIplet DEcoupling (CA-TRIDE). Specifically,
TRIDE yields a stronger adversary by spatially
decoupling the perturbation targets into the anchor and the other candidates. Furthermore,
CA prevents the consequential model collapse,
based on a novel metric, collapseness, which is
incorporated into the optimization of perturbation. We also identify two drawbacks of the existing robustness metric in image retrieval and
propose a new metric for a more reasonable robustness evaluation. Extensive experiments on
three datasets demonstrate that CA-TRIDE outperforms existing defense methods in both conventional and new metrics. Codes are available at
https://github.com/michaeltian108/CA-TRIDE.

Figure 1. Our defense vs. the previous defense. Specifically, we
address the weak adversary by decoupling the updates of perturbation into anchors (A) and positive (P)/negative (N) candidates to
maximize embedding shifts.

cent studies (Zhou et al., 2021b; Zhou & Patel, 2022) have
modified the commonly-used adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2017) from the domain of image classification into
the domain of image retrieval. However, these methods still
suffer from two major limitations:
• Weak adversary is a widely overlooked issue since
existing defenses (Zhou & Patel, 2022; Zhou et al.,
2021b) directly adopt the perturbation method from the
image classification domain without fully exploiting
the triplet structure, which consists of three components: positives, negatives, and anchors. As shown in
Figure 1, the existing method perturbs all three components simultaneously and allocates the desired embedding shifts among each component, as represented by
the small red shadows, which leads to smaller average
embedding shifts. A detailed qualitative analysis is
presented in Section A of the Appendix.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the massive image data and the development of
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), image retrieval has experienced substantial advancements. Despite their effectiveness,
deep image retrieval is known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e. test samples that cause erroneous model
behaviour (Szegedy et al., 2013). Existing work on adversarial attacks against DNN-based image retrieval has explored
deep metric learning (DML) models (Liu et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021a) and deep
hashing models (Bai et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021).

• Model Collapse is a notorious challenge in DML, impeding researchers from training models with hard
samples (Xuan et al., 2020). A collapsed model embeds all samples disastrously close and cannot retrieve
semantically similar examples appropriately. Model
collapse becomes inevitable in adversarial training as
it aims at increasing sample hardness. The current
state-of-the-art adversarial training method, Hardness
Manipulation (Zhou & Patel, 2022), avoids model collapse by restricting perturbation strength, consequently
lowering its gained robustness.

To defend DML models against adversarial examples, re1

Xi’an JiaoTong University, Xi’an, China. Correspondence to: Chenhao Lin <linchenhao@xjtu.edu.cn>, Chao Shen
<chaoshen@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we address the above limitations by propos1

