SiBBlInGS:
Similarity-driven Building-Block Inference using Graphs across States

Noga Mudrik 1 Gal Mishne 2 Adam S. Charles 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

The analysis of high-dimensional time-series is increasingly
important across various scientific disciplines, ranging from
neuroscience (Kala et al., 2009; Mudrik et al., 2024a) to
social sciences (Jerzak et al., 2023) to environmental studies (Hipel & McLeod, 1994). These data, however, present
a daunting challenge in terms of comprehensibility as they
are often highly heterogeneous. Specifically, data in many
domains are gathered under multiple states (e.g., clinical
interventions), while latent factors may introduce variability
across trials within states (e.g., internal biological processes
that lead to variations in patient responses to treatment).
Current analysis methods often struggle to capture the full
variability in such multi-state data. Additionally, integrating data from repeated observations (trials) under the same
state into a coherent representation is often challenged by
missing samples or variable trial duration and sampling
rates (Goris et al., 2014; Charles et al., 2018; Duncker &
Sahani, 2018). The common practice of within-state trial
averaging, for example, obscures important patterns within
individual trials.

Time series data across scientific domains are often collected under distinct states (e.g., tasks),
wherein latent processes (e.g., biological factors)
create complex inter- and intra-state variability.
A key approach to capture this complexity is to
uncover fundamental interpretable units within
the data, Building Blocks (BBs), which modulate
their activity and adjust their structure across observations. Existing methods for identifying BBs
in multi-way data often overlook inter- vs. intrastate variability, produce uninterpretable components, or do not align with properties of real-world
data, such as missing samples and sessions of different duration. Here, we present a framework
for Similarity-driven Building Block Inference
using Graphs across States (SiBBlInGS). SiBBlInGS offers a graph-based dictionary learning
approach for discovering sparse BBs along with
their temporal traces, based on co-activity patterns
and inter- vs. intra-state relationships. Moreover,
SiBBlInGS captures per-trial temporal variability
and controlled cross-state structural BB adaptations, identifies state-specific vs. state-invariant
components, and accommodates variability in the
number and duration of observed sessions across
states. We demonstrate SiBBlInGS’s ability to
reveal insights into complex phenomena as well
as its robustness to noise and missing samples
through several synthetic and real-world examples, including web search and neural data.

A promising approach for analyzing multi-state data involves identifying fundamental representational units—
Building Blocks (BBs)—whose composition remains similar across states, while their temporal profiles can modulate
across trials to capture trial-to-trial variability, both within
the same state and across states. These BBs can represent,
for instance, neural ensembles in the brain; social groups
in diverse contexts; gene clusters under regulatory mechanisms, etc. Identifying these BBs and understanding how
they change across states is a key step for recognizing the
latent processes underlying the data and providing valuable
insights into core commonalities and differences among
states. However, uncovering these BBs poses a challenge,
as their individual activities or compositions are often unobservable. This challenge is further complicated by potential
variations across states, not only in the temporal activity
of these BBs, but also in the subtle structural adjustments
of the BBs’ compositions between states. For example,
a neural ensemble may display varying temporal activity
between normal (non-seizure) brain activity sessions and
during seizures, along with subtle structural adaptations in

1
Biomedical Engineering, Kavli NDI, Center for Imaging Science, The Mathematical Institute for Data Science, The Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 2 Halıcıoğlu Data
Science Institute, UCSD, San Diego, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Noga Mudrik <nmudrik1@jhu.edu>, Gal Mishne
<gmishne@ucsd.edu>, Adam Charles <adamsc@jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

