BAT: Learning to Reason about Spatial Sounds with Large Language Models

Zhisheng Zheng 1 2 Puyuan Peng 1 Ziyang Ma 2 Xie Chen 2 Eunsol Choi 1 David Harwath 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has enabled their application beyond textual data, giving rise to
multimodal language models capable of performing image
understanding tasks such as visual question answering and
image captioning (Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023; Peng et al., 2024). Other work has integrated sound
perception ability into LLMs, enabling them to perform
tasks such as audio question answering, speech recognition, speech translation, and speech synthesis (Deshmukh
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Chu et al., 2023; Borsos
et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2024). However, despite these
LLM-based models’ ability to handle numerous visual and
audio tasks with impressive performance, so far none of
them can handle in-the-wild spatial audio input. Humans
are equipped with binaural hearing ability, allowing us to
not only identify the type of sound we are hearing, but also
infer how far away the sound is, what direction it is coming from, and whether multiple sound sources at different
locations are present at once. Consider scenarios such as
locating someone calling from upstairs, hearing your phone
ringing from behind a sofa, or sensing footsteps approaching from behind; these situations all demand spatial audio
perception and reasoning, a capability not yet present in the
aforementioned models.

Spatial sound reasoning is a fundamental human
skill, enabling us to navigate and interpret our
surroundings based on sound. In this paper we
present BAT, which combines the spatial sound
perception ability of a binaural acoustic scene
analysis model with the natural language reasoning capabilities of a large language model (LLM)
to replicate this innate ability. To address the lack
of existing datasets of in-the-wild spatial sounds,
we synthesized a binaural audio dataset using AudioSet and SoundSpaces 2.0. Next, we developed S PATIAL S OUND QA, a spatial sound-based
question-answering dataset, offering a range of
QA tasks that train BAT in various aspects of spatial sound perception and reasoning. The acoustic
front end encoder of BAT is a novel spatial audio encoder named Spatial Audio Spectrogram
Transformer, or S PATIAL -AST, which by itself
achieves strong performance across sound event
detection, spatial localization, and distance estimation. By integrating S PATIAL -AST with
LLaMA-2 7B model, BAT transcends standard
Sound Event Localization and Detection (SELD)
tasks, enabling the model to reason about the
relationships between the sounds in its environment. Our experiments demonstrate BAT’s superior performance on both spatial sound perception and reasoning, showcasing the immense potential of LLMs in navigating and interpreting
complex spatial audio environments. Our demo,
dataset, code and model weights are available at:
https://zhishengzheng.com/BAT.

To bridge this gap, we introduce BAT, the first spatial audiobased LLM designed to reason about sounds in a 3-D environment. Recognizing the current lack of large-scale
datasets for in-the-wild spatial audio and spatial audio-based
question answering, we synthesized a large-scale binaural
audio dataset using Audioset (Gemmeke et al., 2017) clips
as sound sources and Soundspaces 2.0 (Chen et al., 2022) for
simulating diverse, 3-D, reverberant acoustic environments.
In conjunction with this dataset, we developed S PATIAL S OUND QA, a diverse collection of question answering tasks
designed to train and evaluate spatial sound understanding
across varying levels of complexity.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at
Austin, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to:
Zhisheng Zheng <zszheng@utexas.edu>, David Harwath <harwath@utexas.edu>.

The successful training and evaluation of BAT hinge on
the ability to encode rich spatial audio information accurately. However, existing encoders often specialize in either
monaural event detection (Baade et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2023; 2024b) or are limited to first-order
ambisonics (Shimada et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023b; Kim

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

