From Inverse Optimization to Feasibility to ERM

Saurabh Mishra 1 Anant Raj 2 Sharan Vaswani 1

Abstract
Inverse optimization involves inferring unknown
parameters of an optimization problem from
known solutions and is widely used in fields such
as transportation, power systems, and healthcare.
We study the contextual inverse optimization setting that utilizes additional contextual information
to better predict the unknown problem parameters.
We focus on contextual inverse linear programming (CILP), addressing the challenges posed by
the non-differentiable nature of LPs. For a linear
prediction model, we reduce CILP to a convex
feasibility problem, allowing the use of standard
algorithms such as alternating projections. The
resulting algorithm for CILP is equipped with a
linear convergence guarantee without additional
assumptions such as degeneracy or interpolation.
Next, we reduce CILP to empirical risk minimization (ERM) on a smooth, convex loss that
satisfies the Polyak-Lojasiewicz condition. This
reduction enables the use of scalable first-order
optimization methods to solve large non-convex
problems while maintaining theoretical guarantees in the convex setting. Subsequently, we use
the reduction to ERM to quantify the generalization performance of the proposed algorithm on
previously unseen instances. Finally, we experimentally validate our approach on synthetic and
real-world problems, and demonstrate improved
performance compared to existing methods.

Figure 1: CIO framework: model fθ takes input z and
predicts the cost vector c = fθ (z). This cost vector is the
input of an optimization procedure that outputs decision
x(c). Given the optimal decision x∗ , the objective is to
learn the model parameters such that the predicted decision
x(c) is close to the optimal decision. To train the model in
an end-to-end fashion, the key challenge is to compute the
gradient of c w.r.t decision x(c) (shown in red in the figure).
to the LP in order to learn the coefficients (costs) that can
produce these solutions. Inverse optimization has found applications in transportation (Bertsimas et al., 2015), power
systems (Birge et al., 2017) and healthcare (Chan et al.,
2022) (refer to Chan et al. (2023) for a recent survey).
We focus on integrating additional contextual information
into the inverse optimization framework. In particular, we
leverage historical data and a machine learning (ML) model
to predict the (unknown) optimization problem parameters
that can render (known) optimal decisions. This setting is
commonly referred to as contextual inverse optimization
(CIO) (Besbes et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023) or data-driven
inverse optimization (Mohajerin Esfahani et al., 2018). CIO
requires a combination of prediction and optimization and
has found applications in optimal transport and vehicle
routing (Li et al., 2022), financial modeling (Cornuejols
& Tütüncü, 2006), power systems (Bansal, 2005; Li et al.,
2018), healthcare (Angalakudati et al., 2014), circuit design (Boyd et al., 2001), robotics (Raja & Pugazhenthi,
2012). Some use-cases for CIO are as follows.

1. Introduction
Inverse optimization (Heuberger, 2004) is the reverse of
standard optimization and uses a known output (decision)
of an optimization problem to infer the unknown problem
parameters. For example, in the context of linear programming (LP), inverse optimization uses the optimal solutions

Example 1: Energy-cost aware scheduling (Wahdany et al.,
2023), which involves using weather data to forecast windenergy generation and hence energy prices (prediction).
These predictions can be used to schedule jobs (optimization) to minimize energy costs. For the CIO, the contextual
information corresponds to weather data, and the solutions
(decisions) correspond to past schedules.

1
Simon Fraser University 2 SIERRA Project Team (Inria), Coordinated Science Laboratory (CSL), UIUC. Correspondence to: Saurabh Mishra <skm24@sfu.ca>, Sharan Vaswani
<vaswani.sharan@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

