Improving Open-Ended Text Generation via Adaptive Decoding

Wenhong Zhu 1 Hongkun Hao 1 Zhiwei He 1 Yiming Ai 1 Rui Wang 1

Abstract

intertwined with decoding algorithms. The decoding algorithm can be seen as a mechanism to truncate the entire
vocabulary space into the next candidate token set. When
this set is limited, as seen in greedy decoding and beam
search, it leads to heightened repetition as the model favors previously decoded tokens (Li et al., 2020; Zhu et al.,
2023). Conversely, when this set is expansive, as in top-p
sampling, it can result in incoherence and hallucination (Xu
et al., 2023). This occurs because certain improbable tokens
still contribute to the cumulative probability, causing issues
when sampling these tokens. Numerous efforts have been
devoted to addressing these challenges. Some endeavors
focus on enhancing diversity within the specified sampling
space (Su et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023), while others strive
to identify a rational sampling space (Meister et al., 2023b;
Hewitt et al., 2022).

Current language models decode text token by token according to probabilistic distribution, and determining the appropriate candidates for the next
token is crucial to ensure generation quality. This
study introduces adaptive decoding, a mechanism
that dynamically empowers language models to
ascertain a sensible candidate set during generation. Specifically, we introduce an entropy-based
metric called confidence and conceptualize determining the optimal candidate set as a confidenceincreasing process. The rationality of including
a token in the candidate set is assessed by leveraging the increment of confidence. Experimental
results reveal that our method balances diversity
and coherence well. The human evaluation shows
that our method can generate human-preferred
text. Additionally, our method can potentially improve the reasoning ability of language models.

We provide one human-written text example for the GPT2XL model and use teacher-forcing decoding to demonstrate the distinction between the human-preferred and LMpreferred tokens. In doing so, we save the probability of
human-preferred and LM-prefered tokens. As shown in
Figure 1(a), the choices made by humans and the LM predominantly align at high probability points. The distinction
lies in that the portion of the token selected by humans tends
to fall within the low probability region predicted by the
LM. Simultaneously, the model tends to choose tokens with
relatively higher probability. This suggests that the selection
of the next token could have many possibilities.

1. Introduction
When it comes to open-ended text generation tasks, the aim
is to produce coherent and fluent output based on limited
input information (Holtzman et al., 2020). These tasks span
various applications, including casual conversation (Thoppilan et al., 2022), storytelling (Mostafazadeh et al., 2016),
and similar domains. Language models (LMs) presently
estimate the likelihood of the next token in text generation,
and they have gained extensive application in various tasks
(Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023). One factor that
determines the quality of generation is the decoding algorithm.

On the other hand, the distribution predicted by the LM
exhibits a long-tailed pattern (Holtzman et al., 2020), indicating that choosing the next token following the previous
context is constrained. The main difference in the long tail
distribution is the head shape. For example, as shown in
Figure 1(b), the distribution is flattened, indicating that the
LM has multiple choices of the next token. The diversity
of generated text may be compromised if our candidate set
is too limited. While in Figure 1(c), the distribution is on
a sharp shape, implying the restricted choices. In this scenario, an excessively large candidate set could lead to a loss
of coherence in the generated text. These observations raise
the question: how do we determine the rational size of the
candidate set to ensure both diversity and coherence in the
generated text?

For LMs, training solely on maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) without additional fine-tuning, such as human
preference alignment, often raises distinct degradation issues (Holtzman et al., 2020). These challenges are closely
1

MT Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering ,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence
to: Rui Wang <wangrui12@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

