Parallelized Spatiotemporal Slot Binding for Videos

Gautam Singh 1 2 Yue Wang 2 3 Jiawei Yang 3 Boris Ivanovic 2 Sungjin Ahn * 4 Marco Pavone * 2 5 Tong Che 2

Abstract

Furthermore, the process by which this mental model is
constructed is systematic, enabling us to interpret unfamiliar
environments as a composition of familiar entities (Fodor
& Pylyshyn, 1988; Spelke & Kinzler, 2007; Lake et al.,
2017). This systematic compositionality is critical for building autonomous agents because it would enable them to
understand, plan, and act effectively and robustly in the
physical world.

While modern best practices advocate for scalable
architectures that support long-range interactions,
object-centric models are yet to fully embrace
these architectures. In particular, existing objectcentric models for handling sequential inputs, due
to their reliance on RNN-based implementation,
show poor stability and capacity and are slow
to train on long sequences. We introduce Parallelizable Spatiotemporal Binder or PSB† , the first
temporally-parallelizable slot learning architecture for sequential inputs. Unlike conventional
RNN-based approaches, PSB produces objectcentric representations, known as slots, for all
time-steps in parallel. This is achieved by refining the initial slots across all time-steps through a
fixed number of layers equipped with causal attention. By capitalizing on the parallelism induced
by our architecture, the proposed model exhibits a
significant boost in efficiency. In experiments, we
test PSB extensively as an encoder within an autoencoding framework paired with a wide variety
of decoder options. Compared to the state-of-theart, our architecture demonstrates stable training
on longer sequences, achieves parallelization that
results in a 60% increase in training speed, and
yields performance that is on par with or better
on unsupervised 2D and 3D object-centric scene
decomposition and understanding.

Towards this goal, the most relevant field in deep learning
is that of object-centric learning (Greff et al., 2019; Lin
et al., 2020b; Locatello et al., 2020; Greff et al., 2020).
Object-centric learning aims to learn priors for grouping
or binding low-level and unstructured sensory activations
into a collection of vectors known as slots. Each slot captures a higher-level compositional entity such as an object.
Broadly, this grouping or binding emerges as a result of
architectural priors combined with self-supervised learning,
e.g., by performing auto-encoding with specialized encoder
and decoder architectures.
A notion that is widely acknowledged, but not yet fully embraced in object-centric learning, is to maximally utilize all
available data with increasingly scalable architectures capable of capturing long-range dependencies (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020; Vaswani et al., 2017). Video data has been widely
adopted in self-supervised learning and object-centric learning since videos contain temporal information such as object
motion and behavior; learning from videos has been consistently shown to provide richer representations than training
on static images (Kosiorek et al., 2018; Kipf et al., 2022;
Singh et al., 2022; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022). However,
current object-centric learning methods do not utilize the
full potential of sequential datasets because of RNN-based
modeling (Kipf et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2022; Elsayed
et al., 2022). RNNs lead to major scaling issues—training
instability on longer sequences due to gradient vanishing
or exploding leads to degenerated performance and an increased training time complexity linear in sequence length
(Pascanu et al., 2013). On the other hand, current stateof-the-art sequence models use parallelizable architectures
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2021) instead of RNNs
to support fast and stable training on long sequences and
capture long-range temporal dependencies.

1. Introduction
A key function of the human brain is to translate the incoming stream of sensory inputs into a mental model of the
world. Studies suggest that this mental model is compositional, constructed from building blocks such as objects.
*

Equal contribution 1 Rutgers University 2 NVIDIA Research
University of Southern California 4 KAIST 5 Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Gautam Singh <singh.gautam@rutgers.edu>,
Tong Che <tongc@nvidia.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
†
See our project page at this link.

To address this important gap in object-centric learning,

1

