Towards Efficient Deep Spiking Neural Networks Construction
with Spiking Activity based Pruning

Yaxin Li 1 2 Qi XuB 1 Jiangrong Shen 3 Hongming Xu 1 Long Chen 4 Gang Pan 3

Abstract

renowned for their advantages in biological interpretability
and low power consumption. Inspired by biological information processing mechanisms, unlike traditional artificial
neural networks (ANNs), SNNs utilize spike sequences for
feature encoding, transmission, and processing. Deployed
on neuromorphic chips (Ma et al., 2023), SNNs capitalize on
event-driven and asynchronous computation to significantly
reduce computational complexity and minimize unnecessary overhead (Davies et al., 2018). It’s noteworthy that
the human brain operates on just 20 watts of power (Mink
et al., 1981). The synaptic connection count undergoes a
rapid increase and a gradual decrease throughout the lifecycle (Cizeron et al., 2020). In the process of cognition,
the brain network’s structure exhibits plasticity, meaning
synaptic connections can strengthen, weaken, establish, or
eliminate under the influence of learning and experience
(Trachtenberg et al., 2002) (Stettler et al., 2006) (Holtmaat
& Svoboda, 2009) (Barnes & Finnerty, 2010). However,
many SNNs adopt fixed network structures from conventional deep learning (Wu et al., 2018) (Fang et al., 2021a)
(Ding et al., 2021) (Bu et al., 2023), which may contain
illogical or redundant components. Therefore, to better
leverage the energy-efficient advantages of SNNs, drawing
inspiration from the mechanisms of synaptic plasticity in
biology, it is highly essential to adaptively learn appropriate
and sparse network structures during training according to
the objectives of the task.

The emergence of deep and large-scale spiking
neural networks (SNNs) exhibiting high performance across diverse complex datasets has led
to a need for compressing network models due
to the presence of a significant number of redundant structural units, aiming to more effectively leverage their low-power consumption and
biological interpretability advantages. Currently,
most model compression techniques for SNNs are
based on unstructured pruning of individual connections, which requires specific hardware support. Hence, we propose a structured pruning
approach based on the activity levels of convolutional kernels named Spiking Channel Activitybased (SCA) network pruning framework. Inspired by synaptic plasticity mechanisms, our
method dynamically adjusts the network’s structure by pruning and regenerating convolutional
kernels during training, enhancing the model’s
adaptation to the current target task. While maintaining model performance, this approach refines
the network architecture, ultimately reducing computational load and accelerating the inference
process. This indicates that structured dynamic
sparse learning methods can better facilitate the
application of deep SNNs in low-power and highefficiency scenarios.

In recent years, much research has focused on the adaptive
sparse structural learning of SNNs, training a lightweight
network from scratch. Kappel et al. (2015) proposed a
framework of synaptic sampling for Bayesian inference to
optimize both the structure and parameters of the network.
Inspired by the mechanisms of brain rewiring, Bellec et al.
(2017) introduced the Deep R method for ANNs. This
method trains deep networks under strict connectivity constraints. They extended the Deep R approach to RSNN and
LSNN (Bellec et al., 2018) while also implementing it on
the prototype chip of the 2nd generation SpiNNaker system (Liu et al., 2018). The Spike-Thrift method employs
attention mechanisms for pruning and growing connections
during training (Kundu et al., 2021). Chen et al. (2021)
introduced the Grad R method, defining the size and density
of dendritic spines as the absolute values of weights and

1. Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), known as the third generation of artificial neural networks (Maass, 1997), are
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China 2 Guangdong Laboratory
of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy, Shenzhen, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 4 Centre for Systems Engineering and
Innovation, Imperial College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Qi Xu <xuqi@dlut.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

