Implicit Bias of AdamW: ℓ∞ -Norm Constrained Optimization

Shuo Xie 1 Zhiyuan Li 1

Abstract

Adam and decouples the effect of the learning rate and the
weight decay coefficient by using a different implementation of weight decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018). While
Adam implements weight decay as a ℓ2 regularization of the
training objective, AdamW directly shrinks its weight per step,
known as the decoupled weight decay (see Algorithm 1).

Adam with decoupled weight decay, also known
as AdamW, is widely acclaimed for its superior
performance in language modeling tasks, surpassing Adam with ℓ2 regularization in terms of generalization and optimization. However, this advantage is not theoretically well-understood. One
challenge here is that though intuitively Adam
with ℓ2 regularization optimizes the ℓ2 regularized loss, it is not clear if AdamW optimizes a
specific objective. In this work, we make progress
toward understanding the benefit of AdamW by
showing that it implicitly performs constrained
optimization. More concretely, we show in the
full-batch setting, if AdamW converges with any
non-increasing learning rate schedule whose partial sum diverges, it must converge to a KKT point
of the original loss under the constraint that the
ℓ∞ norm of the parameter is bounded by the inverse of the weight decay factor. This result is
built on the observation that Adam can be viewed
as a smoothed version of SignGD, which is the
normalized steepest descent with respect to ℓ∞
norm, and a surprising connection between normalized steepest descent with weight decay and
Frank-Wolfe.

However, the advantage of AdamW over Adam is mostly empirical and our theoretical understanding is quite limited.
Zhuang et al. (2022) argues that one desirable property that
AdamW has while Adam does not is scale-freeness, meaning
AdamW yields the same optimization trajectory if loss is multiplied by any positive constant. Yet this property does not
give us enough information to understand the difference
regarding the optimization processes and the final learned
solutions between AdamW and Adam with ℓ2 regularization.
Intuitively, if Adam with ℓ2 regularization converges to some
point, it converges to at least a stationary point of the regularized loss function, if not a minimizer. But for AdamW,
it is even not clear if it is optimizing any (regularized) loss
function. Thus, towards taking the first step of understanding the benefit of decoupled weight decay in AdamW, we ask
the following question:
Which solution does AdamW converge to, if it converges?
Our following main result Theorem 1.1 characterizes the
implicit bias of AdamW in the deterministic case, where a
full-batch loss is used:

1. Introduction
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and its variant AdamW
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) have been the most successful
and widely used optimization algorithms in deep learning,
especially for large language models (LLMs), whose pretraining costs massively and cannot be done with SGD.
Despite its tremendous empirical success, we lack a good
theoretical understanding of Adam’s underlying work and
the roles of its hyperparameters, in particular, weight decay.
AdamW achieves better optimization and generalization over

Theorem 1.1. For any continuously differentiable function
L : Rd → R, β1 ≤ β2 < 1, initialization
Px∞0 and nonincreasing learning rate {ηt }∞
t=1 such that
t=1 ηt = ∞,
if the iterates of AdamW {xt }∞
t=0 on L converges to some x∞ ,
then x∞ is a KKT point (Definition 3.6) of the constrained
optimization problem min∥x∥∞ ≤ λ1 L(x).
If L is additionally convex, then AdamW converges to the
constrained minimizer, i.e., x∞ ∈ arg min∥x∥∞ ≤ λ1 L(x).

1

Despite being simplistic, the full-batch setting is still a very
interesting and highly non-trivial regime, because the two
main hypotheses of why Adam outperforms SGD got challenged recently in the deterministic regime (Kunstner et al.,
2022). The first hypothesis is that Adam outperforms SGD
by better handling heavy-tailed noise (Zhang et al., 2020).

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, IL, the United
States. Correspondence to: Shuo Xie <shuox@ttic.edu>, Zhiyuan
Li <zhiyuanli@ttic.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

