SelfVC: Voice Conversion With Iterative
Refinement using Self Transformations

Paarth Neekhara * 1 Shehzeen Hussain * 1 Rafael Valle 1 Boris Ginsburg 1
Rishabh Ranjan 2 Shlomo Dubnov 2 Farinaz Koushanfar 2 Julian McAuley 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deriving meaningful representations from speech has been
a topic of significant interest because such representations
can be useful for both downstream recognition and upstream
speech generation tasks. While some techniques (Défossez
et al., 2022; Eloff et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2022; Kumar
et al., 2023) aim to compress speech into a data-efficient
codec, another line of research has focused on disentangling
the learned features into components such as speaker characteristics (voice or timbre), linguistic content (phonetic
information) and prosodic information (pitch modulation
and speaking rate) (Chou et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2019; Wu
& Lee, 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Qian et al., 2022; Hussain
et al., 2023). Representation disentanglement allows controllable speech synthesis by training a model to reconstruct
the audio from the disentangled features. During inference,
the relevant disentangled representations can be modified
for performing tasks like voice conversion (changing the
speaker of an utterance) or changing the prosody.

We propose SelfVC, a training strategy to iteratively improve a voice conversion model with
self-synthesized examples. Previous efforts on
voice conversion focus on factorizing speech into
explicitly disentangled representations that separately encode speaker characteristics and linguistic content. However, disentangling speech representations to capture such attributes using taskspecific loss terms can lead to information loss.
In this work, instead of explicitly disentangling
attributes with loss terms, we present a framework
to train a controllable voice conversion model on
entangled speech representations derived from
self-supervised learning (SSL) and speaker verification models. First, we develop techniques
to derive prosodic information from the audio
signal and SSL representations to train predictive submodules in the synthesis model. Next,
we propose a training strategy to iteratively improve the synthesis model for voice conversion,
by creating a challenging training objective using self-synthesized examples. We demonstrate
that incorporating such self-synthesized examples
during training improves the speaker similarity of
generated speech as compared to a baseline voice
conversion model trained solely on heuristically
perturbed inputs. Our framework is trained without any text and achieves state-of-the-art results in
zero-shot voice conversion on metrics evaluating
naturalness, speaker similarity, and intelligibility
of synthesized audio. 1

To derive disentangled speech representations in a text-free
manner, recent methods (Lakhotia et al., 2021; Polyak et al.,
2021; Lin et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2021)
have proposed to obtain speaker information from a speaker
verification model and linguistic content information from
the output of models trained using self-supervised learning
(SSL) (Baevski et al., 2020; Gulati et al., 2020). While the
representations obtained from SSL models are highly correlated with phonetic information, they also contain speaker
information (Huang et al., 2022; Hussain et al., 2022). To
remove speaker information from the SSL model outputs,
some techniques utilize an information bottleneck approach
such as quantization (Polyak et al., 2021; Lakhotia et al.,
2021; Gu et al., 2021). Alternatively, several researchers
have proposed training strategies that employ an information perturbation technique to eliminate speaker information
without quantization (Qian et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2021;
2023a; Hussain et al., 2023). Notably, for training synthesizers, NANSY (Choi et al., 2021) and NANSY++ (Choi
et al., 2023a) propose to heuristically perturb the voice of a
given utterance with hand-engineered data augmentations,
before obtaining the output from the SSL model. To recon-

*
Equal contribution 1 NVIDIA 2 UC San Diego. Correspondence to: Paarth Neekhara <pneekhara@nvidia.com>, Shehzeen
Hussain <shehzeenh@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Webpage: https://shehzeen.github.io/selfvc/

1

