Diffusion Tempering Improves Parameter Estimation with Probabilistic
Integrators for Ordinary Differential Equations

Jonas Beck 1 2 Nathanael Bosch 2 Michael Deistler 2 Kyra L. Kadhim 1 2 Jakob H. Macke 2 Philipp Hennig 2
Philipp Berens 1 2

Abstract

2003; Kravtsov, 2020). To overcome this, multiple methods
have been developed, such as grid (Prinz et al., 2003) or
random searches (Taylor et al., 2009), simulated annealing
(Kirkpatrick et al., 1983), genetic algorithms (Ben-Shalom
et al., 2012), Bayesian methods (e.g., approximate Bayesian
computation (Marjoram et al., 2003), Markov-Chain MonteCarlo (Neal, 1993), or simulation-based inference (Cranmer
et al., 2020)). But, these methods can often require large
simulation budgets (Cranmer et al., 2020).

Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are widely
used to describe dynamical systems in science, but
identifying parameters that explain experimental
measurements is challenging. In particular, although ODEs are differentiable and would allow
for gradient-based parameter optimization, the
nonlinear dynamics of ODEs often lead to many
local minima and extreme sensitivity to initial
conditions. We therefore propose diffusion tempering, a novel regularization technique for probabilistic numerical methods which improves convergence of gradient-based parameter optimization in ODEs. By iteratively reducing a noise
parameter of the probabilistic integrator, the proposed method converges more reliably to the true
parameters. We demonstrate that our method is
effective for dynamical systems of different complexity and show that it obtains reliable parameter
estimates for a Hodgkin–Huxley model with a
practically relevant number of parameters.

By incorporating gradient information, gradient descent
provides the potential to be vastly more simulation efficient
and, as demonstrated by Neural ODEs (NODEs), has the
potential to scale to millions of parameters (Chen et al.,
2018). Unfortunately, for many real-world ODEs, gradientbased optimization is challenging: ODEs often have highly
nonlinear dynamics, several local minima, and are sensitive
to initial conditions (Cao et al., 2011; Dass et al., 2017). In
fact, even for models with few parameters, gradient-based
optimization can get stuck in local minima, leading to poor
performance compared to competing gradient-free methods
such as genetic algorithms (Hazelden et al., 2023).
Probabilistic numerical integrators have also been proposed
for parameter inference in ODEs (Tronarp et al., 2022).
Unlike ‘traditional’ non-probabilistic ODE solvers which
usually return only a single (potentially very crude) ODE
solution, probabilistic numerical methods return a posterior
distribution over the ODE solution, accounting for numerical uncertainty (Hennig et al., 2022). Parameters can then
be estimated by maximizing their likelihood, which thanks
to automatic differentiation is amenable to first order methods. This approach has been termed “Physics-Enhanced
Regression for Initial Value Problems”, or Fenrir for short.

1. Introduction
Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are ubiquitous
across science, as they often provide accurate models for
physical processes and mechanisms underlying dynamical
systems. ODEs can, for example, be used to model the motion of a pendulum, the dynamics of predator and prey populations (Hethcote, 2000) or the action potentials of neurons
(Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952). Numerical algorithms for the
(approximate) solution of ODEs are well established (Hairer
et al., 1987), but identifying parameters of the ODE such
that it matches observations can be challenging (Prinz et al.,

Here, we develop diffusion tempering for probabilistic integrators to improve gradient-based parameter inference in
ODEs. The technique is based on previous observations that
Fenrir can effectively ‘smooth out’ the loss surface of ODEs
(Tronarp et al., 2022). We therefore propose to solve consecutive optimization problems using the Fenrir likelihood. We
start with a very smooth loss surface, which yields poor fits
to data, but lets the optimizer avoid local minima. By successively solving less and less smooth problems informed by

1
Hertie Institute for AI in Brain Health, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany 2 AI Center, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany. Correspondence to: Jonas Beck <jonas.beck@unituebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

