Kernel Semi-Implicit Variational Inference

Ziheng Cheng∗ 1 Longlin Yu∗ 1 Tianyu Xie 1 Shiyue Zhang 1 Cheng Zhang 1 2

Abstract

latent variables), and then to find a member from this family
that is close to the target posterior, where the closeness is
often measured by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence.
Since the posterior generally does not possess analytical
densities, in practice people often maximize the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) instead, which is an equivalent but
tractable reformulation (Jordan et al., 1999).

Semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) extends traditional variational families with semiimplicit distributions defined in a hierarchical
manner. Due to the intractable densities of semiimplicit distributions, classical SIVI often resorts
to surrogates of evidence lower bound (ELBO)
that would introduce biases for training. A recent advancement in SIVI, named SIVI-SM, utilizes an alternative score matching objective made
tractable via a minimax formulation, albeit requiring an additional lower-level optimization. In this
paper, we propose kernel SIVI (KSIVI), a variant
of SIVI-SM that eliminates the need for lowerlevel optimization through kernel tricks. Specifically, we show that when optimizing over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), the lowerlevel problem has an explicit solution. This way,
the upper-level objective becomes the kernel Stein
discrepancy (KSD), which is readily computable
for stochastic gradient descent due to the hierarchical structure of semi-implicit variational distributions. An upper bound for the variance of
the Monte Carlo gradient estimators of the KSD
objective is derived, which allows us to establish novel convergence guarantees of KSIVI. We
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
KSIVI on both synthetic distributions and a variety of real data Bayesian inference tasks.

In classical VI, a common assumption is that variational
distributions are factorized over the parameters (or latent
variables) (Bishop & Tipping, 2000; Hinton & van Camp,
1993; Peterson & Hartman, 1989). When combined with
conditional conjugate models, this mean-field assumption
allows for a straightforward coordinate-ascent optimization
scheme with closed-form update rules (Blei et al., 2016).
However, conditional conjugacy may not hold in practice,
and a factorized variational distribution may fail to capture
the complex posterior due to the ignorance of the dependencies between different factorization components. Recent
years have witnessed significant advancements in the field
of VI, with numerous efforts aimed at alleviating these constraints. To address the conjugacy condition, black-box
VI methods have been proposed for a broad class of models that allow generic training algorithms via Monte Carlo
gradient estimators (Paisley et al., 2012; Nott et al., 2012;
Ranganath et al., 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014). In parallel, more flexible variational families have emerged, either
explicitly incorporating certain structures among the parameters or drawing inspiration from invertible transformations
of probability distributions (Jaakkola & Jordan, 1998; Saul
& Jordan, 1996; Giordano et al., 2015; Tran et al., 2015;
Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma
et al., 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2019). Despite their successes, it is noteworthy that all these approaches assume
tractable densities of variational distributions.

1. Introduction
Variational inference (VI) is an optimization based approach
widely used to approximate posterior densities for Bayesian
models (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008;
Blei et al., 2016). The idea behind VI is to first posit a family
of variational distributions over the model parameters (or

To further enhance the capacity of variational families,
one strategy is to incorporate the implicit models defined
through neural network mappings (Huszár, 2017; Tran et al.,
2017; Mescheder et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2018a;b; Song et al.,
2019). These implicit models can provide more flexible variational approximations that allow easy sampling procedures
by design. However, their probability densities are often
intractable, rendering direct computation of the log density
ratio, crucial for evaluating the ELBO, impossible. Implicit

*
Equal contribution (Alphabetical) 1 School of Mathematical
Sciences, Peking University, China 2 Center for Statistical Science, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Cheng Zhang
<chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

