CLIF: Complementary Leaky Integrate-and-Fire Neuron
for Spiking Neural Networks

Yulong Huang * 1 Xiaopeng Lin * 1 Hongwei Ren 1 Haotian Fu 1 Yue Zhou 1 Zunchang Liu 1
Biao Pan 2 Bojun Cheng 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) (Maass, 1997) have captivated the attention of both academic and industrial communities in recent years (Tavanaei et al., 2019; Roy et al., 2019;
Mehonic & Kenyon, 2022; Schuman et al., 2022). Drawing inspiration from the biological neuron, SNNs adopt
the spiking neuron, like the leaky integrate and fire (LIF)
model, utilizing spike-based communication for information
transmission (Teeter et al., 2018). This fundamental characteristic equips SNNs with the capacity to effectively process
information across both temporal and spatial dimensions,
excelling in areas of low latency and low power consumption (Schuman et al., 2022). Compared to conventional deep
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), SNNs exhibit superior
efficiency and capability to process temporal information,
presenting significant implementation potential in edge device applications for real-time applications (Roy et al., 2019;
Mehonic & Kenyon, 2022; Shen et al., 2024).

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising
brain-inspired energy-efficient models. Compared to conventional deep Artificial Neural
Networks (ANNs), SNNs exhibit superior
efficiency and capability to process temporal
information. However, it remains a challenge to
train SNNs due to their undifferentiable spiking
mechanism. The surrogate gradients method
is commonly used to train SNNs, but often
comes with an accuracy disadvantage over ANNs
counterpart. We link the degraded accuracy
to the vanishing of gradient on the temporal
dimension through the analytical and experimental study of the training process of Leaky
Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) Neuron-based SNNs.
Moreover, we propose the Complementary Leaky
Integrate-and-Fire (CLIF) Neuron. CLIF creates
extra paths to facilitate the backpropagation
in computing temporal gradient while keeping
binary output. CLIF is hyperparameter-free
and features broad applicability. Extensive
experiments on a variety of datasets demonstrate
CLIF’s clear performance advantage over
other neuron models. Furthermore, the CLIF’s
performance even slightly surpasses superior
ANNs with identical network structure and
training conditions. The code is available at
https://github.com/HuuYuLong/ComplementaryLIF.

Despite the advantages of SNNs, the training of SNNs
presents a substantial challenge due to the inherently undifferentiable spiking mechanism. Many scholars have intensively explored this problem, three mainstream training methods have been proposed: the bio-inspired training
method (Kheradpisheh et al., 2018), the ANN-to-SNN conversion method (Deng & Gu, 2020) and the surrogate gradient (SG) method (Li et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2022b; Jiang
et al., 2023). The bio-inspired training method bypasses
undifferentiable problems by calculating the gradients with
respect to the spike time (Zhang et al., 2018; Dong et al.,
2023). The ANN-to-SNN method utilizes pre-trained ANN
models to approximate the ReLU function with the spike
neuron model (Li et al., 2021a; Jiang et al., 2023). The
SG method uses surrogate gradients to approximate the
gradients of non-differentiable spike functions during backpropagation (Neftci et al., 2019). This method solves the
problem of non-differentiable spike functions, facilitating
the direct trainable ability of SNNs (Xu et al., 2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 Function Hub, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
School of Integrated Circuit Science and Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Bojun Cheng
<bocheng@hkust-gz.edu.cn>.

Each method is attractive in certain aspects but also process certain limitations. SG and ANN-to-SNN methods
provide great applicability across various neural network
architectures, such as spike-driven MLP (Li et al., 2022),

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

