Position: Levels of AGI for Operationalizing Progress on the Path to AGI

Meredith Ringel Morris 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 2 Noah Fiedel 2 Tris Warkentin 2 Allan Dafoe 3
Aleksandra Faust 2 Clement Farabet 3 Shane Legg 3

Abstract

about a decade (Bengio et al., 2023); some even assert that
current LLMs are AGIs (Agüera y Arcas & Norvig, 2023).

We propose a framework for classifying the capabilities and behavior of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) models and their precursors. This
framework introduces levels of AGI performance,
generality, and autonomy, providing a common
language to compare models, assess risks, and
measure progress along the path to AGI. To develop our framework, we analyze existing definitions of AGI, and distill six principles that a useful
ontology for AGI should satisfy. With these principles in mind, we propose “Levels of AGI” based
on depth (performance) and breadth (generality)
of capabilities, and reflect on how current systems
fit into this ontology. We discuss the challenging
requirements for future benchmarks that quantify the behavior and capabilities of AGI models
against these levels. Finally, we discuss how these
levels of AGI interact with deployment considerations such as autonomy and risk, and emphasize
the importance of carefully selecting Human-AI
Interaction paradigms for responsible and safe
deployment of highly capable AI systems.

The concept of AGI is important as it maps onto goals for,
predictions about, and risks of AI:
Goals: Achieving human-level “intelligence” is an implicit
or explicit north-star goal for many in our field, from the
1956 Dartmouth AI Conference (McCarthy et al., 1955)
that kick-started the modern field of AI, to today’s leading
AI research firms, whose mission statements include goals
such as “ensure transformative AI helps people and society” (Anthropic, 2023a) and “ensure that artificial general
intelligence benefits all of humanity” (OpenAI, 2023).
Predictions: The concept of AGI is related to a prediction about progress in AI, namely that it is toward greater
generality, approaching and exceeding human generality.
Additionally, AGI is typically intertwined with a notion
of “emergent” properties (Wei et al., 2022), i.e. capabilities not explicitly anticipated by the developer. Such capabilities offer promise, perhaps including abilities that are
complementary to typical human skills, enabling new types
of interaction or novel industries. Such predictions about
AGI’s capabilities in turn predict likely societal impacts;
AGI may have significant economic implications, i.e., reaching the necessary criteria for widespread labor substitution
(Ellingrud et al., 2023; Dell’Acqua et al., 2023; Eloundou
et al., 2023), as well as geo-political implications relating
not only to the economic advantages AGI may confer, but
also to military considerations (Kissinger et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) is an important and
sometimes controversial concept in computing research,
used to describe an AI system that is at least as capable as a
human at most tasks. Given the rapid advancement of Machine Learning (ML) models, the concept of AGI has grown
from a subject of philosophical debate, to one which also
has near-term practical relevance. Some experts believe that
“sparks” of AGI (Bubeck et al., 2023) are already present
in the latest generation of large language models (LLMs);
some predict AI will broadly outperform humans within

Risks: Lastly, AGI is viewed by some as a concept for identifying the point when there are extreme risks (Shevlane
et al., 2023; Bengio et al., 2023), as some speculate that
AGI systems might be able to deceive and manipulate, accumulate resources, advance goals, behave agentically, outwit
humans in broad domains, displace humans from key roles,
and/or recursively self-improve.
In this position paper, we argue that it is critical for the
AI research community to explicitly reflect on what we
mean by “AGI,” and aspire to quantify attributes like the
performance, generality, and autonomy of AI systems.
Shared operationalizable definitions for these concepts will
support: comparisons between models; risk assessments

1

Google DeepMind, Seattle, WA, USA 2 Google DeepMind,
Mountain View, CA, USA 3 Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Meredith Ringel Morris <merrie@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

