Slicing Mutual Information Generalization Bounds for Neural Networks

Kimia Nadjahi 1 Kristjan Greenewald 2 Rickard Brüel Gabrielsson 1 Justin Solomon 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generalization is a fundamental aspect of machine learning, where models optimized on training data are expected
to perform similarly on test data. Neural networks (NNs),
in particular, are able to both perform and generalize well,
allowing them to achieve excellent test performance on complex tasks. Despite this empirical success, the architectural
factors influencing how well NNs generalize are not fully
understood theoretically. This has motivated a substantial
body of work using a variety of tools to bound their generalization error (Jiang et al., 2020b), i.e.., the gap between
the average loss on training data (empirical risk) and its
expected loss on a new data from the same distribution (population risk). The goal is to identify when and why a given
model yields a low generalization error, and ultimately, design architectures or training algorithms that guarantee good
generalization. Common approaches include PAC-Bayes
analysis (Dziugaite & Roy, 2017) and information theory
(Xu & Raginsky, 2017).

The ability of machine learning (ML) algorithms
to generalize well to unseen data has been studied through the lens of information theory, by
bounding the generalization error with the inputoutput mutual information (MI), i.e., the MI between the training data and the learned hypothesis. Yet, these bounds have limited practicality
for modern ML applications (e.g., deep learning),
due to the difficulty of evaluating MI in high dimensions. Motivated by recent findings on the
compressibility of neural networks, we consider
algorithms that operate by slicing the parameter
space, i.e., trained on random lower-dimensional
subspaces. We introduce new, tighter informationtheoretic generalization bounds tailored for such
algorithms, demonstrating that slicing improves
generalization. Our bounds offer significant computational and statistical advantages over standard
MI bounds, as they rely on scalable alternative
measures of dependence, i.e., disintegrated mutual information and k-sliced mutual information.
Then, we extend our analysis to algorithms whose
parameters do not need to exactly lie on random
subspaces, by leveraging rate-distortion theory.
This strategy yields generalization bounds that
incorporate a distortion term measuring model
compressibility under slicing, thereby tightening
existing bounds without compromising performance or requiring model compression. Building on this, we propose a regularization scheme
enabling practitioners to control generalization
through compressibility. Finally, we empirically
validate our results and achieve the computation
of non-vacuous information-theoretic generalization bounds for neural networks, a task that was
previously out of reach.

Compression is another topic which has provided a fertile
ground for machine learning research. As model architectures have become more and more complex, their evaluation,
training and fine-tuning become even more challenging. For
instance, large language models are parameterized with billions of parameters. Compressed models, which reduce
the number of trainable parameters without significantly
deteriorating the performance, have been growing in practical relevance, for example LoRA finetuning of large language models (Hu et al., 2021). One compression scheme
which has found success consists in training NNs on random, lower-dimensional subspaces. NNs compressed that
way have been shown to yield satisfying test performances
in various tasks while being faster to train (Li et al., 2018).
This framework has recently been applied by Lotfi et al.
(2022) to significantly improve PAC-Bayes generalization
bounds, to the point where they closely match empirically
observed generalization error.
A recent line of work argues that there is actually an interplay between compressible models and their ability to generalize well. The main conclusion is that one can construct
tighter generalization bounds by leveraging compression
schemes (Arora et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2021; Kuhn et al.,
2021; Sefidgaran et al., 2022).

1
MIT 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab; IBM Research. Correspondence to: Kimia Nadjahi <kimia.nadjahi@ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

