Evolution-Inspired Loss Functions for Protein Representation Learning

Chengyue Gong 1 Adam Klivans 1 James Madigan Loy 2 Tianlong Chen 1 Qiang Liu 1 Daniel Diaz 1 2

Abstract

Lu et al., 2022) can accelerate the development of biotechnology with applications in identifying disease-causing variants (Braunisch et al., 2021; Kouba et al., 2023; Scherer
et al., 2021) and enzyme engineering for biomanufacturing. Due to the prohibitive cost of generating experimental
data, self-supervised learning (SSL) has become the primary technique used by the community to generate protein
representations (e.g., Riesselman et al., 2018a; Rives et al.,
2019a; Meier et al., 2021a; Dauparas et al., 2022; Bepler &
Berger, 2019; d’Oelsnitz et al., 2023; Notin et al., 2022; Hsu
et al., 2022). These methods rely on masking followed by
predicting the wildtype (WT) amino acids in extant proteins
as the SSL training objective. For example, given as input a
protein sequence and masked residue, models can be trained
to predict what amino acid has been masked. The loss in
WT-mask SSL is typically defined to be the cross entropy
between a model’s prediction and the one-hot encoding of
the masked wildtype amino acid(s). This wildtype accuracy
metric, also known as recovery ratio, is then reported as a
proxy for the quality of the learned representations.

AI-based frameworks for protein engineering use
self-supervised learning (SSL) to obtain representations for downstream mutation effect predictions. The most common training objective
for these methods is wildtype accuracy: given a
sequence or structure where a wildtype residue
has been masked, predict the missing amino acid.
Wildtype accuracy, however, does not align with
the primary goal of protein engineering, which is
to suggest a mutation rather than to identify what
already appears in nature. Here we present Evolutionary Ranking (EvoRank), a training objective that incorporates evolutionary information derived from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs)
to learn more diverse protein representations. EvoRank corresponds to ranking amino-acid likelihoods in the probability distribution induced by
an MSA. This objective forces models to learn
the underlying evolutionary dynamics of a protein. Across a variety of phenotypes and datasets,
we demonstrate that EvoRank leads to dramatic
improvements in zero-shot performance and can
compete with models fine-tuned on experimental
data. This is particularly important in protein engineering, where it is expensive to obtain data for
fine-tuning.

For machine learning-guided protein engineering (MLPE),
practitioners desire models that suggest mutations to a protein away from wildtype, as opposed to models that merely
predict wildtype. To address this disparity, several approaches have been proposed. Structure-based methods
often adjust the temperature of the logits (Ingraham et al.,
2019; Dauparas et al., 2022; Sumida et al., 2024) to bias
away from wildtype. Sequence-based methods require large
protein databases and incorporate MSAs as additional inputs
to mitigate the existence of unique wildtype signatures (Rao
et al., 2021a; Notin et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
The success of AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021) has inspired
a new era of deep-learning frameworks for protein design
and engineering. Large protein language models (e.g., ESM
(Rives et al., 2019a; Meier et al., 2021a)), structure generative models (e.g., RFDiffusion (Watson et al., 2023),
NeuralPLexer (Qiao et al., 2023)) and structure-based selfsupervised models (Sumida et al., 2024; Diaz et al., 2023;

A more serious and often overlooked issue, however, is that
improved wildtype accuracy may not correlate with downstream mutation effect performance. We sharply illustrate
this phenomenon in Table 1 where we train a structurebased model to increasing levels of wildtype accuracy and
show that its downstream performance on thermodynamic
stability prediction begins to decrease beyond a wildtype
accuracy threshold.

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Texas at Austin 2 Intelligent
Proteins, LLC.
Correspondence to: Daniel Diaz <dannyjdiaz305@gmail.com>.

Additionally, current frameworks using either sequence or
structure modalities can achieve greater than 90% wildtype
accuracy (e.g., Rives et al., 2019a; Meier et al., 2021a; Lin
et al., 2023; Diaz et al., 2023), forcing the practitioner to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

