Hybrid Reinforcement Learning from Offline Observation Alone

Yuda Song 1 J. Andrew Bagnell 1 2 Aarti Singh 1

Abstract

distribution using online interaction with the environment.
Previously, RL research has tended to focus on either purely
offline or online regimes, each with its inherent challenges.
Offline learning, while benefiting from the exploration and
potential expert “advice” implicit in a large offline dataset,
often suffers from instability due to distribution shifts (Wang
et al., 2021). Online RL benefits from feedback from the
environment but at the cost of increased complexity, both
statistically and computationally (Du et al., 2020; Kane
et al., 2022), due to the requirement of global exploration.
Hybrid RL benefits from the synergy of combining both data
sources. Earlier studies in this domain have predominantly
utilized canonical offline datasets (Levine et al., 2020), with
extensive information of state, action, reward, and subsequent state. This comprehensive data approach has proven
beneficial, highlighting the statistical and computational superiority of hybrid RL (Song et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023),
and its robustness against distribution shift (Wagenmaker &
Pacchiano, 2023; Ren et al., 2023).

We consider the hybrid reinforcement learning
setting where the agent has access to both offline data and online interactive access. While
RL research typically assumes offline data contains complete action, reward and transition information, datasets with only state information (also
known as observation-only datasets) are more general, abundant and practical. This motivates our
study of the hybrid RL with observation-only offline dataset framework. While the task of competing with the best policy “covered” by the offline data can be solved if a reset model of the environment is provided (i.e., one that can be reset to
any state), we show evidence of hardness of competing when only given the weaker trace model
(i.e., one can only reset to the initial states and
must produce full traces through the environment),
without further assumption of admissibility of the
offline data. Under the admissibility assumptions–
that the offline data could actually be produced
by the policy class we consider– we propose the
first algorithm in the trace model setting that provably matches the performance of algorithms that
leverage a reset model. We also perform proof-ofconcept experiments that suggest the effectiveness
of our algorithm in practice.

However, the necessity for expansive datasets in such a
rich format poses a significant barrier. In practice, most
large-scale datasets exist in the format of videos (Grauman
et al., 2022; 2023) (imagine using video demonstrations
from Youtube). The requirement of annotated actions in
the dataset is restrictive because actions do not generalize
between different modalities: one should not expect
to naively apply human actions to robot actuators, and
different robots have different action spaces as well. The
approach of collecting different actions for different
modalities with human labors (Padalkar et al., 2023) is
challenging to scale as the observation-only datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, explosive growth in the availability of offline
data for interactive decision making problems (Dasari et al.,
2019; Qin et al., 2022; Mathieu et al., 2023; Padalkar et al.,
2023), combined with an ability to interact with the environment for feedback, led to the advancement of hybrid Reinforcement Learning (hybrid RL) (Ross & Bagnell,
2012; Song et al., 2022). This setup blends the exploratory
strengths of offline data with the ability to adapt the data

This motivates a more general setting with a weaker
offline data requirement without losing the statistical and
computational benefit of hybrid RL. In this work, we
initiate the study of Hybrid RL from (Offline) Observation
Alone (H Y RLO) framework where the offline data only
contains state1 information. Previous studies that fall into
the H Y RLO framework can be generally characterized in
two ways: the first leverages the offline state data to perform
representation learning (i.e., requires a separate pretraining
stage) (Nair et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2022b; Ghosh et al.,
2023), and then to use the learned feature map to speed up

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Aurora Innovation. Correspondence to: Yuda Song <yudas@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

We will use the terms observation and state interchangeably.

