Instruction Tuning for Secure Code Generation

Jingxuan He * 1 Mark Vero * 1 Gabriela Krasnopolska 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract
Modern language models (LMs) have gained
widespread acceptance in everyday and professional contexts, particularly in programming. An
essential procedure enabling this adoption is instruction tuning, which substantially enhances
LMs’ practical utility by training them to follow
user instructions and human preferences. However, existing instruction tuning schemes overlook
a crucial aspect: the security of generated code.
As a result, even the state-of-the-art instructiontuned LMs frequently produce unsafe code, posing significant security risks. In this work, we introduce SafeCoder to address this gap. SafeCoder
performs security-centric fine-tuning using a diverse and high-quality dataset that we collected
using an automated pipeline. We integrate the security fine-tuning with standard instruction tuning,
to facilitate a joint optimization of both security
and utility. Despite its simplicity, we show that
SafeCoder is effective across a variety of popular
LMs and datasets. It is able to drastically improve
security (by about 30%), while preserving utility.

llama2-Chat

Pretrained CodeLlama-7B

OctoCoder

Inst. Tuned (w/o SafeCoder)

GPT-3.5-Turbo-Instruct

Inst. Tuned (with SafeCoder)

Code Security
100

Code Security
100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

7

13 15.5
Model Size (B)

?

20
26

h
wit

29

Saf

der

eCo

w/o SafeCo

der

32

35

38

HumanEval Pass@1

Figure 1. Left: state-of-the-art instruction-tuned LMs frequently
produce insecure code, regardless of model size and family. Right:
SafeCoder significantly enhances the security of instruction-tuned
LMs with minimal compromise on utility, e.g., Pass@1 score on
the HumanEval benchmark (Chen et al., 2021).

Fishkin (2023), programming is the most common use case
of state-of-the-art instruction-tuned LMs. Moreover, GitHub
has introduced Copilot Chat to assist a variety of software
development tasks (Zhao, 2023).

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Jingxuan He <jingxuan.he@inf.ethz.ch>, Mark Vero <mark.vero@inf.ethz.ch>.

Besides improving helpfulness, instruction tuning also aims
to ensure safety. While existing instruction tuning schemes
have succeeded in improving safety for natural language
attributes such as toxicity (Touvron et al., 2023), addressing the security of generated code has received inadequate
attention. As a result, even after instruction tuning, LMs
still frequently produce insecure code, just like their pretrained versions (Pearce et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). In
Figure 1 (left), we provide an evaluation of four state-ofthe-art instruction-tuned LMs, revealing that they generate
secure code for only around 60% of the time. In particular, OctoCoder (Muennighoff et al., 2023), despite being
tuned with general code commit data, is still prone to generating insecure code frequently. Further detailed results in
Appendix B indicate that merely including security-aware
instructions in the prompt does not significantly enhance
security. The consequences of LM-generated vulnerabilities
are worrisome, as they can incur significant resources to fix
or even leak into production.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Key Challenges Despite the urgent need, mitigating this
security concern is not straightforward. The first challenge

1. Introduction
Modern large language models (large LMs) typically undergo two training stages: pretraining (Brown et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) and instruction tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023a). The instruction tuning phase equips the LM with
instruction-following and user-interaction capabilities, significantly enhancing their practical usability. Instructiontuned LMs, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023a), are increasingly being adopted in daily life and professional environments (Spataro, 2023; Pichai & Hassabis, 2023). A particular strength of these LMs is their proficiency in code
understanding. As suggested by Zheng et al. (2023) and
*

1

