Dynamic Evaluation of Large Language Models by Meta Probing Agents

Kaijie Zhu 1 Jindong Wang 1 Qinlin Zhao 2 Ruochen Xu 1 Xing Xie 1

Abstract

Vanilla

Evaluation of large language models (LLMs) has
raised great concerns in the community due to
the issue of data contamination. Existing work
designed evaluation protocols using well-defined
algorithms for specific tasks, which cannot be
easily extended to diverse scenarios. Moreover,
current evaluation benchmarks can only provide
the overall benchmark results and cannot support
a fine-grained and multifaceted analysis of LLMs’
abilities. In this paper, we propose meta probing agents (MPA), a general dynamic evaluation
protocol inspired by psychometrics to evaluate
LLMs. MPA designs the probing and judging
agents to automatically transform an original evaluation problem into a new one following psychometric theory on three basic cognitive abilities: language understanding, problem solving,
and domain knowledge. These basic abilities are
also dynamically configurable, allowing multifaceted analysis. We conducted extensive evaluations using MPA and found that most LLMs
achieve poorer performance, indicating room for
improvement. Our multifaceted analysis demonstrated the strong correlation between the basic
abilities and an implicit Matthew effect on model
size, i.e., larger models possess stronger correlations of the abilities. MPA can also be used as
a data augmentation approach to enhance LLMs.
Code is available at: https://github.com/
microsoft/promptbench.

LU

PS

DK

All

Accuracy

80
70
60
50

o
o
o
b
b
b
-Turb -3.5-Turb emini-Pr Yi-34 xtral-8x7 lama2-70
i
T
G
L
P
M
G

GPT-4

Model

Figure 1. Performance of different LLMs on vanilla MMLU testset
and our probing benchmarks based on the MMLU. LU, PS, and
DK denote the evaluation sets to evaluate language understanding,
problem solving, and domain knowledge ability, respectively.

models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023b; GeminiTeam, 2023). To
facilitate a better understanding of the strength and weakness of LLMs, evaluation was carried out by collecting data
from various domains (Liang et al., 2023; bench authors,
2023), benchmarking specific tasks (Hendrycks et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021; Clark et al., 2018), and
evaluating in extreme scenarios (Zhu et al., 2023b; Wang
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2022).
There have been increasing concerns about the genuine abilities of LLMs in public benchmarks, attributing the “false
promise” to data contamination (Lovin, 2023; Bender et al.,
2021; Kocoń et al., 2023), overfitting benchmarks (Zhu et al.,
2023a), improper choice of the evaluation criterion (Schaeffer et al., 2023), or lack of causality (Berglund et al., 2023).
Among these concerns, data contamination remains the most
significant, as static public benchmarks could easily be harnessed to train models. Moreover, evaluation should provide
not only benchmark results, but also insight into the structural capabilities of models for future development (Burnell
et al., 2023). For example, evaluations are typically done in
a certain context, e.g., a math application problem requires
at least two abilities: language understanding (to comprehend the problem) and reasoning (to solve the problem).
Which ability matters more, and how can we quantify the
relationship between these abilities?

1. Introduction
Intelligence evaluation has never been as important as today due to the contradiction between unprecedented performance and underexplored interpretability of large language
1
Microsoft Research 2 University of Science and
Technology of China.
Correspondence to:
Kaijie
Zhu <kaijiezhu11@gmail.com>, Jindong Wang <Jindong.Wang@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

