D ISTI LLM: Towards Streamlined Distillation for Large Language Models

Jongwoo Ko 1 Sungnyun Kim 1 Tianyi Chen 2 Se-Young Yun 1
https://github.com/jongwooko/distillm

Abstract

costs or large memory footprints. Therefore, a crucial objective for the practical use of these high-capacity models is to
compress them by reducing the number of parameters while
preserving their performance to the greatest extent possible.

Knowledge distillation (KD) is widely used for
compressing a teacher model to a smaller student model, reducing its inference cost and memory footprint while preserving model capabilities. However, current KD methods for autoregressive sequence models (e.g., large language
models) suffer from missing a standardized objective function. Moreover, the recent use of studentgenerated outputs to address training-inference
mismatches has significantly escalated computational costs. To tackle these issues, we introduce D ISTI LLM, a more effective and efficient KD framework for auto-regressive language models. D ISTI LLM comprises two components: (1) a novel skew Kullback-Leibler divergence loss, where we unveil and leverage its theoretical properties, and (2) an adaptive off-policy
approach designed to enhance the efficiency in
utilizing student-generated outputs. Extensive experiments, including instruction-following tasks,
demonstrate the effectiveness of D ISTI LLM in
building high-performing student models while
achieving up to 4.3× speedup compared to recent
KD methods.

As the necessity of reducing the demands on computational
resources becomes important, KD (Hinton et al., 2015)
emerges as a promising method. It involves the transfer
of knowledge from a teacher model with large capacity (i.e.,
LLMs) to a smaller student LM. Most approaches of KD
have employed the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) loss,
enforcing the student model to generate outputs that mirror
the teacher model’s outputs on a fixed dataset (Kim & Rush,
2016; Sanh et al., 2019). Such methods of KD have significantly enhanced the performance of student models, making
them competitive with teacher models while increasing efficiency, especially for various classification tasks (Sun et al.,
2019; Mirzadeh et al., 2020).
These approaches using KLD on fixed datasets, however, have two primary shortcomings in applying to autoregressive LMs. First, using the KLD can lead to suboptimal results. Given the complexity of generative tasks
compared to classification tasks, this can result in the student distribution becoming overly smooth and consequently
failing to fully capture the teacher distribution, or becoming
overly concentrated in high-probability distributions. This
issue—referred to as mode averaging or mode collapse—
arises due to the asymmetric nature of the KLD (Wen et al.,
2023; Gu et al., 2024). Second, the use of a fixed dataset
in the training phase can cause a distribution mismatch between the sequences observed during training and those
generated by the student in auto-regressive inference, leading to exposure bias problems (Arora et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in auto-regressive language models
(LMs, OpenAI 2023; Touvron et al. 2023) such as large language models (LLMs) have significantly improved the quality of text generation in a variety of generative tasks such
as task-agnostic instruction-following tasks (Wang et al.,
2023b). This success is often attributed to the increased
scale of training data and model parameters (e.g., 175B parameters for GPT-3; Brown et al. 2020). However, expanding the parameter count brings associated costs, limiting the
deployment of these models due to either high inference

Recent studies have explored various divergence losses
(Wen et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2024) or the incorporation
of student-generated output (SGO, Lin et al. 2020; Agarwal et al. 2024) to address the existing problems. However,
these methods often lack standardized objective functions
and are less efficient due to the continuous SGO generation.
For instance, Agarwal et al. (2024) employed on-policy distillation with SGOs, but it faces low sample efficiency and
high generation time as it constantly prompts the student to
produce new training sequences. Also, their experiments in-

1

KAIST AI, Seoul, Republic of Korea 2 Microsoft, Redmond,
Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Se-Young Yun <yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

