Simplicity Bias of Two-Layer Networks beyond Linearly Separable Data

Nikita Tsoy 1 Nikola Konstantinov 1

Abstract

the propensity of neural networks to rely only on “simple”
features. As Shah et al. (2020) demonstrated, this bias might
be persistent and hurt OOD generalization in image classification tasks. Simplicity bias is also a peculiar phenomenon
from a theoretical perspective. Since many neural architectures are universal function approximators (Cybenko, 1989;
Hornik et al., 1989), one might hope that models will learn
other, more sophisticated patterns within the data.

Simplicity bias, the propensity of deep models
to over-rely on simple features, has been identified as a potential reason for limited out-ofdistribution generalization of neural networks
(Shah et al., 2020). Despite the important implications, this phenomenon has been theoretically confirmed and characterized only under
strong dataset assumptions, such as linear separability (Lyu et al., 2021). In this work, we characterize simplicity bias for general datasets in
the context of two-layer neural networks initialized with small weights and trained with gradient flow. Specifically, we prove that in the early
training phases, network features cluster around a
few directions that do not depend on the size of
the hidden layer. Furthermore, for datasets with
an XOR-like pattern, we precisely identify the
learned features and demonstrate that simplicity
bias intensifies during later training stages. These
results indicate that features learned in the middle
stages of training may be more useful for OOD
transfer. We support this hypothesis with experiments on image data.

Despite the importance of simplicity bias, a thorough theoretical understanding of this phenomenon is still lacking.
To the best of our knowledge, existing works on simplicity
bias (Lyu et al., 2021; Safran et al., 2022; Morwani et al.,
2023) only demonstrate its emergence by employing stringent assumptions, which restrict training data to be linearly
separable or one-dimensional.

Contributions We give the first proof of the existence of
simplicity bias and a precise mathematical characterization
of the features learned during training beyond linearly separable data. We do so for two-layer neural networks trained
with gradient flow from a small initialization, a model popular in the theoretical literature (Luo et al., 2021a; Lyu et al.,
2021; Boursier et al., 2022). We characterize simplicity bias
as a property that only a small set of prominent neurons governs the behavior of the network. These prominent neurons
cluster in several directions, which do not depend on the
size of the hidden layer.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is a key challenge towards the widespread adoption of machine learning.
Specifically, since training data may not always cover all
possible test scenarios, networks often rely on shortcuts:
spurious rules that hold on the training distribution but not
in more complicated real-world situations (Geirhos et al.,
2020). For example, convolutional networks often prioritize
texture over shape (Geirhos et al., 2019), or transformers
might rely on simplistic heuristics in natural language inference (McCoy et al., 2019).

Specifically, our theoretical analysis divides training into
three stages. During the first two stages (Section 4), in which
the weights grow from small to constant scale, we prove for
general datasets that the most prominent features recovered
by the training dynamics cluster around the extrema of a
data-dependent function, which does not depend on the number of neurons and disentangles the interactions between
them. For the last stage, where the network converges to
zero loss, we prove that simplicity bias can become extreme
even in non-linearly-separable datasets. In this stage, we
cover the case of XOR-like data under an assumption about
the convergence of a 4-neuron network, which we validate
experimentally. On a methodological level, our work generalizes the analysis of Lyu et al. (2021) beyond linearly
separable data and provides an implicit description of the
most prominent features for general datasets.

One possible mechanism behind shortcuts is simplicity bias,
1
INSAIT, Sofia University, Bulgaria. Correspondence to:
Nikita Tsoy <nikita.tsoy@insait.ai>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

