DiffStitch: Boosting Offline Reinforcement Learning with
Diffusion-based Trajectory Stitching

Guanghe Li 1 Yixiang Shan 1 Zhengbang Zhu 2 Ting Long 1 Weinan Zhang 2

Abstract
S

In offline reinforcement learning (RL), the performance of the learned policy highly depends
on the quality of offline datasets. However, in
many cases, the offline dataset contains very
limited optimal trajectories, which poses a challenge for offline RL algorithms as agents must acquire the ability to transit to high-reward regions.
To address this issue, we introduce Diffusionbased Trajectory Stitching (DiffStitch), a novel
diffusion-based data augmentation pipeline that
systematically generates stitching transitions between trajectories. DiffStitch effectively connects
low-reward trajectories with high-reward trajectories, forming globally optimal trajectories to
address the challenges faced by offline RL algorithms. Empirical experiments conducted on
D4RL datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
DiffStitch across RL methodologies. Notably,
DiffStitch demonstrates substantial enhancements
in the performance of one-step methods (IQL),
imitation learning methods (TD3+BC), and trajectory optimization methods (DT). Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
guangheli12/DiffStitch.

S

S

G

G

G

(a)

(b)

S

S

S

G

(c)

state S
goal state G
trajectory in dataset
trajectory in dataset
stitching trajectory
augmented trajectory
intersection

G

(d)

G

(e)

Figure 1. An illustration of trajectory stitching. Suppose there are
two trajectories (blue and yellow) in the offline dataset, and the
objective for the agent is to learn a policy that starts from S and
reaches G. (a) and (b) present the scenarios where the trajectories
in the offline dataset intersect or are in close proximity, making it
easier to learn a policy that leads to G. (c) presents the scenario
where trajectories are far apart, posing a challenge for learning a
viable policy. (d) illustrates previous solutions that generate trajectories based on original data to enhance policy learning. Although
many branches extend from the original trajectory that starts at S,
none of them formalizes a sample trajectory that starts from S and
reaches G. (e) illustrates our solution which stitches the trajectory
starting from S and ending at G, facilitating policy learning by
providing a clear path to follow.

1. Introduction
Recently, offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al.,
2020; Agarwal et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Janner
et al., 2021; Kidambi et al., 2020), which focuses on learning
a policy from pre-collected, static datasets without directly
interacting with the environment, has gained much attention. It has particularly wide application in scenarios where
obtaining real-time feedback is costly, time-consuming, or
impractical (Levine et al., 2020). By learning from the
offline dataset, offline RL avoids the necessity of direct in-

teraction with the environment, effectively eliminating the
associated costs and risks.
While offline RL has achieved notable sucess in commercial
recommendation , health care (Fatemi et al., 2022), dialog
(Jaques et al., 2020) and autonomous driving (Shi et al.,
2021), its performance is heavily dependent on the quality
of the offline dataset. When the offline dataset suffers from
inherent deficiencies or shortcomings, the performance of
offline RL will remarkably decline. Consider the task in
Figure 1, where an agent starts from state S and receives a
positive reward only when it reaches the goal state G. Suppose there are only two trajectories in the offline dataset,
one starting from state S, and one ending at state G. If
the states of two trajectories intersect, as depicted in Fig-

1
Jilin University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Ting Long <longting@jlu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

