Adaptive Group Personalization for Federated Mutual Transfer Learning

Haoqing Xu 1 Dian Shen 1 2 Meng Wang 3 Beilun Wang 1 *

Abstract

a two-layer linear mixed-effects model as

Mutual transfer learning aims to improve prediction with knowledge from related domains. Recently, federated learning is applied in this field
to address the communication and privacy concerns. However, previous clustered federated
learning (CFL) solutions lack theoretical guarantee of learnability recovery and require timeconsuming hyper-parameter tuning, while centralized mutual transfer learning methods lack adaptability to concept drifts. In this paper, we propose
the Adaptive Group Personalization method (AdaGrP) to overcome these challenges. We adaptively decide the recovery threshold with a nonparametric method, adaptive threshold correction,
for tuning-free solution with relaxed condition.
Theoretical results guarantee the perfect learnability recovery with the corrected threshold. Empirical results show AdaGrP achieves 16.9% average
improvement in learnability structure recovery
compared with state-of-the-art CFL baselines.

y i “ X i β ` Z i θ i ` εi ,
s.t. θ i “ αki ` ui , Di P Ski ,

(1)

where X i P Rni ˆp , Z i P Rni ˆq are global features and
heterogeneous features, and they correspond to parameters
β, θ i . Global parameter β is shared among all the domains,
while heterogeneous parameter θ i contains two components:
αk is only shared within the subgroup Sk , and ui represents
the domain-specific random effects that cannot be transferred. The learnability structure S “ tSk , @ku therefore
reveals the underlying relationships between domains and
helps accurate prediction. Typical applications include climate analysis (Salam & Salam, 2020; Cheng et al., 2020),
healthcare analysis (Zhang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022), and
longitudinal data analyses (Hu et al., 2022).
The learnability structure S is usually unknown a priori in
the aforementioned applications. In order to recovery the
learnability structure S and improve prediction performance,
parameters should be estimated jointly with data in different
domains. Previous mutual transfer learning methods mainly
focus on centralized computing scenario. Data of each domain is collected and sent to a central server for estimation.
However, in the climate analysis applications (Vose et al.,
2014), the data will contain more than 4 billion samples if
collected per second. It is unaffordable to transfer such large
data to a central server. In the healthcare analysis (Li et al.,
2022; Luo et al., 2022), the data usually contain sensitive
information of patients and clinics (Bonomi & Jiang, 2018;
Janmey & Elkin, 2018). Leakage of these private data may
cause serious ethic problems. Therefore, Communication
bottleneck and Privacy concerns significantly hinder mutual
transfer learning from being widely adopted in emerging
applications.

1. Introduction
Mutual transfer learning (Cheng et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2022)
is a learning paradigm in big data analysis. It aims to improve prediction performance by transferring useful knowledge among related domains. It is assumed in mutual transfer learning that data domains are clustered into subgroups,
in which the domains share knowledge more efficiently, as
a learnability structure. For example, in climate analysis
(Vose et al., 2014), climate zones are formed by multiple
climate divisions as a learnability structure. Specifically,
assuming domain Di has subgroup label ki , i.e., Di P Ski ,
the response y i of sample size ni sampled from Di follows

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Konečnỳ
et al., 2016) provides a reliable distributed learning framework to address these concerns. By transmitting parameter
updates only, the server eliminates the heavy burden of communicating all the data. Meanwhile, privacy is preserved
since raw data are not transmitted. Unfortunately, two challenges emerge in Federated Mutual Transfer Learning:

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry
of Education, China 3 College of Design and Innovation, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. * Correspondence to: Beilun Wang
<beilun@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

(1) Learnability Heterogeneity: Learnability structure not
only reveals the relationship between domains but also im1

