Position: Insights from Survey Methodology can Improve Training Data

Stephanie Eckman 1 Barbara Plank 2 3 4 Frauke Kreuter 5 4 1 6

Abstract

ing, and model assessment. Insights from social science
can contribute to the development of more trustworthy and
human-centric models: “if we want to train AI to do what
humans want, we need to study humans” (Irving & Askell,
2019). However, collecting high-quality data is difficult,
as decades of research in survey methodology and recent
high-profile failures in opinion polling (Sturgis et al., 2016;
Kennedy et al., 2017; Clinton et al., 2021) demonstrate.

Whether future AI models are fair, trustworthy,
and aligned with the public’s interests rests in part
on our ability to collect accurate data about what
we want the models to do. However, collecting
high-quality data is difficult, and few AI/ML researchers are trained in data collection methods.
Recent research in data-centric AI has show that
higher quality training data leads to better performing models, making this the right moment to
introduce AI/ML researchers to the field of survey
methodology, the science of data collection. We
summarize insights from the survey methodology
literature and discuss how they can improve the
quality of training and feedback data. We also
suggest collaborative research ideas into how biases in data collection can be mitigated, making
models more accurate and human-centric.

Given the importance of human-labeled data to AI model
development, we are surprised that little research in the AI
literature has used social science, and survey methodology
in particular, to understand the actions and motivations of
the humans behind the data generating process. We worry
that many researchers collecting data to train, fine-tune, or
reinforce AI and ML models are not trained in data collection. A recent paper lamented that, among AI researchers,
“everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”
(Sambasivan et al., 2021).
This position paper argues that lessons from survey
methodology can improve the quality and efficiency of
training data and thus improve models trained on those
data. We introduce AI researchers to the community of
scientists who want to do the data work and their insights
into how to collect high-quality data. We first make the case
that label collection is similar to survey data collection (Section 2). Next, we draw on social science theories to develop
hypotheses about the facets of the data collection task that
may impact the quality of the labels collected (Section 3).
Then, we discuss who works as labelers and how the characteristics and uniqueness of the labelers can impact the labels
collected and the models trained on those data (Section 4).
In Section 5, we join the call for greater transparency in
label collection methods, offering lessons from surveys and
statistical methods. Throughout the paper, we use the terms
labels (and labelers) to refer generally to ML annotations,
such as image object labels and bounding boxes, natural
language understanding labels, model evaluation data, human feedback for reinforcement learning, and other types
of training data (and data generators).

1. Introduction
Social scientists have long relied on survey data collected
from human subjects to quantify the population, understand
public opinion, and test hypotheses about human behavior. The methods used to collect survey data have been
extensively studied and refined by researchers in the field of
survey methodology, which draws on social and cognitive
psychology to develop theories about how humans understand, process, and respond to questions in surveys (Groves
et al., 2009).
Data labeled by humans is also central to all stages of the
AI pipeline (Plank, 2022; Mazumder et al., 2023), from
initial model training, to fine-tuning, reinforcement learn1
Social Data Science Center, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD, USA 2 Center for Information and Language Processing (CIS), LMU Munich, Germany 3 Computer Science Department, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 4 Munich Center for
Machine Learning (MCML), LMU Munich, Germany 5 Institute
for Statistics, LMU Munich, Germany 6 Joint Program in Survey
Methodology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
Correspondence to: Stephanie Eckman <steph@umd.edu>.

2. How Labeling is Like a Survey

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Surveys can be self-administered, like a web or paper-andpencil survey, or interviewer administered, like a telephone
1

