Better & Faster Large Language Models via Multi-token Prediction

Fabian Gloeckle * 1 2 Badr Youbi Idrissi * 1 3 Baptiste Rozière 1 David Lopez-Paz + 1 Gabriel Synnaeve + 1

Abstract

task: next-token prediction. Despite the recent wave of
impressive achievements (OpenAI, 2023), next-token prediction remains an inefficient way of acquiring language,
world knowledge and reasoning capabilities. More precisely,
teacher forcing with next-token prediction latches on local
patterns and overlooks “hard” decisions. Consequently, it
remains a fact that state-of-the-art next-token predictors call
for orders of magnitude more data than human children to
arrive at the same level of fluency (Frank, 2023).

Large language models such as GPT and Llama
are trained with a next-token prediction loss. In
this work, we suggest that training language models to predict multiple future tokens at once results
in higher sample efficiency. More specifically, at
each position in the training corpus, we ask the
model to predict the following n tokens using n
independent output heads, operating on top of a
shared model trunk. Considering multi-token prediction as an auxiliary training task, we measure
improved downstream capabilities with no overhead in training time for both code and natural
language models. The method is increasingly useful for larger model sizes, and keeps its appeal
when training for multiple epochs. Gains are especially pronounced on generative benchmarks
like coding, where our models consistently outperform strong baselines by several percentage
points. Our 13B parameter models solves 12 %
more problems on HumanEval and 17 % more on
MBPP than comparable next-token models. Experiments on small algorithmic tasks demonstrate
that multi-token prediction is favorable for the
development of induction heads and algorithmic
reasoning capabilities. As an additional benefit,
models trained with 4-token prediction are up to
3× faster at inference, even with large batch sizes.

In this study, we argue that training LLMs to predict multiple
tokens at once will drive these models toward better sample
efficiency. As anticipated in Figure 1, multi-token prediction
instructs the LLM to predict the n future tokens from each
position in the training corpora, all at once and in parallel (Qi
et al., 2020).
Contributions While multi-token prediction has been
studied in previous literature (Qi et al., 2020), the present
work offers the following contributions:
1. We propose a simple multi-token prediction architecture with no train time or memory overhead (Section 2).
2. We provide experimental evidence that this training
paradigm is beneficial at scale, with models up to 13B
parameters solving around 15% more code problems
on average (Section 3).
3. Multi-token prediction enables self-speculative decoding, making models up to 3 times faster at inference
time across a wide range of batch-sizes (Section 3.2).

1. Introduction
Humanity has condensed its most ingenious undertakings,
surprising findings and beautiful productions into text.
Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on all of these
corpora are able to extract impressive amounts of world
knowledge, as well as basic reasoning capabilities by implementing a simple—yet powerful—unsupervised learning

While cost-free and simple, multi-token prediction is an effective modification to train stronger and faster transformer
models. We hope that our work spurs interest in novel auxiliary losses for LLMs well beyond next-token prediction,
as to improve the performance, coherence, and reasoning
abilities of these fascinating models.

*
Equal contribution 1 FAIR at Meta 2 CERMICS Ecole des Ponts
ParisTech 3 LISN Université Paris-Saclay. Correspondence to:
Fabian Gloeckle <fgloeckle@meta.com>, Badr Youbi Idrissi <byoubi@meta.com>.

2. Method
Standard language modeling learns about a large text corpus
x1 , . . . xT by implementing a next-token prediction task.
Formally, the learning objective is to minimize the cross-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

