Distilling Morphology-Conditioned Hypernetworks
for Efficient Universal Morphology Control

Zheng Xiong 1 Risto Vuorio 1 Jacob Beck 1 Matthieu Zimmer 2 Kun Shao 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract

2022). However, generalization across robots remains a
key challenge, as the policy trained for one robot transfers
poorly to another robot with a different morphology, i.e.,
the topology graph of a robot and the hardware parameters
of each body part. Furthermore, it is too sample inefficient
to train a separate policy for each new robot from scratch.

Learning a universal policy across different robot
morphologies can significantly improve learning
efficiency and enable zero-shot generalization
to unseen morphologies. However, learning a
highly performant universal policy requires sophisticated architectures like transformers (TF)
that have larger memory and computational cost
than simpler multi-layer perceptrons (MLP). To
achieve both good performance like TF and high
efficiency like MLP at inference time, we propose HyperDistill, which consists of: (1) A
morphology-conditioned hypernetwork (HN) that
generates robot-wise MLP policies, and (2) A
policy distillation approach that is essential for
successful training of the HN. We show that on
UNIMAL, a benchmark with hundreds of diverse
morphologies, HyperDistill performs as well as
a universal TF teacher policy on both training
and unseen test robots, but reduces model size
by 6-14 times, and computational cost by 67-160
times in different environments. Our analysis
attributes the efficiency advantage of HyperDistill at inference time to knowledge decoupling,
i.e., the ability to decouple inter-task and intratask knowledge, a general principle that could
also be applied to improve inference efficiency
in other domains. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/MasterXiong/
Universal-Morphology-Control.

To tackle this challenge, universal morphology control aims
to learn a universal policy to control different robots. By
training on a set of diverse morphologies, this constitutes a
form of multi-task RL (Vithayathil Varghese & Mahmoud,
2020) where controlling each robot is a separate task. The
learned policy is expected to not only improve learning
efficiency on the training robots, but also enable zero-shot
generalization to test robots with unseen morphologies.
Training a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) policy is usually
sufficient to achieve good performance on a single robot,
but often generalizes poorly to other robots (Wang et al.,
2018). While it is feasible to train a multi-robot MLP policy
for universal morphology control, it is significantly outperformed by graph neural networks (GNN) (Wang et al.,
2018; Pathak et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020) and transformers (TF) (Kurin et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2022) w.r.t.
both training and generalization performance. Moreover, TF
outperforms GNN by better modeling interactions between
distant nodes in the morphology graph (Kurin et al., 2020),
and has thus been adopted by most recent approaches (Dong
et al., 2022; Furuta et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2022; Hong
et al., 2022; Trabucco et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Xiong
et al., 2023).
However, TF has significantly higher memory, computation,
and energy costs than MLP, all of which are key considerations when deploying the policy on real-world robots
with constrained hardware (Hutter et al., 2016; Zhao et al.,
2021; Brohan et al., 2022; Leal et al., 2023). For example,
a state-of-the-art TF-based method for universal morphology control (Xiong et al., 2023) requires about 40M FLOPs
for a single step of inference on a robot with just 10 limbs,
more than 100 times that of a single-robot MLP policy with
similar performance, and this efficiency gap increases proportionally with the number of limbs. So a natural question
arises: Can we learn a universal policy with the performance of TF but the inference efficiency of MLP?

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) for robotic control has made
great progress in recent years (Levine et al., 2016; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Brohan et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, London, UK. Correspondence
to: Zheng Xiong <zheng.xiong@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

