Position: Explain to Question not to Justify

Przemyslaw Biecek 1 2 Wojciech Samek 3 4 5

Abstract

Fallacies behind the XAI crisis
models are either interpretable or not

Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is a
young but very promising field of research. Unfortunately, the progress in this field is currently
slowed down by divergent and incompatible goals.
We separate various threads tangled within the
area of XAI into two complementary cultures of
human/value-oriented explanations (BLUE XAI)
and model/validation-oriented explanations (RED
XAI). This position paper argues that the area of
RED XAI is currently under-explored, i.e., more
methods for explainability are desperately needed
to question models (e.g., extract knowledge from
well-performing models as well as spotting and
fixing bugs in faulty models), and the area of RED
XAI hides great opportunities and potential for important research necessary to ensure the safety of
AI systems. We conclude this paper by presenting
promising challenges in this area.

(single) XAI silver bullet exists
true explanations exists
user study is the ultimate validation
only users need explanations

Two XAI Cultures
solved after sorting out

new research perspectives

validation-oriented
Research
Explore
Debug

value-oriented
responsiBle
Legal
trUst
Ethics

So what? New Challenges
supplementary and complementary explanations
multiple models (Rashomon perspective)
explorer mindset for data and models
benchmarks, tools, standards
XAI for Science

Figure 1. Summary of the main claims in this paper. The field of
explainable machine learning (XAI) is currently experiencing a
crisis of identity. Misconceptions about the role and goals of the
XAI method are partly responsible for this crisis, and in the first
chapter, we discuss the most prominent misconceptions. Having
diagnosed the problems, we find that there are two communities
of researchers working in the XAI field having different goals. In
the second chapter, we identify these cultures and disentangle the
main goals and motivations behind each. In addition, we find that
the current narrative in survey papers is dominated by a discussion
of the goals of the BLUE XAI culture. However, it is the RED
XAI culture that has very promising research challenges ahead. A
key conclusion of this diagnosis is to identify new challenges and
research areas that concern RED XAI culture. These are presented
in the third part of this work.

1. Fallacies behind the XAI crisis
“Interpretability may be one of the most confused
topics in all of machine learning, fraught with
confusion and conflict. Read an interpretability
paper selected at random and you’ll find representations (or insinuations) that the work is addressing “trust”, “insights”, “fairness”, “causality”. Then look at what the authors actually do
and you’ll be hard-pressed to tie back the method
to any of these underlying motivations. Half the
papers produce a set of feature important scores.”
– Zachary Lipton in Goldblum et al. (2023)

The growing number of developments that incorporate artificial intelligence and machine learning inevitably leads
to an increasing number of examples of AI models being
flawed (AII, 2023). Failures in the functioning of these
models have become the driving fuel for eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) research (Gunning & Aha, 2019).
One would think that the discussion of the AI act (European
Commission, 2021) or Executive order on AI safety (Joe
Biden, 2023) would follow the flourishing of new XAI techniques. But this is not the case. Instead, the field of XAI
is experiencing an confusion in the flurry of expectations,
troubled by vague and diverging goals.

1

MI2.AI, University of Warsaw, Poland 2 MI2.AI, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland 3 Department of Artificial Intelligence, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute, Germany 4 Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Technical University of Berlin, Germany 5 BIFOLD - Berlin Institute for the
Foundations of Learning and Data, Germany. Correspondence to:
Przemyslaw Biecek <przemyslaw.biecek@pw.edu.pl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

