Arrows of Time for Large Language Models

Vassilis Papadopoulos * 1 2 Jérémie Wenger 3 Clément Hongler * 2

Abstract

data, for prediction or recovery tasks: this yields an estimation of the probability measure underlying the data. These
probabilistic models appear to gain surprising abilities, such
as reasoning, as their sizes increase (see (Wei et al., 2022;
Schaeffer et al., 2023) among others).

We study the probabilistic modeling performed by
Autoregressive Large Language Models (LLMs)
through the angle of time directionality, addressing a question first raised in (Shannon, 1951). For
large enough models, we empirically find a time
asymmetry in their ability to learn natural language: a difference in the average log-perplexity
when trying to predict the next token versus when
trying to predict the previous one. This difference
is at the same time subtle and very consistent
across various modalities (language, model size,
training time, ...). Theoretically, this is surprising: from an information-theoretic point of view,
there should be no such difference. We provide
a theoretical framework to explain how such an
asymmetry can appear from sparsity and computational complexity considerations, and outline a
number of perspectives opened by our results.

In this work, we investigate the interplay between the probabilistic structure of autoregressive LLMs and the data they
are trained on. More precisely, we investigate how time
directionality influences their ability to model natural and
synthetic languages.
1.1. Autoregressive LLMs
Famously, the pre-training of LLMs such as the GPTs consists in ‘learning to predict the next token’ knowing previous
ones, in sequences extracted from large text corpora, using
the natural time ordering of the data they are being trained
on. A vocabulary V of V tokens is chosen; the dataset
is then tokenized into a sequence of tokens in V; at each
step, the model reads a sequence of tokens and outputs a
probability distribution on V predicting the next token.
Typically, as a probabilistic model, an autoregressive model
will estimate the probability that n random consecutive
tokens (X1 , · · · , Xn ) are equal to (x1 , · · · , xn ) ∈ V n by
taking the product of the (estimations of) the probabilities

1. Introduction
Generative Models have revolutionized modern AI, yielding
a wide array of applications. Modern works have shown
that such models can perform spectacularly (and somewhat
mysteriously) well on various kinds of data. Text is perhaps
the domain where progress has been the most drastic: in a
few years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have gone from
generating barely correct sentences to producing consistent
stories, code, and performing countless new tasks; key milestones include the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017), BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and GPTs (Radford et al.,
2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023).

P {X1 = x1 }
P {X2 = x2 |X1 = x1 }
..
.

(1)

P {Xn = xn |X1 = x1 , · · · , Xn−1 = xn−1 } ,
n
yielding an estimated probability measure P→
n on V .

Autoregressive LLMs (GPTs, GRUs, LSTMs, . . . ) thus factorize (their estimates of) the joint probabilities in terms of
conditional probabilities for each token knowing past ones.
This brings a number of advantages: first, this leverages
the fact that for each token sequence x1 , . . . , xn , each token xk is used in to predict each token xℓ with ℓ > k. In
particular, GPT (compared to the earlier BERT) includes
causality-aware attention, allowing for a parallelization of
the training process: a sequence x1 , . . . , xn generates n − 1
fully parallelizable tasks (predict xk from (x1 , . . . , xk−1 )
for 2 ≤ k ≤ n). Also, this representation enables a natural

At the heart of these developments are probabilistic models trained in an unsupervised manner on vast amounts of
*

1
Equal contribution
FSL/Institute of Physics, EPFL
CSFT/Institute of Mathematics, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 3 Department of Computing, Goldsmiths/University of
London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Clément Hongler
<clement.hongler@epfl.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

