Minimum Norm Interpolation Meets The Local Theory of Banach Spaces

Gil Kur 1 Pedro Abdalla 1 * Pierre Bizeul 2 * Fanny Yang 1

Abstract

other words; interpolation is harmless (see e.g. experiments
in (Nakkiran et al., 2021)). A call to explain this counterintuitive observation (see, e.g. (Zhang et al., 2021; Belkin
et al., 2018b)) gave rise to a line of work known as benign
overfitting that set out to prove generalization bounds for
interpolating overparameterized models; in the case of regression, the focus of this paper, interpolation corresponds
to achieving zero square loss on training data.

Minimum-norm interpolators have recently
gained attention primarily as an analyzable model
to shed light on the double descent phenomenon
observed for neural networks. The majority of
the work has focused on analyzing interpolators
in Hilbert spaces, where typically an effectively
low-rank structure of the feature covariance prevents a large bias. More recently, tight vanishing
bounds have also been shown for isotropic highdimensional data for ℓp -spaces with p ∈ [1, 2),
leveraging sparse structure of the ground truth.
However, these proofs are tailored to specific settings and hard to generalize. This paper takes
a first step towards establishing a general framework that connects generalization properties of
the interpolators to well-known concepts from
high-dimensional geometry, specifically, from the
local theory of Banach spaces. In particular, we
show that under 2-uniform convexity, the bias
of the minimal norm solution is bounded by the
Gaussian complexity of the class. We then prove
a “reverse” Efron-Stein lower bound on the expected conditional variance of the minimal norm
solution under cotype 2. Finally, we prove that
this bound is sharp for ℓp -linear regression under
sub-Gaussian covariates. 1

As there are infinitely many interpolating solutions in overparameterized regimes, the specific choice of interpolator
can drastically vary generalization performance. Most commonly studied in the literature is the family of minimumnorm interpolators - a natural choice if the ground truth
has a simple structure such as a small norm in a Banach
space. For additional motivation, first-order methods on the
square loss initialized at zero typically exhibit an implicit
bias towards (i.e. converge to) such minimum-norm solutions (Gunasekar et al., 2018; Oravkin & Rebeschini, 2021;
Shamir, 2022; Efron et al., 2004).

*
Equal contribution 1 ETH Zürich 2 Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology. Correspondence to: Gil Kur <gil.kur@inf.ethz.ch>.

The analysis in the overparameterized regression literature
has primarily focused on Hilbert spaces such as the ℓ2 -space
and Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS), where the
minimum-norm solution has a closed-form solution. For linear min-ℓ2 -norm interpolators in dimension d using n number of samples, the literature consists of asymptotic results
in the inconsistent proportional regime where d/n → γ for
some constant γ < ∞ (Hastie et al., 2022; Ghorbani et al.,
2021; Mei & Montanari, 2022) and non-asymptotic results
in the consistent regime d/n → ∞. In particular, (Bartlett
et al., 2020; Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023; Lecué & Shang, 2022;
Chinot et al., 2020; Muthukumar et al., 2020) prove vanishing finite-sample bounds for minimum ℓ2 -interpolator
when the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of the data
decay rapidly. These proofs take advantage of the innerproduct structure that allows for an explicit analysis of the
closed-form solution. Further, consistency heavily relies on
the eigenvalue decay of the covariate distribution, as the ℓ2 norm cannot capture structural assumptions and in general
suffers from bias in the isotropic high-dimensional setting.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Please consult the arXiv version of the paper for an updated
(and extended) manuscript.

In the isotropic case, different structural assumptions on the
ground truth are necessary to achieve consistency. However,
the minimum-norm interpolators in more general Banach
spaces with a corresponding inductive bias might not have

1. Introduction
Experiments with neural networks have revealed a phenomenon that defies traditional statistical intuition: regularization is critical for large models when fitting noisy
data. Instead, it seems that in the overparameterized regime,
interpolators that achieve zero training error can still generalize well and do not profit from sacrificing datafit, or in

1

