Scalable Safe Policy Improvement for Factored Multi-Agent MDPs

Federico Bianchi 1 Edoardo Zorzi 1 Alberto Castellini 1
Thiago D. Simão 2 Matthijs T. J. Spaan 3 Alessandro Farinelli 1

Abstract

ever, in many real-world applications, collecting experience
can be impractical due to the safety issues inherent in the
learning process (Mazzi et al., 2023). A core foothold towards the deployment of both RL and MARL applications
in real-world domains is the ability to reliably make good
decisions with minimum interactions with the environment
(Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021).

In this work, we focus on safe policy improvement in multi-agent domains where current stateof-the-art methods cannot be effectively applied
because of large state and action spaces. We
consider recent results using Monte Carlo Tree
Search for Safe Policy Improvement with Baseline Bootstrapping and propose a novel algorithm
that scales this approach to multi-agent domains,
exploiting the factorization of the transition model
and value function. Given a centralized behavior
policy and a dataset of trajectories, our algorithm
generates an improved policy by selecting joint
actions using a novel extension of Max-Plus (or
Variable Elimination) that constrains local actions
to guarantee safety criteria. An empirical evaluation on multi-agent SysAdmin and multi-UAV
Delivery shows that the approach scales to very
large domains where state-of-the-art methods cannot work.

Offline RL takes a step in this direction by proposing algorithms capable of learning policies from batches of historical data collected by behavior policies (e.g., sub-optimal
expert-designed policies) (Levine et al., 2020), but it faces
reliability challenges due to distribution shifts (i.e., a policy
different from the behavior policy induces a new distribution
over the trajectories) which can result in high variability in
the performance. In this context, Safe Policy Improvement
(SPI) aims at improving the behavioral policy by exploiting
information based on historical data and ensuring that the
new policy outperforms the behavior policy (Laroche et al.,
2019) with probabilistic guarantees.
Although some progress has been made in offline multiagent settings (Ma & Wu, 2023), to the best of our knowledge, multi-agent methods do not have the reliability guarantees of SPI algorithms. Multi-agent problems are challenging due to the combinatorial number of joint actions, which
grows exponentially with the number of agents, as they need
to coordinate to achieve optimal behavior (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016). Furthermore, reliability becomes an issue in the
offline multi-agent setting due to data availability, resulting
from limited exploration of the behavior policy in largescale problems. A fully observable multi-agent problem
can be treated as a single-agent problem with a centralized
controller responsible for coordinating the agents. However, this approach is severely limited due to the large joint
action space, which makes policy optimization intractable.
To tackle these problems, in this work we propose a factorized SPI approach for large-scale multi-agent problems,
enhancing both sample efficiency and scalability.

1. Introduction
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) (Zhang
et al., 2021; Chalkiadakis & Boutilier, 2003) has recently
gained strong interest from the AI community due to the
theoretical and application challenges it faces. Real-world
applications of MARL are manifold. Some examples are
fleets of mobile robots collecting and delivering goods in
warehouses, or teams of drones used for environmental monitoring (Albrecht et al., 2023; Zuccotto et al., 2024). Significant progress has been made in virtual scenarios, such as
competitive real-time strategy games (Vinyals et al., 2019),
where agents can explore without safety concerns. How1
Department of Computer Science, University of Verona,
Verona, Italy 2 Department of Software Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, Netherlands 3 Department
of Intelligent Systems, Delft University of Technology, Delft,
Netherlands. Correspondence to: Federico Bianchi <federico.bianchi@univr.it>.

Previous work has demonstrated that by exploiting the
independencies between state variables represented by a
factorized transition model, an offline RL algorithm may
need orders of magnitude fewer samples to compute an
improved policy (Simão & Spaan, 2019). Additionally, a

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

