Deciphering RNA Secondary Structure Prediction: A Probabilistic K-Rook
Matching Perspective

Cheng Tan 1 2 * Zhangyang Gao 2 1 * Hanqun Cao 3 Xingran Chen 4 Ge Wang 2 Lirong Wu 2 Jun Xia 2
Jiangbin Zheng 2 Stan Z. Li: 2
A A C C UG G U CA G G CC C GG A A GG G A GC A G CC A
A A C C U G G U C A G G C C C G G A A G G G A G C A G C C A

Abstract
The secondary structure of ribonucleic acid
(RNA) is more stable and accessible in the cell
than its tertiary structure, making it essential for
functional prediction. Although deep learning
has shown promising results in this field, current
methods suffer from poor generalization and high
complexity. In this work, we reformulate the RNA
secondary structure prediction as a K-Rook problem, thereby simplifying the prediction process
into probabilistic matching within a finite solution
space. Building on this innovative perspective, we
introduce RFold, a simple yet effective method
that learns to predict the most matching K-Rook
solution from the given sequence. RFold employs a bi-dimensional optimization strategy that
decomposes the probabilistic matching problem
into row-wise and column-wise components to
reduce the matching complexity, simplifying the
solving process while guaranteeing the validity of
the output. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that RFold achieves competitive performance and
about eight times faster inference efficiency than
the state-of-the-art approaches. The code is available at github.com/A4Bio/RFold.

graph representation

matrix representation (contact map)

Figure 1. The graph and matrix representation of an RNA secondary structure example.

cryogenic electron microscopy (Fica & Nagai, 2017) can be
implemented to determine RNA secondary structure, they
suffer from low throughput and expensive cost.
Computational RNA secondary structure prediction methods have been favored for their high efficiency in recent
years (Iorns et al., 2007). Currently, mainstream methods can be broadly classified into two categories (Rivas,
2013; Szikszai et al., 2022): (i) comparative sequence analysis and (ii) single sequence folding algorithm. Comparative sequence analysis determines the secondary structure
conserved among homologous sequences but the limited
known RNA families hinder its development (Gutell et al.,
2002; Griffiths-Jones et al., 2003; Gardner et al., 2009;
Nawrocki et al., 2015). Researchers thus resort to single
RNA sequence folding algorithms that do not need multiple sequence alignment information. A classical category of computational RNA folding algorithms is to use
dynamic programming (DP) that assumes the secondary
structure is a result of energy minimization (Bellaousov
et al., 2013; Nicholas & Zuker, 2008; Lorenz et al., 2011;
Zuker, 2003; Mathews & Turner, 2006; Do et al., 2006).
However, energy-based approaches usually require the base
pairs have a nested structure while ignoring some valid yet
biologically essential structures such as pseudoknots, i.e.,
non-nested base pairs (Chen et al., 2019; Seetin & Mathews, 2012; Xu & Chen, 2015), as shown in Figure 2. Since
predicting secondary structures with pseudoknots under the
energy minimization framework has shown to be hard and

1. Introduction
The functions of RNA molecules are determined by their
structure (Sloma & Mathews, 2016). The secondary structure, which contains the nucleotide base pairing information,
as shown in Figure 1, is crucial for the correct functions of
RNA molecules (Fallmann et al., 2017). Although experimental assays such as X-ray crystallography (Cheong et al.,
2004), nuclear magnetic resonance (Fürtig et al., 2003), and
*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 University of Michigan.
Correspondence to: Stan Z. Li <Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

