Non-Vacuous Generalization Bounds for Large Language Models

Sanae Lotfi * 1 Marc Finzi * 2 Yilun Kuang * 1
Tim G. J. Rudner 1 Micah Goldblum 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

diction, thereby providing a mathematical guarantee that
LLMs are able to generalize beyond their training data.

Modern language models can contain billions of
parameters, raising the question of whether they
can generalize beyond the training data or simply parrot their training corpora. We provide the
first non-vacuous generalization bounds for pretrained large language models (LLMs), indicating
that language models are capable of discovering
regularities that generalize to unseen data. In particular, we derive a compression bound that is
valid for the unbounded log-likelihood loss using
prediction smoothing, and we extend the bound to
handle subsampling, making bound computation
900 times faster on massive datasets. To achieve
the extreme level of compression required for nonvacuous bounds, we devise SubLoRA, a simple
low-dimensional nonlinear parameterization that
leads to non-vacuous generalization bounds for
very large models with up to 849 million parameters. Finally, we use our bounds to understand
LLM generalization and find that larger models
have better generalization bounds and are more
compressible than smaller models.

Although significant progress has been made in constructing
non-vacuous generalization bounds for image classification
models using the PAC-Bayes framework (Catoni, 2007)
in conjunction with extreme levels of model compression
(Zhou et al., 2019; Lotfi et al., 2022), non-vacuous generalization bounds for large language models remain elusive.
Compared to image classification models, constructing nontrivial bounds for language models presents additional challenges: (i) LLMs are trained on autoregressive token prediction, and thus token predictions are not independent; (ii)
the relevant negative log-likelihood (NLL) metric (bits per
dimension) is a continuous and unbounded random variable
for which previously used non-vacuous PAC-Bayes bounds
are invalid; and (iii) LLMs have orders of magnitude more
parameters than image classification models. To address
these challenges, we derive new generalization bounds that
can be applied to the unbounded bits per dimension objective. We also introduce an extension of these bounds
which can be computed using only a subset of the training
data, making bound computation 900 times faster on the
OpenWebText dataset, which has more than 9 billion tokens.
Achieving the extreme level of compression required to obtain non-vacuous generalization bounds for LLMs is another
challenge. To this end, we devise SubLoRA (SubspaceEnhanced Low-Rank Adaptation): simple nonlinear parameterization for LLMs that makes it possible to smoothly
vary the level of compression while maintaining expressivity. SubLoRA combines low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu
et al., 2021), originally proposed for efficient fine-tuning,
with subspace training (Li et al., 2018; Lotfi et al., 2022) to
pretrain highly compressed LLMs from scratch.

1. Introduction
Do large language models (LLMs) merely memorize the
training data, and if so, are they able to meaningfully generalize beyond their training set? This question is central to
understanding LLMs as they continue to grow in capacity
and are capable of memorizing and parroting training examples verbatim (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Carlini et al., 2020; 2023).
In this work, we address the question of generalization in
LLMs by computing the first non-vacuous generalization
bounds for language model pretraining on next token pre-

Combining the above-described theoretical and practical
contributions, we achieve the first non-vacuous bounds
for large language models. To highlight the efficiency of
our new compression technique, we compare SubLoRA to
LoRA and subspace training in Figure 1 (left). We compute
two metrics that we define as follows: Top-1 Error, which
is the 0-1 error in predicting the next token averaged over a
given document; and the bits per dimension metric, which

*

Equal contribution 1 New York University 2 Carnegie Mellon
University. Correspondence to: Sanae Lotfi <sl8160@nyu.edu>,
Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

