Information-Directed Pessimism for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Rmax/(1-γ)

Alec Koppel 1 Sujay Bhatt 1 Jiacheng Guo 2 Joe Eappen 3 Mengdi Wang 2 Sumitra Ganesh 1

Abstract

Implied by Azuma-Hoeffding

0

⋯

￼

Mismatch [Ps,a − Ps,πb(s)] V(s′)

Policy optimization from batch data, i.e., offline reinforcement learning (RL) is important
when collecting data from a current policy is not
possible. This setting incurs distribution mismatch between batch training data and trajectories from the current policy. Pessimistic offsets
estimate mismatch using concentration bounds,
which possess strong theoretical guarantees and
simplicity of implementation. Mismatch may be
conservative in sparse data regions and less so
otherwise, which can result in under-performing
their no-penalty variants in practice. We derive
a new pessimistic penalty as the distance between the data and the true distribution using an
evaluable one-sample test known as Stein Discrepancy that requires minimal smoothness conditions, and noticeably, allows a mixture family representation of distribution over next states.
This entity forms a quantifier of information in
offline data, which justifies calling this approach
information-directed pessimism (IDP) for offline
RL. We further establish that this new penalty
based on discrete Stein discrepancy yields practical gains in performance while generalizing the
regret of prior art to multimodal distributions.

Next State
Multimodal/Mixture
Unimodal

Allowed by Stein Class

s′ = 1
￼

2

⋯

Next State

S

Figure 1: Visualization of distribution mismatch. Concentration bounds (Azuma-Hoeffding) implicitly require unimodality to be valid forms of pessimism. Notions introduced here enable offline RL algorithms to achieve sublinear regret when transition belongs to a mixture family.
the ‘value’ space (Sutton et al., 2017; Bhatt et al., 2021;
2022). Sampling trajectories from the model conditioned
on current policy may not always be possible, as in finance (Tamar et al., 2014), field robotics (Gregory et al.,
2016) or games (Bhatt & Başar, 2020), which gives rise
to the requirement of building a simulator (Todorov et al.,
2012; Ardon et al., 2023) or using historical data to evaluate policies. In offline RL, data is collected by a behavioral policy distinct from the one whose parameters are being trained, which results in distribution mismatch. Efforts
to correct this mismatch include importance weighting and
pessimistic regularization. The former, which re-weights
updates based on an estimate of the behavioral policy’s induced occupancy measure, exhibits exponential variance
dependence on the horizon (Gelada & Bellemare, 2019;
Nachum et al., 2019; Rashidinejad et al., 2022). This issue can be stabilized through control variates (Jiang & Li,
2016; Dong et al., 2023) which can be difficult to tune in
practice. Whether importance weighting achieves optimal
sample complexity remains unknown. Alternatively, pessimistic penalization of model-free RL methods have been
vetted experimentally (Kumar et al., 2020) in continuous
domains, and can achieve near-optimal sample complexity in theory for value iteration (Rashidinejad et al., 2021)
and Q learning (Shi et al., 2022) when combined with covariance information (Li et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2023) in
discrete domains.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), mathematically encapsulated by a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman,
2014), is a framework in which an autonomous agent
moves through a state space, selects actions according to
a policy, and incrementally receives rewards from the environment. Solution techniques for different challenges RL
broadly consist of those in the ‘policy’ space and those in
1

J.P. Morgan AI Research, 383 Madison Ave., 9th floor, New
York, NY 10017 2 Dept. of ECE, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, Country 3 Dept. of ECE, Purdue University,
West Lafayette,IN, 47906. Correspondence to: Alec Koppel
<alec.koppel@jpmchase.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

