Equivariant Frames and the Impossibility of Continuous Canonicalization

Nadav Dym * 1 Hannah Lawrence * 2 Jonathan W Siegel * 3

Abstract

The genesis of equivariant learning focused on equivariant
architectures, i.e. custom parametric function families containing only functions with the desired symmetries. However, equivariant architectures must be custom-designed for
each group action, which reduces the transferability of engineering best practices. Moreover, the building blocks of
many equivariant architectures (such as tensor products) are
computationally intensive (Passaro & Zitnick, 2023).

Canonicalization provides an architectureagnostic method for enforcing equivariance,
with generalizations such as frame-averaging
recently gaining prominence as a lightweight and
flexible alternative to equivariant architectures.
Recent works have found an empirical benefit
to using probabilistic frames instead, which
learn weighted distributions over group elements.
In this work, we provide strong theoretical
justification for this phenomenon: for commonlyused groups, there is no efficiently computable
choice of frame that preserves continuity of
the function being averaged. In other words,
unweighted frame-averaging can turn a smooth,
non-symmetric function into a discontinuous,
symmetric function. To address this fundamental
robustness problem, we formally define and
construct weighted frames, which provably
preserve continuity, and demonstrate their utility
by constructing efficient and continuous weighted
frames for the actions of SO(d), O(d), and Sn
on point clouds.

In light of these difficulties, the more lightweight and modular approach of frame-averaging has received renewed attention. Frame-averaging (Puny et al., 2021) harnesses a
generic neural network f to create an equivariant framework
by averaging the network’s output over input transformations. It is a direct extension of group-averaging (also known
as the Reynolds operator), whereby f is made invariant by
averaging over all input transformations from a group G:
Z
Iavg [f ](v) =
f (g −1 v)dg.
(1)
G

However, while group averaging scales with |G| (which can
be large or infinite), frame-averaging can enjoy computational advantages by averaging over only an input-dependent
subset of G. A notable special case of frame-averaging is
canonicalization (Figure 1), which “averages” over a single,
canonical group transformation per point. Intuitively, canonicalization is a standardization of the input data, such as
centering a point cloud with respect to translations. Frameaveraging methods are universal (so long as f is universal), in the sense that they can approximate all continuous
equivariant functions, and are projections1 onto the space of
invariant functions. Recent approaches include using both
fixed (Duval et al., 2023; Du et al., 2022; 2023), and learned
(Zhang et al., 2019; Kaba et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022)
frames and canonicalizations. Despite their simplicity, however, it seems that such approaches have generally not yet
supplanted popular equivariant architectures in applications.

1. Introduction
Equivariance has emerged in recent years as a cornerstone
of geometric deep learning, with widespread adoption in
domains including biology, chemistry, and graphs (Jumper
et al., 2021; Corso et al., 2023; Liao et al., 2023; Satorras et al., 2021; Frasca et al., 2022). This fundamental
idea — incorporating known data symmetries into a learning
pipeline — often enables improved generalization and sample complexity, both in theory (Petrache & Trivedi, 2024;
Mei et al., 2021; Bietti et al., 2021; Elesedy, 2021) and in
practice (Batzner et al., 2022; Liao et al., 2023).
*

Equal contribution 1 Faculty of Mathematics, Faculty of Computer Science, Technion, Israel 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, MA, USA 3 Department of
Mathematics, Texas A&M University, TX, USA. Correspondence
to: Nadav Dym <nadavdym@technion.ac.il>.

In this work, we unearth an insidious problem with frames,
which may shed light on their slow adoption in applications: they very often induce discontinuity. The absence of
a continuous canonicalization for permutations was already
observed by Zhang et al. (2020). We prove that there are
no continuous canonicalization for rotations, either. More-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Recall that a projection P need only satisfy P(Pf ) = Pf .

