video-SALMONN: Speech-Enhanced Audio-Visual Large Language Models

Guangzhi Sun * 1 Wenyi Yu * 1 Changli Tang * 1 Xianzhao Chen 2 Tian Tan 2 Wei Li 2 Lu Lu 2 Zejun Ma 2
Yuxuan Wang 2 Chao Zhang 1

Abstract

cially achieving human-level capabilities in reasoning and
comprehension (OpenAI, 2023). Meanwhile, instruction
fine-tuning (Chung et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Peng
et al., 2023), where data is organised as paired user instructions (or prompts) and reference responses, has emerged as
a training paradigm that enables LLMs to perform tasks by
following open-ended natural language instructions from
non-expert users. Recently, there has been a burgeoning research interest in equipping LLMs with visual and auditory
perception abilities, resulting in a range of visual (Li et al.,
2023a; Alayrac et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2023; Maaz et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Zhao et al., 2022; Zeng et al.,
2023; Luo et al., 2023), audio (Gong et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023a; Rubenstein et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023),
and audio-visual LLMs (av-LLMs) (Su et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023b; Lyu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023a; Shu et al., 2023b; Piergiovanni et al., 2023).

Speech understanding as an element of the more
generic video understanding using audio-visual
large language models (av-LLMs) is a crucial
yet understudied aspect. This paper proposes
video-SALMONN, a single end-to-end av-LLM
for video processing, which can understand not
only visual frame sequences, audio events and
music, but speech as well. To obtain fine-grained
temporal information required by speech understanding, while keeping efficient for other video
elements, this paper proposes a novel multiresolution causal Q-Former (MRC Q-Former)
structure to connect pre-trained audio-visual encoders and the backbone large language model.
Moreover, dedicated training approaches including the diversity loss and the unpaired audiovisual mixed training scheme are proposed to
avoid frames or modality dominance. On the introduced speech-audio-visual evaluation benchmark, video-SALMONN achieves more than 25%
absolute accuracy improvements on the videoQA task and over 30% absolute accuracy improvements on audio-visual QA tasks with human speech. In addition, video-SALMONN
demonstrates remarkable video comprehension
and reasoning abilities on tasks that are unprecedented by other av-LLMs. Our training code
and model checkpoints are available at https:
//github.com/bytedance/SALMONN/.

Despite av-LLMs’ prosperity, speech, as a primary carrier of
human language in videos, is considerably under-explored
in these models. Complementary to non-speech audio events
and natural images, speech provides direct and abundant
linguistic and semantic information, making it indispensable
for comprehensive video understanding. Speech signals also
include rich paralinguistic information, such as the tone and
pitch of voice, which is often hard to textualise precisely but
necessary to understand the underlying meanings and emotions. Additionally, there exist diverse speaker attributes in
speech, which are tedious and difficult to transcribe using
separate systems but essential for video understanding (see
Fig. 16), including the speaker’s age, gender, accent and
identity etc. To avoid building complex cascaded systems,
it is desired to recognise and understand all of the aforementioned speech attributes in videos in a fully end-to-end
and integrated way with av-LLMs. Nevertheless, enhancing
general-purposed av-LLMs with speech is very challenging,
which requires temporally fine-grained modelling while intricately interacting with other modalities at both coarse (e.g.
video topics) and fine (e.g. lip movements) time scales. This
necessitates the design of specialised fine-grained multiresolution approaches to address this challenge.

1. Introduction
Text-based large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al.,
2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; Anil et al.,
2023; Du et al., 2022) have demonstrated remarkable performance in many natural language processing tasks, espe*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electronic Engineering,
Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance Ltd. Correspondence to: Chao
Zhang <cz277@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To this end, we propose video-SALMONN (speech audio
language music open neural network), a speech-enhanced
av-LLM for short video understanding. By resembling the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

