FADAS: Towards Federated Adaptive Asynchronous Optimization

Yujia Wang 1 Shiqiang Wang 2 Songtao Lu 2 Jinghui Chen 1

Abstract

aggregates these local updates into the global model. Following the original design of the FedAvg algorithm (McMahan
et al., 2017), a large number of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD)-based FL methods have emerged, aiming to improve
the performance or efficiency of FedAvg (Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Acar et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020b).

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a widely
adopted training paradigm for privacy-preserving
machine learning. While the SGD-based FL algorithms have demonstrated considerable success in
the past, there is a growing trend towards adopting
adaptive federated optimization methods, particularly for training large-scale models. However,
the conventional synchronous aggregation design
poses a significant challenge to the practical deployment of those adaptive federated optimization
methods, particularly in the presence of straggler
clients. To fill this research gap, this paper introduces federated adaptive asynchronous optimization, named FADAS, a novel method that
incorporates asynchronous updates into adaptive
federated optimization with provable guarantees.
To further enhance the efficiency and resilience
of our proposed method in scenarios with significant asynchronous delays, we also extend FADAS
with a delay-adaptive learning adjustment strategy. We rigorously establish the convergence rate
of the proposed algorithms and empirical results
demonstrate the superior performance of FADAS
over other asynchronous FL baselines.

In addition to the successes of SGD-based algorithms in
enhancing the efficiency of FL, the adoption of adaptive
optimization techniques is becoming increasingly prevalent in FL. Adaptive optimization techniques such as Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) and AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter,
2017) have proven their advantages over SGD in effectively
training or fine-tuning large-scale models like BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), and Llama
(Touvron et al., 2023). This progress has encouraged the
incorporation of adaptive optimization into the FL settings,
taking advantage of their ability to navigate update directions and dynamically adjust learning rates. For example,
FedAdam (Reddi et al., 2021) and FedAMS (Wang et al.,
2022b) employ global adaptive optimization after the server
aggregates local model updates. Moreover, strategies such
as FedLALR (Sun et al., 2023a), FedLADA (Sun et al.,
2023b), and FAFED (Wu et al., 2023) replace SGD with the
Adam optimizer for the local training phase, exemplifying
the utility of local adaptive optimizations in FL.
However, existing methods in adaptive FL still rely on traditional synchronous aggregation approaches, where the
server must wait for all participating clients to complete
their local training before global updates. This reliance
presents a significant challenge to the practical implementation of adaptive FL methodologies, as the server is required
to wait until slower clients, which may have limited computation or communication capabilities. While asynchronous
FL strategies such as FedBuff (Nguyen et al., 2022) and
FedAsync (Xie et al., 2019) have been investigated to improve the scalability and to study the impact of client delays on the convergence of SGD-based FL algorithms, the
specific implications of asynchronous delays on nonlinear
adaptive gradient operations are not completely understood.
This motivates us to explore the following question:

1. Introduction
In recent years, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al.,
2017) has drawn increasing attention as an efficient privacypreserving distributed machine learning paradigm. An FL
framework consists of a central server and numerous clients,
where clients collaboratively train a global model without
sharing their private data. FL entails each client conducting
multiple local iterations, while the central server periodically
1
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, USA 2 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yujia Wang <yjw5427@psu.edu>, Shiqiang Wang
<wangshiq@us.ibm.com>, Songtao Lu <songtao@ibm.com>,
Jinghui Chen <jzc5917@psu.edu>.

Can we develop an asynchronous method for adaptive federated optimization (with provable guarantees) that enhances
training efficiency and is resilient to asynchronous delays?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

