Magicoder: Empowering Code Generation with OSS-I NSTRUCT

Yuxiang Wei 1 Zhe Wang 2 † Jiawei Liu 1 Yifeng Ding 1 Lingming Zhang 1

Abstract

2023a) for domain-specific tasks. Until recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on code (Austin et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021) has shown outstanding breakthroughs in
generating code that accurately satisfies user intents, and
they are widely deployed to assist real-world software development (Microsoft, 2023b; Services, 2023).

We introduce Magicoder, a series of fully opensource (code, weights, and data) Large Language
Models (LLMs) for code that significantly closes
the gap with top code models while having no
more than 7B parameters. Magicoder models are
trained on 75K synthetic instruction data using
OSS-I NSTRUCT, a novel approach to enlightening LLMs with open-source code snippets to generate diverse instruction data for code. Our main
motivation is to mitigate the inherent bias of the
synthetic data generated by LLMs through the
wealth of open-source references for the production of more realistic and controllable data. The
orthogonality of OSS-I NSTRUCT and other data
generation methods like Evol-Instruct further enables us to build an enhanced MagicoderS. Both
Magicoder and MagicoderS substantially outperform state-of-the-art code models with similar or
even larger sizes on a wide range of coding benchmarks. Notably, MagicoderS-CL-7B based on
C ODE L LAMA even surpasses the prominent ChatGPT on HumanEval+ (66.5 vs. 65.9 in pass@1).
Overall, OSS-I NSTRUCT opens a new direction
for crafting diverse synthetic instruction data for
code using abundant open-source references.

Initially, closed-source models such as GPT-3.5 Turbo (OpenAI, 2022) (i.e., ChatGPT) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) massively dominated various coding benchmarks and leaderboards (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023b; Lai et al., 2022; Xia & Zhang, 2023). To further push
the boundaries of code generation with open source LLMs,
S ELF -I NSTRUCT (Wang et al., 2023a) is adopted to bootstrap the instruction-following ability of LLMs. In the realm
of code, practitioners commonly devise synthetic coding
instructions using a stronger teacher model (e.g., ChatGPT
and GPT-4) and then finetune a weaker student model (e.g.,
C ODE L LAMA (Rozière et al., 2023)) with the generated data
to distill the knowledge from the teacher (Taori et al., 2023;
Chaudhary, 2023). For example, Code Alpaca (Chaudhary,
2023) consists of 20K automatically generated code instructions by applying S ELF -I NSTRUCT on ChatGPT using 21
seed tasks. To further enhance the coding abilities of LLMs,
Luo et al. (2023b) proposes Code Evol-Instruct that employs
various heuristics to increase the complexity of seed code
instructions (Code Alpaca in this case), achieving state-ofthe-art (SOTA) results among open-source models.
While these data generation methods can effectively improve the instruction-following capability of an LLM, they
rely on a narrow range of predefined tasks or heuristics
under the hood. For example, on the one hand, Code Alpaca that adopts S ELF -I NSTRUCT only relies on 21 seed
tasks to generate new code instructions using an identical
prompt template. On the other hand, Code Evol-Instruct
takes Code Alpaca as seeds and merely depends on 5 heuristics to evolve the dataset. As partly suggested by Yu et al.
(2023) and Wang et al. (2023a), such approaches may significantly inherit the system bias inherent in the LLMs as
well as the predefined tasks.

1. Introduction
Code generation, also known as program synthesis (Gulwani et al., 2017), is a long-standing challenge in computer science. In the past few decades, a large body of
research has been studying symbolic approaches, such as
abstraction-based synthesis (Wang et al., 2017; Feng et al.,
2018) for general-purpose synthesis problems and programming by examples (Cambronero et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
†
The work was done during a remote summer internship at the
University of Illinois. 1 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
USA 2 Tsinghua University, China. Correspondence to: Yuxiang
Wei <ywei40@illinois.edu>.

Therefore, in this paper, we propose OSS-I NSTRUCT to
mitigate the inherent bias of LLMs and to unleash their
potential to craft diverse and creative code instructions via
direct learning from the open source. As shown in Figure 1,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

