Total Variation Floodgate for Variable Importance Inference in Classification

Wenshuo Wang Lucas Janson 1 Lihua Lei 2 Aaditya Ramdas 3

Abstract

often limited in their capacity to capture complex relationships. This paper aims at defining a VIM for classification
problems and conducting inference on it. As a design objective, this (population-level) VIM must be model-free, in that
it does not rely on an underlying model assumptions. We
would also like the VIM to be intuitive and easy to interpret.

Inferring variable importance is the key goal of
many scientific studies, where researchers seek to
learn the effect of a feature X on the outcome Y
in the presence of confounding variables Z. Focusing on classification problems, we define the
expected total variation (ETV), which is an intuitive and deterministic measure of variable importance that does not rely on any model assumption.
We then introduce algorithms for statistical inference on the ETV under design-based/model-X
assumptions. We name our method Total Variation Floodgate in reference to its shared high-level
structure with the Floodgate method of Zhang &
Janson (2020). The algorithms we introduce can
leverage any user-specified regression function
and produce asymptotic lower confidence bounds
for the ETV. We show the effectiveness of our
algorithms with simulations and a case study in
conjoint analysis on the US general election.

1.2. Our Contribution
The main contributions of this work are listed below.
1. We propose the expected total variation (ETV) as a
VIM that is well-defined for any type of variables
(X, Y, Z). In this paper, we focus on categorical response variables Y , for which VIMs with rigorous
statistical guarantees were rarely discussed in the literature and ETV has both an intuitive model-free interpretation and sound statistical properties.
2. We introduce algorithms that provide lower confidence
bounds on the ETV without imposing any assumptions
on the distribution L(Y | X, Z), but instead make the
design-based/model-X assumption that we can sample
from L(X | Z), which we discuss in Secion 2.2. We
accompany our algorithms with hyperparameter choice
recommendations and show that they work well in our
extensive simulation results. Again, the same idea also
works for continuous and binary Y .

1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
In many scientific studies, researchers would like to understand the effect of a feature X on a response variable
Y , while controlling for potential confounding features Z.
While this question is sometimes simplified to a hypothesis
testing problem of “does X affect Y at all in the presence
of Z”, it is more desirable to follow up with “if so, by how
much”; that is, we wish to provide a quantitative variable
importance measure (VIM). In traditional statistical frameworks, such a follow-up question is addressed by postulating
a parametric model of L(Y | X, Z) and looking at the inferred parameters. However, such parametric models are

3. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms in
a real conjoint data analysis study.
In the remainder of this section, we will discuss related
work and introduce notation. The mathematical definition
of ETV will be given in Section 2. We will discuss the
properties of ETV in Section 2.1. Section 2.2 is devoted to
our main algorithm to conduct inference on ETV. We then
study the algorithm parameters in Section 2.3 to facilitate
practical applications and discuss a generalization of ETV
in Section 2.4. Section 3 includes simulations on synthetic
data to support the effectiveness of our proposed method.
We then apply our method to a conjoint analysis example
on political candidate preferences in Secton 4.

1

Department of Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA 2 Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 3 Departments of Statistics and Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Wenshuo Wang <wenshuowang1997@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

