Fast Peer Adaptation with Context-aware Exploration

Long Ma* 1 2 Yuanfei Wang* 3 2 Fangwei Zhong 4 2 Song-Chun Zhu 5 4 2 Yizhou Wang 3 5 6 2

Abstract
Fast adapting to unknown peers (partners or opponents) with different strategies is a key challenge
in multi-agent games. To do so, it is crucial for the
agent to probe and identify the peer’s strategy efficiently, as this is the prerequisite for carrying out
the best response in adaptation. However, exploring the strategies of unknown peers is difficult, especially when the games are partially observable
and have a long horizon. In this paper, we propose
a peer identification reward, which rewards the
learning agent based on how well it can identify
the behavior pattern of the peer over the historical context, such as the observation over multiple
episodes. This reward motivates the agent to learn
a context-aware policy for effective exploration
and fast adaptation, i.e., to actively seek and collect informative feedback from peers when uncertain about their policies and to exploit the context to perform the best response when confident.
We evaluate our method on diverse testbeds that
involve competitive (Kuhn Poker), cooperative
(PO-Overcooked), or mixed (Predator-Prey-W)
games with peer agents. We demonstrate that our
method induces more active exploration behavior,
achieving faster adaptation and better outcomes
than existing methods 1 .

Figure 1. An example of fast peer adaptation with experiences from
online interaction, where a mother employs her prior experiences
with her baby as contextual cues to determine the appropriate item
to offer and further explore the baby. In the initial encounter, having observed the baby’s disinterest in the milk bottle, the mother
infers that the baby is not hungry and suggests a toy as an alternative. Despite the initial unfavorable response to the teddy
bear, there is a discernible improvement in the baby’s reaction,
ultimately leading the mother to successfully choose a toy car in
their third interaction.

operative or competitive strategies in multi-agent games.
Thus, the agents’ performance hinges on how quickly and
effectively they can adapt to these peers. This requires the
agents to efficiently probe and identify the peer’s strategy
and respond with the optimal strategies accordingly. This is
essential for achieving successful cooperation or exploitation in various domains. For example, in board and card
games (Brown & Sandholm, 2019; Silver et al., 2017; Hu
et al., 2020), agents need to adjust to the skill and style of
their opponents or teammates, such as bluffing, coordination, or signaling. In DOTA (Berner et al., 2019), agents
need to cope with the dynamic strategies and tactics of the
enemy team, such as counter-picking, ganking, or pushing.

1. Introduction

Previous works overlooked the role of efficient exploration
in obtaining informative feedback for fast peer adaptation.
They mainly focused on opponent modeling (He et al., 2016;
Raileanu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2022; Papoudakis et al.,
2021; Yu et al., 2022; Albrecht & Stone, 2018), assuming
that the ego agents can readily observe the others’ behaviors and infer the best response accordingly. However, this
assumption may not hold in partially observable environments, which are more realistic and challenging for multiagent games. Therefore, the ego agent needs to learn an
exploratory policy that can actively induce the game states
that reveal the peers’ preferences and strategies.

Fast adaptation to diverse peers is a key ability for social
agents, who often face unknown peers with different co*
Equal contribution 1 Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary
Studies, Peking University 2 Nat’l Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI&PKU 3 Center on Frontiers of Computing
Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University 4 School
of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 5 Inst.
for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 6 Nat’l Eng. Research
Center of Visual Technology, Peking University. Correspondence
to: Fangwei Zhong <zfw@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/
peer-adaptation

Learning to explore is challenging in peer adaptation, as it involves trading off short-term and long-term outcomes under
a limited context and without explicit reward signals. Fig1

