Leveraging Attractor Dynamics in Spatial Navigation for Better Language
Parsing

Xiaolong Zou * 1 Xingxing Cao * 1 Xiaojiao Yang 1 Bo Hong 1

Abstract

mostly exhibiting periodic grid cell representation in the
entorhinal cortex during spatial navigation tasks (Krubitzer
et al., 2011). This indicates that this system, which emerged
early in mammalian evolution and was shaped by spatial navigation tasks, has become an integral, pre-existing structure
in the human brain. However, extended evolution has also
introduced notable differences to the human hippocampalentorhinal system. A significant change is the enlargement
of the anterior part of the human hippocampus, which has
developed extensive bidirectional connections with the prefrontal cortex (Buzsáki & Tingley, 2018). As a result, in
humans, the function of this system extends beyond physical space navigation to include various high-level cognitive
tasks, such as encoding abstract conceptual spaces (Behrens
et al., 2018). An intriguing concept is that the hippocampalentorhinal system may serve as a cognitive scaffold which
can be adapted for a range of advanced functions (Lerousseau & Summerfield, 2024).

Increasing experimental evidence suggests that
the human hippocampus, evolutionarily shaped
by spatial navigation tasks, also plays an important role in language comprehension, indicating a
shared computational mechanism for both functions. However, the specific relationship between
the hippocampal formation’s computational mechanism in spatial navigation and its role in language
processing remains elusive. To investigate this
question, we develop a prefrontal-hippocampalentorhinal model (which called PHE-trinity) that
features two key aspects: 1) the use of a modular continuous attractor neural network to represent syntactic structure, akin to the grid network
in the entorhinal cortex; 2) the creation of two
separate input streams, mirroring the factorized
structure-content representation found in the hippocampal formation. We evaluate our model on
language command parsing tasks, specifically using the SCAN dataset. Our findings include: 1)
attractor dynamics can facilitate systematic generalization and efficient learning from limited data;
2) through visualization and reverse engineering,
we unravel a potential dynamic mechanism for
grid network representing syntactic structure. Our
research takes an initial step in uncovering the
dynamic mechanism shared by spatial navigation
and language information processing.

Experimental studies increasingly indicate that the hippocampal formation plays a crucial role in language information processing (Blank et al., 2016; Piai et al., 2016;
Solomon et al., 2019; Hahamy et al., 2023). For instance,
Blank et al. discovered that specific regions of the hippocampus are actively involved in language comprehension
tasks (Blank et al., 2016). Additionally, through direct brain
recordings, Piai et al. observed that the human hippocampus generates sustained theta oscillations during real-time
language processing (Piai et al., 2016), with the oscillation
power correlating with semantic distance. Furthermore, the
recent identification of semantic boundary cells in the human hippocampus suggests its potential function in segmenting and abstracting natural narratives, thereby enhancing
language comprehension (Zheng et al., 2022). These collective findings imply the existence of a shared computational
mechanism for spatial navigation and language information
processing (Kazanina & Poeppel, 2023; O’keefe & Nadel,
1978; Whittington et al., 2022b). Investigating this shared
mechanism is vital for understanding how the brain represents and processes language and inspiring innovative
language intelligence algorithms. However, the shared computational mechanism remains largely unknown.

1. Introduction
Despite millions of years of human brain evolution, the
hippocampal-entorhinal system has remained remarkably
conservative (Krubitzer et al., 2011). For instance, similar anatomical structures are observed across various
species (Strange et al., 2014) from rodents to humans,
*
Equal contribution 1 Qiyuan Lab, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Bo Hong <hongbo@qiyuanlab.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A key function of the hippocampal-entorhinal system in

1

