Tabular Insights, Visual Impacts: Transferring Expertise from Tables to Images

Jun-Peng Jiang 1 2 Han-Jia Ye 1 2 Leye Wang 3 Yang Yang 4 Yuan Jiang 1 2 De-Chuan Zhan 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Data in modern machine learning applications can take
various forms, including images, text, video, and audio,
providing rich and diverse sources of information. Multimodal learning seeks to fuse information from these different modalities (Ngiam et al., 2011; Ye et al., 2016; Ramachandram & Taylor, 2017; Baltrušaitis et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2020), has demonstrated enhanced model accuracy
and comprehensiveness across several domains such as recommender systems (Huang et al., 2019; Salah et al., 2020;
Baltescu et al., 2022), healthcare (Zhang et al., 2022; Han
et al., 2022), and visual question answering (Li et al., 2019;
Zheng et al., 2020; Jing et al., 2020).

Transferring knowledge across diverse data
modalities is receiving increasing attention in machine learning. This paper tackles the task of
leveraging expert-derived, yet expensive, tabular
data to enhance image-based predictions when
tabular data is unavailable during inference. The
primary challenges stem from the inherent complexity of accurately mapping diverse tabular data
to visual contexts, coupled with the necessity to
devise distinct strategies for numerical and categorical tabular attributes. We propose CHannel tAbulaR alignment with optiMal tranSport
(C HARMS), which establishes an alignment between image channels and tabular attributes, enabling selective knowledge transfer that is pertinent to visual features. Specifically, C HARMS
measures similarity distributions across modalities to effectively differentiate and transfer relevant tabular features, with a focus on morphological characteristics, enhancing the capabilities
of visual classifiers. By maximizing the mutual
information between image channels and tabular features, knowledge from both numerical and
categorical tabular attributes are extracted. Experimental results demonstrate that C HARMS not
only enhances the performance of image classifiers but also improves their interpretability by
effectively utilizing tabular knowledge.

Despite its potential, different modalities not only contribute
distinctively but also vary significantly in their acquisition
costs (Zhou, 2018). For example, in the healthcare field,
acquiring medical images relies on specialized equipment,
while the extraction of detailed and accurate diagnoses requires expert medical knowledge, often a more challenging
and costly endeavor. A practical solution involves leveraging multiple modalities during the training phase to facilitate the transfer of expert knowledge from one modality to
another, subsequently enhancing the performance of singlemodality models during the inference phase (Karpathy &
Fei-Fei, 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Radford et al., 2021).
Tabular data, characterized by its structured format of rows
and columns (McKinney et al., 2010), often encapsulates
expert knowledge that is crucial yet underutilized in imagebased machine learning tasks. Continuing with the healthcare example, a doctor’s diagnosis, typically recorded in tabular format, can provide critical insights, such as specific annotations in MRI images essential for accurate interpretation.
Since the structured nature of tabular data significantly differs from unstructured data like images, existing crossmodal
transfer methods are unsuitable for tabular data (Kimball
& Ross, 2011; Shwartz-Ziv & Armon, 2022; Hager et al.,
2023). This paper focuses on leveraging expert-derived, yet
expensive, tabular data to enhance image-based predictions
when tabular data is unavailable during inference.

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
China. 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. 3 Key Lab of High Confidence
Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education & School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China. 4 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye <yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>, Yang Yang
<yyang@njust.edu.cn>.

Although the main idea is to incorporate the tabular attributes as auxiliary information when training the visual
model, there are several challenges when making the learned
visual embeddings aligned with the tabular data due to the

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

