A Multimodal Automated Interpretability Agent

Franklin Wang

1

Tamar Rott Shaham 1 * Sarah Schwettmann 1 *
Achyuta Rajaram 1 Evan Hernandez 1 Jacob Andreas 1 Antonio Torralba 1

Abstract
This paper describes MAIA, a Multimodal
Automated Interpretability Agent. MAIA is a system that uses neural models to automate neural
model understanding tasks like feature interpretation and failure mode discovery. It equips a
pre-trained vision-language model with a set of
tools that support iterative experimentation on
subcomponents of other models to explain their
behavior. These include tools commonly used by
human interpretability researchers: for synthesizing and editing inputs, computing maximally activating exemplars from real-world datasets, and
summarizing and describing experimental results.
Interpretability experiments proposed by MAIA
compose these tools to describe and explain system behavior. We evaluate applications of MAIA
to computer vision models. We first characterize
MAIA’s ability to describe (neuron-level) features
in learned representations of images. Across several trained models and a novel dataset of synthetic vision neurons with paired ground-truth
descriptions, MAIA produces descriptions comparable to those generated by expert human experimenters. We then show that MAIA can aid
in two additional interpretability tasks: reducing
sensitivity to spurious features, and automatically
identifying inputs likely to be mis-classified.†

Figure 1. MAIA framework. MAIA autonomously conducts experiments on other systems to explain their behavior.

of understanding requires significant effort on the part of
researchers—involving exploratory data analysis, formulation of hypotheses, and controlled experimentation (Nushi
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). As a consequence, this
kind of understanding is slow and expensive to obtain even
about the most widely used models.

1. Introduction

Recent work on automated interpretability (e.g. Hernandez et al., 2022; Bills et al., 2023; Schwettmann et al., 2023)
has begun to address some of these limitations by using
learned models themselves to assist with model understanding tasks—for example, by assigning natural language descriptions to learned representations, which may then be
used to surface features of concern. But current methods
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to:
are useful almost exclusively as tools for hypothesis gen<tamarott@mit.edu, schwett@mit.edu>.
eration; they characterize model behavior on a limited set
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
of inputs, and are often low-precision (Huang et al., 2023).
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
How can we build tools that help users understand models,
the author(s).
†
while
combining the flexibility of human experimentation
Website: https://multimodal-interpretability.
csail.mit.edu/maia
with the scalability of automated techniques?
Understanding of a neural model can take many forms.
Given an image classifier, for example, we may wish to
recognize when and how it relies on sensitive features like
race or gender, identify systematic errors in its predictions,
or learn how to modify the training data and model architecture to improve accuracy and robustness. Today, this kind

1

