Scaling Down Deep Learning with MNIST-1D

Sam Greydanus 1 2 Dmitry Kobak 3 4
Original MNIST examples

Abstract
Although deep learning models have taken on
commercial and political relevance, key aspects
of their training and operation remain poorly understood. This has sparked interest in science of
deep learning projects, many of which require
large amounts of time, money, and electricity. But
how much of this research really needs to occur at
scale? In this paper, we introduce MNIST-1D: a
minimalist, procedurally generated, low-memory,
and low-compute alternative to classic deep learning benchmarks. Although the dimensionality of
MNIST-1D is only 40 and its default training set
size only 4000, MNIST-1D can be used to study
inductive biases of different deep architectures,
find lottery tickets, observe deep double descent,
metalearn an activation function, and demonstrate
guillotine regularization in self-supervised learning. All these experiments can be conducted on a
GPU or often even on a CPU within minutes, allowing for fast prototyping, educational use cases,
and cutting-edge research on a low budget.

Represent digits as 1D patterns

Pad, translate & transform

Figure 1: Constructing the MNIST-1D dataset. Unlike
MNIST, each sample is a one-dimensional sequence. To
generate each sample, we begin with a hand-crafted digit
template loosely inspired by MNIST shapes. Then we randomly pad, translate, and add noise to produce 1D sequences
with 40 points each.
[CODE]

prizes, have been awarded for work performed with fruit
flies. Early work in genetics — work that paved the way
for the Human Genome Project, which involved billions
of dollars of funding, dozens of institutions, and over a
decade of accelerated research (Lander et al., 2001) — was
performed on fruit flies and other simple organisms. To
this day, experiments on Drosophila are a cornerstone of
biomedical research.

1. Introduction
The deep learning analogue of Drosophila melanogaster
is the MNIST dataset. Drosophila, the fruit fly, has a life
cycle that is just a few days long, its nutritional needs are
negligible, and it is easier to work with than mammals,
especially humans. Like Drosophila, MNIST is easy to
use: training a classifier on it takes only a few a minutes
whereas training full-size vision and language models can
take months of time and millions of dollars (Sharir et al.,
2020).

Meanwhile, MNIST has served as the initial proving ground
for a large number of deep learning innovations including
dropout, Adam, convolutional networks, generative adversarial networks, and variational autoencoders (Srivastava
et al., 2014; Kingma and Ba, 2014; LeCun et al., 1989;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kingma and Welling, 2014). Once
a proof of concept was established in small-scale experiments, researchers were able to justify the time and resources needed for larger and more impactful applications.

But in spite of their small size, both test systems have had
a major impact on their respective fields. A number of
seminal discoveries in medicine, including multiple Nobel
1

Oregon State University, USA 2 The ML Collective 3 University
of Tübingen, Germany 4 Heidelberg University, Germany. Correspondence to: Sam Greydanus <samgreydanus@gmail.com>.

However, despite its historical significance, MNIST has
three notable shortcomings. First, it is too simple. Linear classifiers, fully-connected networks, and convolutional
models all perform similarly well, obtaining above 90%
accuracy (Table 1). This makes it hard to measure the contribution of a CNN’s spatial priors or to judge the relative

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

