Generalized Smooth Variational Inequalities: Methods with Adaptive Stepsizes

Daniil Vankov 1 Angelia Nedić 1 Lalitha Sankar 1

Abstract

and reinforcement learning (Daskalakis et al., 2020; Kotsalis
et al., 2022).

Variational Inequality (VI) problems have attracted great interest in the machine learning (ML)
community due to their application in adversarial
and multi-agent training. Despite its relevance in
ML, the oft-used strong-monotonicity and Lipschitz continuity assumptions on VI problems are
restrictive and do not hold in many machine learning problems. To address this, we relax smoothness and monotonicity assumptions and study
structured non-monotone generalized smoothness.
The key idea of our results is in adaptive stepsizes.
We prove the first-known convergence results for
solving generalized smooth VIs for the three popular methods, namely, projection, Korpelevich,
and Popov methods. Our convergence rate results
for generalized smooth VIs match or improve existing results on smooth VIs. We present numerical experiments that support our theoretical guarantees and highlight the efficiency of proposed
adaptive stepsizes.

The VI problem has been extensively studied (Facchinei and
Pang, 2003; Tseng, 1995; Beznosikov et al., 2022) under
(strong)-monotonicity and Lipschitz continuity assumptions
on the operator. Two optimal solution approaches for solving VIs under these assumptions are the well-known extragradient (which we interchangeably refer to as the Korpelevich method) (Korpelevich, 1976), and optimistic gradient
(which we refer to as the Popov method here) (Popov, 1980)
methods; both require taking an extra-gradient step in every
iteration though Popov requires only one oracle call to do
so. Despite this progress, machine learning (ML) applications do not satisfy such assumptions (Diakonikolas et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2020). To this end, recent works (Wei
et al., 2021; Diakonikolas et al., 2021; Vankov et al., 2023)
have proposed and investigated new classes of structured
non-monotone operators to address non-monotonicity in
VIs. Furthermore, while the bulk of research on VIs assume
Lipschitz continuity or boundedness of the operator, more
recently, guarantees for non-smooth VIs with only a linear
growth assumption have been considered using Korpelevich
(Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis et al., 2023) and Popov (Vankov
et al., 2023) methods.

1. Introduction

For the class of smooth VI operators, (Malitsky, 2020)
propose adaptive golden ratios stepsizes to adapt to a local Lipschitz constant. (Böhm, 2023) utilize this adaptive
schedule for the Extragradient method and prove sublinear
convergence under a weak Minty assumption. (Gorbunov
et al., 2022b) use clipping techniques to show convergence
of stochastic Extragradient method under heavy tail noise.
They use the fact that the operator is Lipschitz continuous
to show that iterates of the clipped Korpelevich method
stay within the bounded set. However, the resulting Lipschitz constants can be very large, thus leading to extremely
small stepsizes and slow convergence rates. More generally,
for non-smooth VIs, despite the lack of theoretical results,
adaptive and normalized first-order methods are popular and
efficient in practice for training GANs (Brock et al., 2019),
(Karras et al., 2020). Recently, (Jelassi et al., 2022) argues
that the success of the ADAM optimizer (Kingma and Ba,
2015) for GANs is due to normalization.

We consider a constrained variational inequality (VI) problem on a set U ⊆ Rm . Given an operator F : U → Rm ,
the variational inequality problem, denoted as VI(U, F ), is
defined as
find u∗ ∈ U such that ⟨F (u∗ ), u − u∗ ⟩ ≥ 0, ∀u ∈ U.
(1)
Many numerical problems, such as constrained optimization,
saddle-point problems, and multi-agent games are important
and pertinent practical examples of VI problems. The recent
interest in VIs is due to their application in machine learning applications such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Gemp and Mahadevan, 2018; Gidel et al., 2019)
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Arizona
State University Tempe, Arizona, USA. Correspondence to: Daniil
Vankov <dvankov@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Non-smoothness assumptions on the operator are of increas-

1

