Tell, Don’t Show!: Language Guidance Eases
Transfer Across Domains in Images and Videos

Tarun Kalluri 1 Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder 2 Manmohan Chandraker 1
https://tarun005.github.io/lagtran/

Abstract

Source Domain

We introduce LaGTran, a novel framework that
utilizes text supervision to guide robust transfer
of discriminative knowledge from labeled source
to unlabeled target data with domain gaps. While
unsupervised adaptation methods have been established to address this problem, they show limitations in handling challenging domain shifts
due to their exclusive operation within the pixelspace. Motivated by our observation that semantically richer text modality has more favorable
transfer properties, we devise a transfer mechanism to use a source-trained text-classifier to generate predictions on the target text descriptions,
and utilize these predictions as supervision for
the corresponding images. Our approach driven
by language guidance is surprisingly easy and
simple, yet significantly outperforms all prior approaches on challenging datasets like GeoNet and
DomainNet, validating its extreme effectiveness.
To further extend the scope of our study beyond
images, we introduce a new benchmark called
Ego2Exo to study ego-exo transfer in videos and
find that our language-aided approach LaGTran
yields significant gains in this highly challenging and non-trivial transfer setting. Code, models
and proposed datasets are publicly available at
https://tarun005.github.io/lagtran/.

Target Domain

Image Classifier

-17.1%

Large
Domain Gap

Caption:
A photo of a room with a
fireplace and carpet
Tags:
#CozyNights, #SofaStyle,
#ModernLiving, #HomeStyle

Label: Living Room

Smaller
Domain Gap

Text Classifier

-9.5%

Caption:
A picture of a room with a
television and a table
Tags:
# 이지리빙, #2008,
#⼤韓⺠國

Label: ?

Figure 1: A summary of our insights for LaGTran: In a domain transfer
setting with labeled source and unlabeled target domain data, we observe
significantly more drop incurred while transferring an image-classifier
trained on source images to target (17.1%), compared to a text-classifier
trained on corresponding text descriptions of source images (9.5%). We
use this insight to build a simple framework called LaGTran that leverages
these text descriptions easily available in both domains to improve transfer
in images and videos.

cost and scarcity of acquiring labeled images. A dominant
paradigm to address this limitation has been unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA), which uses labels from a related
source domain along with distribution alignment techniques
to bridge the domain gap (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Long
et al., 2018; Saito et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; Sharma et al.,
2021; Wei et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023).
Despite their noted success, their limitations in addressing
challenging transfer beyond regular domain shifts (Saenko
et al., 2010; Venkateswara et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2017)
is recently highlighted (Prabhu et al., 2022; Kalluri et al.,
2023). We posit that a part of this limitation potentially
stems from their dependence on pixel-level data alone to
bridge domain gaps, as accurately characterizing shifts and
devising bridging strategies solely based on images becomes
challenging beyond standard domain shift scenarios.

1. Introduction
Despite great strides in the performance in several applications of computer vision recent years, achieving robustness
to distribution shifts at test-time still remains a challenge.
In particular, a fundamental need to improve generalization
to domains without manual supervision arises due to the

In contrast, we propose an alternative approach to ease transfer across such challenging shifts by instead leveraging ubiquitously available language guidance during training. Our
framework, called LaGTran for Language Guided Transfer
Across Domains, is surprisingly simple to implement, yet
shows extreme effectiveness and competence in handling
transfer across challenging domain shifts in images and
videos compared to any image-based adaptation method.

*
Equal contribution 1 UC San Diego 2 Allen Institute for AI.
Correspondence to: TK <sskallur@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

