Emergence of In-Context Reinforcement Learning from Noise Distillation

Ilya Zisman 1 2 * Vladislav Kurenkov 1 3 * Alexander Nikulin 1 4 * Viacheslav Sinii 5 3 Sergey Kolesnikov 5

Abstract
Recently, extensive studies in Reinforcement
Learning have been carried out on the ability of
transformers to adapt in-context to various environments and tasks. Current in-context RL methods are limited by their strict requirements for
data, which needs to be generated by RL agents
or labeled with actions from an optimal policy.
In order to address this prevalent problem, we
propose ADε , a new data acquisition approach
that enables in-context Reinforcement Learning
from noise-induced curriculum. We show that it
is viable to construct a synthetic noise injection
curriculum which helps to obtain learning histories. Moreover, we experimentally demonstrate
that it is possible to alleviate the need for generation using optimal policies, with in-context RL
still able to outperform the best suboptimal policy
in a learning dataset by a 2x margin.
Figure 1. Data acquisition for in-context RL training. While other
in-context RL methods either train thousands of single-task RL
algorithms to obtain their learning histories (AD) or pretrain on
optimal actions (DPT), our approach ADε alleviates these problems introducing synthetic noise injection curriculum by which
learning histories are generated. Algorithms trained on this kind of
data can not only generalize to unseen tasks, but also outperform
the best available policy in data (π data ).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved great success
in recent years, from showing superhuman performance
in games (Fuchs et al., 2021; Schrittwieser et al., 2020)
to successfully learning complex real-world tasks (Brohan
et al., 2022; Herzog et al., 2023). At the same time, RL
has a persistent problem of severe sample inefficiency. For
example, in order to learn to match human performance in
StarCraft 2, an agent may need to process tens of billions
of frames for a single game (Vinyals et al., 2019). At the
same time, a trained agent cannot generalize to new tasks,
so mastering another game requires the entire process to be
repeated from scratch. In order to enable fast and reliable

generalization and adaptation in RL agents, Meta-RL was
introduced. This framework is designed to teach agents the
process of learning itself, enabling them to learn how to
learn to accomplish unseen tasks (Finn et al., 2017; Duan
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016). Recent approaches leverage
specially constructed datasets that enable learning the task
in-context by interacting and adapting to the environment
(Laskin et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023; Kirsch et al., 2023;
Sinii et al., 2023). These approaches are referred to as
in-context RL.

*

Work done while at Tinkoff 1 AIRI, Moscow, Russia 2 Skoltech,
Moscow, Russia 3 Innopolis University, Kazan, Russia 4 MIPT,
Moscow, Russia 5 Tinkoff, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence to:
Ilya Zisman <i.zisman@airi.net>.
Our implementation is available at https://github.com/
corl-team/ad-eps

It is important to note that the construction of curated data
that can enable in-context RL may be considered troublesome. Laskin et al. (2022) show that the data must reflect
the process of learning a task, rather than simply presenting

st

Proceedings of the 41
International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright
2024 by the author(s).

1

