Fine-Grained Causal Dynamics Learning with Quantization
for Improving Robustness in Reinforcement Learning

Inwoo Hwang 1 Yunhyeok Kwak 1 Suhyung Choi 1 Byoung-Tak Zhang 1 Sanghack Lee 1 2

Abstract
<latexit sha1_base64="m9iHAv9KiC4kj6ms0spC2L8VFQg=">AAACBXicbVDLSsNAFJ34rPUVdamLYBFclUTqY1lx47KifUATymQ6aYdOJmHmRighGzf+ihsXirj1H9z5N07aINp64MLhnHu59x4/5kyBbX8ZC4tLyyurpbXy+sbm1ra5s9tSUSIJbZKIR7LjY0U5E7QJDDjtxJLi0Oe07Y+ucr99T6VikbiDcUy9EA8ECxjBoKWeeeCGGIYE8/Q2c4GFVP0Il1nPrNhVewJrnjgFqaACjZ756fYjkoRUAOFYqa5jx+ClWAIjnGZlN1E0xmSEB7SrqcB6n5dOvsisI630rSCSugRYE/X3RIpDpcahrzvzE9Wsl4v/ed0EggsvZSJOgAoyXRQk3ILIyiOx+kxSAnysCSaS6VstMsQSE9DBlXUIzuzL86R1UnXOqqc3tUq9VsRRQvvoEB0jB52jOrpGDdREBD2gJ/SCXo1H49l4M96nrQtGMbOH/sD4+AZ9mJkt</latexit>

Causal dynamics learning has recently emerged as
a promising approach to enhancing robustness in
reinforcement learning (RL). Typically, the goal
is to build a dynamics model that makes predictions based on the causal relationships among
the entities. Despite the fact that causal connections often manifest only under certain contexts,
existing approaches overlook such fine-grained
relationships and lack a detailed understanding of
the dynamics. In this work, we propose a novel
dynamics model that infers fine-grained causal
structures and employs them for prediction, leading to improved robustness in RL. The key idea
is to jointly learn the dynamics model with a discrete latent variable that quantizes the state-action
space into subgroups. This leads to recognizing
meaningful context that displays sparse dependencies, where causal structures are learned for each
subgroup throughout the training. Experimental
results demonstrate the robustness of our method
to unseen states and locally spurious correlations
in downstream tasks where fine-grained causal
reasoning is crucial. We further illustrate the effectiveness of our subgroup-based approach with
quantization in discovering fine-grained causal
relationships compared to prior methods.

S ⇥A

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Previous causal dynamics models infer the global
causal structure of the transition dynamics. (b) Existing approaches
to discovering fine-grained relationships examine individual samples. (c) Our approach quantizes the state-action space into subgroups and infers causal relationships specific to each subgroup.

causal relationships between the environmental variables,
such as objects and the agent, into dynamics learning (Wang
et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2022). Unlike the traditional dense
models that employ the whole state and action variables
to predict the future state, causal dynamics models infer
the causal structure of the transition dynamics and make
predictions based on it. Consequently, they are more robust
to unseen states by discarding spurious dependencies.
Our motivation stems from the observation that causal connections often manifest only under certain contexts in many
practical scenarios. Consider autonomous driving, where
recognizing the traffic signal is crucial for its safety (e.g.,
stops at red lights). However, in the presence of a pedestrian
on the road, it must stop, even with a green light, ignoring
the signal, i.e., the traffic signal becomes locally spurious.
Therefore, such fine-grained causal reasoning will be crucial
to the robustness of MBRL for its real-world deployment.

1. Introduction
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) has showcased its capability of solving various sequential decision
making problems (Kaiser et al., 2020; Schrittwieser et al.,
2020). Since learning an accurate and robust dynamics
model is crucial in MBRL, recent works incorporate the

Fine-grained causal relationships can be understood with local independence between the variables, which holds under
certain contexts but does not hold in general (Boutilier et al.,
2013). Our goal is to incorporate them into dynamics modeling by capturing meaningful contexts that exhibit more
sparse dependencies than the entire domain. Unfortunately,
prior causal dynamics models examining global independence (Fig. 1-(a)) cannot harness them. On the other hand,
existing methods for discovering fine-grained relationships
have focused on examining sample-specific dependencies
(Pitis et al., 2020; Hwang et al., 2023) (Fig. 1-(b)). However,

1
AI Institute, Seoul National University 2 Graduate School
of Data Science, Seoul National University. Correspondence
to: Sanghack Lee <sanghack@snu.ac.kr>, Byoung-Tak Zhang
<btzhang@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

