Highway Value Iteration Networks

Yuhui Wang * 1 Weida Li * 2 Francesco Faccio 1 3 Qingyuan Wu 4 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 3

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Success Rate

Abstract
Value iteration networks (VINs) enable end-toend learning for planning tasks by employing
a differentiable “planning module” that approximates the value iteration algorithm. However,
long-term planning remains a challenge because
training very deep VINs is difficult. To address
this problem, we embed highway value iteration—
a recent algorithm designed to facilitate long-term
credit assignment—into the structure of VINs.
This improvement augments the “planning module” of the VIN with three additional components:
1) an “aggregate gate,” which constructs skip connections to improve information flow across many
layers; 2) an “exploration module,” crafted to
increase the diversity of information and gradient flow in spatial dimensions; 3) a “filter gate”
designed to ensure safe exploration. The resulting novel highway VIN can be trained effectively
with hundreds of layers using standard backpropagation. In long-term planning tasks requiring
hundreds of planning steps, deep highway VINs
outperform both traditional VINs and several advanced, very deep NNs.

300-layer Highway VIN (ours)
30-layer VIN
300-layer VIN

0

100
200
Shortest Path Length

Figure 1: Success rates of reaching the goal in a 25 × 25
maze problem. The success rate of a 30-layer VIN considerably decreases as the shortest path length increases,
and training a 300-layer VIN is difficult and exhibits poor
performance.

However, VIN encounters significant challenges in longterm planning. For example, in path planning tasks where
the shortest path length exceeds 120, the success rate of
VINs in reaching the goal drastically decreases below 10%
(Fig. 1). A promising approach to improve the long-term
planning capabilities of VIN is increasing the depth of its
embedded “planning module.” A deeper planning module can integrate more planning steps in VINs, potentially
improving their ability to perform long-term planning.

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology 2 National University of Singapore 3 The
Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI 4 The University of Liverpool.
Correspondence to: Yuhui Wang <yuhui.wang@kaust.edu.sa>.

Nonetheless, increasing the depth of an NN can introduce
complications, such as vanishing or exploding gradients,
which is a fundamental problem in deep learning (Hochreiter, 1991). Although very deep NNs can be effectively
trained in classification tasks using different methods (Srivastava et al., 2015b;a; He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017),
these methods have not been equally successful in planning
tasks (Table 1 in Section 5). This disparity may arise from
the unique architecture of the VIN, particularly its planning
module, which incorporates a specific inductive bias from reinforcement learning (RL). This inductive bias is grounded
in the value iteration algorithm, known for its theoretical
soundness (Bellman, 1966; Sutton & Barto, 2018). Herein,
additional RL-relevant prior knowledge is integrated into
the VIN architecture to address these challenges.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This study aims to integrate well-established techniques
from both the fields of NNs and RL to create an effective
and theoretically sound method. Central to the foundation

Planning is a search for action sequences that are predicted
to achieve specific goals. The value iteration network (VIN)
(Tamar et al., 2016) is a neural network (NN) architecture
that enables end-to-end training for planning tasks using an
embedded “planning module,” a differentiable approximation of the value-iteration algorithm (Bellman, 1966). VINs
have exhibited remarkable proficiency in various tasks, including path planning (Pflueger et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2021),
autonomous navigation (Wöhlke et al., 2021), and complex
decision-making in dynamic environments (Li et al., 2021b).

1

