Antibody Design Using a Score-based Diffusion Model
Guided by Evolutionary, Physical and Geometric Constraints

Tian Zhu 1 2 Milong Ren 1 2 Haicang Zhang # 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

The rational design of antigen-specific antibodies plays a
pivotal role in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of
various diseases (Carter, 2006). Antibodies perform their
functions by binding to antigens, triggering a cascade of
immune responses. While the framework regions of antibodies exhibit high conservation, their complementaritydetermining regions (CDRs) are variable both in sequence
and structure, mainly determining the binding affinity and
specificity to antigens (Al-Lazikani et al., 1997; North et al.,
2011). Therefore, the primary objective of rational antibody
design is to optimize the CDRs for effective binding to the
targeted antigen.

Antibodies are central proteins in adaptive
immune responses, responsible for protecting
against viruses and other pathogens. Rational
antibody design has proven effective in the diagnosis and treatment of various diseases like cancers and virus infections. While recent diffusionbased generative models show promise in designing antigen-specific antibodies, the primary
challenge lies in the scarcity of labeled antibodyantigen complex data and binding affinity data.
We present AbX, a new score-based diffusion
generative model guided by evolutionary, physical, and geometric constraints for antibody design. These constraints serve to narrow the search
space and provide priors for plausible antibody sequences and structures. Specifically, we leverage
a pre-trained protein language model as priors
for evolutionary plausible antibodies and introduce additional training objectives for geometric and physical constraints like van der Waals
forces. Furthermore, as far as we know, AbX is
the first score-based diffusion model with continuous timesteps for antibody design, jointly modeling the discrete sequence space and the SE(3)
structure space. Evaluated on two independent
testing sets, we show that AbX outperforms other
published methods, achieving higher accuracy in
sequence and structure generation and enhanced
antibody-antigen binding affinity. Ablation studies highlight the clear contributions of the introduced constraints to antibody design.

Experimentally exploring the huge structure and sequence
space of CDRs and validating their binding affinity to antigens is inefficient in wet lab settings. Therefore, computational methods have been proposed to optimize CDRs,
with antibody-antigen binding affinity as the primary objective. These include traditional classical methods such as
RAbD (Pantazes & Maranas, 2010; Lapidoth et al., 2015;
Adolf-Bryfogle et al., 2018), as well as more recent deep
learning-based methods.
Diffusion models, commonly applied in generating image
data, have recently been introduced to antibody design. For
example, DiffAb proposes a denoising diffusion probabilistic model on both discrete sequence space and SE(3) structure space of antibody, targeting specific antigens (Luo et al.,
2022).
The scarcity of available antibody-antigen complex data
poses a significant challenge for these diffusion-based generative models. In the field of computer vision, models
often require significantly larger datasets for effective training, and diffusion models trained on limited datasets tend to
exhibit restricted expressiveness, resulting in the generation
of less diverse and potentially biased images (Hur et al.,
2024). For the case of antibody design, the widely-used
SAbDab database (Dunbar et al., 2014) of antibody-antigen
complexes comprises only thousands of non-redundant samples, leading to a high risk of overfitting.

1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. 2 University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Haicang Zhang
<zhanghaicang@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We develop AbX, a new score-based diffusion model that is
guided by evolutionary, physical, and geometric constraints.
1

