TabLog: Test-Time Adaptation for Tabular Data Using Logic Rules

Weijieying Ren 1 Xiaoting Li 2 Huiyuan Chen 2 Vineeth Rakesh 2 Zhuoyi Wang 2 Mahashweta Das 2
Vasant Honavar 1 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Tabular data are ubiquitous in many applications including
clinical diagnosis (Somepalli et al., 2022; Arik & Pfister,
2021), climate modeling (Shi et al., 2021), e-commerce
(Gardner et al., 2023), among others. Although a variety of
methods exist for learning predictive models from tabular
data, they suffer from substantial drops in accuracy when
the data distribution during model deployment, i.e., the
target domain distribution, is significantly different from that
encountered during model training, i.e., the source domain
distribution (Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2022; Bahri et al.,
2021; Wang & Chen, 2022; Gardner et al., 2023). Hence,
there is much work on domain adaptation methods that
aim to transfer knowledge under distribution shift from a
source domain to a target domain (Kundu et al., 2020). Of
particular interest is the problem of test-time or source-free
(Liang et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2024) domain adaptation
where the source data is unavailable during adaptation to
the target domain.

We consider the problem of test-time adaptation
of predictive models trained on tabular data. Effective solution of this problem requires adaptation of predictive models trained on the source
domain to a target domain, using only unlabeled
target domain data, without access to source domain data. Existing test-time adaptation methods
for tabular data have difficulty coping with the
heterogeneous features and their complex dependencies inherent in tabular data. To overcome
these limitations, we consider test-time adaptation
in the setting wherein the logical structure of the
rules is assumed to remain invariant despite distribution shift between source and target domains
whereas the numerical parameters associated with
the rules and the weights assigned to them can
vary to accommodate distribution shift. TabLog
discretizes numerical features, models dependencies between heterogeneous features, introduces a
novel contrastive loss for coping with distribution
shift, and presents an end-to-end framework for efficient training and test-time adaptation by taking
advantage of a logical neural network representation of a rule ensemble. We present results of experiments using several benchmark data sets that
demonstrate TabLog is competitive with or improves upon the state-of-the-art methods for testtime adaptation of predictive models trained on
tabular data. Our code is available at https://
github.com/WeijieyingRen/TabLog.

Despite notable advances in test-time adaptation (Liang
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020; Niu et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2023a; Liang et al., 2020) (see (Liang et al., 2023; Fang
et al., 2024) for surveys), there has been limited progress on
test-time adaptation of predictive models trained on tabular
data (TabTTA). Tabular data present several challenges to
existing domain adaptation methods: (i) They are characterized by heterogeneous (boolean, categorical, numeric)
features, with different underlying distributions (Bahri et al.,
2021; Chen & Guestrin, 2016). (ii) The dependencies between features are often complex, and a priori unknown
(Shi et al., 2021; Gardner et al., 2023). Hence, some of
the state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods, e.g., those
that rely on feature alignment (Chen et al., 2019) or feature
transfer (Bengio, 2012; Wang & Chen, 2022) fail on tabular
data. Effective solution of the TAbTTA problem have to
come to terms with two questions: (i) What information
can be reasonably transferred from the source domain to the
target domain and (ii) How to perform such transfer.

1
Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory, Center for Artificial Intelligence Foundations and Scientific Applications, Institute
for Computational and Data Sciences, College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, PA,
United States. 2 Visa Research, CA, United States 3 College of
Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State
University, PA, United States. Correspondence to: Vasant Honavar
<vuh14@psu.edu>.

Motivated by the above considerations and the needs of
practical applications, we introduce TabLog, a novel testtime adaptation technique for tabular data. TabLog learns
an ensemble of rules for classifying tabular data in the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

