PrE-Text: Training Language Models on
Private Federated Data in the Age of LLMs

Charlie Hou 1 Akshat Shrivastava 2 Hongyuan Zhan 2 Rylan Conway 2 Trang Le 2
Adithya Sagar 2 Giulia Fanti 1 Daniel Lazar 3

Abstract

model on private user data can significantly improve model
performance. However, user data is often sensitive, necessitating the use of algorithmic techniques for protecting
privacy. Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017a)
is a prominent technique that trains models on user devices
(we call this on-device training) and aggregates the resulting
model updates at a central server. Recent works have shown
that FL combined with differential privacy (DP) (Dwork,
2006)—a combination we refer to as DP-FL—can protect
privacy while also improving model performance in user applications (McMahan et al., 2017b; Kairouz et al., 2021b;a;
Nguyen et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023b).

On-device training is currently the most common approach for training machine learning (ML)
models on private, distributed user data. Despite this, on-device training has several drawbacks: (1) most user devices are too small to train
large models on-device, (2) on-device training is
communication- and computation-intensive, and
(3) on-device training can be difficult to debug
and deploy. To address these problems, we propose Private Evolution-Text (PrE-Text), a method
for generating differentially private (DP) synthetic
textual data. First, we show that across multiple
datasets, training small models (models that fit
on user devices) with PrE-Text synthetic data outperforms small models trained on-device under
practical privacy regimes ( = 1.29,  = 7.58).
We achieve these results while using 9× fewer
rounds, 6× less client computation per round, and
100× less communication per round. Second,
finetuning large models on PrE-Text’s DP synthetic data improves large language model (LLM)
performance on private data across the same range
of privacy budgets. Altogether, these results suggest that training on DP synthetic data can be
a better option than training a model on-device
on private distributed data. Code is available at
https://github.com/houcharlie/PrE-Text.

On-device training or federated learning has several drawbacks. (1) Due to limited on-device storage and computation, client devices cannot be used to train large language
models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Touvron et al., 2023).
As LLMs become more critical in many use-cases, this becomes more limiting (Charles et al., 2023). (2) On-device
training can have high communication and computation
costs for clients (Cai et al., 2022). Indeed, there is a large
body of literature studying how to improve the efficiency of
on-device training (Wang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Hou et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2021;
Mishchenko et al., 2022; Sadiev et al., 2022; Grudzień et al.,
2023). (3) It is difficult to deploy and debug (Augenstein
et al., 2019), requiring extensive infrastructure investment
(Tensorflow, 2018; Zhao et al., 2023; PyTorch, 2024).
An alternative paradigm: Train or finetune on differentially private (DP) synthetic data. We propose to have the
central server first generate DP synthetic data from private
client data, then centrally finetune a pretrained language
model on that private synthetic data. As in on-device training, clients send DP information to the server; this is used
by the server to generate high-quality synthetic data. Unlike
on-device training, clients do not need to run training steps
for the downstream model. Finetuning on DP synthetic data
located on-server (1) eliminates the model size constraints
of on-device training, (2) is easier to debug as we can observe the training process without compromising DP, and
(3) does not require new training infrastructure, unlike ondevice training. Furthermore, DP synthetic data located on

1. Introduction
In many language applications, such as mobile keyboard
autocompletion (McMahan et al., 2017b), or instructionfollowing large language models (Yu et al., 2024), training a
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University 2 Meta 3 Coldrays. Correspondence to: Charlie
Hou <hou.charlie2@gmail.com>. Charlie Hou and Daniel Lazar
partially worked on this paper while at Meta.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

