Improving Computational Complexity in Statistical Models with Local
Curvature Information
Pedram Akbarian * 1 Tongzheng Ren * 2 Jiacheng Zhuo 2 Sujay Sanghavi 1 Nhat Ho 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

It is known that when the statistical models are
singular, i.e., the Fisher information matrix at
the true parameter is degenerate, the fixed stepsize gradient descent algorithm takes polynomial
number of steps in terms of the sample size n to
converge to a final statistical radius around the
true parameter, which can be unsatisfactory for
the practical application. To further improve that
computational complexity, we consider utilizing
the local curvature information for parameter estimation. Even though there is a rich literature in
using the local curvature information for optimization, the statistical rate of these methods in statistical models, to the best of our knowledge, has
not been studied rigorously. The major challenge
of this problem is due to the non-convex nature
of sample loss function. To shed light on these
problems, we specifically study the normalized
gradient descent (NormGD) algorithm, a variant
of gradient descent algorithm whose step size is
scaled by the maximum eigenvalue of the Hessian
matrix of the empirical loss function, and deal
with the aforementioned issue with a populationto-sample analysis. When the population loss
function is homogeneous, the NormGD iterates
reach a final statistical radius around the true parameter after a logarithmic number of iterations
in terms of n. Therefore, for fixed dimension
d, the NormGD algorithm achieves the optimal
computational complexity O(n) to reach the final statistical radius, which is cheaper than the
complexity O(nτ ) of the fixed step-size gradient
descent algorithm for some τ > 1.

Optimization serves a critical role in statistical models by
enabling the determination of fixed points in data-dependent
operators. This process is fundamental to finding parameter
values that either maximize likelihood functions or minimize cost functions. The asymptotic performance of these
models is linked to the properties of the population-level
operator, particularly under the assumption of an infinitely
large sample size. Consider the problem of determining
the unique minimizer, denoted as θ⋆ , of an objective function f : Rd → R. Crucially, we must emphasize that
our understanding of the genuine objective function f is
indirect and limited; but instead, we have access to an approximate (random) objective function fn which serves as
an unbiased estimate of the true objective function. To optimize the objective function, the gradient descent (GD)
algorithm has been one of the most well-known and widely
used (first-order) optimization methods for approximating
the true parameter for parametric statistical models (Polyak,
1987; Bubeck, 2015; Nesterov, 2018).

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA
2
Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA
3
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas
at Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Pedram Akbarian <akbarian@utexas.edu>, Tongzheng Ren <tongzheng@utexas.edu>.

θ⋆ ∈ arg min f (θ),

Problem Setup. We are interested in solving the following
optimization problem
θbn ∈ arg min fn (θ),

(1)

θ∈Rd

where fn denote as the sample loss function, applied to a set
i.i.d.
of data points S = {Xi }ni=1 ∼ Pθ⋆ that are independently
and identically distributed according to the probability distribution Pθ⋆ . In this context, θ⋆ represents the true, yet
unknown, parameter of the distribution Pθ⋆ , and θbn is a
solution of (1) which can be viewed as an estimation of the
true parameter θ⋆ . Moreover, we define the corresponding
population version of optimization problem (1) as follows:
(2)

θ∈Rd

where f (θ) := ES∼Pθn⋆ [fn (θ)] is the population loss function, and the expectation is taken with respect to the data. It
is worth noting that we can perceive any optimization algorithm as an iterative procedure, which can be reframed as a
fixed point problem concerning its corresponding operator.
Now, We denote F as the operator defining the iterates at the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

