Bayesian Knowledge Distillation: A Bayesian Perspective
of Distillation with Uncertainty Quantification

Luyang Fang * 1 Yongkai Chen * 1 Wenxuan Zhong 1 Ping Ma 1

Abstract

mance, playing a pivotal role in addressing the challenges in
model deployment (Zhao et al., 2022; Tung & Mori, 2019;
Hinton et al., 2015; Huang & Wang, 2017; Li et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2023; Latif et al., 2023). Knowledge distillation
(KD) is a technique where a smaller and simpler model
(the student model) learns from a larger and more complex
pre-trained model (the teacher model), similar to a student
learning from a teacher. To facilitate this learning process,
a penalty term is introduced that measures the dissimilarity
between the predictions made by the teacher model and the
student model. This penalty term is then incorporated into
the loss function used for training the student model. By
minimizing the combined loss, the student model is guided
to make predictions that align with the teacher model’s outputs. We refer to Gou et al. (2021) for a comprehensive
survey on KD methods.

Knowledge distillation (KD) has been widely
used for model compression and deployment acceleration. Nonetheless, the statistical insight of
the remarkable performance of KD remains elusive, and methods for evaluating the uncertainty of
the distilled model/student model are lacking. To
address these issues, we establish a close connection between KD and a Bayesian model. In particular, we develop an innovative method named
Bayesian Knowledge Distillation (BKD) to provide a transparent interpretation of the working
mechanism of KD, and a suite of Bayesian inference tools for the uncertainty quantification of
the student model. In BKD, the regularization
imposed by the teacher model in KD is formulated as a teacher-informed prior for the student
model’s parameters. Consequently, we establish
the equivalence between minimizing the KD loss
and estimating the posterior mode in BKD. Efficient Bayesian inference algorithms are developed
based on the stochastic gradient Langevin Monte
Carlo and examined with extensive experiments
on uncertainty ranking and credible interval construction for predicted class probabilities.

Despite the empirical success of KD, there remains a lack
of clear statistical insight into the distillation process and
its effects on the improvement of the student model. One
commonly accepted intuition, as proposed by Hinton et al.
(2015), is that the teacher model’s prediction probabilities
provide soft labels for the training data to the student model.
Although these soft labels are more ambiguous than the true
labels, they facilitate easier learning for the student model,
thereby enhancing its performance. Numerous studies have
provided a more comprehensive analysis to investigate the
impact of distillation, as discussed in Section 2. However,
it’s worth noting that most existing research primarily concentrates on assessing how distillation enhances the prediction performance of the student model. While these
insights are valuable, a deeper exploration of the statistical
perspective and theoretical aspects of knowledge distillation
is needed to gain a more comprehensive understanding of
its efficacy and capability.

1. Introduction
The exponential growth of parameters in deep learning models, driven by extensive resource allocation for training, has
led to remarkable performance (Kondratyuk et al., 2023;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2023). However, this
growth also poses challenges in practical deployment due
to the immense model sizes. Knowledge distillation (KD)
emerges as an efficient solution for model compression
designed to reduce the model size while maintaining perfor-

In this work, we approach this problem from a different
perspective. We develop a novel method called Bayesian
Knowledge Distillation (BKD) to distill knowledge from
the teacher model to the student model in a Bayesian framework. Consider the classification task as an example. In
BKD, the cross-entropy between prediction probabilities
and labels of the data in the KD’s loss function is treated as
a likelihood function of the student model’s parameters. A

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Georgia, Athens, USA. Correspondence to: Wenxuan Zhong
<wenxuan@uga.edu>, Ping Ma <pingma@uga.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

