The Stronger the Diffusion Model, the Easier the Backdoor: Data Poisoning to
Induce Copyright Breaches Without Adjusting Finetuning Pipeline

Haonan Wang 1 Qianli Shen 1 Yao Tong 1 Yang Zhang 1 Kenji Kawaguchi 1

Abstract

the full potential of diffusion models, both academia and
industry have made dedicated efforts to address the associated challenges (Wiggers, 2023; Somepalli et al., 2023a;
Vyas et al., 2023). This includes theoretical analyses of
copyright protection through an examination of accessibility (Vyas et al., 2023). In addition, several industry players
have taken proactive steps in response to content creators’
concerns about using public works in model training. Notably, OpenAI has recently announced protocols allowing
content creators to opt-out and enabling artists to submit specific images for exclusion in future model training (Wiggers,
2023). Intuitively, the removal of copyrighted materials
from training data seems to be an effective strategy to prevent unauthorized access, memorization, and reproduction
breaching copyright. However, the vulnerabilities of those
protection methods remain underexplored.

The commercialization of text-to-image diffusion models (DMs) brings forth potential copyright concerns. Despite numerous attempts to
protect DMs from copyright issues, the vulnerabilities of these solutions are underexplored.
In this study, we formalized the Copyright
Infringement Attack on generative AI
models and proposed a backdoor attack method,
SilentBadDiffusion, to induce copyright
infringement without requiring access to or control over training processes. Our method strategically embeds connections between pieces of
copyrighted information and text references in
poisoning data while carefully dispersing that
information, making the poisoning data inconspicuous when integrated into a clean dataset.
Our experiments show the stealth and efficacy
of the poisoning data. When given specific text
prompts, DMs trained with a poisoning ratio of
0.20% can produce copyrighted images. Additionally, the results reveal that the more sophisticated the DMs are, the easier the success of
the attack becomes. These findings underline
potential pitfalls in the prevailing copyright protection strategies and underscore the necessity
for increased scrutiny to prevent the misuse of
DMs. Github link: https://github.com/
haonan3/SilentBadDiffusion.

In this study, we formalize the copyright infringement attack on generative AI models and examine the vulnerabilities of copyright protection in text-to-image diffusion
models (DMs) by introducing the backdoor attack method,
SilentBadDiffusion.
Copyright Infringement Attack
A copyright infringement attack is a specific type of
backdoor attack targeting generative models. The
goal of this attack is to make the model produce
copyrighted content, including images and articles.
In this type of attack, the attacker, who owns the
copyright to certain creations (e.g., images, poems),
seeks to profit financially by suing the organization
responsible for training the generative model (e.g.,
a large language model or a text-to-image diffusion
model) for copyright infringement.

1. Introduction
As an increasing number of companies incorporate textto-image diffusion models (DMs) (Rombach et al., 2022;
Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022)
into their products, the issue of copyright becomes increasingly prominent (Vincent, 2023). To responsibly harness

The proposed method does not require access to or control
over the diffusion model’s training or fine-tuning processes.
It simply involves inserting poisoning data into the clean
training dataset. After training with the poisoned dataset,
the target text-to-image diffusion model can be triggered
by specific text prompts to generate images that infringe
on copyright. The proposed attack works by semantically
dissecting a copyrighted image into nuanced elements and

1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Kenji Kawaguchi <kenji@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

