Do Efficient Transformers Really Save Computation?

Kai Yang 1 Jan Ackermann 2 Zhenyu He 3 Guhao Feng 1 Bohang Zhang 3 Yunzhen Feng 4 Qiwei Ye 5
Di He 3 Liwei Wang 3 6

Abstract

markable performance in numerous applications ranging
from natural language processing to computer vision and
speech. A significant advancement has recently been made,
by scaling up Transformers to build Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023). These LLMs, exemplified by models like GPT
and LLaMa, typically have billions of parameters and are
trained on datasets containing trillions of tokens. Given
the substantial computational demands, enhancing LLMs’
efficiency has become a pivotal research focus in academic
and industrial contexts.

As transformer-based language models are trained
on increasingly large datasets and with vast numbers of parameters, finding more efficient alternatives to the standard Transformer has become
very valuable. While many efficient Transformers
and Transformer alternatives have been proposed,
none provide theoretical guarantees that they are a
suitable replacement for the standard Transformer.
This makes it challenging to identify when to use
a specific model and what directions to prioritize
for further investigation. In this paper, we aim to
understand the capabilities and limitations of efficient Transformers, specifically the Sparse Transformer and the Linear Transformer. We focus on
their reasoning capability as exhibited by Chainof-Thought (CoT) prompts and follow previous
works to model them as Dynamic Programming
(DP) problems. Our results show that while these
models are expressive enough to solve general
DP tasks, contrary to expectations, they require
a model size that scales with the problem size.
Nonetheless, we identify a class of DP problems
for which these models can be more efficient than
the standard Transformer. We confirm our theoretical results through experiments on representative
DP tasks, adding to the understanding of efficient
Transformers’ practical strengths and weaknesses.

The primary computational bottleneck in Transformers
arises from the self-attention module, whose complexity
scales quadratically with the sequence length. The cost
becomes particularly noticeable in tasks that require long sequence generation, such as coherent story generation or reasoning with Chain-of-Thought prompts (Wei et al., 2022b;
Kojima et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2023).
Given the practical needs, a large body of work seeks to
develop efficient Transformers that can reduce the quadratic
complexity of self-attention (Tay et al., 2022), typically
by imposing sparsity into architectural design (Child et al.,
2019; Beltagy et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2020; Kitaev et al.,
2020; Vyas et al., 2020; Roy et al., 2021) or by employing low-rank or kernel-based approximations to accelerate
the computation (Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski
et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020; Luo et al.,
2021). However, there is generally a lack of understanding
about the capabilities of efficient Transformer.

1. Introduction

In this work, we take a step towards theoretically understanding the capability of efficient Transformers. In particular,
we focus on the models’ reasoning ability, a fundamental aspect of human intelligence that plays a vital role in
problem-solving, decision-making, and planning. Inspired
by a recent study in Feng et al. (2023), we model reasoning as a dynamic programming (DP) process as it closely
resembles the way Chain-of-Thought prompts are executed.
The output sequence consists of answers to a series of intermediate steps, each corresponding to solving a subproblem
represented by a DP state. Feng et al. (2023) proved that
all reasoning problems fitting within this framework can be
solved by a standard autoregressive Transformer of a constant size (irrelevant to the problem scale), thus achieving a

The Transformer architecture, as introduced in the seminal work of Vaswani et al. (2017), has demonstrated a re1
School of EECS, Peking University 2 ETH Zürich 3 National
Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School
of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
New York University 5 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 6 Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University. Correspondence to: Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@pku.edu.cn>, Bohang Zhang <zhangbohang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

