Positive Concave Deep Equilibrium Models

Mateusz Gabor 1 Tomasz Piotrowski 2 Renato L. G. Cavalcante 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Implicit models (Bai et al., 2019; 2020; Chen et al., 2018;
El Ghaoui et al., 2021; Baker et al., 2023; Tsuchida & Ong,
2023; Revay et al., 2020; Wei & Kolter, 2021; Geng et al.,
2021) are attracting considerable interest owing to their
improved memory efficiency compared to standard neural
networks. These models solve implicit equations instead
of explicitly computing the output of the layers, and they
can be divided into two main categories: neural ordinary
differential equations (Neural ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018) and
deep equilibrium models (DEQ) models (Bai et al., 2019).

Deep equilibrium (DEQ) models are widely recognized as a memory efficient alternative to standard
neural networks, achieving state-of-the-art performance in language modeling and computer vision
tasks. These models solve a fixed point equation
instead of explicitly computing the output, which
sets them apart from standard neural networks.
However, existing DEQ models often lack formal
guarantees of the existence and uniqueness of the
fixed point, and the convergence of the numerical
scheme used for computing the fixed point is not
formally established. As a result, DEQ models
are potentially unstable in practice. To address
these drawbacks, we introduce a novel class of
DEQ models called positive concave deep equilibrium (pcDEQ) models. Our approach, which
is based on nonlinear Perron-Frobenius theory,
enforces nonnegative weights and activation functions that are concave on the positive orthant. By
imposing these constraints, we can easily ensure
the existence and uniqueness of the fixed point
without relying on additional complex assumptions commonly found in the DEQ literature, such
as those based on monotone operator theory in
convex analysis. Furthermore, the fixed point
can be computed with the standard fixed point
algorithm, and we provide theoretical guarantees
of its geometric convergence, which, in particular, simplifies the training process. Experiments
demonstrate the competitiveness of our pcDEQ
models against other implicit models.

Neural ODEs solve differential equations parameterized by
the neural network input, with the output representing the
solution to these equations. On the other hand, the implicit
layers of DEQ models solve nonlinear fixed point equations
that are not necessarily derived from differential equations.
An interesting aspect about DEQ models is that a single implicit DEQ layer emulates a standard neural network with an
infinite number of layers and tied weights. While both DEQ
models and neural ODEs require constant training memory, DEQ models often outperform neural ODEs, achieving
state-of-the-art results in language modeling tasks (Bai et al.,
2019) and computer vision tasks (Bai et al., 2020; Xie et al.,
2022). However, a potential limitation of standard DEQ
models is that they are based on iterative methods that require careful initialization, tuning of hyperparameters, and
special regularization (e.g., recurrent dropout) to ensure convergence to the fixed point, which is hard to guarantee with
existing approaches. In general, standard DEQ models operate heuristically, and in many cases they even lack formal
guarantees regarding the existence and uniqueness of the
fixed point problem being solved.
To overcome the limitations of existing DEQ models, we
introduce a new variant called positive concave deep equilibrium (pcDEQ) models. In particular, these pcDEQ models address issues related to the existence and uniqueness
of the fixed point. Furthermore, the fixed points of the
proposed pcDEQ models can be easily computed with the
standard fixed point iteration, and we provide formal guarantees of geometric convergence. The theoretical foundation
of pcDEQ models is rooted in nonlinear Perron-Frobenius
(NPF) theory (Lemmens & Nussbaum, 2012; Lins, 2023),
which is commonly used in the analysis of nonnegative

1
Faculty of Electronics, Photonics, and Microsystems,Wrocław
University of Science and Technology, Wrocław, Poland 2 Faculty
of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics, Nicolaus Copernicus
University, Toruń, Poland 3 Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute,
Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Mateusz Gabor <mateusz.gabor@pwr.edu.pl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

