Category-Aware Active Domain Adaptation

Wenxiao Xiao 1 * Jiuxiang Gu 2 Hongfu Liu 1

Abstract

domain transfer. Most existing active DA works (Huang
et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2022b; 2023) evaluate the importance
of each unlabeled sample by various indirect measurements,
such as diversity (Su et al., 2020), uncertainty (Prabhu et al.,
2021), or domainness (Fu et al., 2021). The target samples
with the highest importance estimation are annotated and
subsequently incorporated into the labeled source data for
re-training the adaptation model.

Active domain adaptation has shown promising
results in enhancing unsupervised domain adaptation (DA), by actively selecting and annotating a small amount of unlabeled samples from
the target domain. Despite its effectiveness in
boosting overall performance, the gain usually
concentrates on the categories that are readily improvable, while challenging categories that demand the utmost attention are often overlooked
by existing models. To alleviate this discrepancy,
we propose a novel category-aware active DA
method that aims to boost the adaptation for the
individual category without adversely affecting
others. Specifically, our approach identifies the
unlabeled data that are most important for the
recognition of the targeted category. Our method
assesses the impact of each unlabeled sample on
the recognition loss of the target data via the influence function, which allows us to directly evaluate the sample importance, without relying on
indirect measurements used by existing methods.
Comprehensive experiments and in-depth explorations demonstrate the efficacy of our method on
category-aware active DA over three datasets.

Nevertheless, the overall advancements brought by these
methods also come with a hidden cost for certain data categories. Specifically, to achieve the maximum overall enhancement with a limited number of new annotations, existing active domain adaptation models (Prabhu et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2021; Rangwani et al., 2021; Hwang et al., 2022;
Xie et al., 2023) predominantly focus on easier categories.
That is, the categories that are relatively simple to improve
are frequently queried by the model, even though some of
them already have satisfactory performance. On the contrary, the most challenging categories seldom receive any
new annotations, obtaining little improvement or even suffering impairment after active learning. The negligence of
critical categories could raise significant concerns or vulnerability in real-life applications.
Contributions. To avoid these risks, we consider categoryaware active domain adaptation, which seeks a strategy that
facilitates adaptation for individual categories, particularly
those deemed challenging. Our major contributions are
summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Recent research efforts have been dedicated to active domain adaptation (Su et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Rangwani et al., 2021; Hwang
et al., 2022), in order to bridge the significant performance
gap (Chen et al., 2018; Tsai et al., 2018) between unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) and their supervised counterpart. The active DA framework actively queries ground
truth labels for a small set of important unlabeled target data,
providing extra supervision for the DA models to facilitate

• We consider a new research question, category-aware
active domain adaptation, which targets the performance enhancement specific for each individual category, avoiding the potential risks caused by the neglect
of critical categories. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first attempt to address the performance discrepancy among categories in active domain adaptation.
• We employ the influence function (Cook & Weisberg,
1980) and extend it into the active learning context to
estimate the usefulness of target data. The influence
function enables a direct evaluation of each sample’s
impact on the category-specific classifier, unlike other
indirect measurements aiming for overall performance.

*
Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.
Computer Science Department, Brandeis University, Waltham,
Massachusetts, USA 2 Adobe Research, USA. Correspondence to:
Wenxiao Xiao <wenxiaoxiao@brandeis.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

