Predictive Coding beyond Correlations

Tommaso Salvatori 1 2 Luca Pinchetti 3 Amine M’Charrak 3 Beren Millidge 4 5 Thomas Lukasiewicz 2 3

Abstract
Recently, there has been extensive research on the
capabilities of biologically plausible algorithms.
In this work, we show how one of such algorithms,
called predictive coding, is able to perform causal
inference tasks. First, we show how a simple
change in the inference process of predictive coding enables to compute interventions without the
need to mutilate or redefine a causal graph. Then,
we explore applications in cases where the graph
is unknown, and has to be inferred from observational data. Empirically, we show how such
findings can be used to improve the performance
of predictive coding in image classification tasks,
and conclude that such models are able to perform
simple end-to-end causal inference tasks.

Socio
economic
Status

Intelligence

Education
Level

Income
Level

Correlation

Intervention

Figure 1. Example socio-economic graph and its structure after
conditioning and intervening on education level.

2009). Then, we show how such techniques from causal
inference can allow PC graphs reach a performance similar
to those of hierarchical models on image classification tasks.
One of the main objects of study in causal inference are interventions (or do-operations), usually performed on Bayesian
networks by computing a conditional probability on a mutilated graph (see Fig. 1). In Bayesian networks, the process
of mutilating the graph can be computationally expensive. A
second object of study is structure learning, where the goal
is to infer the structure of a graph underlying observational
data (Zheng et al., 2018). The goals of this work are (i)
to show both how it is possible to model interventions and
perform structure learning in a biologically plausible and
efficient fashion, and (ii) to use the developed techniques
to improve the performance of PC graphs. Our experiments
can then be divided into two categories: the first where we
use PC to tackle benchmarks in the causal inference literature, and the second where we show how interventional
queries and structure learning techniques can be used improve the performance of PC graphs in image classification
tasks. Our contributions are briefly as follows:

1. Introduction
Predictive coding (PC) is an influential theory of learning
and perception in the brain, with roots in Bayesian inference and signal compression (Friston, 2018). Conventional
literature primarily deals with hierarchical models relating
top-down predictions to internal states and external stimuli (Rao & Ballard, 1999). A recent work went beyond
this, and showed how PC can be used to perform inference
and learning on structures with any topology, called PC
graphs (Salvatori et al., 2022a). Such models are able to
perform both discriminative and generative tasks by computing conditional probabilities (i.e., correlations) on Bayesian
networks. However, their performance on discriminative
tasks are not comparable to the ones obtained by purely hierarchical models. In this work, we first show how PC graphs
have the capabilities to go beyond the computation of correlations, and model interventions and counterfactuals (Pearl,

• We introduce interventional queries, which allow to
compute interventions on PC graphs efficiently, and
without the need of mutilating the graph. Empirically,
we test our claims on PC-based structural causal models, and show that the performance is comparable to
that obtained by standard baselines. We then show how
interventionl queries can be used to improve the test
accuracy of PC graphs on MNIST and FashionMNIST.

1
VERSES Research Lab, Los Angeles, CA 90016, USA
Institute of Logic and Computation, Vienna University of Technology, Austria 3 Department of Computer Science, University of
Oxford, UK 4 MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of
Oxford, UK 5 Zyphra, Palo Calto, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Tommaso Salvatori <tommaso.salvatori@verses.ai>.
2

• We show how PC graphs can perform structure learning from observational data. Empirically, we test two
techniques that can be used to learn such a structure:
using an acyclic prior (Zheng et al., 2018), or negative
examples, the second being a novel contribution. We
then show how such techniques further improve the
performance of PC graphs on classification tasks.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

