Spotting LLMs With Binoculars: Zero-Shot Detection of
Machine-Generated Text
Abhimanyu Hans * 1 Avi Schwarzschild * 2 Valeriia Cherepanova 1 Hamid Kazemi 1 Aniruddha Saha 1
Micah Goldblum 3 Jonas Geiping 4 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract

Verma et al., 2023). At the same time, because of the zeroshot nature of our detector, the very same detector can spot
multiple different LLMs with high accuracy—something
that all existing solutions fail to do.

Detecting text generated by modern large language models is thought to be hard, as both
LLMs and humans can exhibit a wide range of
complex behaviors. However, we find that a
score based on contrasting two closely related
language models is highly accurate at separating
human-generated and machine-generated text.
Based on this mechanism, we propose a novel
LLM detector that only requires simple calculations using a pair of pre-trained LLMs. The
method, called Binoculars, achieves state-of-theart accuracy without any training data. It is capable of spotting machine text from a range of
modern LLMs without any model-specific modifications. We comprehensively evaluate Binoculars on a number of text sources and in varied situations. Over a wide range of document
types, Binoculars detects over 90% of generated
samples from ChatGPT (and other LLMs) at a
false positive rate of 0.01%, despite not being
trained on any ChatGPT data. Code available at
https://github.com/ahans30/Binoculars.

The ability to detect LLMs in the zero-shot setting addresses issues of growing importance. Prior research on
combating academic plagiarism (TurnitIn.com) has fixated
strongly on ChatGPT because of its simple and accessible
interface. But more sophisticated actors use LLM APIs to
operate bots, create fake product reviews, and spread misinformation on social media platforms at a large scale. These
actors have a wide range of LLMs available to them beyond
just ChatGPT, making zero-shot, model-agnostic detection
critical for social media moderation and platform integrity
assurance (Crothers et al., 2022; Bail et al., 2023). Our
zero-shot capability is a departure from existing detectors
that rely on model-specific training data and often fail to
transfer to new models.
Our proposed detector, called Binoculars, works by viewing text through two lenses. First, we compute the log perplexity of the text in question using an “observer” LLM. We
then compute next-token predictions using a “performer”
LLM and compute their perplexity according to the observer. We call this metric cross-perplexity. We observe
that perplexity per cross-perplexity is a surprisingly powerful signal to detect LLM-text. We first motivate this simple
observation, and then show that it is sufficient to build a
strong zero-shot detector, which we extensively stress-test
in a number of text domains.

1. Introduction
We present a method to detect LLM-generated text that
works in the zero-shot setting in which no training examples are used from the LLM source. Even with this strict
limitation, our scheme still out-performs all open-source
methods for ChatGPT detection and is competitive with or
better than commercial APIs, despite these competitors using training samples from ChatGPT (Mitchell et al., 2023;

2. The LLM Detection Landscape
Successful efforts to spot machine-generated text show
promise on early models whose generation output is not
convincingly human. However, with the rise of transformer models for language modeling (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023), primitive mechanisms to detect machinegenerated text are rendered useless. While one approach is
to record (Krishna et al., 2023) or watermark all generated
text (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023), these preemptive detection
approaches can only be implemented with full control over

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland 2 Carnegie
Mellon University 3 New York University 4 ELLIS Institute
Tübingen, MPI Intelligent Systems.
Correspondence to:
Abhimanyu Hans <ahans1@umd.edu>, Avi Schwarzschild
<schwarzschild@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

