Applying language models to algebraic topology:
generating simplicial cycles using multi-labeling in Wu’s formula

Kirill Brilliantov * 1 Fedor Pavutnitskiy * 2 Dmitry Pasechnyuk 3 4 German Magai 5 6

Abstract

jectures (Wagner, 2021), accelerating calculations (Peifer
et al., 2020), generating symbolic solutions (Lample &
Charton, 2019), detecting structural patterns in mathematical objects (He, 2021), automated generation of formal
proofs (Han et al., 2021), (Polu et al., 2022) and guiding
human intuition to making hypothesis (Davies et al., 2021).
These capabilities offer vast potential for expanding mathematical knowledge and advancing the field.

Computing homotopy groups of spheres has long
been a fundamental objective in algebraic topology. Various theoretical and algorithmic approaches have been developed to tackle this problem. In this paper we take a step towards the goal
of comprehending the group-theoretic structure of
the generators of these homotopy groups by leveraging the power of machine learning. Specifically,
in the simplicial group setting of Wu’s formula,
we reformulate the problem of generating simplicial cycles as a problem of sampling from the intersection of algorithmic datasets related to Dyck
languages. We present and evaluate language
modelling approaches that employ multi-label
information for input sequences, along with the
necessary group-theoretic toolkit and non-neural
baselines.

Inspired by these recent advanced in AI driven mathematical research, we propose a proof-of-concept framework
for generating simplicial cycles in simplicial groups. This
serves as an initial step towards a broader initiative of
utilizing machine learning techniques to sample elements
from the homotopy groups of spheres and more general
spaces. In the current work1 we apply our ideas in particular case of free simplicial group which models (loops
over) a two-dimensional sphere. We adopt a simplicial and
group-theoretic approach due to its combinatorial nature
and computer-friendly representation.
The theoretical background for Wu’s formula (4) is outlined
in Section 3 with a more detailed exposition given in Appendix B. This formula expresses our object of interest as a
certain quotient of the intersection of normal subgroups of
free group. Generating elements from this intersection ∩i Ri
(see notation (1) below) is the main topic of the present work.
The key features of the problem include the similarity between Ri ’s and sets of Dyck-n words (allowing a suitable
distribution on it to sample from) and a clear algorithmic
procedure for determining if a given element w lies within
the intersection.

1. Introduction
Mathematical progress often depends on the identification
of patterns and the formulation of conjectures, which are
statements believed to be true but yet to be proven. For centuries, mathematicians have relied on data, from early prime
tables to modern computer-generated data, to aid in this process. While computational techniques have proven useful
in some areas of pure mathematics (Appel & Haken, 1977),
(Hales, 2005), the full potential of artificial intelligence (AI)
in the field is yet to be fully explored.

We develop the following non-neural-based baselines for
this problem: random search, evolutionary method and
greedy algorithm. These baselines are extensively described in Section 4.2. Concurrently, our main deep learning approaches described in Section 4.3 are based on language modelling and differ in the various usages of training
dataset’s meta information.

In mathematics, AI has demonstrated remarkable abilities in tasks such as identifying counterexamples to con*

Equal contribution 1 ETH, Zurich 2 Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, Beijing 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi 4 Ivannikov
Institute for System Programming of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow 5 HSE University, Moscow 6 Noeon Research, Tokyo. Correspondence to: Fedor Pavutnitskiy <fedor.pavutnitskiy@gmail.com>.

The goal of introducing the deep learning approaches is to
1
Code
available
at
https://github.
com/ml-in-algebraic-topology/
gen-simplicial-cycles

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

