The Linear Representation Hypothesis and
the Geometry of Large Language Models

Kiho Park 1 Yo Joong Choe 1 Victor Veitch 1

Abstract

representation hypothesis is that—were it true—the tasks of
interpreting and controlling model behavior could exploit
linear algebraic operations on the representation space. Our
goal is to formalize the linear representation hypothesis, and
clarify how it relates to interpretation and control.

Informally, the “linear representation hypothesis” is the idea that high-level concepts are represented linearly as directions in some representation space. In this paper, we address two closely
related questions: What does “linear representation” actually mean? And, how do we make
sense of geometric notions (e.g., cosine similarity and projection) in the representation space?
To answer these, we use the language of counterfactuals to give two formalizations of linear
representation, one in the output (word) representation space, and one in the input (context) space.
We then prove that these connect to linear probing and model steering, respectively. To make
sense of geometric notions, we use the formalization to identify a particular (non-Euclidean)
inner product that respects language structure in a
sense we make precise. Using this causal inner
product, we show how to unify all notions of linear representation. In particular, this allows the
construction of probes and steering vectors using
counterfactual pairs. Experiments with LLaMA2 demonstrate the existence of linear representations of concepts, the connection to interpretation and control, and the fundamental role of
the choice of inner product. Code is available at
github.com/KihoPark/linear rep geometry.

The first challenge is that it is not clear what “linear representation” means. There are (at least) three interpretations:
1. Subspace: (e.g., Mikolov et al., 2013c; Pennington
et al., 2014) The first idea is that each concept is represented as a (1-dimensional) subspace. For example,
in the context of word embeddings, it has been argued empirically that Rep(“woman”) − Rep(“man”),
Rep(“queen”) − Rep(“king”), and all similar pairs belong to a common subspace (Mikolov et al., 2013c).
Then, it is natural to take this subspace to be a representation of the concept of Male/Female.
2. Measurement: (e.g., Nanda et al., 2023; Gurnee &
Tegmark, 2023) Next is the idea that the probability of
a concept value can be measured with a linear probe.
For example, the probability that the output language
is French is logit-linear in the representation of the
input. In this case, we can take the linear map to be a
representation of the concept of English/French.
3. Intervention: (e.g., Wang et al., 2023; Turner et al.,
2023) The final idea is that the value a concept takes
on can be changed, without changing other concepts,
by adding a suitable steering vector—e.g., we change
the output from English to French by adding an
English/French vector. In this case, we take this
added vector to be a representation of the concept.

1. Introduction
In the context of language models, the “Linear Representation Hypothesis” is the idea that high-level concepts are represented linearly in the representation space of a model (e.g.,
Mikolov et al., 2013c; Arora et al., 2016; Elhage et al., 2022).
High-level concepts might include: is the text in French or
English? Is it in the present or past tense? If the text is about
a person, are they male or female? The appeal of the linear
1

It is not clear a priori how these ideas relate to each other,
nor which is the “right” notion of linear representation.
Next, suppose we have somehow found the linear representations of various concepts. We can then use linear algebraic
operations on the representation space for interpretation and
control. For example, we might compute the cosine similarity between a representation and known concept directions,
or edit representations projected onto target directions. However, similarity and projection are geometric notions: they
require an inner product on the representation space. The
second challenge is that it is not clear which inner product

University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

