Unraveling the Impact of Heterophilic Structures on Graph
Positive-Unlabeled Learning

Yuhao Wu 1 Jiangchao Yao 2 3 Bo Han 4 Lina Yao 5 Tongliang Liu 1

Abstract

Veličković, 2023; Wu et al., 2024). For instance, in online transaction networks, fraudsters are labeled as positive
nodes only upon being detected (Yoo et al., 2021), and a similar case holds in pandemic graph prediction (Panagopoulos
et al., 2021) where only affected nodes are identified as positive, while the remaining nodes are actually label-agnostic.

While Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning is vital
in many real-world scenarios, its application to
graph data still remains under-explored. We unveil that a critical challenge for PU learning on
graph lies on the edge heterophily, which directly
violates the irreducibility assumption for ClassPrior Estimation (class prior is essential for building PU learning algorithms) and degenerates the
latent label inference on unlabeled nodes during
classifier training. In response to this challenge,
we introduce a new method, named Graph PU
Learning with Label Propagation Loss (GPL).
Specifically, GPL considers learning from PU
nodes along with an intermediate heterophily reduction, which helps mitigate the negative impact
of the heterophilic structure. We formulate this
procedure as a bilevel optimization that reduces
heterophily in the inner loop and efficiently learns
a classifier in the outer loop. Extensive experiments across a variety of datasets have shown that
GPL significantly outperforms baseline methods,
confirming its effectiveness and superiority.

However, most current approaches to PU learning are built
on the hypothesis that each sample is independently generated. Such a premise hinders these methods from readily adapting to graph data where nodes are interdependent
by edges (Wu et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2020). Our investigation reveals that a primary challenge in adapting
these approaches to graph data is the prevalence of heterophilic structure, where positive and negative nodes are
connected (Zhu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019). Such heterophily widely existed in standard graph learning (Platonov
et al., 2023; Luan et al., 2022), intensifies when dealing with
only positive and unlabeled nodes of interest.
The heterophilic structure impedes two aspects of PU learning: (i) It results in the latent feature entanglement of positive and negative nodes due to heterophilic edges, which
directly challenges Class-Prior Estimation (CPE), i.e, estimating the fraction of positive nodes among the unlabeled
nodes. CPE methods rely on the irreducibility assumption,
which holds that the patterns belonging to positive nodes
could not possibly be confused with patterns from negative
nodes. (Garg et al., 2021; Bekker & Davis, 2020; Ivanov,
2020). However, heterophilic structures violate this assumption, yielding an overestimated class prior. (ii) The presence
of heterophilic structure complicates the latent label inference for unlabeled nodes. More precisely, the heterophilic
edges between different classes mislead the message passing
among same-class nodes, hindering the accurate inference
of latent labels for unlabeled nodes during the classifier
training process (termed as PU classification for simplicity) (Garg et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2020). The adverse effect
to CPE and PU classification significantly challenges graph
PU learning when heterophilic structure exists.

1. Introduction
Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning (Denis, 1998; De Comité
et al., 1999; Denis et al., 2005), where a binary classifier
is trained from positive and unlabeled samples, has made
remarkable progress on image (Kiryo et al., 2017; Niu et al.,
2016; Garg et al., 2021) and text (Li et al., 2016) data. Nowadays, there is burgeoning interest in extending PU learning
to graph-structured data due to the ubiquitous nature of
real-world contexts (Hu et al., 2020; Gaudelet et al., 2021;
1

Sydney AI Center, The University of Sydney 2 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 TMLR Group,
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
5
University of New South Wales. Correspondence to: Tongliang
Liu <tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au>.

In our paper, we present a Graph PU Learning with Label
Propagation Loss (GPL) method to alleviate the side effect
of heterophilic structures on PU learning. GPL mitigates the
impact of heterophilic edges by reducing their weights based

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

