Analysis for Abductive Learning and Neural-Symbolic Reasoning Shortcuts

Xiao-Wen Yang 1 2 Wen-Da Wei 1 2 Jie-Jing Shao 1 Yu-Feng Li 1 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

Task 2

Task 1

Abductive learning models (ABL) and neuralsymbolic predictive models (NeSy) have been recently shown effective, as they allow us to infer labels that are consistent with some prior knowledge
by reasoning over high-level concepts extracted
from sub-symbolic inputs. However, their generalization ability is affected by reasoning shortcuts:
high accuracy on given targets but leveraging intermediate concepts with unintended semantics.
Although there have been techniques to alleviate
reasoning shortcuts, theoretical efforts on this issue remain to be limited. This paper proposes
a simple and effective analysis to quantify harm
caused by it and how can mitigate it. We quantify
three main factors in how NeSy algorithms are
affected by reasoning shortcuts: the complexity
of the knowledge base, the sample size, and the
hypothesis space. In addition, we demonstrate
that ABL can reduce shortcut risk by selecting
specific distance functions in consistency optimization, thereby demonstrating its potential and
approach to solving shortcut problems. Empirical
studies demonstrate the rationality of the analysis.
Moreover, the proposal is suitable for many ABL
and NeSy algorithms and can be easily extended
to handle other cases of reasoning shortcuts.

Red: False
Car: True

Red: True
Car: True

KB : Red ˅ Car → Stop

Stop

Stop

Red: False
Car: True
KB : Car → Stop

Stop

Shortcuts: Confusing Car and Red!!

Figure 1. Reasoning shortcuts. In Task 1, an autonomous vehicle
needs to decide whether to move forward or stop based on the
given rule: Red ∨ Car → Stop, which means it should stop if
there is a red light or a vehicle ahead. The model trained on this
task could correctly classify the target, but it acquires a reasoning
shortcut by confusing the presence of a vehicle and the red light.
When the perception model learned in Task 1 is applied to Task 2,
which involves determining whether turning right is permissible,
the autonomous vehicle mistakenly decides it should stop when
the perception model incorrectly predicts a vehicle ahead, possibly
resulting in a dangerous situation.

Cun et al., 2015) serve as low-level perception models to
translate raw inputs into symbolic concepts of practical
meaning, while the symbolic knowledge constrains both the
intermediate symbolic concepts and the final target using
logical rules. Abductive learning (Zhou, 2019) is one recent
generic and effective framework that bridges any kind of
machine learning algorithms and logical reasoning by using
inconsistency minimization to construct pseudo-labels of the
intermediate symbolic concepts. The inconsistency value
is calculated by a designed distance function (Huang et al.,
2021b; Cai et al., 2021). Unlike most NeSy algorithms, ABL
does not attempt to make symbolic knowledge differentiable.
Instead, it fully utilizes the symbolic reasoning capability
within the symbolic knowledge by sampling pseudo-labels
of intermediate symbols using abductive reasoning. Both
methods combine the interpretability of symbolic knowledge with the learning capabilities and flexibility of neural

1. Introduction
Recently, neural-symbolic learning (NeSy) (d’Avila Garcez
et al., 2019) and abductive learning (ABL) (Zhou, 2019)
have been shown effective for integration of raw data and
symbolic rules. Neural-symbolic learning (d’Avila Garcez
et al., 2019; Sarker et al., 2021; Cunnington et al., 2022)
focuses on integrating logical reasoning into the neural networks in an end-to-end manner. Deep neural networks (Le1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China. 2 School of Artificial Intelligence,
Nanjing University, China.. Correspondence to: Yu-Feng Li
<liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

