Learning Low-dimensional Latent Dynamics from High-dimensional
Observations: Non-asymptotics and Lower Bounds

Yuyang Zhang 1 Shahriar Talebi 1 Na Li 1

Abstract

time series, which becomes useful in various down-stream
tasks like prediction and inference (Churchland et al., 2012;
Mudassir et al., 2020; Pandarinath et al., 2018).

In this paper, we focus on learning a linear timeinvariant (LTI) model with low-dimensional latent variables but high-dimensional observations.
We provide an algorithm that recovers the highdimensional features, i.e. column space of the
observer, embeds the data into low dimensions
and learns the low-dimensional model parameters. Our algorithm enjoys a sample complexity
guarantee of order Õ(n/ϵ2 ), where n is the observation dimension. We further establish a fundamental lower bound indicating this complexity
bound is optimal up to logarithmic factors and
dimension-independent constants. We show that
this inevitable linear factor of n is due to the learning error of the observer’s column space in the
presence of high-dimensional noises. Extending
our results, we consider a meta-learning problem
inspired by various real-world applications, where
the observer column space can be collectively
learned from datasets of multiple LTI systems.
An end-to-end algorithm is then proposed, facilitating learning LTI systems from a meta-dataset
which breaks the sample complexity lower bound
in certain scenarios.

Popular techniques for such analysis range from linear models, such as linear time-invariant (LTI) systems (Sikander &
Prasad, 2015; Bui-Thanh et al., 2008; Hespanha, 2018) and
auto-regressive models (Dong et al., 2022; Poloni & Sbrana,
2019; Qin, 2022), to more complex nonlinear models, exemplified by recurrent neural networks (Yu et al., 2021;
Sussillo & Barak, 2013; Medsker & Jain, 1999). Herein, we
focus on LTI models as they are interpretable and require
much less computational power in many real-world applications (Gallego et al., 2020; Churchland et al., 2012; Dong
et al., 2022).
Specifically, we learn partially observed LTI systems in the
following form
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt ,

yt = Cxt + ηt ,

(1)

where yt ∈ Rn are high-dimensional observations, xt ∈ Rr
are low-dimensional latent variables with n ≫ r, ut ∈ Rm
are inputs and wt , ηt are process and observation noises,
respectively. Matrices A and B are the system parameters
for the dynamics and inputs, respectively, and C can be seen
as the observer, mapping latent variables to noisy observations. Recently, a contemporary perspective has revitalized
well-established system identification (SYSID) algorithms
for similar setups (Shirani Faradonbeh et al., 2018; Sarkar
& Rakhlin, 2019; Oymak & Ozay, 2019; Sarkar et al., 2021;
Zheng & Li, 2021). Without any structural assumptions,
they have established
finite time convergence results with
p
a rate of Õ( n · poly (r, m) /T ), leading to a sample complexity of Õ(n·poly (r, m) /ϵ2 ) for an ϵ-well approximation
of model parameters. Such results are not satisfying for LTI
systems with a large observation dimension n. One alternative way to directly applying the SYSID algorithm is to
initially project the high-dimensional data to lower dimensions before conducting further analysis (Saul & Roweis,
2000; Churchland et al., 2012), either for efficiency or for interpretability. Moreover, these projections may often consist
of “meta information” that is shared across different tasks.
This is consistent with many scenarios in meta-learning settings where we deal with more complex datasets collected

1. Introduction
Analyzing high-dimensional time series data is essential for
numerous real-world applications in finance (Mudassir et al.,
2020), economics (Maliar & Maliar, 2015; Masini et al.,
2023) and biology (Churchland et al., 2012; Hajnal et al.,
2023; Xia et al., 2021; Gallego et al., 2020; Stringer et al.,
2019). High-dimensional time series observations often find
succinct representation through a set of low-dimensional
latent variables. In this paper, the focus is to learn the lowdimensional dynamics capturing the very essence of the
1
SEAS, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA. Correspondence
to: Yuyang Zhang <yuyangzhang@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

