Model Tailor: Mitigating Catastrophic Forgetting in
Multi-modal Large Language Models

Didi Zhu * 1 2 Zhongyi Sun 2 Zexi Li 1 Tao Shen 1 Ke Yan 2 Shouhong Ding 2 Chao Wu 1 Kun Kuang 1

Abstract

integrating additional modalities, particularly vision, leading to the emergence of multi-modal LLMs (MLLMs) (Li
et al., 2023b; Dai et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Zhu et al.,
2023a; Achiam et al., 2023). Prominent examples such as
GPT-4V (Achiam et al., 2023) have played a pivotal role in
enriching multi-modal dialog systems, demonstrating the
versatility and depth of these advanced models. MLLMs
typically comprise modality-specific sub-modules (such as
a vision encoder and an LLM) to capture knowledge from
different modalities, necessitating the incorporation of a
lightweight projector for achieving cross-modal alignment
(Li et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2023b; Zhu et al., 2023a).

Catastrophic forgetting emerges as a critical challenge when fine-tuning multi-modal large language models (MLLMs), where improving performance on target tasks often leads to a significant performance drop on the original tasks. This
paper presents a comprehensive analysis of catastrophic forgetting in MLLMs and introduces a
post-training adjustment method called Model
Tailor. Our method primarily preserves the pretrained parameters while replacing a small number (≤ 10%) of fine-tuned parameters, maintaining ∼ 99% effectiveness on original tasks versus
pre-training, and achieving ∼ 97% on new tasks
compared to standard fine-tuning. Specifically,
we derive a sparse mask to identify the “model
patch”, based on a fusion strategy that integrates
salience and sensitivity analysis. Subsequently, a
compensation mechanism is introduced to “decorate the patch”, enhancing the model’s performance on both target and original tasks. Additionally, our method is adaptable to multi-task scenarios. Through extensive experiments on InstructBLIP and LLaVA-1.5 in both image captioning
and visual question answering tasks, our approach
demonstrates significant task adaptability while
preserving inherent pre-trained capabilities.

Due to the architectural complexity of MLLMs and the inherent disparities in data characteristics across modalities,
these models face challenges in task generalization compared to uni-modal LLMs (Sung et al., 2023). As a result,
MLLMs often demonstrate notably poor performance when
faced with unseen tasks (Lin et al., 2023; Zhai et al., 2023;
He et al., 2023). While fine-tuning MLLMs on these unseen
data appears to be a straightforward solution, our empirical
findings indicate that such approaches significantly impair
the models’ performance on their original tasks, as evidenced in Figure 1. This observed decline, which is defined
as catastrophic forgetting in MLLMs, highlights a critical
challenge that has been seldom explored. This naturally
raises a pivotal question:
How to enhance the performance of MLLMs on target tasks without
diminishing their effectiveness in original tasks?

1. Introduction

Current approaches to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in
machine learning (Goodfellow et al., 2013; Masana et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2023) are primarily devised for small models and rely heavily on full-model fine-tuning. In MLLMs,
full-model fine-tuning on new tasks leads to heightened
computational demands, escalating data storage and training costs, thus becoming impractical with more downstream
tasks and highlighting its inefficiency for large-scale use.
Furthermore, while parameter-efficient methods like LowRank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) are designed to
reduce computational and memory burdens, they fall short
in addressing catastrophic forgetting in MLLMs. During
fine-tuning with LoRA, a substantial number of redundant

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
(Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2024; 2023e) have marked
a significant milestone in the pursuit of human-like artificial intelligence. This evolution has been accelerated by
*
Work done during internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
Department of Computer and Science, Zhejiang University 2 Tencent Youtu Lab. Correspondence to: Chao Wu
<chao.wu@zju.edu.cn>, Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

