STEER: Assessing the Economic
Rationality of Large Language Models

Narun Raman 1 Taylor Lundy 1 Samuel Joseph Amouyal 2 Yoav Levine 3 Kevin Leyton-Brown 1
Moshe Tennenholtz 4
based agents are already showing strength in planning (e.g.,
Abstract
for personal finance (Reworkd, 2023)), solving complex
There is increasing interest in using LLMs as
problems (e.g., medical diagnostics; McDuff et al., 2023),
decision-making “agents.” Doing so includes
leveraging tools (e.g., Schick et al., 2023) and playing games
many degrees of freedom: which model should
(e.g., chess; Nakajima, 2023). Better decision-making cabe used; how should it be prompted; should it be
pabilities will be critical for advancing the use of Reinasked to introspect, conduct chain-of-thought reaforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) to fine-tune
soning, etc? Settling these questions—and more
chatbots, such as constitution-based approaches (Bai et al.,
broadly, determining whether an LLM agent is
2022; Hong et al., 2023). LLMs may soon take the place of
reliable enough to be trusted—requires a methodhumans in some social science experiments (Horton, 2023;
ology for assessing such an agent’s economic
Aher et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023). Eventually, this research
rationality. In this paper, we provide one. We
agenda offers the promise of realizing the longstanding AI
begin by surveying the economic literature on radream of personalized economic agents.
tional decision making, taxonomizing a large set
How can we best configure LLMs to maximize their perof fine-grained “elements” that an agent should
formance on decision-making tasks (e.g., via prompting to
exhibit, along with dependencies between them.
perform chain-of-thought reasoning; fine-tuning; or more
We then propose a benchmark distribution called
complex architectures that make repeated calls to a model)?
STEER (Systematic and Tuneable Evaluation of
After we have done so, how well do LLM-based agents perEconomic Rationality) that quantitatively scores
form? Recent research has begun to develop testing regimes
an LLMs performance on these elements and,
that can address these questions in various restricted docombined with a user-provided rubric, produces
mains. These include various narrowly defined tasks (Liu
a “STEER report card.” Finally, we describe the
et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Yao et al.,
results of a large-scale empirical experiment with
2023); limited economic settings (Shah et al., 2022; Chen
14 different LLMs, characterizing the both curet al., 2021; Sinha and Khandait, 2020; Araci, 2019; Akata
rent state of the art and the impact of different
et al., 2023); and open-world video games (Wang et al.,
model sizes on models’ ability to exhibit rational
2023a; Zhu et al., 2023). Going beyond such problembehavior.
specific approaches to assessing decision making more
broadly requires a holistic approach to describing good decision making and explaining how it can be decomposed into
1. Introduction
different, individually testable components. One approach
is to divide decision making into distinct, ad hoc tasks, emRecently, much research has worked to leverage Large Lanphasizing those that have been clasically studied in NLP
guage Models (LLMs) to create decision-making engines,
(Liang et al., 2022; Gehrmann et al., 2021).
configuring them either to act directly as economic agents
(Cai et al., 2023; Horton, 2023; Wang et al., 2023a) or to
We advocate a different approach: enumerating first prinserve as key elements of broader systems that do so (Zhuge
ciples that describe how agents should make decisions,
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Shen et al., 2023). LLMand then evaluating an agent’s degree of adherence with
1
these principles. Answering the normative question of how
Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Tel Aviv University, Aviv, Isdecision-makers should act has been the focus of more than
rael 3 Stanford & AI21 Labs, Palo Alto, California, United States
a century of research in economics, cognitive psychology,
4
Technion & AI21 Labs, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to:
computer science, and philosophy. The resulting literature
Narun Raman <narunram@cs.ubc.ca>.
provides a mature mathematical foundation for so-called
economic rationality. The grounding principle is that agents
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
should (implicitly or explicitly) quantify their preferences
the author(s).

1

