DiNADO: Norm-Disentangled Neurally-Decomposed Oracles for Controlling
Language Models

Sidi Lu 1 Wenbo Zhao 2 Chenyang Tao 2 Arpit Gupta 2 Shanchan Wu 3 Tagyoung Chung 2 Nanyun Peng 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large pretrained generative transformers (Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020) have achieved
remarkable success in a wide range of natural language
generation tasks, such as story generation, text summarization, and question answering. Such models benefit from the
vast amount of training data to learn powerful distributions
that contain rich information about the underlying logic of
human languages.

NeurAlly-Decomposed Oracle (NADO) is a powerful approach for controllable generation with
large language models. It is designed to avoid
catastrophic forgetting while achieving guaranteed convergence to an entropy-maximized closedform optimal solution with reasonable modeling capacity. Despite the success, several challenges arise when apply NADO to a wide range
of scenarios. Vanilla NADO suffers from gradient vanishing for low-probability control signals and is highly reliant on a regularization to
satisfy the stochastic version of Bellman equation. In addition, the vanilla implementation of
NADO introduces a few additional transformer
layers, suffering from a limited capacity especially compared to other finetune-based model
adaptation methods like LoRA. In this paper, we
propose a improved version of the NADO algorithm, namely DiNADO (norm-Disentangled
NeurAlly-Decomposed Oracles), which improves
the performance of the NADO algorithm through
disentangling the step-wise global norm over the
approximated oracle R-value for all potential
next-tokens, allowing DiNADO to be combined
with finetuning methods like LoRA. We discuss
in depth how DiNADO achieves better capacity, stability and flexibility with both empirical
and theoretical results. Experiments on formality
control in machine translation and the lexically
constrained generation task CommonGen demonstrates the significance of the improvements. 1

One typical way to adapt such models for specific applications is through fine-tuning. However, there are a few
problems associated with fine-tuning: 1) The computational
efficiency of fine-tuning is highly dependent on the model’s
number of parameters. Fine-tuning some extremely large
models provided as services rather than open-sourced checkpoints can be too expensive for the majority of the community. 2) Fine-tuning on smaller datasets risks causing the
catastrophic forgetting problem. A pretrained model can
overfit to an under-represented task domain, while forgetting
important knowledge it once learned during the pre-training
stage. This is particularly a problem when the model is examined for some reasoning capabilities like compositional
generalization and/or commonsense reasoning.
Prompt-tuning (Dong et al., 2022) are recent approaches to
addressing the challenges associated with fine-tuning large
pretrained models. These approaches involve adding a few
tokens, which can be discrete natural language tokens or
continuous trainable vectors, to the input of a task. Then
instead of modifying the parameters of the model, gradientbased optimization is employed to change the embeddings
of the added tokens to maximize the probability of the model
producing a specific desired output. This allows for the
model to adapt to unseen tasks and domains with minimal
data, and can also help to avoid the catastrophic forgetting
problem associated with traditional fine-tuning methods.
However, prompt-tuning has only limited capacity, so it is
usually only effective in specific scenarios.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles 2 Amazon AGI 3 Samsung Research America; Work
was done when Shanchan and Sidi were working at Amazon. Correspondence to: Sidi Lu <sidilu@cs.ucla.edu>, Nanyun Peng <violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu>.

In-context learning, another popular approach to control/adapt models without needing to update the model
parameters, requires reading the prompt/instructive examples every time the model is executed. On one hand, this

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/PlusLabNLP/DiNADO

1

