Self-Composing Policies for Scalable Continual Reinforcement Learning

Mikel Malagón 1 Josu Ceberio 1 Jose A. Lozano 1 2

Abstract

that incrementally develop complex behavior based on previously acquired knowledge. Ideally, such agents should
learn, adapt, reuse, and transfer knowledge in a never-ending
stream of tasks (Hadsell et al., 2020).

This work introduces a growable and modular
neural network architecture that naturally avoids
catastrophic forgetting and interference in continual reinforcement learning. The structure of
each module allows the selective combination of
previous policies along with its internal policy,
accelerating the learning process on the current
task. Unlike previous growing neural network
approaches, we show that the number of parameters of the proposed approach grows linearly with
respect to the number of tasks, and does not sacrifice plasticity to scale. Experiments conducted
in benchmark continuous control and visual problems reveal that the proposed approach achieves
greater knowledge transfer and performance than
alternative methods.1

It is well known that Neural Networks (NNs) can benefit
from the experience obtained in simple problems to approach new and more complex challenges that otherwise
would hardly be solvable or would require extreme computational resources (Wang et al., 2019; Bauer et al., 2023).
However, as described by Bengio et al. (2009) and Graves
et al. (2017), NNs are highly sensitive to the order of appearance and complexity of tasks. Learning a new task can easily
harm the performance of the model in previously learned
or future tasks due to the well-known phenomena of catastrophic forgetting and interference (McCloskey & Cohen,
1989; French, 1999; Kumaran et al., 2016). To overcome the
mentioned issues, growable NN architectures (Rusu et al.,
2016; Hung et al., 2019; Gaya et al., 2023) incorporate new
NN modules every time a new task is presented. By retaining parameters learned in previous tasks, these methods
naturally overcome forgetting and interference, while knowledge is transferred between modules by sharing hidden layer
representations. However, by increasing the number of parameters, the memory cost of these models also increases.
Indeed, many of these approaches grow quadratically in the
number of parameters with respect to the number of tasks,
greatly limiting their scalability (Terekhov et al., 2015; Rusu
et al., 2016; 2017).

1. Introduction
The real world is non-stationary. Continuously learning,
acquiring new knowledge, and fine-tuning existing skills
are vital for Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents operating
within our world (Hassabis et al., 2017). Dating back to
Mnih et al. (2013), deep RL has demonstrated the ability
to outperform humans in a constantly increasing number of
tasks and domains (Badia et al., 2020; Perolat et al., 2022).
These powerful algorithms are usually trained from scratch
to operate in a stationary environment where the goal is
to solve a single well-delimited problem. On the contrary,
humans and other animals greatly benefit from previous experiences to efficiently solve novel tasks (Lawrence, 1952;
Elio & Anderson, 1984). In this realm, the Continual Reinforcement Learning (CRL) field aims to develop agents

In this paper, we present a growable NN architecture that
leverages the composition of previously learned policy modules instead of sharing hidden layer representations. This approach significantly reduces the memory and computational
cost per task required by the model. Contrarily to many
compositional NN approaches (Rosenbaum et al., 2019),
the method we introduce eliminates the need for a dedicated
NN to learn to compose the modules. Instead, modules autonomously learn to compose themselves, hence the name
self-composing policies. Illustrated in Figure 1, the architecture, called CompoNet, adds a new module to the network
each time a new task is introduced while retaining modules
learned in previous tasks. Within the NN architecture of
each module, policies from previous modules are selectively
composed together with an internal policy, accelerating the
learning process for new tasks. Direct access to previously

1

Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, DonostiaSan Sebastian, Spain 2 Basque Center for Applied Mathematics
(BCAM), Bilbao, Spain. Correspondence to: Mikel Malagón
<mikel.malagon@ehu.eus>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code available at https://github.com/mikelma/
componet.

1

