Semantically-correlated memories in a dense associative model

Thomas F Burns 1 2 3

Abstract

neurons, which was subsequently formalised in a similar
way (Nakano, 1972; Amari, 1972; Little, 1974; Stanley,
1976; Hopfield, 1982)1 . A key difference between these
associative memory and ferromagnetism models is that the
neurons are typically connected all-to-all with infinite-range
interactions whereas in the ferromagnetism models variables
were typically connected locally within a finite range.

I introduce a novel associative memory model
named Correlated Dense Associative Memory
(CDAM), which integrates both auto- and heteroassociation in a unified framework for continuousvalued memory patterns. Employing an arbitrary graph structure to semantically link memory patterns, CDAM is theoretically and numerically analysed, revealing four distinct dynamical modes: auto-association, narrow heteroassociation, wide hetero-association, and neutral
quiescence. Drawing inspiration from inhibitory
modulation studies, I employ anti-Hebbian learning rules to control the range of hetero-association,
extract multi-scale representations of community
structures in graphs, and stabilise the recall of
temporal sequences. Experimental demonstrations showcase CDAM’s efficacy in handling realworld data, replicating a classical neuroscience
experiment, performing image retrieval, and simulating arbitrary finite automata.

The principle by which these associative memory networks
store memories is by assigning recurrent connection weights
and update rules such that the energy landscape of the network forms dynamic attractors (low energy states) around
memory patterns (particular states of the neurons). In the
case of pairwise connections, these weights translate to the
synaptic strength between pairs of neurons in biological
neural networks. The network therefore acts as a content
addressable memory – given a partial or noise-corrupted
memory, the network can update its states through recurrent
dynamics to retrieve the full memory.

Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in
Mathematics, Brown University, USA 2 SciAI Center, Cornell University, USA 3 Neural Coding and Brain Computing Unit, OIST
Graduate University, Japan. Correspondence to: Thomas F Burns
<tfb43@cornell.edu>.

Of particular interest to the machine learning community
is the recent development of dense associative memory networks (Krotov & Hopfield, 2016) (also referred to as modern
Hopfield networks) and their close correspondence (Ramsauer et al., 2021) to the attention mechanism of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). In particular, the dense associative memory networks introduced by Krotov & Hopfield
(2016) (including with continuous variables) were generalised by using the SOFTMAX activation function, whereby
Ramsauer et al. (2021) showed a connection to the attention mechanism of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Indeed, Krotov & Hopfield (2016) make a mathematical
analogy between their energy-based update rule and setwise
connections given their energy-based update rule can be
interpreted as allowing individual pairs of pre- and postsynaptic neurons to make multiple synapses with each other
– making pairwise connections mathematically as strong as
equivalently-ordered setwise connections. Demircigil et al.
(2017) later proved this analogy to be accurate in terms of
theoretical memory capacity. As shown subsequently, by
explicitly modelling higher-ordered connections in such networks, the energy landscape becomes sharper and memory
capacity is increased (Burns & Fukai, 2023).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Simultaneously, work in spin glasses followed a similar mathematical trajectory in the works of Sherrington & Kirkpatrick (1975)
and Pastur & Figotin (1977).

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Mathematical models of ferromagnetism in statistical mechanics, as developed by Lenz, Ising, Schottky, and others
(Brush, 1967; Folk & Holovatch, 2022), model the interactions between collections of discrete variables. When
connected discrete variables disagree in their values, the
energy of the system increases. The system trends toward
low energy states via recurrent dynamics, but can be perturbed or biased by external input. Marr (1971) proposed a
conceptual framework of associative memory in neurobiological systems using a similar principle but of interacting
1

1

