Grokking Group Multiplication with Cosets

Dashiell Stander 1 Qinan Yu 1 2 Honglu Fan 1 3 Stella Biderman 1

Abstract

will give misleading results [1, 2, 9, 25].
Mechanistic interpretability seeks to find “neural circuits”
within deep neural networks, small sub-networks that act
as connected computation graphs and accomplish a task. In
“toy” (highly constrained) settings mechanistic interpretability has been successful, with multiple examples where the
inner workings of neural networks have been successfully
reverse engineered end-to-end [20, 40, 41, 49, 63]. There
have also been encouraging early successes in finding interpretable circuits within real-world models [18, 32, 35,
44, 57], but there is already work emerging that illustrates
how neural networks can resist common “mechanistic interpretability” methods [14, 34, 60].

The complex and unpredictable nature of deep
neural networks prevents their safe use in many
high-stakes applications. There have been many
techniques developed to interpret deep neural networks, but all have substantial limitations. Algorithmic tasks have proven to be a fruitful test
ground for interpreting a neural network end-toend. Building on previous work, we completely
reverse engineer fully connected one-hidden layer
networks that have “grokked” the arithmetic of
the permutation groups S5 and S6 . The models
discover the true subgroup structure of the full
group and converge on neural circuits that decompose the group arithmetic using the permutation
group’s subgroups. We relate how we reverse engineered the model’s mechanisms and confirmed
our theory was a faithful description of the circuit’s functionality. We also draw attention to
current challenges in conducting interpretability
research by comparing our work to Chughtai et al.
[4] which alleges to find a different algorithm for
this same problem.

The toy interpretability projects that have succeeded have
done so in large part because a distinct ground truth circuit
that encodes the true nature of the task or environment
emerged in the model. We build on this tradition and study
a model that has perfectly learned to multiply permutations
of five and six elements, which in mathematics is known as
the symmetric groups S5 and S6 , which are deeply studied
and well-understood objects [8, 10, 15]. We succeed in
completely reverse engineering the model and enumerating
the diverse circuits that it converges on to implement the
multiplication of the symmetric group. Our work does not,
however, represent an unmitigated success for the project
of mechanistic interpretability. The prior work of Chughtai
et al. [4] studied the exact same model and setting, but came
to completely different conclusions. Understanding why
our and Chughtai et al. [4]’s interpretations of the same data
diverged required extensive effort (see Appendix 7 for a
thorough comparison). We find that even in a setting as
simple and well understood as group arithmetic, it is
incredibly difficult to do interpretability research and be
confident about one’s conclusions.

1. Introduction
Many methods have been proposed to render deep neural
networks interpretable. There is both an academic interest
in understanding how neural networks do what they do
and a societal interest in ensuring that decisions made by
such models are sound, unbiased, and subject to human
review. These concerns are not new, nor are they unique to
deep neural networks. Many of the techniques developed
(such as SHAP values [33], saliency maps [52], gradient
attribution [51], dimension reduction [61], etc...) are still
widely used today, but there is an understanding that such
methods must be used as just one part of a careful analysis.
Naive applications of even the most sophisticated algorithms

Our main contributions are as follows:
• We completely reverse engineer a one-hidden layer
fully-connected network trained on the permutation
groups S5 and S6 .

1
EleutherAI 2 Brown University 3 University of Geneva. Correspondence to: Dashiell Stander <dash.stander@gmail.com>.

• We apply a methodology inspired by Geiger et al. [17]
to use causal experiments to thoroughly test all of the
properties of our proposed circuit.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We survey current research in mechanistic interpretabil1

