Graph Positional and Structural Encoder

Semih Cantürk * 1 2 Renming Liu * 3 Olivier Lapointe-Gagné 1 2 Vincent Létourneau 1 2 Guy Wolf 1 2
Dominique Beaini 1 2 4 Ladislav Rampášek 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2009) are the
dominant paradigm in graph representation learning (Hamilton et al., 2017b; Bronstein et al., 2021), spanning diverse applications across many domains in biomedicine (Yi
et al., 2022), molecular chemistry (Xia et al., 2022), and
more (Dwivedi et al., 2022a; Hu et al., 2020a; 2021; Liu
et al., 2022). For most of its relatively short history, GNN algorithms were developed within the message-passing neural
network (MPNN) framework (Gilmer et al., 2017), where
vertices exchange internal states within their neighborhoods
defined by the typically sparse graph structure. This standard MPNN framework has several fundamental limits, such
as the 1-WL bounded expressiveness (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019), under-reaching (Barceló et al., 2020), and
over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al., 2022).
Leveraging the success of the Transformer model in natural
language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), graph Transformer (GT) models were developed as a new paradigm for
GNNs to address the above limitations by attending to all
node pairs in a graph (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021). This full
attention inevitably discards the inductive biases related to
the graph structure (Battaglia et al., 2018), which MPNNs
leverage well to excel. Consequently, positional and structural encodings (PSE) have played the quintessential role in
reintroducing such inductive biases, leading to the remarkable success of GTs (Rampášek et al., 2022; Dwivedi &
Bresson, 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Ying et al., 2021).

Positional and structural encodings (PSE) enable
better identifiability of nodes within a graph, rendering them essential tools for empowering modern GNNs, and in particular graph Transformers.
However, designing PSEs that work optimally for
all graph prediction tasks is a challenging and
unsolved problem. Here, we present the Graph
Positional and Structural Encoder (GPSE), the
first-ever graph encoder designed to capture rich
PSE representations for augmenting any GNN.
GPSE learns an efficient common latent representation for multiple PSEs, and is highly transferable: The encoder trained on a particular graph
dataset can be used effectively on datasets drawn
from markedly different distributions and modalities. We show that across a wide range of benchmarks, GPSE-enhanced models can significantly
outperform those that employ explicitly computed
PSEs, and at least match their performance in others. Our results pave the way for the development
of foundational pre-trained graph encoders for
extracting positional and structural information,
and highlight their potential as a more powerful
and efficient alternative to explicitly computed
PSEs and existing self-supervised pre-training approaches. Our framework and pre-trained models
are publicly available1 . For convenience, GPSE
has also been integrated into the PyG library to
facilitate downstream applications.

While many different types of hand-crafted PSEs have been
proposed in the literature and used by various GT models,
there is no one-size-fits-all PSE that performs optimally for
all tasks. For example, random walk encodings are more
effective for molecular property prediction tasks (Rampášek
et al., 2022; Dwivedi et al., 2022b). Conversely, graph
Laplacian eigenvectors are more useful for tasks involving
long-range dependencies (Dwivedi et al., 2022c;a). Moreover, naively stacking different PSEs together does not yield
the expected gains. As a result, researchers have to rely on a
combination of heuristics, trial-and-error and domain knowhow to select the single best encoding for their respective
tasks. Developing a universal encoding that combines the
benefits of diverse hand-crafted PSEs is thus fundamental to
bringing the most performance out of existing GT models.

*

1
Equal contribution
DIRO, Université de Montréal,
2
Montréal, Canada Mila – Quebec AI Institute, Montréal, Canada 3 Department of Computational Mathematics,
Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, United States 4 Valence Labs, Montréal, Canada
5
Isomorphic Labs, London, UK. Correspondence to: Semih
Cantürk <semih.canturk@mila.quebec>, Renming Liu <liurenmi@msu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1

https://github.com/G-Taxonomy-Workgroup/GPSE

1

