Privacy-Preserving Embedding via Look-up Table Evaluation with Fully
Homomorphic Encryption

Jae-yun Kim 1 Saerom Park 2 Joohee Lee 3 Jung Hee Cheon 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) introduced by (Gentry, 2009) is a cryptographic primitive that enables computations over encrypted data without decryption. Machine
learning (ML) has permeated various domains with significant privacy implications (Chen et al., 2017; McMahan et al.,
2023; Tanuwidjaja et al., 2020). When an outsourced computation is required while maintaining data privacy, building
privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML) with FHE facilitates the utilization of sensitive data. However, most
FHE schemes only support limited operations such as multiplication, addition, and slotwise rotation with increased
memory and computations. Given these limitations, combining PPML with FHE presents a significant challenge as
ML models often involve more advanced operations.

In privacy-preserving machine learning (PPML),
homomorphic encryption (HE) has emerged as
a significant primitive, allowing the use of machine learning (ML) models while protecting the
confidentiality of input data. Although extensive
research has been conducted on implementing
PPML with HE by developing the efficient construction of private counterparts to ML models,
the efficient HE implementation of embedding
layers for token inputs such as words remains inadequately addressed. Thus, our study proposes
an efficient algorithm for privacy-preserving embedding via look-up table evaluation with HE
(HELUT) by developing an encrypted indicator function (EIF) that assures high precision
with the use of the approximate HE scheme
(CKKS). Based on the proposed EIF, we propose the CodedHELUT algorithm to facilitate
an encrypted embedding layer for the first time.
CodedHELUT leverages coded inputs to improve
overall efficiency and optimize memory usage.
Our comprehensive empirical analysis encompasses both synthetic tables and real-world largescale word embedding models. CodedHELUT
algorithm achieves amortized evaluation time of
0.018-0.242s for GloVe6B50d, 0.104-01.298s for
GloVe42300d, 0.262-3.283s for GPT-2 and BERT
embedding layers while maintaining high precision (16 bits).

Among the diverse range of FHE schemes (Brakerski et al.,
2011; 2014; Brakerski, 2012; Fan & Vercauteren, 2012), the
CKKS scheme (Cheon et al., 2017) stands out as a prominent candidate for PPML studies (Kim et al., 2018; 2020;
Boemer et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; 2022; 2020; Byun
et al., 2023), due to its plaintext space, which is adept at
handling large-sized real (or complex) vectors and offers
slot-wise approximate computations in a Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) manners. This suitability has
encouraged the widespread adoption of CKKS in PPML,
with the development of algorithms for supporting advanced
operations such as inversion (Cheon et al., 2017), comparison (Cheon et al., 2020), and statistics for various data
types (Lee et al., 2023).
While prior PPML research using FHE has focused on making ML algorithm evaluation HE-compatible, implementing
PPML for NLP tasks poses a new challenge. Unlike other
unstructured data such as images and audio that can be
readily represented as numerical vectors, NLP models often rely on memory-intensive processes to generate word
or token vectors, heavily involving Look-up Table (LUT)
operations with large-sized inputs. Thus, although we can
make the rest of ML evaluations HE-friendly, representing
client-provided natural language as HE ciphertexts can lead
to impractical ciphertext sizes and execution times. Alternatively, offloading computations to the client by sharing
partial model information for numerical embedding calcu-

1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Department of Industrial Engineering,
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, South
Korea 3 Department of Convergence Security Engineering, Sungshin Women’s University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Saerom Park <srompark@unist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

