Encodings for Prediction-based Neural Architecture Search

Yash Akhauri 1 Mohamed S. Abdelfattah 1

Abstract

with NAS is its computational cost, which can be attributed
to the sample efficiency of the NAS search algorithm, and
the cost of evaluating each NN candidate. A vast array of
search algorithms have been proposed to improve NAS sample efficiency, ranging from reinforcement learning (Zoph
& Le, 2017), to evolutionary search (Pham et al., 2018),
and differentiable methods (Liu et al., 2019). To reduce the
evaluation cost of each NN candidate, prior work has utilized reduced-training accuracy (Zhou et al., 2020) zero-cost
proxies (Abdelfattah et al., 2021), and accuracy predictors
that are sometimes referred to as surrogate models (Zela
et al., 2020). One of the most prevalent sample-based NAS
algorithms utilizes accuracy predictors to both evaluate a
candidate NN, and to navigate the search space. Recent
work has clearly demonstrated the versatility and efficiency
of prediction-based NAS (Dudziak et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2021), highlighting its importance. In this paper, we focus on understanding the makings of an efficient accuracy
predictor for NAS, and we propose improvements that significantly enhance its sample efficiency and generality.

Predictor-based methods have substantially enhanced Neural Architecture Search (NAS) optimization. The efficacy of these predictors is
largely influenced by the method of encoding neural network architectures. While traditional encodings used an adjacency matrix describing the
graph structure of a neural network, novel encodings embrace a variety of approaches from unsupervised pretraining of latent representations to
vectors of zero-cost proxies. In this paper, we categorize and investigate neural encodings from three
main types: structural, learned, and score-based.
Furthermore, we extend these encodings and introduce unified encodings, that extend NAS predictors to multiple search spaces. Our analysis draws
from experiments conducted on over 1.5 million
neural network architectures on NAS spaces such
as NASBench-101 (NB101), NB201, NB301, Network Design Spaces (NDS), and TransNASBench101. Building on our study, we present our predictor FLAN: Flow Attention for NAS. FLAN integrates critical insights on predictor design, transfer learning, and unified encodings to enable more
than an order of magnitude cost reduction for
training NAS accuracy predictors. Our implementation and encodings for all neural networks are
open-sourced at https://github.com/abdelfattahlab/flan nas.

An integral element within NAS is the encoding method
to represent NN architectures. Consequently, an important
question arises, how can we encode NNs to improve NAS
efficiency? This question has been studied in the past by
White et al. (2020), investigating the effect of graph-based
encodings such as adjacency matrices or path enumeration
to represent NN architectures. However, recent research
has introduced a plethora of new methods for encoding
NNs which rely on concepts ranging from unsupervised
auto-encoders, zero-cost proxies, and clustering NNs by
computational similarity to learn latent representations. This
motivates an updated study on NN encodings for NAS to
compare their relative performance and to elucidate the
properties of effecive encodings to improve NAS efficiency.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has
emerged as an important methodology to automate neural network design. NAS consists of three components: (1)
a neural network search space that contains a large number
of candidate Neural Networks (NNs), (2) a search algorithm
that navigates that search space, and (3) optimization objectives such as NN accuracy and latency. A key challenge

We identify three key categories of encodings. Structural
encodings (White et al., 2020) represent the graph structure of the NN architecture in the form of an adjacency
matrix or path enumeration, typically represented by an operation matrix to identify the operation at each edge or node.
Score-based (Akhauri & Abdelfattah, 2023) encodings map
architectures to a vector of measurements such as Zero-Cost
Proxies (Lee et al.; Tanaka et al., 2020; Mellor et al., 2021).
Finally, Learned encodings learn latent representations of
the architecture space. They can be further bifurcated into

1
Cornell University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Yash
Akhauri <ya255@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

