Dynamic Metric Embedding into ℓp Space

Kiarash Banihashem 1 MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi 1 Dariusz R. Kowalski 2 Jan Olkowski 1 Max Springer 3

Abstract

in the algorithm design literature (Indyk, 2001). This effectiveness stems primarily from the ability to represent
any graph G using a metric, wherein distances correspond
to the shortest paths between two nodes. However, computing numerous graph properties within such a metric is
inherently challenging. Thus, by first embedding the graph
into an “easy” metric, we can facilitate simplified problemsolving, albeit with an approximation factor determined
by the distortion introduced by the embedding. For example, approximation algorithms for the sparsest cut (Linial
et al., 1995), bandwidth (Blum et al., 1998) and buy-at-bulk
(Awerbuch & Azar, 1997b) graph problems leverage embeddings into low-distortion metric spaces to obtain their
near-optimal guarantees.

We give the first non-trivial decremental dynamic
embedding of a weighted, undirected graph G
into ℓp space. Given a weighted graph G undergoing a sequence of edge weight increases, the
goal of this problem is to maintain a (randomized) mapping ϕ : (G, d) → (X, ℓp ) from the
set of vertices of the graph to the ℓp space such
that for every pair of vertices u and v, the expected distance between ϕ(u) and ϕ(v) in the ℓp
metric is within a small multiplicative factor, referred to as the distortion, of their distance in G.
Our main result is a dynamic algorithm with expected distortion O(log2 n) and total update time
O (m1+o(1) log2 W + Q) log(nW ) , where W
is the maximum weight of the edges, Q is the
total number of updates and n, m denote the number of vertices and edges in G respectively. This
is the first result of its kind, extending the seminal result of Bourgain (Bourgain, 1985) to the
expanding field of dynamic algorithms. Moreover, we demonstrate that in the fully dynamic
regime, where we tolerate edge insertions as well
as deletions, no algorithm can explicitly maintain an embedding into ℓp space that has a low
distortion with high probability.

In the present work, we investigate fundamental embedding
problems in the dynamic setting, where the input graph G
is subject to modification at each iteration by an adversary.
Specifically, we address the following question:
Problem 1. Is it possible to embed any graph G, undergoing
a dynamic sequence of edge updates, into Euclidean (and
more broadly the ℓp -metric) space with minimal distortion
of the underlying metric’s pairwise distances?
Unsurprisingly, the use of randomization is essential in
demonstrating that such a data structure is indeed attainable. Most notably, we build upon the fundamental building
blocks of Bourgain, Johnson and Lindenstrauss in further
demonstrating the power of randomized decompositions of a
graph to efficiently map such an input, undergoing dynamic
updates, into Euclidean space for ease of computation with
only polylogarithmic expected distortion of the original distances between nodes of G. These are the first results of
their kind in the dynamic input setting.

1. Introduction
A low distortion embedding between two metric spaces,
M = (X, d) and M ′ = (X ′ , d′ ), is a mapping f such that
for every pair of points x, y ∈ X we have
d(x, y) ≤ d′ (f (x), f (y)) ≤ C · d(x, y) ,
where C is often referred to as the distortion of such an embedding. Low-distortion embeddings have been extensively
employed to simplify graph theoretic problems prevalent

1.1. Motivation
Metric Embedding. From a mathematical perspective, embeddings of finite metric spaces into normed spaces is a
natural extension on the local theory of Banach spaces (J.,
2002). The goal of this area of research is to devise mappings, f , that preserve pairwise distances up to an additive
or multiplicative distortion. In tandem to ensuring this metric is not too heavily distorted, we also seek to ensure that
the resulting embedding of a point in the original space
has low-dimension (i.e. can be represented by small number of coordinates) to ensure the representation is spacially

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, USA 2 School of Computer and Cyber Sciences,
Augusta University, Georgia, USA 3 Department of Mathematics,
University of Maryland, College Park, USA. Correspondence to:
Max Springer <mss423@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

