Model-Free Robust φ-Divergence Reinforcement Learning
Using Both Offline and Online Data

Kishan Panaganti 1 Adam Wierman 1 Eric Mazumdar 1

Abstract

in semiconductors (Mirhoseini et al., 2021), fast transform
computations in mathematics (Fawzi et al., 2022), and more.
However, online RL agents (Botvinick et al., 2019) are
known to suffer sample inefficiency due to complex exploration strategies in sophisticated environments. To overcome
this, learning from available historical data has been studied
using offline RL protocols (Levine et al., 2020). However,
offline RL agents suffer from out-of-data-distribution (Yang
et al., 2021; Robey et al., 2020) due to the lack of online exploration. Recent work Song et al. (2023) proposes another
learning setting called hybrid RL that makes the best of
both offline and online RL worlds. In particular, hybrid RL
agents have access to both offline data (to reduce exploration
overhead) and online interaction with the environment (to
mitigate the out-of-data-distribution issue).

The robust φ-regularized Markov Decision Process (RRMDP) framework focuses on designing
control policies that are robust against parameter
uncertainties due to mismatches between the simulator (nominal) model and real-world settings.
This work makes two important contributions.
First, we propose a model-free algorithm called
Robust φ-regularized fitted Q-iteration for learning an ε-optimal robust policy that uses only the
historical data collected by rolling out a behavior policy (with robust exploratory requirement)
on the nominal model. To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first unified analysis for a
class of φ-divergences achieving robust optimal
policies in high-dimensional systems of arbitrary
large state space with general function approximation. Second, we introduce the hybrid robust
φ-regularized reinforcement learning framework
to learn an optimal robust policy using both historical data and online sampling. Towards this
framework, we propose a model-free algorithm
called Hybrid robust Total-variation-regularized
Q-iteration. To the best of our knowledge, we
provide the first improved out-of-data-distribution
assumption in large-scale problems of arbitrary
large state space with general function approximation under the hybrid robust φ-regularized reinforcement learning framework.

All three of these approaches (online, offline, and hybrid
RL) require training environments (simulators) that closely
represent real-world environments. However, time-varying
real-world environments (Maraun, 2016), sensor degradations (Chen et al., 1996), and other adversarial disturbances
in practice (Pioch et al., 2009) mean that even high-fidelity
simulators are not enough (Schmidt et al., 2015; Shah et al.,
2018). RL agents are known to fail due to these mismatches
between training and testing environments (Sünderhauf
et al., 2018; Lesort et al., 2020). As a result, robust RL
(Mankowitz et al., 2020; Panaganti & Kalathil, 2021a) has
received increasing attention due to the potential for it to
alleviate the issue of mismatches between the simulator and
real-world environments.
Robust RL agents are built using the robust Markov Decision Process (RMDP) (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2005) framework. In this framework, the goal is to find
an optimal policy that is robust, i.e., performs uniformly
well across a set of models (transition probability functions).
This is formulated via a max-min problem, and the set of
models is typically constructed around a simulator model
(transition probability function) with some notion of divergence or distance function. We refer to the simulator model
as any nominal model that is provided to RL agents.

1. Introduction
Online Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents learn through
online interactions and exploration in environments and
have been shown to perform well in structured domains such
as Chess and Go (Silver et al., 2018), fast chip placements
1

Computing + Mathematical Sciences Department, California
Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Kishan Panaganti
<kpb@caltech.edu>.

The RMDP framework in RL is identical to the Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) framework in supervised
learning (Duchi & Namkoong, 2018; Chen et al., 2020).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

