SimPro: A Simple Probabilistic Framework
Towards Realistic Long-Tailed Semi-Supervised Learning

Chaoqun Du * 1 Yizeng Han * 1 Gao Huang 1

Abstract

Realistic Long-tailed semi-supervised learning (ReaLTSSL)
Unlabeled data distribution is inconsistent with labeled data and unknown

Recent advancements in semi-supervised learning
have focused on a more realistic yet challenging task: addressing imbalances in labeled data
while the class distribution of unlabeled data remains both unknown and potentially mismatched.
Current approaches in this sphere often presuppose rigid assumptions regarding the class distribution of unlabeled data, thereby limiting the
adaptability of models to only certain distribution ranges. In this study, we propose a novel
approach, introducing a highly adaptable framework, designated as SimPro, which does not rely
on any predefined assumptions about the distribution of unlabeled data. Our framework, grounded
in a probabilistic model, innovatively refines the
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm by explicitly decoupling the modeling of conditional
and marginal class distributions. This separation
facilitates a closed-form solution for class distribution estimation during the maximization phase,
leading to the formulation of a Bayes classifier.
The Bayes classifier, in turn, enhances the quality
of pseudo-labels in the expectation phase. Remarkably, the SimPro framework not only comes
with theoretical guarantees but also is straightforward to implement. Moreover, we introduce two
novel class distributions broadening the scope of
the evaluation. Our method showcases consistent state-of-the-art performance across diverse
benchmarks and data distribution scenarios. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
LeapLabTHU/SimPro.

Labeled
Consistent
Uniform
Reverse
(a) Previous studies: assuming some distributions for unlabeled data
Labeled

Unlabeled

?

Arbitrary
Middle
Head-tail
(b) Our SimPro: a simple probabilistic framework for a more realistic
scenario, making no assumption on the unlabeled data distribution

Figure 1. The general idea of SimPro addressing the ReaLTSSL
problem. (a) Current methods typically rely on predefined or
assumed class distribution patterns for unlabeled data, limiting
their applicability. (b) In contrast, our SimPro embraces a more
realistic scenario by introducing a simple and elegant framework
that operates effectively without making any assumptions about
the distribution of unlabeled data. This paradigm shift allows for
greater flexibility and applicability in diverse ReaLTSSL scenarios.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) offers a viable solution
to the scarcity of labeled data by leveraging unlabeled
data (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Berthelot et al., 2019b;
Miyato et al., 2018; Sohn et al., 2020). Common SSL algorithms typically generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled data
to facilitate model training (Lee et al., 2013). However,
real-world data often adheres to a long-tailed distribution,
leading to a predominant focus on majority classes and resulting in imbalanced pseudo-labels (Liu et al., 2019; Kang
et al., 2020; Du et al., 2024). This phenomenon, known
as long-tailed semi-supervised learning (LTSSL), presents
significant challenges in the field. Traditional LTSSL methods (Lai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; 2021;
Kim et al., 2020) assume consistency in class distributions
between labeled and unlabeled data, an often unrealistic
premise. In practice, class distributions can be inconsistent and unknown, especially as new data are continuously
collected or from different tasks. This ongoing integration
process can lead to significant shifts in class distributions.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Gao Huang
<gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

