Causal Inference from Competing Treatments

Ana-Andreea Stoica 1 Vivian Yvonne Nastl 1 2 Moritz Hardt 1

Abstract

Given the abundance of experimentation, an agent who
wishes to measure the effect of their treatment through an
RCT may not be alone in doing so. Competing treatments
arise when multiple agents share the population on which
they wish to experiment. Subjects may then receive multiple
treatments sequentially determined by some form of competition between the treatment administrators. Treatments that
came before may modify the effectiveness of subsequent
treatments. Precisely estimating effects therefore becomes
challenging under competition: sequential treatments may
pose the issue of external validity (Duflo, 2006) or mislead
companies in their assessment of products (e.g. as the
click-through-rate plummets for low-position content).

Many applications of RCTs involve the presence
of multiple treatment administrators—from field
experiments to online advertising—that compete
for the subjects’ attention. In the face of competition, estimating a causal effect becomes difficult,
as the position at which a subject sees a treatment
influences their response, and thus the treatment
effect. In this paper, we build a game-theoretic
model of agents who wish to estimate causal effects in the presence of competition, through a bidding system and a utility function that minimizes
estimation error. Our main technical result establishes an approximation with a tractable objective
that maximizes the sample value obtained through
strategically allocating budget on subjects. This
allows us to find an equilibrium in our model: we
show that the tractable objective has a pure Nash
equilibrium, and that any Nash equilibrium is an
approximate equilibrium for our general objective
that minimizes estimation error under broad conditions. Conceptually, our work successfully combines elements from causal inference and game
theory to shed light on the equilibrium behavior
of experimentation under competition.

Our concrete running example is online advertising. Multiple advertisers wish to estimate the effectiveness of their
campaign. However, due to competition between advertisers, their ad will be displayed at a certain position on
screen. The lower the rank of the ad, the lesser its effectiveness (Agarwal et al., 2011). Running the campaign, an
advertiser collects data of impressions and clicks on ads
displayed at different ranks. From this data, the advertiser
wishes to answer the question:
What would have been the effect of the treatment
had it been the first treatment applied?
In other words, how effective is the ad if it is displayed in
the top rank? Equipped with knowledge of this effect, an
advertiser can distinguish between two scenarios: (1) an ad
was not effective because it was mostly displayed at lower
ranks, or (2) an ad was not effective because of its design.
An advertiser can then take appropriate action to increase
its effectiveness in subsequent campaigns. The advertiser
faces two problems: one game-theoretic, the other statistical.
First, how should the advertiser bid on subjects, anticipating
that other advertisers will bid strategically, too? Second,
how should data from different ranks be weighted optimally
to obtain the best possible estimate of the causal effect?

1. Introduction
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have become
ubiquitous in a variety of fields, to the point that they are
“not so much the ‘gold standard’ as just a standard tool
in the toolbox” (Banerjee et al., 2016). Application areas
range from A/B testing in industry to informing policy
choices at a large scale (Levy, 2007; Alatas et al., 2012;
de Souza Leão & Eyal, 2019).
1
Social Foundations of Computation, Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany and Tübingen AI
Center, Germany 2 Department of Mathematics, ETH Zürich,
Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ana-Andreea Stoica <astoica@tuebingen.mpg.edu>, Vivian Yvonne Nastl <vivian.nastl@tuebingen.mpg.de>.

Specifically, we show what the optimal estimation error is
that an advertiser can achieve at equilibrium in a game that
models the competition between advertisers. In other words,
our work shows how to spend an experimental budget
rationally on subjects when the goal is to estimate a causal
effect optimally.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

