Improving Neural Additive Models with Bayesian Principles

Kouroche Bouchiat 1 Alexander Immer 1 2 Hugo Yèche 1 Gunnar Rätsch 1 Vincent Fortuin 3 4 5

Abstract

explaining predictions in machine learning, but the explanations they generate for DNNs are not faithful representations of their full complexity (Rudin, 2019). Instead, one
can enhance transparency in DNNs by acting directly on
the architecture and training procedure. For instance, in
generalized additive models (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1999),
the response variable y is associated with inputs x1 , ..., xp
using an additive structure of the form

Neural additive models (NAMs) enhance the
transparency of deep neural networks by handling
input features in separate additive sub-networks.
However, they lack inherent mechanisms that provide calibrated uncertainties and enable selection
of relevant features and interactions. Approaching
NAMs from a Bayesian perspective, we augment
them in three primary ways, namely by a) providing credible intervals for the individual additive
sub-networks; b) estimating the marginal likelihood to perform an implicit selection of features
via an empirical Bayes procedure; and c) facilitating the ranking of feature pairs as candidates
for second-order interaction in fine-tuned models.
In particular, we develop Laplace-approximated
NAMs (LA-NAMs), which show improved empirical performance on tabular datasets and challenging real-world medical tasks.

g(E[y | x1 , . . . , xp ]) = β0 + f1 (x1 ) + · · · + fp (xp ). (1)
The neural additive models (NAMs) introduced by Agarwal
et al. (2021) hinge on this concept. In this model architecture, each input dimension is processed by a distinct
sub-network, elucidating the connections between the input
features and the model’s predictions. However, restricting
neural network models in this way can lead to overconfidence, overreliance on uninformative features and obliviousness to underlying feature interactions.
Main contributions. In this work, we (a) propose a
Bayesian variant of the NAM by deriving a tailored linearized Laplace inference (MacKay, 1996) on the subnetworks. We show that this improves intelligibility by encouraging smoothness and enhancing uncertainty estimation.
Moreover, (b) this construction enables the estimation of
the marginal likelihood, which serves as a Bayesian model
selection criterion. This enables the model to mitigate the
impact of uninformative features, further contributing to
robustness and trustworthiness. Also, (c) in situations where
strong feature interaction exists in the ground-truth, causing poor performance of first-order additive models, we
leverage our Laplace approximation to automatically select
informative feature interactions, which are then added
to the model to improve overall performance. Finally, (d)
we show on tabular regression and classifications benchmarks, as well as on challenging real-world medical tasks,
that our proposed LA - NAM performs competitively with the
baselines while offering more interpretable global and local
explanations, all within a same framework.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
found successful applications in numerous fields, ranging
from computer vision and speech recognition to natural
language processing and recommendation systems. This
success is often attributed to the growing availability of data
in all areas of science and industry. However, the inherent
complexity and lack of transparency of DNNs have impeded
their use in domains where understanding the reasoning
behind their decision-making process is important (Pumplun
et al., 2021; Veale et al., 2018).
Model-agnostic methods, such as partial dependence (Friedman, 2001), SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), and LIME
(Ribeiro et al., 2016), provide a standardized approach to
1
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Helmholtz AI, Munich,
Germany 4 TU Munich, Munich, Germany 5 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Kouroche
Bouchiat <kouroche.bouchiat@gmail.com>, Alexander Immer
<alexander.immer@inf.ethz.ch>.

2. Related Work
Neural additive models. Several constructions exist for
the generalized additive models (GAMs) of Hastie & Tibshirani (1999), including smoothing splines (Wahba, 1983) and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

