Stochastic Localization via Iterative Posterior Sampling

Louis Grenioux * 1 Maxence Noble * 1 Marylou Gabrié 1 Alain Durmus 1
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers are among
the most common approaches for this task with a wide
span of applicability. In addition, under appropriate conditions on the target, theoretical guarantees can be derived
(Dalalyan, 2017; Durmus & Moulines, 2017). However,
for complex distributions, simple MCMC algorithms have
some limitations. As a workaround, it has been suggested
to solve the problem progressively, targeting intermediate
smoothed distributions. The resulting algorithms include
Replica Exchange (Swendsen & Wang, 1986), Annealed
Importance Sampling (Neal, 2001) and Sequential Monte
Carlo (Del Moral et al., 2006). Nevertheless, these methods can still largely struggle in high-dimensional settings.
To address this issue, approximate inference methods such
as Variational Inference (VI) (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008)
have emerged, in connection with deep generative models
such as Variational Auto-Encoders (Rezende et al., 2014;
Kingma & Welling, 2014) or Normalizing Flows (Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015).

Abstract
Building upon score-based learning, new interest in stochastic localization techniques has recently emerged. In these models, one seeks to
noise a sample from the data distribution through
a stochastic process, called observation process,
and progressively learns a denoiser associated to
this dynamics. Apart from specific applications,
the use of stochastic localization for the problem
of sampling from an unnormalized target density
has not been explored extensively. This work contributes to fill this gap. We consider a general
stochastic localization framework and introduce
an explicit class of observation processes, associated with flexible denoising schedules. We provide a complete methodology, Stochastic Localization via Iterative Posterior Sampling (SLIPS),
to obtain approximate samples of this dynamics, and as a by-product, samples from the target
distribution. Our scheme is based on a Markov
chain Monte Carlo estimation of the denoiser and
comes with detailed practical guidelines. We illustrate the benefits and applicability of SLIPS
on several benchmarks of multi-modal distributions, including Gaussian mixtures in increasing
dimensions, Bayesian logistic regression and a
high-dimensional field system from statisticalmechanics.

In contrast to “density-based sampling”, which is the setting considered in the present work, generative modeling
assumes the availability of training samples and aims to
generate similar realizations. Henceforth, we refer to generative modeling as “data-based sampling” as opposed to
“density-based sampling”. Diffusion-based generative models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021) now constitute the state-of-the-art of data-based sampling. In these models, noise is progressively added to
the training samples via a forward stochastic process. The
derivatives of the logarithm of the forward marginal densities, called scores, are learned via score matching techniques
(Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Vincent, 2011), and new samples are obtained by simulating the backward process using
the learned scores. This approach to generative modeling
has been found to scale well with dimension in a large variety of applications (Rombach et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021;
Nichol et al., 2022) and comes with theoretical guarantees
(Chen et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
We consider in this paper the problem of sampling from a
probability density known up to a normalization constant.
This problem finds its origin in various tasks, ranging from
Bayesian statistics (Kroese et al., 2011) to statistical mechanics (Krauth, 2006), including now generative modeling
(Turner et al., 2019; Grenioux et al., 2023a).
*
Equal contribution 1 CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 91120 Palaiseau, France. Correspondence to: Louis Grenioux <louis.grenioux@polytechnique.edu>,
Maxence Noble <maxence.noble-bourillot@polytechnique.edu>.

Extending diffusion-based model techniques to densitybased sampling proves challenging as it requires an efficient estimator of the score without samples of the target.
Relying on the link made with stochastic optimal control
(Tzen & Raginsky, 2019; De Bortoli et al., 2021; Holdijk
et al., 2023; Pavon, 2022), several VI methods using deep

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

