T IME X++: Learning Time-Series Explanations with Information Bottleneck

Zichuan Liu 1 2 * Tianchun Wang 3 * Jimeng Shi 4 Xu Zheng 4 Zhuomin Chen 4 Lei Song 2
Wenqian Dong 4 Jayantha Obeysekera 4 Farhad Shirani 4 Dongsheng Luo 4
TimeX

Abstract
Explaining deep learning models operating on
time series data is crucial in various applications
of interest which require interpretable and transparent insights from time series signals. In this
work, we investigate this problem from an information theoretic perspective and show that
most existing measures of explainability may
suffer from trivial solutions and distributional
shift issues. To address these issues, we introduce a simple yet practical objective function
for time series explainable learning. The design
of the objective function builds upon the principle of information bottleneck (IB), and modifies the IB objective function to avoid trivial solutions and distributional shift issues. We further
present T IME X++, a novel explanation framework that leverages a parametric network to produce explanation-embedded instances that are
both in-distributed and label-preserving. We evaluate T IME X++ on both synthetic and real-world
datasets comparing its performance against leading baselines, and validate its practical efficacy
through case studies in a real-world environmental application. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that T IME X++ outperforms baselines across all datasets, demonstrating a substantial improvement in explanation quality for
time series data. The source code is available
at https://github.com/zichuan-liu/
TimeXplusplus.

Consistency
is needed

White-box 𝐸
𝑓
latent
embeddings

Black-box
𝑓
latent
embeddings

nance (Bento et al., 2021), healthcare (Kaushik et al., 2020),
and environmental science (Adebayo et al., 2021). Despite
its successes, a critical limitation of deep learning in time
series analysis is the lack of explainability, which is crucial
for gaining trust and actionable insights in these sensitive
and impactful domains. For instance, in environmental science, the ability to explain deep learning predictions is vital
for understanding complex ecological dynamics and making informed, impactful policy decisions (Reichstein et al.,
2019; Razavi, 2021; Adebayo et al., 2021).

Deep learning has become a cornerstone technology in analyzing time series data, prevalent in scenarios such as fi1

Black-box
𝑓
latent
embeddings

TimeX++

Figure 1. A comparison of our model and the reference model,
where the latent embeddings of explanations are learned from the
ECG dataset. Our explanations are within the original distribution,
whereas explanations of the reference model are not.

1. Introduction

*

Original time series

Current efforts in enhancing explainability in deep learning for time series analysis primarily focus on pinpointing
significant locations of time series signals that dominate
the model’s prediction in a post-hoc sense. For example,
Shi et al. (2023a) explained their trained models for water
level prediction using LIME, a local interpretable modelagnostic explanation technique (Ribeiro et al., 2016). On
top of this intuitive principle, perturbation-based methods,

2

Equal contribution Nanjing University Microsoft Research
Asia 3 Pennsylvania State University 4 Florida International University. Correspondence to: Farhad Shirani <fshirani@fiu.edu>,
Dongsheng Luo <dluo@fiu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

