A General Framework for Sequential Decision-Making under Adaptivity
Constraints
Nuoya Xiong 1 Zhaoran Wang 2 Zhuoran Yang 3

Abstract

et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019), robotic control (Akkaya
et al., 2019), healthcare (Yu et al., 2021), hardware device
placement (Mirhoseini et al., 2017), recommender systems
(Zou et al., 2020), and so on.

We take the first step in studying general sequential decision-making under two adaptivity constraints: rare policy switch and batch learning.
First, we provide a general class called the Eluder
Condition class, which includes a wide range of
reinforcement learning classes. Then, for the rare
policy switch constraint, we provide a generic
e
algorithm √
to achieve a O(log
K) switching cost
e
with a O( K) regret on the EC class. For the
batch learning constraint,
√ we provide an algoe K + K/B) regret with
rithm that provides a O(
the number of batches B. This paper is the first
work considering rare policy switch and batch
learning under general function classes, which
covers nearly all the models studied in the previous works such as tabular MDP (Bai et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020), linear MDP (Wang et al.,
2021; Gao et al., 2021), low eluder dimension
MDP (Kong et al., 2021; Velegkas et al., 2022),
generalized linear function approximation (Qiao
et al., 2023), and also some new classes such as
the low D∆ -type Bellman eluder dimension problem, linear mixture MDP, kernelized nonlinear
regulator and undercomplete partially observed
Markov decision process (POMDP).

1

In the online setting, an RL algorithm iteratively finds the
optimal policy of the sequential decision-making problem
by (i) deploying the current policy to gather data and (ii)
using the collected data to learn an improved policy. Most
of provably sample efficient algorithms in the existing literature consider an ideal setting where policy updates can
be fully adaptive, i.e., the policy can be updated after each
episode, using the data sampled from this newly finished
episode. From a practical perspective, however, updating
the policy after each episode can be unrealistic, especially
when computation resources are limited, or the cost of policy switching is prohibitively high, or the data is not fully
serial. For example, in recommender systems, it is unrealistic to change the policy after each instantaneous data such
as a click of one of the customers. Moreover, the customers
might not come in a serial manner – it is possible that multiple customers arrive at the same time and we need to make
simultaneous decisions. Similarly, when the RL algorithms
are deployed on the large-scale hardwares, changing a policy may need recompiling the code or changing the physical
placement for devices, incurring considerable switching
costs. Thus, when it comes to designing RL algorithms in
these scenarios, in addition to achieving sample efficiency,
we also aim to reduce or limit the number of policy switches.

Introduction

Such an additional restriction is known as the adaptivity
constraints (Wang et al., 2021). There are two common
types of adaptivity constraints: the rare policy switch constraint (Perchet et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2021) and the batch
learning constraint (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011). With the
rare policy switch constraint, the agent adaptively decides
when to update the policy during the course of the online
reinforcement learning, and the goal is to achieve the sample
efficiency that is comparable to the fully adaptive setting,
while minimizing the number of policy switches. With the
batch learning constraint, the total number of batches B is
pre-determined, and the agent has to follow the same policy
within each batch. In other words, the number of policy
switches is limited by the number of batches. In addition
to designing the policies used in each batch, the agent addi-

Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a systematic framework for solving large-scale sequential decision-making
problems and has demonstrated striking empirical successes
across various domains (Li, 2017), including games (Silver
*

Equal contribution 1 IIIS, Tsinghua University, China
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, USA 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University, USA. Correspondence to: Nuoya Xiong <nuoyaxiong@gmail.com>, Zhuoran Yang <zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

