Optimal Eye Surgeon: Finding image priors through sparse generators at
initialization
Avrajit Ghosh 1 Xitong Zhang 1 Kenneth Sun 2 Qing Qu 2 Saiprasad Ravishankar 1 3 Rongrong Wang 1

Abstract
We introduce Optimal Eye Surgeon (OES), a
framework for pruning and training deep image
generator networks. Typically, untrained deep
convolutional networks, which include image
sampling operations, serve as effective image priors (Ulyanov et al., 2018). However, they tend
to overfit to noise in image restoration tasks due
to being overparameterized. OES addresses this
by adaptively pruning networks at random initialization to a level of underparameterization. This
process effectively captures low-frequency image
components even without training, by just masking. When trained to fit noisy image, these pruned
subnetworks, which we term Sparse-DIP, resist
overfitting to noise. This benefit arises from underparameterization and the regularization effect
of masking, constraining them in the manifold of
image priors (Figure-3). We demonstrate that subnetworks pruned through OES surpass other leading pruning methods, such as the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis, which is known to be suboptimal
for image recovery tasks (Wu et al., 2023). Our
extensive experiments demonstrate the transferability of OES-masks and the characteristics of
sparse-subnetworks for image generation. Code
is available at https://github.com/Avra98/OptimalEye-Surgeon.git.

Figure 1. Sparse-DIP lessens overfitting

Figure 2. Sparse-DIPs are transferrable

better. Eventually, it was found that sufficiently sparse subnetworks can be found within these deep dense networks
that can reach as high test accuracy as their dense counterparts. These sparse networks are called matching subnetworks. This led researchers to further study neural network
pruning. However, the impact of overparameterization in
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) hasn’t been
thoroughly studied for image reconstruction and inversion
tasks although overparameterization is important in many
image recovery tasks. Jin et al. (2017) empirically showed
that trained deep CNNs are better substitutes to regularized
iterative algorithms and direct inversion (Katsaggelos, 1989).
The initial works further led to deploying deep convolutional
networks inside the typical iterative image reconstruction
framework, where it is fused with the physics or the forward
model of the image generation problem (Venkatakrishnan

1. Introduction
Overparameterization has been central to the success of deep
learning especially in image classification tasks. Empirically it is observed that bigger models (at scale) generalize
1

Department of Computational Mathematics, Science and
Engineering (CMSE), Michigan State University, MI, USA.
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS), University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Michigan State
University, MI, USA. Correspondence to: Avrajit Ghosh
<ghoshavr@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

