Position: Tensor Networks are a Valuable Asset for Green AI
Eva Memmel 1 Clara Menzen 1 Jetze Schuurmans 2 Frederiek Wesel 1 Kim Batselier 1

Abstract

sequently, AI development and data availability are deeply
intertwined, and they have a common characteristic: both
are growing exponentially (Wu et al., 2021). While this
wealth of information is opening the doors for extraordinary
opportunities, the downside of this development cannot be
ignored: AI research on a large scale has adverse side effects
on economic, social, and environmental sustainability. Let
us consider the example from Strubell et al. that analyzes
the energy required for training popular off-the-shelf natural
language processing models (2019). The training causes
CO2 emissions up to 280 000 kg and cloud computing costs
up to 3 million dollars. As a comparison, a person could fly
more than 300 times between Amsterdam and New York to
emit the same amount of CO2 (myclimate, 2024).

For the first time, this position paper introduces a
fundamental link between tensor networks (TNs)
and Green AI, highlighting their synergistic potential to enhance both the inclusivity and sustainability of AI research. We argue that TNs are
valuable for Green AI due to their strong mathematical backbone and inherent logarithmic compression potential. We undertake a comprehensive
review of the ongoing discussions on Green AI,
emphasizing the importance of sustainability and
inclusivity in AI research to demonstrate the significance of establishing the link between Green
AI and TNs. To support our position, we first
provide a comprehensive overview of efficiency
metrics proposed in Green AI literature and then
evaluate examples of TNs in the fields of kernel
machines and deep learning using the proposed
efficiency metrics. This position paper aims to
incentivize meaningful, constructive discussions
by bridging fundamental principles of Green AI
and TNs. We advocate for researchers to seriously evaluate the integration of TNs into their
research projects, and in alignment with the link
established in this paper, we support prior calls encouraging researchers to treat Green AI principles
as a research priority.

On another note, Schwartz et al. argued that one of the reasons for the unsustainable development in AI research is unfortunately anchored in what the AI community commonly
defines as state-of-the-art results (2020), namely focusing
on accuracy or similar measures. They claim that to obtain
more accurate results, the number of model parameters and
hyperparameters is increased, as well as the size of the training data. The result is an exponentially growing demand
for compute used to train AI models (Schwartz et al., 2020).
This development is not only unsustainable from an environmental and economic point of view but also from a social
one: this exponential growth has a large carbon footprint, is
expensive, and excludes researchers with fewer resources
(Schwartz et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2023).
The problems associated with the unsustainable development of AI have led to a growing awareness in the AI
community. Several researchers call for redirecting the
focus of AI research by implementing efficiency as an additional benchmark alongside accuracy to assess algorithmic
progress (Schwartz et al., 2020; Strubell et al., 2020; Tamburrini, 2022). In fact, efficiency has always been the primary criterion to measure algorithmic progress in computer
science (Knuth, 1976; 1973; Cormen et al., 2022). Inspired
by this, a similar approach can be adapted to AI algorithms.
For this purpose, different metrics have been proposed in
the literature, e.g. estimating the carbon footprint, reporting
the energy consumption, or stating the number of floatingpoint operations (FLOPS) (Lacoste et al., 2019; Henderson
et al., 2020; Lannelongue et al., 2021). In this context, a new
vocabulary has been suggested in (Schwartz et al., 2020). It

1. Introduction
More than ever, we have access to data sets throughout
almost all science and engineering disciplines. Fueling
our economies and shaping our society, data is therefore
considered the oil of the 21st century. At the same time,
AI algorithms become increasingly powerful to transform
large amounts of raw data into valuable information. Con1

Delft Center of Systems and Control, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands 2 Xebia
Data, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Correspondence to:
Eva Memmel <e.m.memmel@tudelft.nl>, Kim Batselier
<k.batselier@tudelft.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

