BOtied: Multi-objective Bayesian optimization with tied multivariate ranks

Ji Won Park * 1 Nataša Tagasovska * 1 Michael Maser 1 Stephen Ra 1 Kyunghyun Cho 1 2 3
Hypervolume

Abstract

0.3

0.6


Candidates
Reference point

Objective 1
Dominated region

0.3

4

3
3


1

0.4
0.3

Objective 1

Multivariate Ranks
0.9

0.6

Objective 2

Many scientific and industrial applications require
the joint optimization of multiple, potentially competing objectives. Multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) is a sample-efficient framework for identifying Pareto-optimal solutions. At
the heart of MOBO is the acquisition function,
which determines the next candidate to evaluate
by navigating the best compromises among the
objectives. Acquisition functions that rely on integrating over the objective space scale poorly to a
large number of objectives. In this paper, we show
a natural connection between the non-dominated
solutions and the highest multivariate rank, which
coincides with the extreme level line of the joint
cumulative distribution function (CDF). Motivated by this link, we propose the CDF indicator, a Pareto-compliant metric for evaluating the
quality of approximate Pareto sets, that can complement the popular hypervolume indicator. We
then introduce an acquisition function based on
the CDF indicator, called BOtied. BOtied can be
implemented efficiently with copulas, a statistical tool for modeling complex, high-dimensional
distributions. Our experiments on a variety of
synthetic and real-world experiments demonstrate
that BOtied outperforms state-of-the-art MOBO
algorithms while being computationally efficient
for many objectives.

CDF Scores

2
1

1

Objective 1
Level lines of CDF
True Pareto front (unknown)

Figure 1. Illustration of the conceptual link between the empirical
Pareto front probed by the HV indicator and innermost level line
of the CDF probed by the BOtied CDF indicator. The blue set of
candidates dominates the orange. The HV indicator is consistent
with this ordering; the area of the box dominated by the blue set is
greater. The BOtied CDF values and associated multivariate ranks
also favor the blue.

number of potentially noisy function evaluations (Romero
et al., 2013; Calandra et al., 2016; Kusne et al., 2020; Shields
et al., 2021; Zuo et al., 2021; Bellamy et al., 2022; Park et al.,
2022). In BO, we fit a probabilistic surrogate model on the
available observations so far. Based on the model, the acquisition function determines the next candidate to evaluate
by balancing exploration (evaluating highly uncertain candidates) with exploitation (evaluating designs believed to be
optimal). Often, applications call for the joint optimization
of M ≥2 multiple, potentially competing objectives (Marler
& Arora, 2004; Jain et al., 2017; Tagasovska et al., 2022).
Unlike in single-objective settings, a single optimal solution
may not exist and we must identify a set of solutions that
represents the best compromises among the multiple objectives. The acquisition function in multi-objective Bayesian
optimization (MOBO) navigates these trade-offs as it guides
the optimization toward regions of interest.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has demonstrated promise in a
variety of scientific and industrial domains where the goal is
to optimize an expensive black-box function using a limited

Many bona fide MO acquisition functions without scalarization involve high-dimensional integrals and scale poorly
with increasing M . Moreover, improvement-based acquisition functions including some variants of random scalarization are sensitive to non-informative monotonic transformations of the objectives. This is a pain point for many
practical applications. For instance, in biochemistry, the
dissociation constant KD is typically expressed in terms
of its log transformation, the pKD ≡ − log10 (KD ). It
would be desirable to work with acquisition functions that
are invariant to the choice of such unit conversions.

*
Equal contribution 1 Prescient Design, Genentech, South
San Francisco, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, New
York University, New York City, USA 3 Center for Data Science,
New York University, New York City, USA. Correspondence
to: Ji Won Park <park.ji won@gene.com>, Nataša Tagasovska
<natasa.tagasovska@roche.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

