Generalization Bounds for Heavy-Tailed SDEs through the
Fractional Fokker-Planck Equation

Benjamin Dupuis 1 2 3 Umut Şimşekli 1 2 3 4

Abstract

As µz is typically unknown in practice, the population risk
L is replaced by the empirical risk, defined as follows:

Understanding the generalization properties of
heavy-tailed stochastic optimization algorithms
has attracted increasing attention over the past
years. While illuminating interesting aspects
of stochastic optimizers by using heavy-tailed
stochastic differential equations as proxies, prior
works either provided expected generalization
bounds, or introduced non-computable information theoretic terms. Addressing these drawbacks,
in this work, we prove high-probability generalization bounds for heavy-tailed SDEs which do
not contain any nontrivial information theoretic
terms. To achieve this goal, we develop new proof
techniques based on estimating the entropy flows
associated with the so-called fractional FokkerPlanck equation (a partial differential equation
that governs the evolution of the distribution of
the corresponding heavy-tailed SDE). In addition
to obtaining high-probability bounds, we show
that our bounds have a better dependence on the
dimension of parameters as compared to prior
art. Our results further identify a phase transition
phenomenon, which suggests that heavy tails can
be either beneficial or harmful depending on the
problem structure. We support our theory with
experiments conducted in a variety of settings.

n
X
b S (w) := 1
L
ℓ(w, zi ),
n i=1

where S = (z1 , . . . , zn ) ∼ µ⊗n
is a dataset and each zi is
z
sampled independent and identically (i.i.d.) from µz . Even
b S can be computed in practice as opposed to L,
though L
in several practical scenarios, ℓ is further replaced with a
‘surrogate loss’ function f : Rd × Z −→ R. For instance,
in a binary classification setting, ℓ is typically chosen as
the non-differentiable 0-1 loss, whereas f can be chosen
as a differentiable surrogate, such as the cross-entropy loss,
which would be amenable to gradient-based optimization.
We accordingly define the surrogate empirical risk:1
n
1X
f (w, zi ).
FbS (w) :=
n i=1

Given a dataset S and a surrogate loss f , a stochastic optimization algorithm A aims at minimizing FbS and can be
seen as a function such that A(S, U ) =: wS,U , where U is a
random variable encompassing all the randomness in the algorithm. One of the major challenges of statistical learning
theory is then to upper-bound the so-called generalization
b S (wS,U ). Once such a bound can
error, i.e., L(wS,U ) − L
be obtained, it immediately provides an upper-bound on the
b S can be computed numerically.
true risk L, as L

1. Introduction

In our study, we analyze the generalization error induced
by a specific class of heavy-tailed optimization algorithms,
described by the next stochastic differential equation (SDE):
√
dWtS = −∇VS (WtS )dt + σ1 dLα
2σ2 dBt , (3)
t +

A supervised machine learning setup consists of a data space
Z, a data distribution µz , and a parameter space, which will
be Rd in our study. Given a loss function ℓ : Rd × Z −→
R+ , the goal is to minimize the following population risk:
minw∈Rd L(w),

L(w) := Ez∼µz [ℓ(w, z)] .

(2)

where Lα
t is a stable Lévy process, which will be formally
introduced in Section 2, α ∈ (1, 2) is the tail-index, controlling the heaviness of the tails2 (examples of Lévy processes
are provided in Fig. 1), Bt is a Brownian motion in Rd ,

(1)

1
Inria 2 Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France 3 PSL Research University, Paris, France 4 CNRS. Correspondence to:
Benjamin Dupuis <benjamin.dupuis@inria.fr>, Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@inria.fr>.

1

In our theoretical setup we introduce the surrogate loss to
be able to cover more general settings. However, this is not a
requirement, we can set f = ℓ.
2 α
Lt does not admit a finite variance and as α gets smaller the
process becomes heavier-tailed.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

