Mind the Boundary: Coreset Selection via Reconstructing the Decision Boundary

Shuo Yang 1 Zhe Cao 2 Sheng Guo 3 Ruiheng Zhang 2 Ping Luo 1 4 Shengping Zhang 5 Liqiang Nie 5

Abstract

computational and storage exhaustion and unsustainable
data growth pose significant barriers to the development
of general intelligence models, calling for innovative approaches to efficiently utilize training data.

Existing paradigms of pushing the state of the art
require exponentially more training data in many
fields. Coreset selection seeks to mitigate this
growing demand by identifying the most efficient
subset of training data. In this paper, we delve
into geometry-based coreset methods and preliminarily link the geometry of data distribution with
models’ generalization capability in theoretics.
Leveraging these theoretical insights, we propose
a novel coreset construction method by selecting training samples to reconstruct the decision
boundary of a deep neural network learned on the
full dataset. Extensive experiments across various
popular benchmarks demonstrate the superiority
of our method over multiple competitors. For
the first time, our method achieves a 50% data
pruning rate on the ImageNet-1K dataset while
sacrificing less than 1% in accuracy. Additionally,
we showcase and analyze the remarkable crossarchitecture transferability of the coresets derived
from our approach.

Fortunately, a recent study (Sorscher et al., 2022) provides
a potential breakthrough by suggesting that the power-law
correlation between the testing error and training data size
could be downgraded to exponential scaling. This could be
achieved by selecting a high-quality, information-rich subset
(a.k.a, coreset) from the entire pool of training data. This
revelation paves the way for a potential reduction in training
costs, while simultaneously retaining performance. Generally, popular coreset selection methods can be stratified
into three categories (Guo et al., 2022): geometry-based,
score-based, and optimization-based methods. Geometrybased methods select samples grounded on their geometric
characteristics in the feature space, such as distance to class
centers (Rebuffi et al., 2017; Castro et al., 2018; Belouadah
& Popescu, 2020; Kaddour, 2023), distance to other selected
samples (Wolf, 2011; Sener & Savarese, 2018), and distance
to feature median (Xia et al., 2022). Score-based methods
rank and choose training samples based on a specific predefined score about model prediction (Maharana et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2023), including the Forgetting score (Toneva
et al., 2019), EL2N score (Paul et al., 2021), and uncertainty score (Liu et al., 2019; He et al., 2023). However,
most of these approaches select data based on heuristicly
designed metrics and are devoid of guaranteed generalization ability for the coreset, making it hard to justify the
effectiveness and theoretical property of the coreset. To
overcome this, optimization-based methods (Tukan et al.,
2023; Tan et al., 2023; Abbas et al., 2023) strive to bestow
superior theoretical properties on the coreset by optimizing
the selected data to ensure they mirror a similar gradient
direction (Killamsetty et al., 2021a; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2020), influence function (Koh & Liang, 2017; Yang et al.,
2022; Pooladzandi et al., 2022), or validation error (Killamsetty et al., 2021b; Borsos et al., 2020) to the full training
data. Though equipped with solid theoretical underpinnings,
these methods grapple with severe challenges when scaling
to large-scale datasets due to the intricate bilevel optimization.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from training on datasets of unprecedented scale,
language and vision foundational models (Brown et al.,
2020; Radford et al., 2021) exhibit the immense potential
to actualize Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). However,
challenges arise as recent studies reveal a power law trend
linking the generalization capability of deep neural networks to the volume of their training data, namely, scaling
law (Hestness et al., 2017; Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Gordon
et al., 2021). This trend implies that any further reduction
on the testing error may necessitate an order of magnitude
more training data, thereby exponentially escalating the
computational cost (Kaplan et al., 2020). The consequent
1
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Beijing Institute
of Technology, China 3 MYBank, Ant Group, China 4 Shanghai AI
Lab, China 5 Harbin Institute of Technology, China. Correspondence to: Shengping Zhang <s.zhang@hit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Though various geometry-based methods have been proposed in the literature (Sener & Savarese, 2017; Cohen1

