Chasing Convex Functions with Long-term Constraints

Adam Lechowicz 1 Nicolas Christianson 2 Bo Sun 3 Noman Bashir 4 Mohammad Hajiesmaili 1
Adam Wierman 2 Prashant Shenoy 1

Abstract

resource allocation problems; in this paper, we consider one
such special case, discussing its connections to other online
settings and suggestions towards broad new areas of inquiry
in online optimization with long-term constraints.

We introduce and study a family of online metric problems with long-term constraints. In these
problems, an online player makes decisions xt in
a metric space (X, d) to simultaneously minimize
their hitting cost ft (xt ) and switching cost as determined by the metric. Over the time horizon
T , the player
P must satisfy a long-term demand
constraint t c(xt ) ≥ 1, where c(xt ) denotes
the fraction of demand satisfied at time t. Such
problems can find a wide array of applications
to online resource allocation in sustainable energy/computing systems. We devise optimal competitive and learning-augmented algorithms for
the case of bounded hitting cost gradients and
weighted ℓ1 metrics, and further show that our
proposed algorithms perform well in numerical
experiments.

Our motivation to introduce these problems is rooted in an
emerging class of carbon-aware control problems for sustainable systems. A shared objective involves minimizing
carbon emissions by shifting flexible workloads temporally
and/or spatially to better leverage low-carbon electricity
generation (e.g., renewables such as solar and wind). Examples which have recently seen significant interest include
carbon-aware electric vehicle (EV) charging (Cheng et al.,
2022) and carbon-aware compute shifting (Wiesner et al.,
2021; Bashir et al., 2021; Radovanovic et al., 2022; Acun
et al., 2023; Hanafy et al., 2023).
The problems we introduce in this paper build on a long
line of related work in online algorithms. Most existing
work can be roughly classified into two types: online metric
problems, where many works consider multidimensional
decision spaces and switching costs but do not consider
long-term constraints (Borodin et al., 1992; Koutsoupias,
2009; Chen et al., 2018; Bubeck et al., 2019; 2021; Bansal
& Coester, 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023), and online search
problems, which feature long-term demand constraints but
do not consider multidimensional decision spaces or switching costs (El-Yaniv et al., 2001; Lorenz et al., 2008; Mohr
et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2021b).

1. Introduction
This paper introduces and studies a novel class of online
metric problems with long-term demand constraints motivated by emerging applications in the design of sustainable
systems. In convex function chasing with a long-term constraint, an online player aims to satisfy a demand by making
decisions in a normed vector space, paying a hitting cost
based on time-varying convex cost functions which are revealed online, and switching cost defined by the norm. The
player is constrained to ensure that the entire demand is
satisfied at or before the time horizon T ends, and their
objective is to minimize their total cost. The generality of
this problem makes it applicable to a wide variety of online

We briefly review the direct precursors of our work below.
In the online metric literature, the problem we study is
an extension of convex function chasing (CFC) introduced
by Friedman & Linial (1993), where an online player makes
online decisions xt in a normed vector space (X, ∥·∥) over
a sequence of time-varying cost functions in order to minimize their total hitting and switching cost. In the online
search literature, the problem we study is a generalization
of one-way trading (OWT) introduced by El-Yaniv et al.
(2001), in which an online player must sell an entire asset
in fractional shares over a sequence of time-varying prices
while maximizing their profit.

1

Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA. 2 Computing &
Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, USA.
3
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Ontario, Canada. 4 Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA.. Correspondence to: Adam Lechowicz <alechowicz@cs.umass.edu>.

Despite extensive existing work in the online metric and
online search tracks, few works simultaneously consider
long-term demand constraints (as in OWT) and move-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

