On the Diminishing Returns of Width for Continual Learning

Etash Guha 1 2 Vihan Lakshman 3

Abstract

However, preventing catastrophic forgetting is theoretically
and empirically tricky in many situations (Knoblauch et al.,
2020; Kim et al., 2022). Many empirical studies of Continual Learning (CL) have observed that a model’s hidden
dimension or width is positively correlated with the ability
to continually learn (Mirzadeh et al., 2022b;a; Ramasesh
et al., 2021). Moreover, catastrophic forgetting is more
easily mitigated in the infinite-width or Neural Tangent Kernel regime (Bennani & Sugiyama, 2020; Doan et al., 2021;
Chizat et al., 2019; Geiger et al., 2020). However, the exact relationship between width and continual learning still
needs to be clarified in the more practical finite-width setting. Theoretically, explaining this relationship requires
understanding the effects of training and retraining a model
on different datasets, which is a complex and difficult-toanalyze process. Through pure experimentation, most works
observe a roughly linear relationship between width and
continual learning, such as in small FFNs (Mirzadeh et al.,
2022a) or in large CNNs and ResNets (Ramasesh et al.,
2021; Mirzadeh et al., 2022b), suggesting that increasing
the scale of models is a simple method for improving continual learning.

While deep neural networks have demonstrated
groundbreaking performance in various settings,
these models often suffer from catastrophic forgetting when trained on new tasks in sequence.
Several works have empirically demonstrated that
increasing the width of a neural network leads to a
decrease in catastrophic forgetting but have yet to
characterize the exact relationship between width
and continual learning. We designed one of the
first frameworks to analyze continuous learning
theory and prove that width is directly related to
forgetting in feed-forward networks (FFN). In particular, we demonstrate that increasing network
widths to reduce forgetting yields diminishing returns. We empirically verify our claims at widths
hitherto unexplored in prior studies where the
diminishing returns are clearly observed as predicted by our theory.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we explicitly investigate the relationship between width and continual learning. We have observed empirically and theoretically that simply increasing a model’s
width suffers diminishing returns in improving continual
learning. To rigorously analyze these phenomena, we establish one of the first theoretical frameworks for analyzing the
continual learning error of Feed-Forward Networks, connecting fundamental properties like depth, number of tasks,
sparsity, activation smoothness, and width to continual learning error. We use this framework to prove the connection
between width and continual learning in Feed-Forward Networks of arbitrary depth and nonlinear activations more
tightly. To circumvent the typical analytical difficulties of
continual learning, we use the well-observed empirical observation that wider models move less from initialization
during training. For completeness, we empirically verify
this relationship on Feed-Forward Networks trained with either Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) or Adam (Kingma
& Ba, 2015) optimizers1 . This lazy training phenomenon
has often been observed empirically in the literature (Zou

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved breakthrough
performance in numerous challenging computational tasks
that serve as a proxy for intelligence (LeCun et al., 2015).
An essential and practical question is whether the same neural network can continuously learn over a series of tasks
while maintaining performance. Practically, using a welltrained neural network to achieve similar quality over a
series of tasks is essential for reducing expensive retraining and computational costs (Diethe et al., 2019) and for
mimicking the human-like ability to continually update its
knowledge (Hadsell et al., 2020; Kudithipudi et al., 2022;
Parisi et al., 2019). In practice, DNNs exhibit catastrophic
forgetting when trained over a series of tasks, experiencing
a sharp drop in performance on the previously learned tasks.
*

1
Equal contribution
SambaNova Systems,
Palo
2
Alto, USA University of Washington, Seattle, USA
3
ThirdAI, Houston, USA. Correspondence to: Etash Guha
<etash.guha@sambanovasystems.com>, Vihan Lakshman <vihan@thirdai.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

https://github.com/vihan-lakshman/diminishing-returnswide-continual-learning

1

