Learning Universal Predictors

Jordi Grau-Moya * 1 Tim Genewein * 1 Marcus Hutter * 1 Laurent Orseau * 1 Grégoire Déletang 1 Elliot Catt 1
Anian Ruoss 1 Li Kevin Wenliang 1 Christopher Mattern 1 Matthew Aitchison 1 Joel Veness 1

Abstract
Meta-learning has emerged as a powerful approach to train neural networks to learn new tasks
quickly from limited data by pre-training them on
a broad set of tasks. But, what are the limits of
meta-learning? In this work, we explore the potential of amortizing the most powerful universal
predictor, namely Solomonoff Induction (SI), into
neural networks via leveraging (memory-based)
meta-learning to its limits. We use Universal Turing Machines (UTMs) to generate training data
used to expose networks to a broad range of patterns. We provide theoretical analysis of the UTM
data generation processes and meta-training protocols. We conduct comprehensive experiments
with neural architectures (e.g. LSTMs, Transformers) and algorithmic data generators of varying
complexity and universality. Our results suggest
that UTM data is a valuable resource for metalearning, and that it can be used to train neural
networks capable of learning universal prediction
strategies.

Figure 1: Summary of our meta-learning methodology.

key challenge in meta-learning is to design task distributions
that are sufficiently broad, exposing the model to a rich variety of structures and patterns. Such broad exposure could
lead to “universal” representations, enabling the system to
tackle a wide range of problems and bringing us closer to
the goal of artificial general intelligence (AGI).
Solomonoff Induction 1 (SI) offers a compelling theoretical foundation for constructing such an ideal universal prediction system (Solomonoff, 1964a;b) 2 . At its core, SI
elegantly integrates three fundamental principles (see Figure 1). Consideration of all computable hypotheses: Unlike
traditional approaches, SI explores the entire space of computable hypotheses (i.e. generated by a computer program)
as potential explanations for observed data. Occam’s Razor:
SI assigns higher prior probabilities to simpler hypotheses
with shorter descriptions. Bayesian Updating: With new
data, SI employs Bayes’ rule to refine its belief about each
hypothesis. The theoretical strength of SI lies in its ability
to rapidly converge on the true data-generating process, if
computable (Li & Vitanyi, 1992; Hutter, 2004; Sunehag &

1. Introduction
Meta-learning has emerged as a powerful approach to enable AI systems to learn new tasks quickly from limited
data (Hospedales et al., 2021). By training a model on a
diverse set of tasks, meta-learning encourages the discovery
of representations and learning strategies that generalize to
new, unseen tasks. Memory-based meta-learning (Santoro
et al., 2016)—a type of meta-learning that relies on memory
updates, instead of a two-level optimization procedure (Finn
et al., 2017)—has been shown to be a promising way of
teaching neural networks to implicitly implement Bayesian
inference (Ortega et al., 2019; Mikulik et al., 2020; Genewein et al., 2023) tailored to a prior task-distribution. A

1
SI arguably solved the century-old induction problem (Rathmanner & Hutter, 2011), is the basis of the Hutter prize (Hutter,
2006/2020) and has been praised by the father of AI, Marvin
Minsky: “the most important discovery since Gödel”.
2
For an introduction see (Hutter et al., 2007; Hutter, 2017) and
see (Hutter, 2007) for technical details.

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Jordi Grau-Moya <jordigrau@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

