Compression of Structured Data with Autoencoders:
Provable Benefit of Nonlinearities and Depth

Kevin Kögler * 1 Alexander Shevchenko * 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Marco Mondelli 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Autoencoders have achieved remarkable performance in
many machine learning areas, such as generative modeling
(Kingma & Welling, 2014), inverse problems (Peng et al.,
2020) and data compression (Ballé et al., 2017; Theis et al.,
2017; Agustsson et al., 2017). Motivated by this practical
success, an active area of research is aimed at theoretically
analyzing the performance of autoencoders to understand
the quality and dynamics of representation learning when
these architectures are trained with gradient methods.

Autoencoders are a prominent model in many empirical branches of machine learning and lossy
data compression. However, basic theoretical
questions remain unanswered even in a shallow
two-layer setting. In particular, to what degree
does a shallow autoencoder capture the structure
of the underlying data distribution? For the prototypical case of the 1-bit compression of sparse
Gaussian data, we prove that gradient descent converges to a solution that completely disregards the
sparse structure of the input. Namely, the performance of the algorithm is the same as if it was
compressing a Gaussian source – with no sparsity.
For general data distributions, we give evidence
of a phase transition phenomenon in the shape of
the gradient descent minimizer, as a function of
the data sparsity: below the critical sparsity level,
the minimizer is a rotation taken uniformly at random (just like in the compression of non-sparse
data); above the critical sparsity, the minimizer
is the identity (up to a permutation). Finally, by
exploiting a connection with approximate message passing algorithms, we show how to improve
upon Gaussian performance for the compression
of sparse data: adding a denoising function to a
shallow architecture already reduces the loss provably, and a suitable multi-layer decoder leads to a
further improvement. We validate our findings on
image datasets, such as CIFAR-10 and MNIST.

Formally, consider the encoding of x ∈ Rd given by
z = σ(Bx),

B ∈ Rn×d ,

z ∈ Rn ,

(1)

where the non-linear activation σ(·) is applied componentwise. The ratio r = n/d is referred to as the compression
rate, which in the case of 1-bit compressed sensing corresponds to the number of bits per input dimension. For a
shallow (two-layer) autoencoder, the decoding consists of a
single linear transformation A ∈ Rd×n :
x̂Θ (x) = Az = Aσ(Bx).

(2)

The optimal set of parameters Θ = {A, B} minimizes the
mean-squared error (MSE)


R(Θ) := d−1 E ∥x − x̂Θ (x)∥22 ,
(3)
where the expectation is taken over the data distribution
x. The model described in (2) is a natural extension of
linear autoencoders (σ(x) = α · x for some α ̸= 0), which
were thoroughly studied over the past years (Kunin et al.,
2019; Gidel et al., 2019; Bao et al., 2020). In an effort to
go beyond the linear setting, a number of recent works have
considered the non-linear model (2). Specifically, Refinetti
& Goldt (2022); Nguyen (2021) study the training dynamics
under specific scaling regimes of the input dimension d and
the number of neurons n, which lead to either vanishing
or diverging compression rates. Shevchenko et al. (2023)
focus on the proportional regime in which d and n grow at
the same speed, but their analysis relies heavily on Gaussian data assumptions. In contrast with Gaussian data that
lacks any particular structure, real data often exhibits rich
structural properties. For instance, images are inherently

*

1
Equal contribution
ISTA, Klosterneuburg, Austria
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Kevin
Kögler <kevin.koegler@ist.ac.at>, Alexander Shevchenko
<alex.shevchenko@ist.ac.at>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

