On the Identifiability of Switching Dynamical Systems

Carles Balsells-Rodas 1 Yixin Wang 2 Yingzhen Li 1

Abstract

theless, significant progress has been made on fusing neural
networks with SSMs, with Gu et al. (2022) as one of the
latest examples. Many of these advances focus on building
sequential latent variable models (LVMs) as flexible deep
generative models (Chung et al., 2015; Li & Mandt, 2018;
Babaeizadeh et al., 2018; Saxena et al., 2021), where SSMs
have been incorporated as latent dynamical priors (Johnson
et al., 2016; Linderman et al., 2016; 2017; Fraccaro et al.,
2017; Dong et al., 2020; Ansari et al., 2021; Smith et al.,
2023). Despite the efforts in designing flexible SSM priors
and developing stable training schemes, theoretical properties such as identifiability for sequential generative models
are less studied, contrary to early literature on linear SSMs.

The identifiability of latent variable models has
received increasing attention due to its relevance
in interpretability and out-of-distribution generalisation. In this work, we study the identifiability of Switching Dynamical Systems, taking an
initial step toward extending identifiability analysis to sequential latent variable models. We
first prove the identifiability of Markov Switching Models, which commonly serve as the prior
distribution for the continuous latent variables
in Switching Dynamical Systems. We present
identification conditions for first-order Markov
dependency structures, whose transition distribution is parametrised via non-linear Gaussians.
We then establish the identifiability of the latent
variables and non-linear mappings in Switching
Dynamical Systems up to affine transformations,
by leveraging identifiability analysis techniques
from identifiable deep latent variable models. We
finally develop estimation algorithms for identifiable Switching Dynamical Systems. Throughout
empirical studies, we demonstrate the practicality of identifiable Switching Dynamical Systems
for segmenting high-dimensional time series such
as videos, and showcase the use of identifiable
Markov Switching Models for regime-dependent
causal discovery in climate data.

Identifiability, in general, establishes a one-to-one correspondence between the data likelihood and the model parameters (or latent variables), or an equivalence class of
the latter. In causal discovery (Peters et al., 2017), identifiability refers to whether the underlying causal structure
can be correctly pinpointed from infinite observational data.
In independent component analysis (ICA, Comon (1994)),
identifiability analysis focuses on both the latent sources and
the mapping from the latents to the observed. While general
non-linear ICA is ill-defined (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999),
recent results show that identifiability can be achieved using conditional priors (Khemakhem et al., 2020). For deep
(non-temporal) latent variable models, the required access
to auxiliary variables can be relaxed using a finite mixture
prior (Kivva et al., 2022). Recent works have attempted to
extend these results to sequential models using non-linear
ICA (Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2017; Hyvarinen et al., 2019;
Hälvä & Hyvarinen, 2020; Hälvä et al., 2021), or latent
causal processes (Yao et al., 2022a;b; Lippe et al., 2023b;a).

1. Introduction
State-space models (SSMs) are well-established sequence
modelling techniques where their linear versions have been
extensively studied (Lindgren, 1978; Poritz, 1982; Hamilton,
1989). Meanwhile, recurrent neural networks (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014) have gained high
popularity for sequence modelling thanks to their abilities
in capturing non-linear and long-term dependencies. Never-

In this work, we develop an identifiability analysis for
Switching Dynamical Systems (SDSs) – a class of sequential LVMs with SSM priors that allow regime-switching
behaviours, where their associated inference methods have
been explored recently (Dong et al., 2020; Ansari et al.,
2021). Our approach differs fundamentally from non-linear
ICA since the latent variables are no longer independent.
To address this challenge, we first construct the latent dynamical prior using Markov Switching Models (MSMs)
(Hamilton, 1989) – an extension of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) with autoregressive connections, for which
we provide the first identifiability analysis of this model

1
Imperial College London 2 University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Carles Balsells-Rodas <cb221@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

