BeigeMaps: Behavioral Eigenmaps for Reinforcement Learning from Images

Sandesh Adhikary 1 Anqi Li 1 2 Byron Boots 1

Abstract

learning (Jaderberg et al., 2016; Laskin et al., 2020b; Zhang
et al., 2020; Stooke et al., 2021). The goal of representation learning is to map high-dimensional observations, e.g.
images, to low-dimensional representations, facilitating the
learning of downstream policies and/or value functions. The
representation can be learned a priori (Lange & Riedmiller,
2010; Lange et al., 2012) or jointly with the policy (Yarats
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020).

Training reinforcement learning (RL) agents directly from high-dimensional image observations
continues to be a challenging problem. Recent
line of work on behavioral distances proposes to
learn representations that encode behavioral similarities quantified by the bisimulation metric. By
learning an isometric mapping to a lower dimensional space that preserves this metric, such methods attempt to learn representations that group
together functionally similar states. However,
such an isometric mapping may not exist, making the learning objective ill-defined. We propose
an alternative objective that allows distortions in
long-range distances, while preserving local metric structure – inducing representations that highlight natural clusters in the state space. This leads
to new representations, which we term Behavioral Eigenmaps (BeigeMaps), corresponding to
the eigenfunctions of similarity kernels induced
by behavioral distances. We empirically demonstrate that when added as a drop-in modification,
BeigeMaps improve the policy performance of
prior behavioral distance based RL algorithms.

Recently, a set of representation learning approaches
has been proposed using behavioral distances (Zhang
et al., 2020; Castro et al., 2021; Kemertas & AumentadoArmstrong, 2021; Castro et al., 2023; Chen & Pan, 2022).
These distances are variants and relaxations of the bisimulation metric (Ferns et al., 2011; Castro, 2020) and capture
state-differences based on expected returns under certain
policies. These approaches not only encourage the lowdimensional representation to extract task-relevant information (Zhang et al., 2020), but also induce value-based metric
structure in the representation space (Castro, 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020). It has been shown that value function learning
can benefit from such metric shaping, as states with similar values are grouped together in the representation space
(Castro et al., 2021; 2023; Zhang et al., 2020).
Although prior approaches have proposed different behavioral distances, with considerations for computational complexity (Castro et al., 2021), training stability (Kemertas &
Aumentado-Armstrong, 2021), approximation error (Chen
& Pan, 2022), etc., they follow the same recipe when encoding the behavioral metric structure into the representation
space. Namely, learning a representation mapping such that
the low-dimensional representation space is isometric, i.e.,
globally distance preserving, to the space defined by a given
behavioral distance.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) from image observations holds
great promise as it enables learning control policies for domains where obtaining low-dimensional state information
is expensive or impossible (Yarats et al., 2019; Yen-Chen
et al., 2020). However, image observations are typically
high-dimensional and contain redundant or task-irrelevant
information. Directly applying RL on image observations
often results in poor sample efficiency and weak generalization capability (Laskin et al., 2020a; Zhang et al., 2020).

Unfortunately, such an objective can be ill-defined – there
may not exist a low-dimensional space with a metric that
exactly matches the behavioral distance (Bourgain, 1985;
Linial et al., 1995; Belkin & Niyogi, 2001; Castro et al.,
2023). This issue may undermine the quality of the
learned representation and induce instability in training
since behavioral distances are computed through bootstrapping (Van Hasselt et al., 2018).

Central to this challenge is the problem of representation
1
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA (USA) 2 NVIDIA; Work done while AL was affiliated
with the University of Washington. Correspondence to: Sandesh
Adhikary <adhikary@cs.washington.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This raises a natural question: if isometry is ill-defined, is
there a certain type of acceptable distortion that still pre1

