Accelerating Convergence of Score-Based Diffusion Models, Provably

Gen Li * 1 Yu Huang * 2 Timofey Efimov 3 Yuting Wei 2 Yuejie Chi 3 Yuxin Chen 2

Abstract

(Croitoru et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Kazerouni et al.,
2023; Guo et al., 2023), outperforming earlier generative
methods such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2020) and VAEs
(Kingma and Welling, 2014) on multiple fronts (Dhariwal
and Nichol, 2021).

Score-based diffusion models, while achieving
remarkable empirical performance, often suffer from low sampling speed, due to extensive
function evaluations needed during the sampling
phase. Despite a flurry of recent activities towards speeding up diffusion generative modeling
in practice, theoretical underpinnings for acceleration techniques remain severely limited. In this
paper, we design novel training-free algorithms
to accelerate popular deterministic (i.e., DDIM)
and stochastic (i.e., DDPM) samplers. Our accelerated deterministic sampler converges at a rate
O( T12 ) with T the number of steps, improving
upon the O( T1 ) rate for the DDIM sampler; and
our accelerated stochastic sampler converges at
a rate O( T1 ), outperforming the rate O( √1T ) for
the DDPM sampler. The design of our algorithms
leverages insights from higher-order approximation, and shares similar intuitions as popular highorder ODE solvers like the DPM-Solver-2. Our
theory accommodates ℓ2 -accurate score estimates,
and does not require log-concavity or smoothness
on the target distribution.

1.1. Score-based diffusion models
On a high level, diffusion-based generative modeling begins
by considering a forward Markov diffusion process that
progressively diffuses a data distribution into noise:
add noise

add noise

add noise

add noise

X0 −→ X1 −→ X2 −→ · · · −→ XT ,

(1)

where X0 ∼ pdata is drawn from the target data distribution
in Rd , and XT resembles pure noise (e.g., with a distribution
close to N (0, Id )). The pivotal step then lies in learning to
construct a reverse Markov process
use scores

use scores

use scores

use scores

Y0 ←− Y1 ←− Y2 ←− · · · ←− YT ,

(2)

which starts from purse noise YT ∼ N (0, Id ) and maintains distributional proximity throughout in the sense that
d

Yt ≈ Xt (t ≤ T ). To accomplish this goal, Yt−1 in each
step is typically obtained from Yt with the aid of (Stein)
score functions — namely, ∇X log pXt (X), with pXt denoting the distribution of Xt — where the score functions
are pre-trained by means of score matching techniques (e.g.,
Hyvärinen (2005); Ho et al. (2020); Hyvärinen (2007); Vincent (2011); Song and Ermon (2019); Pang et al. (2020)).

1. Introduction
Initially introduced by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015) and subsequently gaining momentum through the works Ho et al.
(2020); Song et al. (2021), diffusion models have risen to
the forefront of generative modeling. Remarkably, scorebased diffusion models have demonstrated superior performance across various domains like computer vision, natural
language processing, medical imaging, and bioinformatics

The mainstream approaches for constructing the reversetime process (2) can roughly be divided into two categories,
as described below.
• Stochastic (or SDE-based) samplers. A widely adopted
strategy involves exploiting both the score function and
some injected random noise when generating each Yt−1 ;
that is, Yt−1 is taken to be a function of Yt and some
independent noise Zt . A prominent example of this kind
is the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM)
(Ho et al., 2020), to be detailed in Section 2. Notably, this
approach has intimate connections with certain stochastic
differential equations (SDEs), which can be elucidated
via celebrated SDE results concerning the existence of
reverse-time diffusion processes (Anderson, 1982; Haussmann and Pardoux, 1986).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 3 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. Correspondence to: Yuxin Chen <yuxinc@wharton.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

