Estimating Distributional Treatment Effects in Randomized Experiments:
Machine Learning for Variance Reduction

Undral Byambadalai 1 Tatsushi Oka 2 Shota Yasui 1

Abstract

standard practice within the technology sector (Tang et al.,
2010; Bakshy et al., 2014; Xie & Aurisset, 2016; Kohavi
et al., 2020).

We propose a novel regression adjustment method
designed for estimating distributional treatment
effect parameters in randomized experiments.
Randomized experiments have been extensively
used to estimate treatment effects in various scientific fields. However, to gain deeper insights, it
is essential to estimate distributional treatment effects rather than relying solely on average effects.
Our approach incorporates pre-treatment covariates into a distributional regression framework,
utilizing machine learning techniques to improve
the precision of distributional treatment effect estimators. The proposed approach can be readily
implemented with off-the-shelf machine learning
methods and remains valid as long as the nuisance components are reasonably well estimated.
Also, we establish the asymptotic properties of
the proposed estimator and present a uniformly
valid inference method. Through simulation results and real data analysis, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of integrating machine learning techniques in reducing the variance of distributional
treatment effect estimators in finite samples.

When analyzing data from randomized experiments, one
commonly used measure is the Average Treatment Effect
(ATE). However, it is often the case that understanding the
distributional treatment effects can provide a richer perspective than solely focusing on overall average effects. Furthermore, while randomized experiments simplify outcomebased analysis, pre-treatment auxiliary information is frequently available. This quest for a more comprehensive
understanding of treatment effects, marked by supplementing auxiliary data, calls for new approaches to enhance
precision through pre-treatment data incorporation.
In this work, we propose a novel regression-adjusted method
to estimate a wide range of distributional parameters in the
randomized experiment setup. Our approach draws inspiration from the generic Neyman-orthogonal moment condition
(Chernozhukov et al., 2018), which facilitates the decoupling of nuisance parameter and treatment effect estimation
into two stages. The nuisance parameters of our interest are
the conditional outcome distributions given pre-treatment
covariates, and we propose the use of machine learning models (e.g., LASSO, random forests, neural networks, etc.),
allowing for complex data and distributional structures. By
integrating these sophisticated machine learning techniques
with cross-fitting, we reduce the sensitivity of our treatment
effect estimator to errors arising from nuisance parameter
estimation.

1. Introduction
Randomized experiments have played a crucial role in understanding the effects of interventions and guiding policy
decisions, ever since the seminal work by Fisher (1935).
The estimation of causal effects through randomized experiments has found widespread application across various
scientific disciplines (Rubin, 1974; Heckman et al., 1997;
Imai, 2005; Imbens & Rubin, 2015) and has also become a

Our paper makes several noteworthy contributions. First,
our approach expands the scope regression adjustment.
While regression adjustment is commonly employed for
variance reduction in the estimation of the ATE with mean
regression (Deng et al., 2013; Poyarkov et al., 2016; Guo
et al., 2021), our method leverages pre-treatment information under the distributional regression framework, incorporating machine learning methods. This enables us to conduct more powerful statistical inference for distributional
parameters, including the Distributional Treatment Effect
(DTE) and the Quantile Treatment Effect (QTE). Second,
we provide theoretical validation for the regression-adjusted
method by demonstrating the variance reduction of the esti-

1

CyberAgent, Inc., Tokyo, Japan 2 Department of Economics, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Undral Byambadalai <undral byambadalai@cyberagent.co.jp>,
Tatsushi Oka <tatsushi.oka@keio.jp>, Yasui Shota <yasui shota@cyberagent.co.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

