Pre-Training Protein Bi-level Representation Through Span Mask Strategy On
3D Protein Chains
Jiale Zhao 1 2 Wanru Zhuang 1 3 Jia Song 1 4 Yaqi Li 1 Shuqi Lu 1

Abstract

tion, signaling, and cell cycle regulation. In recent years,
advances in deep learning have significantly contributed
to the development of pre-trained models for generating
high-quality protein representations, enabling the prediction of diverse properties, like protein classification and
function. Although many previous studies have focused on
pre-training based on protein sequences (Rao et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a), the significance of protein structure as a determinant of protein function has led to
the emergence of 3D structure-based models (Zhang et al.,
2022b; 2023; Lee et al., 2023). The development of these
models has been greatly enhanced by recent breakthroughs
in highly accurate deep learning-based protein structure
prediction methods (Jumper et al., 2021).

In recent years, there has been a surge in the development of 3D structure-based pre-trained protein models, representing a significant advancement over pre-trained protein language models
in various downstream tasks. However, most existing structure-based pre-trained models primarily focus on the residue level, i.e., alpha carbon
atoms, while ignoring other atoms like side chain
atoms. We argue that modeling proteins at both
residue and atom levels is important since the
side chain atoms can also be crucial for numerous
downstream tasks, for example, molecular docking. Nevertheless, we find that naively combining
residue and atom information during pre-training
typically fails. We identify a key reason is the
information leakage caused by the inclusion of
atom structure in the input, which renders residuelevel pre-training tasks trivial and results in insufficiently expressive residue representations. To
address this issue, we introduce a span mask pretraining strategy on 3D protein chains to learn
meaningful representations of both residues and
atoms. This leads to a simple yet effective approach to learning protein representation suitable
for diverse downstream tasks. Extensive experimental results on binding site prediction and function prediction tasks demonstrate our proposed
pre-training approach significantly outperforms
other methods. Our code will be made public.

A common pre-training approach in previous studies leverages advances in self-prediction techniques within the field
of natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018). In this context, the objective for a given
protein can be framed as predicting a specific segment of
the protein based on the information from the remaining
structure. Standard pre-training tasks often involve randomly masking certain residues, predicting the types and
positions of the masked residues (i.e., the coordinates of
alpha carbon atoms), and the angles between them and other
residues (Zhang et al., 2022b; Guo et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2023b). Through this process, the model effectively captures the information of the residues, thereby obtaining a
high-quality representation of the protein’s residues.
Although many pre-trained models have demonstrated success in modeling the 3D structure of proteins, the majority
focus on the residue level, utilizing only the geometric positions of alpha carbon atoms or main chain atoms. However,
side chain atoms are also essential in numerous downstream
tasks, such as molecular docking, due to their interactions
with small molecules (Krishna et al., 2023). Thus, it is
imperative to incorporate information from all atoms in protein modeling. In our empirical study, we find that naive
atom-level modeling typically fails: (1) Simply replacing
residue input with atom input, conducting pre-training tasks
at the atom level without considering residue level, such
as predicting atom coordinates and angles, does not yield
significant improvements. This suggests that residue-based
modeling is indispensable. (2) Naively combining residue

1. Introduction
Protein modeling is essential, as proteins play critical roles
in various cellular processes, such as transcription, transla*

Equal contribution 1 DP Technology, Beijing, China 2 Institute
of Computing Technology,UCAS, Beijing, China 3 Xiamen University, School of Informatics, Xiamen, China 4 Xiamen University,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen, China. Correspondence
to: Shuqi Lu <lusq@dp.tech>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

