Dynamic Facility Location in High Dimensional Euclidean Spaces

Sayan Bhattacharya 1 Gramoz Goranci 2 Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang 3 Yi Qian 3 Yubo Zhang 3

Abstract

of clients (known as ’facilities’), so as to minimize the cost
of opening the facilities plus the cost of assigning clients to
their closest facilities. Facility Location is an NP-complete
problem whose approximability has been well-studied (Jain
& Vazirani, 2001; Mettu & Plaxton, 2003). Because of its
practical relevance and connections to other areas such as
operations research, this problem has also been extensively
studied under different computational paradigms, including
the streaming model (Indyk, 2004; Lammersen & Sohler,
2008; Czumaj et al., 2013), massive parallel computation
(MPC) model (Czumaj et al., 2024), online algorithms (Meyerson, 2001; Fotakis, 2008; Cygan et al., 2018), dynamic
algorithms (Goranci et al., 2018; Cohen-Addad et al., 2019;
Guo et al., 2020; Bhattachcharya et al., 2022), and many
more.

We consider the facility location problem in the
dynamic setting, where the goal is to efficiently
process an intermixed sequence of point insertions
and deletions while maintaining a high-quality
and stable solution. Although the problem has
been studied in the context of general metrics and
low-dimensional spaces, much remains unknown
concerning dynamic facility location in highdimensional spaces. In this work, we present the
first fully dynamic algorithm for facility location
in high-dimensional spaces Rd . For any c ≥ 1,
our algorithm achieves O(c)-approximation, supports point updates in Õ(poly(d)n1/c+o(1) ) amortized time and incurs O(1) amortized recourse.
More generally, our result shows that despite the
linear-time lower bound on the update time for
general metrics, it is possible to achieve sub-linear
update times for metric spaces that admit dynamic
nearest neighbour oracles. Experiments on real
datasets confirm that our algorithm achieves highquality solutions with low running time, and incurs minimal recourse.

In many modern applications of facility location, the underlying data evolves dynamically. While many efficient
approximation algorithms have been developed for facility location, these algorithms usually operate under the assumption that input data is static. To tackle the evolving
nature of data, there has been a recent and growing focus
on facility location, and more broadly, clustering, in the
fully dynamic setting. Here, the input data undergoes an
intermixed sequence of point insertions and deletions, referred to as updates. The goal is to process these updates
as efficiently as possible, ensuring that (i) the maintained
clustering achieves a small approximation ratio and that (ii)
the number of changes in the clustering between any two
adjacent updates, known as the recourse, is minimal.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the most important problems in unsupervised learning, finding a wide range of applications
in social network analysis, image segmentation, anomaly
detection, and grouping of search results, among others. A
classical problem at the core of cluster analysis is the facility location problem: the input is a set of points (known as
’clients’) in a metric space, and the goal is to find a subset

Much of the work on dynamic facility location has focused
on general metrics and low-dimensional spaces. For the
former, (Cohen-Addad et al., 2019) showed an algorithm
that achieves O(1) approximation, O(n log n) update time,
and O(1) amortized recourse. One drawback of considering general metric spaces is the natural linear-update
time lower bound: inserting a point entails describing distances to other points, which requires Ω(n) time. In the
low-dimensional regime, (Goranci et al., 2018) presented
an O(1)-approximation algorithm with Õ(1) update time.
However, their update time grows exponentially with the
dimension, which is prohibitive for high-dimensional Euclidean spaces.

The authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 University of
Warwick, UK 2 Faculty of Computer Science, University of
Vienna, Austria 3 Peking University, China. Correspondence to:
Sayan
Bhattacharya
<S.Bhattacharya@warwick.ac.uk>,
Gramoz
Goranci
<gramoz.goranci@univie.ac.at>,
Shaofeng
H.-C.
Jiang
<shaofeng.jiang@pku.edu.cn>,
Yi
Qian
<qianyi@stu.pku.edu.cn>,
Yubo
Zhang
<zhangyubo18@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we give the first fully dynamic algorithm

1

