The Pitfalls and Promise of Conformal Inference Under Adversarial Attacks
Ziquan Liu 1 Yufei Cui 2 Yan Yan 3 Yi Xu 4 Xiangyang Ji 5 Xue Liu 2 Antoni B. Chan 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
The research into adversarial defense has been focused on
improving adversarial training with various strategies, such
as logit-level supervision (Zhang et al., 2019; Cui et al.,
2021a) and loss re-weighting (Wang et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2021a). However, the predictive uncertainty of an adversarially trained model is a crucial dimension of the model in
safety-critical applications such as healthcare (Razzak et al.,
2018), and is not sufficiently understood. Existing works
focus on calibration uncertainty (Stutz et al., 2020; Qin et al.,
2021; Kireev et al., 2022), without investigating practical
uncertainty quantification of a model, e.g., prediction sets in
image classification (Shafer & Vovk, 2008; Angelopoulos
et al., 2020; Romano et al., 2020).

In safety-critical applications such as medical
imaging and autonomous driving, where decisions
have profound implications for patient health and
road safety, it is imperative to maintain both high
adversarial robustness to protect against potential adversarial attacks and reliable uncertainty
quantification in decision-making. With extensive research focused on enhancing adversarial
robustness through various forms of adversarial
training (AT), a notable knowledge gap remains
concerning the uncertainty inherent in adversarially trained models. To address this gap, this
study investigates the uncertainty of deep learning models by examining the performance of conformal prediction (CP) in the context of standard
adversarial attacks within the adversarial defense
community. It is first unveiled that existing CP
methods do not produce informative prediction
sets under the commonly used l∞ -norm bounded
attack if the model is not adversarially trained,
which underpins the importance of adversarial
training for CP. Our paper next demonstrates that
the prediction set size (PSS) of CP using adversarially trained models with AT variants is often
worse than using standard AT, inspiring us to research into CP-efficient AT for improved PSS. We
propose to optimize a Beta-weighting loss with
an entropy minimization regularizer during AT to
improve CP-efficiency, where the Beta-weighting
loss is shown to be an upper bound of PSS at
the population level by our theoretical analysis.
Moreover, our empirical study on four image classification datasets across three popular AT baselines validates the effectiveness of the proposed
Uncertainty-Reducing AT (AT-UR).

On the other hand, the research into conformal prediction
(CP) has been extended to non-i.i.d. (identically independently distributed) settings, including distribution shifts
(Gibbs & Candes, 2021) and toy adversarial noise (Ghosh
et al., 2023; Gendler et al., 2021). However, there is little
research work on the performance of CP under standard
adversarial attacks in the adversarial defense community,
such as PGD-based attacks (Madry et al., 2018; Croce &
Hein, 2020) with l∞ -norm bounded perturbations. For example, (Gendler et al., 2021) and (Ghosh et al., 2023) only
consider l2 -norm bounded adversarial perturbations with a
small attack budget, e.g., ϵ = 0.125 for the CIFAR dataset
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009). In contrast, the common l2 -norm
bounded attack budget in the adversarial defense community
reaches ϵ = 0.5 on CIFAR (Croce & Hein, 2020). In other
words, existing research on adversarially robust conformal
prediction is not practical enough to be used under standard
adversarial attacks.
In this context, our paper is among the first research papers
to explore uncertainty of deep learning models within the
framework of CP in the presence of a standard adversary.
We first present an empirical result that shows the failure of
three popular CP methods on non-robust models under standard adversarial attacks, indicating the necessity of using
adversarial training (AT) during the training stage. Next, we
show the CP performance of three popular AT methods, finding that advanced AT methods like TRADES (Zhang et al.,
2019) and MART (Wang et al., 2019) substantially increase
the PSS in CP even though they improve the Top-1 robust

1
Queen Mary University of London 2 McGill University, Mila
Washington State University 4 Dalian University of Technology
5
Tsinghua University 6 City University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Ziquan Liu <ziquan.liu@qmul.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

