Repeat After Me:
Transformers are Better than State Space Models at Copying
Transformers are Better than State Space Models at Copying

Samy Jelassi 1 David Brandfonbrener 2 Sham M. Kakade 2 3 Eran Malach 2

Abstract

compute to predict the next token of a sequence of length L.

Transformers are the dominant architecture for sequence modeling, but there is growing interest in
models that use a fixed-size latent state that does
not depend on the sequence length, which we refer
to as “generalized state space models” (GSSMs).
In this paper we show that while GSSMs are
promising in terms of inference-time efficiency,
they are limited compared to transformer models
on tasks that require copying from the input context. We start with a theoretical analysis of the
simple task of string copying and prove that a two
layer transformer can copy strings of exponential
length while GSSMs are fundamentally limited by
their fixed-size latent state. Empirically, we find
that transformers outperform GSSMs in terms of
efficiency and generalization on synthetic tasks
that require copying the context. Finally, we evaluate pretrained large language models and find
that transformer models dramatically outperform
state space models at copying and retrieving information from context. Taken together, these results
suggest a fundamental gap between transformers
and GSSMs on tasks of practical interest.

This has spurred a boom in attempts to create architectures
that can achieve similar performance as transformers, but
with O(1) memory to predict each token. This class of
models includes state space models like S4 (Gu et al., 2021)
or Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023), as well as traditional RNN
models (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and models that
can be trained in parallel like linear attention (Katharopoulos
et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2020) and parallel RNNs
(Bradbury et al., 2016; Peng et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023).
In this paper, we will refer to this entire class of models that
use a fixed-size memory as “generalized state space models”
or GSSMs (see a formal definition in Section 2).
Recent work has demonstrated impressive performance of
GSSMs, but it is not yet clear what these models sacrifice
for their improved efficiency, if anything. In this paper, we
find that one particular capability that is sacrificed is the
ability to retrieve and repeat parts of the input context. As a
result, transformers are better than GSSMs at a variety of
tasks that require accessing arbitrary parts of the context.
To understand this gap in capabilities, we begin by presenting a theoretical analysis of the copying task2 . First, we
show via construction that a simple transformer model can
copy strings of length that is exponential in the number of
heads of the transformer. This construction relies on the
ability of the transformer to implement a mechanism of
“storage” and retrieval of sequences of n tokens (n-grams),
where the n-grams are used to track where to copy from. In
contrast, we show that, trivially, GSSMs cannot accurately
copy strings with more bits than the size of the latent state.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are the workhorse of
modern sequence modeling, achieving remarkable performance on a variety of tasks, but they have unavoidable
inefficiencies. Specifically, they require Ω(L) memory1 and
Harvard University, Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications 2 Harvard University, Kempner Institute for the Study
of Natural and Artificial Intelligence 3 Harvard University, Departments of Computer Science and Statistics. Correspondence to:
Samy Jelassi <sjelassi@fas.harvard.edu>.

Our theory studies representation expressivity, but not
whether these representations will be learned. Moreover, in
practice a large GSSM may have enough capacity to represent the entire input in the latent state, at least in theory. To
resolve these concerns, we conduct a variety of synthetic
experiments with models of ∼160M parameters. We find

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
In some naive implementations of transformers, it is common
to allocate a L × L matrix to compute the attention. However,

memory efficient implementations, such as FlashAttention (Dao
et al., 2022), compute the attention with O(L) memory.
2
Note that we study copying of the input and not copying of
training data (McCoy et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2022)

1

1

