Meta-Learners for Partially-Identified Treatment Effects Across Multiple
Environments
Jonas Schweisthal * 1 2 Dennis Frauen * 1 2 Mihaela van der Schaar 3 Stefan Feuerriegel 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2024), economics (Angrist, 1990; Kuzmanovic et al.,
2024), or marketing (Varian, 2016). For example, medical
professionals are interested in leveraging electronic health
records to personalize care by understanding the estimated
CATE of treatments.

Estimating the conditional average treatment effect (CATE) from observational data is relevant for many applications such as personalized
medicine. Here, we focus on the widespread
setting where the observational data come from
multiple environments, such as different hospitals, physicians, or countries. Furthermore, we allow for violations of standard causal assumptions,
namely, overlap within the environments and unconfoundedness. To this end, we move away from
point identification and focus on partial identification. Specifically, we show that current assumptions from the literature on multiple environments
allow us to interpret the environment as an instrumental variable (IV). This allows us to adapt
bounds from the IV literature for partial identification of CATE by leveraging treatment assignment
mechanisms across environments. Then, we propose different model-agnostic learners (so-called
meta-learners) to estimate the bounds that can be
used in combination with arbitrary machine learning models. We further demonstrate the effectiveness of our meta-learners across various experiments using both simulated and real-world data.
Finally, we discuss the applicability of our metalearners to partial identification in instrumental
variable settings, such as randomized controlled
trials with non-compliance.

In this paper, we are interested in the CATE in a setting
where we have access to observational data, that are collected from multiple environments. Furthermore, we allow
for violations of standard causal assumptions, namely, overlap within the environments and unconfoundedness. Our
setting is particularly relevant for medical applications for
two reasons.
First, CATE estimation in practice often involves settings
where the observational data come from multiple environments (Shi et al., 2021). Common examples in medicine are
settings where patient data come from multiple hospitals,
multiple physicians, or multiple countries (e.g., Huang et al.,
2022). As a result, each environment is characterized by
unique patient demographics (e.g., a specialized hospital
may have more severe cases of disease) and/or unique treatment policies (e.g., the default treatment option may vary
across countries).
Second, identification of the CATE from observational data
is challenging and typically requires strong assumptions
such as (i) overlap (within environments) and (ii) unconfoundedness (Wager & Athey, 2018). (i) Overlap ensures
that each individual has a positive probability of receiving
any treatment (D’Amour et al., 2021) within each environment. (ii) Unconfoundedness implies that all potential
confounders that influence both the treatment assignment
and the outcome of interest are contained within the observational data. Under violations of these assumptions,
the CATE is generally unidentifiable and can not be estimated consistently from observational data (Pearl, 2009).
Notwithstanding, violations are likely to occur in settings
with multiple environments. (i) When patient characteristics
and/or treatment policies vary across environments, then it
is likely that certain patient characteristics and/or certain
treatments are rarely or even never observed in some environments (e.g., certain treatments are only administered by
specialized physicians). As such, overlap is often violated.
(ii) Confounders such as socioeconomic status are often

1. Introduction
Estimating conditional average treatment effects (CATEs)
from observational data is relevant for many applications.
Examples include medicine (Glass et al., 2013; Feuerriegel
*

Equal contribution 1 LMU Munich, Germany 2 Munich
Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany
3
University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Jonas
Schweisthal <jonas.schweisthal@lmu.de>, Dennis Frauen
<frauen@lmu.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

