Lessons from Generalization Error Analysis of Federated Learning :
You May Communicate Less Often!

Milad Sefidgaran 1 Romain Chor 1 2 Abdellatif Zaidi 1 2 Yijun Wan 1

Abstract
We investigate the generalization error of statistical learning models in a Federated Learning (FL)
setting. Specifically, we study the evolution of
the generalization error with the number of communication rounds R between K clients and a
parameter server (PS), i.e., the effect on the generalization error of how often the clients’ local
models are aggregated at PS. In our setup, the
more the clients communicate with PS the less
data they use for local training in each round,
such that the amount of training data per client
is identical for distinct values of R. We establish
PAC-Bayes and rate-distortion theoretic bounds
on the generalization error that account explicitly
for the effect of the number of rounds R, in addition to the number of participating devices K and
individual datasets size n. The bounds, which apply to a large class of loss functions and learning
algorithms, appear to be the first of their kind for
the FL setting. Furthermore, we apply our bounds
to FL-type Support Vector Machines (FSVM);
and derive (more) explicit bounds in this case. In
particular, we show that the generalization bound
of FSVM increases with R, suggesting that more
frequent communication with PS diminishes the
generalization power. This implies that the population risk decreases less fast with R than does
the empirical risk. Moreover, our bound suggests
that the generalization error of FSVM decreases
faster a
than that of centralized learning by a factor
of Op logpKq{Kq. Finally, we provide experimental results obtained using neural networks
(ResNet-56) which show evidence that not only
may our observations for FSVM hold more generally but also that the population risk may even
start to increase beyond some value of R.

Figure 1. Multi-round Federated Learning

1. Introduction
A major focus of machine learning research over recent
years has been the development of statistical learning algorithms that can be applied to spatially distributed data.
In part, this is due to the emergence of new applications
for which it is either not possible (due to lack of resources
(Zinkevich et al., 2010; Kairouz et al., 2021)) or not desired (due to privacy concerns (Truex et al., 2019; Wei et al.,
2020; Mothukuri et al., 2021)) to collect all the data at one
point prior to applying a suitable machine learning algorithm to it (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017;
Aguerri & Zaidi, 2019; Zaidi et al., 2020; Verbraeken et al.,
2020; Moldoveanu & Zaidi, 2021; Kasiviswanathan et al.,
2011; Sefidgaran et al., 2023). One popular such algorithm
is Federated-Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Yang
et al., 2018; Kairouz et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Reddi
et al., 2020; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021).
In FL, there are K clients or devices that hold each their
own dataset and collaborate to collectively train a (global)
model without sharing their data. The distributions of the
clients’ data can be identical (homogeneous) or different
(heterogeneous). The model is depicted in Figure 1 and
described in Section 2. An FL algorithm typically proceeds
in R P N˚ communication rounds: at each round, every
device produces a local model or hypothesis by means of a
possibly different learning algorithm, e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). Then, all clients’ local models are sent
to the parameter server (PS) which aggregates them into
a (global) model. This aggregated model is sent back to

1

Huawei Paris Research Center, Paris, France 2 Université Gustave Eiffel, Champs-sur-Marne, France. Correspondence to: Milad
Sefidgaran <milad.sefidgaran2@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

