Lightweight Image Super-Resolution via Flexible Meta Pruning

Yulun ZhangB 1 Kai Zhang 2 Luc Van Gool 3 4 5 Martin Danelljan 3 Fisher Yu 3

Abstract
Lightweight image super-resolution (SR) methods have obtained promising results with moderate model complexity. These approaches primarily focus on a lightweight architecture design, but neglect to further reduce network redundancy. While some model compression techniques try to achieve more lightweight SR models with neural architecture search, knowledge
distillation, or channel pruning, they typically require considerable extra computational resources
or neglect to prune weights. To address these issues, we propose a flexible meta pruning (FMP)
for lightweight image SR, where the network
channels and weights are pruned simultaneously.
Specifically, we control the network sparsity via
channel vectors and weight indicators. We feed
them into a hypernetwork, whose parameters
act as meta-data for the parameters of the SR
backbone. Consequently, for each network layer,
we conduct structured pruning with channel vectors, which control the output and input channels.
Besides, we conduct unstructured pruning with
weight indicators to influence the sparsity of kernel weights, resulting in flexible pruning. During
pruning, the sparsity of both channel vectors and
weight indicators are regularized. We optimize
the channel vectors and weight indicators with
proximal gradient and SGD. We conduct extensive experiments to investigate critical factors in
the flexible channel and weight pruning for image SR, demonstrating the superiority of our FMP
when applied to baseline image SR architectures.

Urban100: img 062

HR

Bicubic

CARN

IMDN

ASSLN

FMP (ours)

Figure 1. Visual samples of image SR (×4) by lightweight methods. Our FMP achieves better visual reconstruction.

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental image processing tasks, single image super-resolution (SR) aims to upscale a low-resolution
(LR) input to the desired size by restoring more details.
Recently, the task has received increasing attention, with
much exploration of deep neural network architectures for
improved performance and efficiency (Dong et al., 2014;
Kim et al., 2016; Lim et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018b;
Liang et al., 2021). Image SR first witnessed the application of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) in
SRCNN (Dong et al., 2014), with three convolutional layers. Kim et al. successfully trained a deeper network with
residual learning (Kim et al., 2016). Lim et al. further built
a much deeper network EDSR (Lim et al., 2017) by simplifying the residual blocks (He et al., 2016). Zhang et
al. achieved even deeper in RCAN (Zhang et al., 2018a)
with the residual in residual (RIR) structure. Such an RIR
structure was further utilized in SwinIR (Liang et al., 2021),
where Swin Transformer (Liu et al., 2021) was introduced
as the basic block. Most of these CNN and Transformer
based methods have obtained increasing SR performance
with large model size and run-time, making them hard to deploy in practice. Therefore, lightweight models are heavily
desired in real-world applications, where the computational
resources are limited (Lee et al., 2020).
To achieve lightweight image SR, increasing effort has
been devoted to design lightweight architectures and incorporation of model compression techniques. Many welldesigned lightweight SR models have been proposed, such
as CARN (Ahn et al., 2018), IMDN (Hui et al., 2019),
RLFN (Kong et al., 2022), and ELAN (Zhang et al., 2022a).
However, the required architectural exploration is costly
in both time and energy. Meanwhile, knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2014) was introduced to distill
knowledge from a teacher SR network to the student (He
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020). Neural architecture search

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China 2 School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, Nanjing University, China 3 ETH Zürich, Switzerland
4
KU Leuven, Belgium 5 INSAIT, Bulgaria. Correspondence to:
B
Yulun Zhang <yulun100@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

