Adaptive Observation Cost Control for Variational Quantum Eigensolvers

Christopher J. Anders * 1 2 Kim A. Nicoli * 3 4 Bingting Wu 2 Naima Elosegui 1 2 Samuele Pedrielli 2
Lena Funcke 3 4 Karl Jansen 5 Stefan Kühn 5 Shinichi Nakajima 1 2 6

Abstract

tonian. It utilizes a quantum device to efficiently prepare a
trial state in the form of a parameterized ansatz circuit and
to measure the expectation value of the Hamiltonian, i.e.,
the energy, in the given ansatz. Subsequently, based on the
measurement outcome, a classical optimizer is used to compute a new set of parameters that likely lowers the energy.
Running the feedback loop between the quantum device and
the classical optimizer until convergence, the parametric
ansatz encodes an approximation for the ground-state of the
Hamiltonian, and the final energy measurement provides an
estimate for the ground-state energy.

The objective to be minimized in the variational
quantum eigensolver (VQE) has a restricted form,
which allows a specialized sequential minimal
optimization (SMO) that requires only a few observations in each iteration. However, the SMO iteration is still costly due to the observation noise—
one observation at a point typically requires averaging over hundreds to thousands of repeated
quantum measurement shots for achieving a reasonable noise level. In this paper, we propose an
adaptive cost control method, named subspace
in confident region (SubsCoRe), for SMO. SubsCoRe uses the Gaussian process (GP) surrogate,
and requires it to have low uncertainty over the
subspace being updated, so that optimization in
each iteration is performed with guaranteed accuracy. The adaptive cost control is performed by
first setting the required accuracy according to the
progress of the optimization, and then choosing
the minimum number of measurement shots and
their distribution such that the required accuracy
is satisfied. We demonstrate that SubsCoRe significantly improves the efficiency of SMO, and
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

VQEs may offer the potential to overcome computational
challenges in many fields of science, including quantum
chemistry, biology, and material science (Kandala et al.,
2017; Grimsley et al., 2019; Bauer et al., 2020; Fedorov
& Gelfand, 2021; Ollitrault et al., 2020), where accurately
identifying the ground-state energy of complex molecules
or materials is intractable for classical computers. By leveraging the principles of quantum mechanics, VQEs may
efficiently solve such problems, enabling advancements in
drug discovery, materials design, and other fields (Cao et al.,
2018). Furthermore, applications of VQEs to other computationally challenging tasks, e.g., high-energy physics
calculations (Humble et al., 2022; Di Meglio et al., 2023) including lattice field theory simulations (Funcke et al., 2023),
have been recently investigated. We refer readers to Tilly
et al. (2022) for a comprehensive review.

1. Introduction

As is typical for any type of quantum computing protocols,
VQEs suffer from two types of noise—hardware noise and
shot noise. The hardware noise is caused by the imperfect
quantum circuit that systematically or stochastically distorts
the observations, while the shot noise is due to the intrinsic
(and therefore unavoidable) stochastic nature of quantum
computing. Throughout the paper, we do not consider the
hardware noise* and focus on the shot noise, i.e., statistical
uncertainties due to a finite number of repeated measurements (shots) to estimate expected values of observables
on the quantum computer. We treat the shot noise as i.i.d.
observation noise when regression is applied to the measurements.

Introduced a decade ago by Peruzzo et al. (2014), the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) (McClean et al., 2016)
has become a widespread hybrid quantum-classical algorithm for approximating the ground-state of a given Hamil*
Equal contribution 1 Berlin Institute for the Foundations of
Learning and Data (BIFOLD) 2 Technische Universität Berlin,
Germany 3 Transdisciplinary Research Area (TRA) Matter, University of Bonn, Germany 4 Helmholtz Institute for Radiation
and Nuclear Physics (HISKP), University of Bonn, Germany
5
CQTA, Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Zeuthen,
Germany 6 RIKEN Center for AIP, Japan. Correspondence to:
<anders/nakajima@tu-berlin.de>, <knicoli@uni-bonn.de>.

* Recent progress in quantum hardware development has substantially reduced the hardware noise, see, e.g., Bluvstein et al.
(2023).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

