Stochastic Optimization with Arbitrary Recurrent Data Sampling

William Powell * 1 Hanbaek Lyu * 1
where Θ ⊆ Rp is a convex, but not necessarily compact
feasible set and θ represents the parameters of a model to be
optimized. Here V is a finite index set where one can view
each index v ∈ V representing (a batch of) data that can
be accessed at once. Then f v (θ) is the loss incurred using
parameter θ with respect to data at v, which is weighted
by π(v) ≥ 0 when forming the overall objective f in (1).
Without loss of generality, we assume the π(v)s sum to one.
1
When π(v) ≡ |V|
the problem (1) becomes the classical
finite sum problem in the optimization literature. Instances
of non-uniform π arise when training a model with imbalanced data as has been studied in (Steininger et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022b; Sow et al., 2024).

Abstract
For obtaining optimal first-order convergence
guarantees for stochastic optimization, it is necessary to use a recurrent data sampling algorithm
that samples every data point with sufficient frequency. Most commonly used data sampling algorithms (e.g., i.i.d., MCMC, random reshuffling)
are indeed recurrent under mild assumptions. In
this work, we show that for a particular class
of stochastic optimization algorithms, we do not
need any further property (e.g., independence, exponential mixing, and reshuffling) beyond recurrence in data sampling to guarantee optimal rate
of first-order convergence. Namely, using regularized versions of Minimization by Incremental
Surrogate Optimization (MISO), we show that for
non-convex and possibly non-smooth objective
functions with constraints, the expected optimality gap converges at an optimal rate O(n−1/2 )
under general recurrent sampling schemes. Furthermore, the implied constant depends explicitly
on the ‘speed of recurrence’, measured by the expected amount of time to visit a farthest data point,
either averaged (‘target time’) or supremized (‘hitting time’) over the initial locations. We discuss
applications of our general framework to decentralized optimization and distributed non-negative
matrix factorization.

We aim to solve this problem by developing an algorithm
which produces iterative parameter updates θ n given only
access to an arbitrary sequence of data samples (vn )n≥1 .
In order to reach a first-order stationary point of (1) for general objectives, it is necessary to use a sampling algorithm
that is recurrent, meaning that every data point is sampled
infinitely often with ‘sufficient frequency’. Note that recurrence is satisfied by many common sampling schemes such
as i.i.d. (independently and identically distributed) sampling, (irreducible) Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC),
cyclic sampling (Bertsekas, 2011), and random-reshuffling
(Ying et al., 2017). The main question we ask in this work
is the following:
• Is there any class of stochastic optimization algorithms
for which recurrent sampling is enough to obtain optimal first-order convergence guarantee for (1)?

1. Introduction

In this paper, we show that for a class of suitable extensions
of stochastic optimization algorithms known as Minimization by Incremental Surrogate Optimization (MISO) (Mairal,
2015), no additional property of a data sampling algorithm
(e.g., independence, exponential mixing, reshuffling) other
than recurrence is needed in order to guarantee convergence
to first-order stationary points. Furthermore, we show that
the rate of convergence depends crucially on either the averaged or supremized return time to the farthest data point,
corresponding to the notion of ‘target time’ and ‘hitting
time’ in Markov chain theory, respectively.

In this paper we consider the minimization of a non-convex
weighted finite-sum objective f : Rp → R:
n
o
X
θ ∗ ∈ arg min f (θ) :=
f v (θ)π(v)
θ∈Θ

(1)

v∈V

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence
to: William Powell <wgpowell@wisc.edu>, Hanbaek Lyu
<hlyu@math.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

With the original MISO algorithm in (Mairal, 2013), even
under the general recurrent data sampling, we are able to
1

