Learning with Adaptive Resource Allocation

Jing Wang 1 2 Miao Yu 1 2 Peng Zhao 1 2 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1 2

Abstract

Task 1

The study of machine learning under limited resources has gathered increasing attention, considering improving the learning efficiency and
effectiveness with budgeted resources. However,
previous efforts mainly focus on single learning
task, and a common resource-limited scenario is
less explored: to handle multiple time-constrained
learning tasks concurrently with budgeted computational resources. In this paper, we point out
that this is a very challenging task because it demands the learner to be concerned about not only
the progress of the learning tasks but also the coordinative allocation of computational resources.
We present the Learning with Adaptive Resource
Allocation (LARA) approach, which comprises
an efficient online estimator for learning progress
prediction, an adaptive search method for computational resource allocation, and a balancing
strategy for alleviating prediction-allocation compounding errors. Empirical studies validate the
effectiveness of our proposed approach.

Task 1

User 1
Task 2

Task 2

..
.

User 2

Upload time

Task K
User K

Task K

..
.

Deadline time

Computational facility

Figure 1. Multiple users upload diverse learning tasks to a shared
computational facility, all intended to be completed before userdefined deadlines. Due to computational resource limitation, we
aim to complete as many tasks as possible within these constraints.

In order to improve training efficiency and effectiveness
with limited computational resources, various significant
strides have been made in prior research, which include:
improving resource usage efficiency (Dean et al., 2012; Li
et al., 2014), reducing model size (Frankle & Carbin, 2019;
Mirzadeh et al., 2020), designing memory-efficient optimization algorithms (Anil et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2022),
etc. Notably, previous efforts mainly focus on the computational resource issue of single learning task. However, a
common resource limitation scenario has received less attention: multiple time-constrained learning tasks competing for
budgeted computational resources, as illustrated in Figure 1.

1. Introduction

Consider a practical example of a quantitative finance
startup, where there can be multiple analysts or traders who
aim to train many different learning models to help forecast
the market or manage risks, and these model training tasks
require a large amount of computational resources. Given
their limited budgets, these startups often face challenges
in acquiring advanced computational resources necessary
for concurrently handling everyone’s computational needs.
This limitation typically results in a first-come, first-served
basis in resource allocation. Such an approach can be highly
inefficient, particularly when earlier uploaded tasks use resources poorly, which not only leads to computational power
wastage but also causes delays in executing other critical
tasks. In the dynamic and fast-paced domain of finance,
such delays can incur significant costs, such as missed opportunities or delayed responses to emerging risks.

The impact of limited computational resources on machine
learning (ML) is of increasing attention due to its significant
influence on the efficiency and effectiveness of the model
training process in various real-world scenarios. This is
particularly noticeable in situations involving large models,
such as large language models (Achiam et al., 2023), which
always demand the use of thousands of GPUs for several
months to achieve effective training, as well as the situation of tiny training devices such as certain IoT devices or
microcontrollers (Lin et al., 2023), which are incapable of
supporting even regular sized models. All these situations
highlight the diverse challenges posed by computational
resource limitations in different contexts of learning tasks.
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China. Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua Zhou
<zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

A similar challenge arises when a user purchases or leases
cloud computational services. As the user always needs to
execute multiple tasks concurrently, each corresponding to
different model structures or hyperparameter tunings, these

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

