Long Is More for Alignment:
A Simple but Tough-to-Beat Baseline for Instruction Fine-Tuning
Hao Zhao 1 Maksym Andriushchenko 1 Francesco Croce 1 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract

Ouyang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Taori et al., 2023)
to make them suitable for downstream tasks like user
interaction or question answering. While the details may
vary, alignment often relies on supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
on a dataset of instruction-response pairs to improve conversational ability, followed by reinforcement learning from
either human (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) or automated
(RLAIF) (Bai et al., 2022b; Lee et al., 2023) feedback to
promote the preferred style and content of replies. It is
an active research direction to study whether it is possible
to achieve satisfactory results while relying only on SFT,
which would avoid the (potentially expensive) process
of collecting preference data. Taori et al. (2023) created
Alpaca, an open source dataset of 52k instruction-response
pairs, and fine-tuned on it a Llama-2-7B model to match
the performance of the closed-source text-davinci-003
model. Then, Chen et al. (2023) introduced AlpaGasus,
consisting of the 9k examples of Alpaca which are judged
of highest quality by GPT-3.5-Turbo, to further improve the
instruction-following abilities of the fine-tuned models. The
intuition that instruction fine-tuning (IFT) might benefit
from fewer demonstrations but of higher quality has been
further pursued by Zhou et al. (2023) which manually
curated LIMA, a dataset of 1k examples, which outperforms
AlpaGasus. While the quality of the instructions seems to
play a major role for IFT, it remains unclear which are the
distinguishing features of high quality demonstrations.

There is a consensus that instruction fine-tuning
of LLMs requires high-quality data, but what
are they? LIMA (NeurIPS 2023) and AlpaGasus (ICLR 2024) are state-of-the-art methods for
selecting such high-quality examples, either via
manual curation or using GPT-3.5-Turbo as a quality scorer. We show that the extremely simple
baseline of selecting the 1,000 instructions with
longest responses—that intuitively contain more
learnable information and are harder to overfit—
from standard datasets can consistently outperform these sophisticated methods according to
GPT-4 and PaLM-2 as judges, while remaining
competitive on the Open LLM benchmarks that
test factual knowledge. We demonstrate this
for several LLMs (Llama-2-7B, Llama-2-13B,
Mistral-7B-v0.1) and datasets (Alpaca-52k, EvolInstruct-70k). In addition, a lightweight refinement of such long instructions can further improve
the abilities of the fine-tuned LLMs, and allows
us to obtain competitive results on MT-Bench and
the 2nd highest-ranked Llama-2-7B-based model
on AlpacaEval 2.0, while training on only 1,000
examples and no extra preference data. We also
conduct a thorough analysis of our models to ensure that their enhanced performance is not simply
due to GPT-4’s preference for longer responses.
Overall, our findings suggest that fine-tuning on
the longest responses should be the default baselinefor any work on instruction fine-tuning. We
provide our code in this GitHub repository.

In this work, we revisit the significant efforts in constructing
instruction-tuning datasets from prior work. Inspired by the
fact LIMA contains much longer examples than Alpaca and
the observation of recent works (Singhal et al., 2023; Yuan
et al., 2024) that RLHF and direct preference optimization
(DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) seem to mostly make the outputs longer, we test selecting longest responses as a simple
and inexpensive heuristic to curate a small (only 1k examples) and high-quality IFT dataset from a larger one. Surprisingly, fine-tuning a Llama-2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023)
base model on the 1k longest elements of Alpaca outperforms both AlpaGasus and LIMA in one-to-one comparison
with different LLMs as judges and on the AlpacaEval 2.0
benchmark (see Fig. 1). Moreover, simply improving the
quality and the style of the response in Alpaca-1k-longest
with GPT-3.5-Turbo, in combination with NEFTune noise

1. Introduction
Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) need to undergo
an alignment phase (Askell et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022a;
1
EPFL, Switzerland.
<hao.zhao@epfl.ch>.

Correspondence to:

Hao Zhao

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

