Robust Optimization in Protein Fitness Landscapes Using
Reinforcement Learning in Latent Space

Minji Lee * 1 Luiz Felipe Vecchietti * 2 Hyunkyu Jung 1 2 Hyunjoo Ro 3 Meeyoung Cha 1 2 Ho Min Kim 4 3

Abstract

tively in the laboratory, even with high-throughput screening
from diversified libraries (Huang et al., 2016). Therefore,
computational methods have been proposed to improve the
success rate of fitness optimization by generating optimized
sequences or predicting beneficial mutations (Brookes et al.,
2019; Sinai et al., 2020; Kirjner et al., 2023). When experimental data is available, fitness predictors have been trained
to act as surrogate models for optimization (Rao et al., 2019;
Dallago et al., 2021).

Proteins are complex molecules responsible for
different functions in nature. Enhancing the functionality of proteins and cellular fitness can significantly impact various industries. However,
protein optimization using computational methods remains challenging, especially when starting
from low-fitness sequences. We propose LatProtRL, an optimization method to efficiently traverse a latent space learned by an encoder-decoder
leveraging a large protein language model. To escape local optima, our optimization is modeled
as a Markov decision process using reinforcement learning acting directly in latent space. We
evaluate our approach on two important fitness
optimization tasks, demonstrating its ability to
achieve comparable or superior fitness over baseline methods. Our findings and in vitro evaluation
show that the generated sequences can reach highfitness regions, suggesting a substantial potential
of LatProtRL in lab-in-the-loop scenarios.

In our work, we consider protein fitness optimization in
an active learning setting (Algorithm 1) starting from lowfitness sequences. The model iteratively proposes optimized
sequences, gets feedback from a black-box oracle, and
updates its belief on the fitness landscape, i.e., mapping
between sequence and fitness, for the next optimization
round. For example, Bayesian optimization (BO) methods
(Brookes et al., 2019; Belanger et al., 2019) update their
acquisition function after each round. In this paper, we
propose an optimization of sequences via reinforcement
learning (RL) directly in a latent representation space rather
than in the protein sequence space. Our protein fitness optimization framework (Figure 1) works as follows:

1. Introduction

• State. We introduce a variant encoder-decoder
(VED), which reduces a protein sequence into a lowdimensional representation using a pre-trained protein
language model (pLM). In the decoder, we introduce a
prompt-tuning approach to recover the sequence from
predicted embeddings. By treating the learned representation as states, we can use the knowledge of a large
pre-trained language model and detach the representation learning from optimization.

Proteins mediate the fundamental processes of life. Improving the proteins’ functions or cellular fitness is crucial
for industrial, research, and therapeutic applications (Yang
et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2016). One powerful approach to
this is directed evolution, the iterative process of performing
random mutations and screening proteins with desired phenotypes. However, the protein sequence space of possible
combinations of 20 amino acids is too vast to search exhaus-

• Action. Generating sequences via single mutations
can lead to challenges in exploration, particularly for
proteins where multiple mutations are required to acquire high fitness. Therefore, we define actions as
perturbations in a latent space. The optimized representation generated by the policy is decoded back to
the sequence space using the variant encoder-decoder.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea 2 Center for Mathematical and Computational
Sciences, Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon, South Korea
3
Center for Biomolecular and Cellular Structure, Institute for
Basic Science, Daejeon, South Korea 4 Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Meeyoung Cha <meeyoungcha@kaist.ac.kr>, Ho Min Kim
<hm kim@kaist.ac.kr>.

• Optimization. The protein fitness landscape is often rugged (Szendro et al., 2013), exhibiting multiple
peaks surrounded by low fitness valleys. When starting

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

