Acquiring Diverse Skills using Curriculum Reinforcement Learning with
Mixture of Experts

Onur Celik 1 2 Aleksandar Taranovic 1 Gerhard Neumann 1 2

Abstract

Similarly, in scenarios with environmental changes where
learned skills might be infeasible over time (e.g. grasping
an object while avoiding obstacles), diverse skills provide
additional adaptivity by discarding these invalid skills and
relying on alternatives. This property makes them superior
because complete relearning of skills is avoided.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful approach for acquiring a good-performing policy.
However, learning diverse skills is challenging
in RL due to the commonly used Gaussian policy parameterization. We propose Diverse Skill
Learning (Di-SkilL1 ), an RL method for learning
diverse skills using Mixture of Experts, where
each expert formalizes a skill as a contextual motion primitive. Di-SkilL optimizes each expert
and its associate context distribution to a maximum entropy objective that incentivizes learning diverse skills in similar contexts. The perexpert context distribution enables automatic curricula learning, allowing each expert to focus
on its best-performing sub-region of the context
space. To overcome hard discontinuities and
multi-modalities without any prior knowledge of
the environment’s unknown context probability
space, we leverage energy-based models to represent the per-expert context distributions and
demonstrate how we can efficiently train them
using the standard policy gradient objective. We
show on challenging robot simulation tasks that
Di-SkilL can learn diverse and performant skills.

Acquiring these diverse skill sets requires learning a policy that can represent multi-modality in the behavior space.
Recent advances in supervised policy learning have demonstrated the potential of training high-capacity policies capable of capturing multi-modal behaviors (Shafiullah et al.,
2022; Blessing et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2024).
These policies exhibit remarkably diverse skills and outperform state-of-the-art methods. However, Reinforcement
Learning (RL) is essential to acquire skills in cases where
no expert data is available, or data collection is expensive.
Discovering multi-modal behaviors using RL is challenging
since the policies usually rely on Gaussian parameterization
and thus can only discover a single behavior.
We consider training agents that possess diverse skills, from
which they can select to tackle a specific task differently.
For capturing these multi-modalities in the agent’s behavior
space, we employ highly non-linear Mixture of Experts policies. Furthermore, we use automatic curriculum learning
for efficient learning, enabling each expert to focus on a
specific sub-region of the context space it favors. We introduce this curriculum shaping by optimizing for an additional
per-expert context distribution that is used to sample contexts from the preferred regions to train the corresponding
expert. Automatic curriculum learning has proven to increase performance by improving the exploration of agents,
particularly in sparse-rewarded environments (Klink et al.,
2022b).

1. Introduction
Solving tasks in diverse manners enables agents to better
adapt to unknown and challenging situations. This diverse
skill set is beneficial in many scenarios, such as playing
table tennis, where applying different strikes (e.g. backhand,
forehand, or smashing) to similar incoming balls is advantageous because the strike is less predictable for the opponent.

We explore Contextual Reinforcement Learning in which a
continuous-valued context describes the task (Kupcsik et al.,
2013). In the example of robot table tennis (see Fig. 3a),
a context includes the desired ball landing positions on the
opponent’s tableside as well as physical aspects, such as the
incoming ball’s velocity or friction properties. In continuous
context spaces, the curriculum shaping per-expert context
distributions are often parameterized as Gaussian (Klink
et al., 2020a; Celik et al., 2022). However, the agent is usu-

1

Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 2 FZI Research Center for Information
Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to: Onur Celik
<celik@kit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Videos and code are available on the project webpage:
https://alrhub.github.io/di-skill-website/

1

