Robustly Learning Single-Index Models via Alignment Sharpness

Nikos Zarifis * 1 Puqian Wang * 1 Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Jelena Diakonikolas 1

Abstract

agnostic (or adversarial label noise) model (Haussler, 1992;
Kearns et al., 1994), where no assumptions are made on
the labels of the examples and the goal is to compute a
hypothesis that is competitive with the best-fit function in
the class. Importantly, as will be formalized below, we
will not assume a priori knowledge of the link function. In
more detail, let D be a distribution on labeled examples
(x, y) ∈ Rd × R and L2 (h) = E(x,y)∼D [(h(x) − y)2 ] be
the squared loss of the hypothesis h : Rd → R with respect
to D. Given i.i.d. samples from D, the goal of the learner is
to output a hypothesis h with squared error competitive with
OPT, where OPT = inf f ∈C L2 (f ) is the best attainable
error by any function in the target class C.

We study the problem of learning Single-Index
Models under the L22 loss in the agnostic model.
We give an efficient learning algorithm, achieving
a constant factor approximation to the optimal
loss, that succeeds under a range of distributions
(including log-concave distributions) and a broad
class of monotone and Lipschitz link functions.
This is the first efficient constant factor approximate agnostic learner, even for Gaussian data and
for any nontrivial class of link functions. Prior
work for the case of unknown link function either works in the realizable setting or does not
attain constant factor approximation. The main
technical ingredient enabling our algorithm and
analysis is a novel notion of a local error bound
in optimization that we term alignment sharpness
and that may be of broader interest.

In the context of this paper, the class C above is the class
of SIMs, i.e., all functions of the form f (x) = u(w · x)
where both the weight vector w and the link function u are
unknown. For this task to be even information-theoretically
solvable, one requires some assumptions on the vector w
and the link function u. We will assume, as is standard,
that the ℓ2 -norm of w is bounded by a parameter W . We
will similarly assume that the link function lies in a family
of well-behaved functions that are monotone and satisfy
certain Lipschitz properties (see Definition 1.3).

1. Introduction
Single-index models (SIMs) (Ichimura, 1993; Hristache
et al., 2001; Härdle et al., 2004; Dalalyan et al., 2008; Kalai
& Sastry, 2009; Kakade et al., 2011; Dudeja & Hsu, 2018)
are a classical supervised learning model extensively studied
in statistics and machine learning. SIMs capture the common assumption that the target function f depends on an
unknown direction w, i.e., f (x) = u(w · x) for some link
(a.k.a. activation) function u : R 7→ R and w ∈ Rd . In most
settings, the link function is unknown and is assumed to satisfy certain regularity properties. Classical works (Kalai &
Sastry, 2009; Kakade et al., 2011) studied the efficient learnability of SIMs for monotone and Lipschitz link functions
and data distributed on the unit ball. These early algorithmic results succeed in the realizable setting (i.e., with clean
labels) or in the presence of zero-mean label noise.

For a weight vector w and link function u , the L22 loss
of the SIM hypothesis u(w · x) (defined by u and w) is
L2 (w; u) = E(x,y)∼D [(u(w · x) − y)2 ]. Our problem of
robustly learning SIMs is defined as follows.
Problem 1.1 (Robustly Learning Single-Index Models). Fix
a class of distributions G on Rd and class of link functions1
F. Let D be a distribution of labeled examples (x, y) ∈
Rd × R such that its x-marginal Dx belongs to G. We say
that an algorithm is a C-approximate proper SIM learner, for
some C ≥ 1, if given ϵ > 0, W > 0, and i.i.d. samples from
D, the algorithm outputs a link function û ∈ F and a vector
b ∈ Rd such that with high probability it holds L2 ( b
w
w; û) ≤
C OPT + ϵ, where OPT ≜ min∥w∥2 ≤W,u∈F L2 (w; u).

The focus of this work is on learning SIMs in the challenging

Throughout, we use u∗ (w∗ ·x) to denote an(y) fixed optimal
solution to the learning problem, i.e., L2 (w∗ ; u∗ ) = OPT.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence
to: Puqian Wang <pwang333@wisc.edu>.

Some comments are in order. First, Problem 1.1 does not
make realizability assumptions on the distribution D. That

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Throughout this paper, we will use the terms “link function”
and “activation” interchangeably.

1

