Positional Knowledge is All You Need:
Position-induced Transformer (PiT) for Operator Learning

Junfeng Chen 1 Kailiang Wu 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are essential in modeling a vast array of phenomena across various fields including physics, engineering, biology, and finance. They
are the foundation for predicting and understanding many
complex dynamics in natural and engineered systems. Over
the past century, traditional numerical methods, such as finite element, finite difference, and spectral methods, have
been well established for solving many PDEs. However,
these methods often face challenges for complex nonlinear
systems with complicated geometries or in high dimensions.

Operator learning for Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) is rapidly emerging as a promising approach for surrogate modeling of intricate
systems. Transformers with the self-attention
mechanism—a powerful tool originally designed
for natural language processing—have recently
been adapted for operator learning. However,
they confront challenges, including high computational demands and limited interpretability.
This raises a critical question: Is there a more
efficient attention mechanism for Transformerbased operator learning? This paper proposes the
Position-induced Transformer (PiT), built on an
innovative position-attention mechanism, which
demonstrates significant advantages over the classical self-attention in operator learning. Positionattention draws inspiration from numerical methods for PDEs. Different from self-attention,
position-attention is induced by only the spatial
interrelations of sampling positions for input functions of the operators, and does not rely on the
input function values themselves, thereby greatly
boosting efficiency. PiT exhibits superior performance over current state-of-the-art neural operators in a variety of complex operator learning
tasks across diverse PDE benchmarks. Additionally, PiT possesses an enhanced discretization convergence feature, compared to the widely-used
Fourier neural operator.

The advent of machine learning has shifted the paradigm
in addressing these challenges in PDEs. Key developments
include but are not limited to PINN (Raissi et al., 2019),
Deep-Galerkin (Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018), and DeepRitz (Yu et al., 2018). These methods are typically solutionlearners, i.e., learning a solution of PDEs. They closely
resemble traditional approaches such as finite elements, replacing local basis functions with neural networks. While
advantageous for high-dimensional problems and complex
geometries, solution-learners are usually limited to a single instance, i.e., solving one solution of the PDEs with a
fixed initial/boundary condition. To get solution for every
new condition, retraining a new neural network is required,
which can be very costly.
Solution-learners usually focus on a given PDE. However,
for many complex systems the governing equations remain
unclear due to uncertain mechanisms, yet identifying underlying PDEs is very challenging without sufficient domain
knowledge. Data-driven approaches have emerged as a
powerful tool for discovering unknown PDEs or surrogate
modeling of known yet complex PDEs. Early strategies
include sparse-promoting regression (Rudy et al., 2017;
Schaeffer, 2017); however, even after learning the underlying PDEs, numerical solving is still necessary to obtain
their solutions. Other techniques, such as PDE-Net (Long
et al., 2018; 2019), can learn both the underlying PDE and
its solution dynamics.

1
Department of Mathematics, Southern University of Science
and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China 2 Shenzhen International
Center for Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China 3 National Center for Applied
Mathematics Shenzhen (NCAMS), Shenzhen 518055, China. Correspondence to: Kailiang Wu <wukl@sustech.edu.cn>.

Another data-driven approach is Flow Map Learning (FML)
(Qin et al., 2019; Wu & Xiu, 2020; Chen et al., 2022b;
Churchill & Xiu, 2023). Unlike solution-learners, FML is an

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

