Agent Instructs Large Language Models to be General Zero-Shot Reasoners

Nicholas Crispino 1 Kyle Montgomery 1 Fankun Zeng 1 Dawn Song 2 Chenguang Wang 1

Abstract

ing tasks, leading to widespread deployment and adoption
in applications (Araci, 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Bolton
et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Driess et al., 2023; Huang
et al., 2023). In particular, the emerging capabilities of
LLMs such as complex reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b; Wang
et al., 2023c; Kıcıman et al., 2023) have made them the
subject of research in recent years. Among these, zero-shot
reasoning (Kojima et al., 2022; Wan et al., 2023) has drawn
substantial public interest and achieved promising results
in specific task domains. However, the reasoning ability of
LLMs on general tasks remains unclear.

We introduce a method to improve the zero-shot
reasoning abilities of large language models on
general language understanding tasks. Specifically, we build an autonomous agent to instruct
the reasoning process of large language models.
To enable this, our agent only needs to generate
a single set of instructions for each task. These
instructions turn out to be extremely effective for
improving the reasoning process of different large
language models across all task instances. We
show this approach further unleashes the zeroshot reasoning abilities of large language models
to more tasks. We study the performance of our
method on a wide set of datasets spanning generation, classification, and reasoning. We show that
our method generalizes to most tasks and obtains
state-of-the-art zero-shot performance on 20 of
the 29 datasets that we evaluate. For instance, our
method boosts the performance of state-of-the-art
large language models by a large margin, including Vicuna-13b, Llama-2-70b-chat, and GPT-3.5
Turbo. Compared to zero-shot chain of thought,
our improvement in reasoning is striking. With
our method, Llama-2-70b-chat outperforms zeroshot GPT-3.5 Turbo significantly.

In this paper, we improve the zero-shot reasoning abilities
of LLMs on general language understanding tasks. To solve
a task, we build an agent to instruct the reasoning process of
LLMs for the task (Figure 1). For each task, our autonomous
agent generates a unique set of task-specific instructions.
These instructions, produced only once per task, are used
to guide the reasoning of a variety of LLMs across all task
instances. Our agent is built upon a larger LLM teaching the
reasoning process to smaller LLMs. This design follows the
general knowledge distillation setup involving the teacherstudent paradigm. Intuitively, task-specific instructions help
better align the chain of thought reasoning process of LLMs
with each task. We refer to this approach as zero-shot agent
instructed reasoning (AgentInstruct). The basic idea of our
approach is motivated by two lines of work. First, the development of language agents (Yao et al., 2023b; Shinn et al.,
2023; Park et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Xi et al., 2023)
to automatically complete a task. Instead of completing the
task, our agent produces instructions on how to complete
the task. We enable this by adapting an existing agent to
access a wide variety of task-relevant knowledge on the
web, given basic task information such as the dataset name
and several input-only examples. As a result, the agent
synthesizes high-quality step-by-step instructions for tasks,
verified by web resources. We follow the recent design of
language agents that plan a process, though our process runs
only once per dataset instead of per dataset instance. Second, zero-shot chain of thought (CoT) reasoning of LLMs
has obtained promising results on tasks such as arithmetic
reasoning (Kojima et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b). Standard zero-shot learning prompts an LLM to directly output
predictions without task examples. In contrast, CoT decomposes a task into intermediate steps where solving each will

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Wang
& Komatsuzaki, 2021; Zhang et al., 2022a; Smith et al.,
2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Scao
et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023a;b; Penedo et al., 2023) have significantly advanced
the state-of-the-art on a wide range of language understandThe code is available at https://github.com/
wang-research-lab/agentinstruct.
1

Washington University in St. Louis, MO, USA 2 UC Berkeley,
CA, USA. Correspondence to: Chenguang Wang <chenguangwang@wustl.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

