An Information Theoretic Approach to Interaction-Grounded Learning

Xiaoyan Hu 1 Farzan Farnia 1 Ho-fung Leung 2

Abstract

the reward variable, e.g. in applications concerning braincomputer interface (BCI) (Schalk et al., 2004; Serrhini &
Dargham, 2017) and recommender systems (Maghakian
et al., 2023). In such RL settings, the lack of an explicit
reward could lead to a challenging learning task where the
learner needs to infer the unseen reward from observed
feedback variables. The additional inference task for the
reward variable could significantly raise the computational
and statistical complexity of the RL problem. Due to the
great importance of addressing such RL problems with a
misspecified reward variable, they have been exclusively
studied in several recent papers (Xie et al., 2021b; 2022;
Maghakian et al., 2023).

Reinforcement learning (RL) problems where
the learner attempts to infer an unobserved reward from some feedback variables have been
studied in several recent papers. The setting of
Interaction-Grounded Learning (IGL) is an example of such feedback-based RL tasks where the
learner optimizes the return by inferring latent
binary rewards from the interaction with the environment. In the IGL setting, a relevant assumption used in the RL literature is that the feedback
variable Y is conditionally independent of the
context-action (X, A) given the latent reward R.
In this work, we propose Variational Informationbased IGL (VI-IGL) as an information-theoretic
method to enforce the conditional independence
assumption in the IGL-based RL problem. The
VI-IGL framework learns a reward decoder using
an information-based objective based on the conditional mutual information (MI) between (X, A)
and Y . To estimate and optimize the informationbased terms for the continuous random variables
in the RL problem, VI-IGL leverages the variational representation of mutual information to
obtain a min-max optimization problem. Also,
we extend the VI-IGL framework to general f Information measures leading to the generalized
f -VI-IGL framework for the IGL-based RL problems. We present numerical results on several
reinforcement learning settings indicating an improved performance compared to the existing
IGL-based RL algorithm.

To handle the challenges posed by a misspecified reward
variable, Xie et al. (2021b; 2022) propose the InteractionGrounded Learning (IGL) framework. According to the
IGL framework, the agent observes a multidimensional context vector based on which she takes an action. Then, the
environment generates a latent 0-1 reward and reveals a
multidimensional feedback vector to the agent. The agent
aims to maximize the (unobserved) return by inferring rewards from the interaction, a sub-task which needs to be
solved based on the assumptions on the relationship between
reward and feedback variables.

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Independent Researcher. Correspondence to: Xiaoyan Hu <xyhu21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.

As a result, the key to addressing the IGL-based RL problem
is a properly inferred reward decoder ψ ∈ Ψ, which maps a
context-action-feedback tuple (X, A, Y ) ∈ X × A × Y to
a prediction of the posterior probability on the latent reward
R. Given such a reward decoder, the optimal policy can be
obtained using standard contextual bandit algorithms (Langford & Zhang, 2007; Dudı́k et al., 2014). However, such
a reward decoder will be information-theoretically infeasible to learn without additional assumptions (Xie et al.,
2022). Consequently, the existing works on the IGL setting (Xie et al., 2021b; 2022) make relevant assumptions on
the statistical relationship between the random variables of
context X, action A, feedback Y , and latent reward R. In
particular, a sensible assumption on the connection between
X, A, Y, R is the following conditional independence assumption proposed by Xie et al. (2021b) (The causal graph
is given in Figure 1.):

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Assumption 1 (Full conditional independence). For arbitrary (X, A, R, Y ) tuple where R and Y are generated
based on the context-action pair (X, A), the feedback Y

1. Introduction
In several applications of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, the involved agent lacks complete knowledge of
1

1

