AquaLoRA: Toward White-box Protection for Customized
Stable Diffusion Models via Watermark LoRA
Weitao Feng * 1 Wenbo Zhou * 1 Jiyan He 1 Jie Zhang † 2 Tianyi Wei 1 Guanlin Li 2 Tianwei Zhang 2
Weiming Zhang 1 Nenghai Yu 1

Abstract

et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021), text-based image editing
methods (Wei et al., 2022; 2023; Brooks et al., 2023) and
text-to-image (T2I) synthesis models (Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022) have gained popularity due to their convenient interactions and high-fidelity
synthetic results. As a standout in the realm of T2I models,
the universe of Stable Diffusion is thriving, fueled by its
complete open-source nature. Various versions of models
(e.g., v1, v2, XL, etc.) and customized technologies (Ruiz
et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2022) are constantly emerging, providing immense enjoyment and have fostered active communities (e.g., Civitai, prompthero, Patreon) where users can
exchange or sell their customized Stable Diffusion models.

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in generating high-quality images. Recently,
the open-source models represented by Stable Diffusion (SD) are thriving and are accessible for
customization, giving rise to a vibrant community of creators and enthusiasts. However, the
widespread availability of customized SD models
has led to copyright concerns, like unauthorized
model distribution and unconsented commercial
use. To address it, recent works aim to let SD models output watermarked content for post-hoc forensics. Unfortunately, none of them can achieve
the challenging white-box protection, wherein the
malicious user can easily remove or replace the
watermarking module to fail the subsequent verification. For this, we propose AquaLoRA as the
first implementation under this scenario. Briefly,
we merge watermark information into the U-Net
of Stable Diffusion Models via a watermark LowRank Adaptation (LoRA) module in a two-stage
manner. For watermark LoRA module, we devise a scaling matrix to achieve flexible message
updates without retraining. To guarantee fidelity,
we design Prior Preserving Fine-Tuning (PPFT)
to ensure watermark learning with minimal impacts on model distribution, validated by proofs.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments and
ablation studies to verify our design. Our code is
available at github.com/Georgefwt/AquaLoRA.

This ease of sharing raises copyright concerns, such as the
unconsented use of generated images and redistribution of
customized models for profit, potentially compromising the
interest of original creators. The official repository of Stable
Diffusion models offers some ad-hoc image watermarking
methods (Rahman, 2013; Zhang et al., 2019) as a makeshift
protection. Afterward, additional efforts (Wen et al., 2023;
Fernandez et al., 2023) propose intergrated watermarking,
namely, integrating the watermarking process more intricately with the generation process, including factors like
initial noise and the VAE decoder. All the above watermarking approaches are illustrated in Figure 1. In this paper, we
consider a more challenging protection scenario, namely,
white-box protection, wherein adversaries have full access to the watermarked SD models. Because SD models
are wildly open-source, it’s easy for adversaries to bypass
watermarking by changing the sampling strategy or replacing the VAE, making all current watermarking protection
ineffective.

1. Introduction

To remedy it, we propose the insight that watermarking
should be coupled with the most crucial component of Stable Diffusion. Thus, we suggest embedding the watermark
directly into U-Net, the most central structure containing
essential knowledge. In such a mechanism, the disruption
of watermarking is accompanied by a significant drop in
generation fidelity. Besides, there are three additional requirements: 1) Fidelity: high visual quality between the
watermarked generated image and the watermark-free one,
2) Robustness: the watermark shall be robust against differ-

With the flourishing development of generative AI and crossmodal visual and language representation learning (Radford
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Jie Zhang <jie zhang@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

