Feedback Loops With Language Models Drive In-Context Reward Hacking

Alexander Pan 1 Erik Jones 1 Meena Jagadeesan 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1

Abstract

ple, Microsoft’s Sydney chat bot (the LLM) interacts with
Twitter (the world) by searching through Twitter and placing tweets into its context window. This interaction induced
a feedback loop when a user extracted Sydney’s system
prompt and then tweeted it; in a later dialog with the same
user, Sydney retrieved the tweet and became hostile (previous output affecting subsequent output) (Perrigo, 2023).
As LLMs are given greater access to tools (OpenAI, 2023b)
and deployed in more settings (Grant, 2023), feedback loops
will become more ubiquitous (Bottou et al., 2013).

Language models influence the external world:
they query APIs that read and write to web pages,
generate content that shapes human behavior, and
run system commands as autonomous agents.
These interactions form feedback loops: LLM
outputs affect the world, which in turn affect subsequent LLM outputs. In this work, we show
that feedback loops can cause in-context reward
hacking (ICRH), where the LLM at test-time optimizes a (potentially implicit) objective but creates
negative side effects in the process. For example, consider an LLM agent deployed to increase
Twitter engagement; the LLM may retrieve its previous tweets into the context window and make
them more controversial, increasing engagement
but also toxicity. We identify and study two processes that lead to ICRH: output-refinement and
policy-refinement. For these processes, evaluations on static datasets are insufficient—they miss
the feedback effects and thus cannot capture the
most harmful behavior. In response, we provide
three recommendations for evaluation to capture
more instances of ICRH. As AI development accelerates, the effects of feedback loops will proliferate, increasing the need to understand their role
in shaping LLM behavior.

In this work, we examine how feedback loops unexpectedly
induce optimization in the world-LLM system (Figure 1).
Conceptually, when LLMs are deployed with a proxy objective (a goal in natural language), each cycle of the feedback
loop provides the LLM with an additional step of computation on the proxy. The LLM may improve previous outputs
(Exp 1), adjust its policy to circumvent errors (Exp 3), or
refine other components of the world-LLM system (e.g.,
user preferences), all of which induce optimization.
We show that such optimization can drive in-context reward
hacking (ICRH)—the creation of harmful side effects en
route to optimizing the proxy objective (Figures 5 and 8).
Similar to reward hacking in traditional optimizers (Pan
et al., 2022), ICRH in LLMs occurs because the proxy
objective is under-specified and does not capture implicit
constraints. However, ICRH differs from reward hacking
both because a) it is a test-time phenomenon and because b)
it is driven by LLMs, which are able to exhibit optimization
even with sparse reward signal (Section 3.3).

1. Introduction

We identify output-refinement and policy-refinement, two
mechanisms through which feedback loops can induce optimization. We study these mechanisms conceptually (Section 3) and empirically (Section 4), showing that they both
can lead to in-context reward hacking.

Language models (LLMs) are increasingly influencing the
real world (Benaich et al., 2023). Developers are beginning
to augment LLMs with the ability to call external APIs (Mialon et al., 2023), retrieve documents (Jiang et al., 2023),
execute code (Zhou et al., 2023), and act as autonomous
agents (Richards, 2023). LLMs that interact with the world
induce feedback loops: its previous outputs affect the world
state, which in turn shapes its subsequent outputs. For exam-

In output-refinement (Section 4.1), the LLM uses feedback
to iteratively refine its outputs. For example, consider an
LLM agent increasing engagement on Twitter. The agent
generates a tweet, posts it, and receives engagement metrics
as feedback, enabling it to perform A/B testing on tweets.
With more cycles of feedback, the LLM optimizes the proxy
objective (engagement) by seeding its outputs with tweets
that perform well on the A/B test. However, it increases
negative side effects (toxicity) in the process (Exp 2).

1
University of California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Alexander Pan <aypan.17@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

