Smooth Min-Max Monotonic Networks
Christian Igel 1

800

Monotonicity constraints are powerful regularizers in statistical modelling. They can support fairness in computer-aided decision making and increase plausibility in data-driven scientific models. The seminal min-max (MM) neural
network architecture ensures monotonicity, but
often gets stuck in undesired local optima during training because of partial derivatives of the
MM nonlinearities being zero. We propose a
simple modification of the MM network using
strictly-increasing smooth minimum and maximum functions that alleviates this problem. The
resulting smooth min-max (SMM) network module inherits the asymptotic approximation properties from the MM architecture. It can be used
within larger deep learning systems trained endto-end. The SMM module is conceptually simple
and computationally less demanding than stateof-the-art neural networks for monotonic modelling. Our experiments show that this does not
come with a loss in generalization performance
compared to alternative neural and non-neural
approaches.

700

wood dry mass (kg/plant)

Abstract

MM
XG
SMM

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0

20

40

60

80

crown area (m2 /plant)

Figure 1. Learning an allometric equation from data with an original min-max network (MM), XGBoost (XG) and a smooth
min-max network (SMM), here estimating wood dry mass (and
thereby stored carbon) from tree crown area (Hiernaux et al.,
2023; Tucker et al., 2023).

Monotonicity constraints can incorporate ethical principles
into data-driven models and improve their fairness (e.g., see
Cole & Williamson, 2019; Wang & Gupta, 2020).

1. Introduction

Work on monotonic neural networks was pioneered by
the min-max (MM) architecture proposed by Sill (1997),
which is simple, elegant, and able to asymptotically approximate any monotone target function by a piecewise linear neural network model. However, learning an MM network, which can be done by unconstrained gradient-based
optimization, often does not lead to satisfactory results.
Thus, a variety of alternative approaches were proposed,
which are much more complex than an MM network module (for recent examples see Milani Fard et al., 2016; You
et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2019; Yanagisawa et al., 2022;
Sivaraman et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020, and Nolte et al.,
2022). We argue that the main problem when training an
MM network are partial derivatives being zero because of
the maximum and minimum computations. This leads to
large parts of the MM network being silent, that is, most
parameters of the network do not contribute to computing
the model output at all, and therefore the MM network underfits the training data with a very coarse piecewise lin-

In many data-driven modelling tasks we have a priori
knowledge that the output is monotonic, that is, nonincreasing or non-decreasing, in some of the input variables. This knowledge can act as a regularizer, and often
monotonicity is a strict constraint for ensuring the plausibility and therefore acceptance of the resulting model.
We are particularly interested in monotonicity constraints
when learning bio- and geophysical models from noisy observations, see Figure 1. Examples from finance, medicine
and engineering are given, for instance, by Daniels & Velikova (2010), see also the review by Cano et al. (2019).
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Christan Igel
<igel@diku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

