Potential Based Diffusion Motion Planning

Yunhao Luo 1 Chen Sun 1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 2 Yilun Du 2

Abstract
Effective motion planning in high dimensional
spaces is a long-standing open problem in
robotics. One class of traditional motion planning algorithms corresponds to potential-based
motion planning. An advantage of potential based
motion planning is composability – different motion constraints can easily combined by adding
corresponding potentials. However, constructing motion paths from potentials requires solving a global optimization across configuration
space potential landscape, which is often prone
to local minima. We propose a new approach towards learning potential based motion planning,
where we train a neural network to capture and
learn an easily optimizable potentials over motion
planning trajectories. We illustrate the effectiveness of such approach, significantly outperforming both classical and recent learned motion planning approaches and avoiding issues with local
minima. We further illustrate its inherent composability, enabling us to generalize to a multitude
of different motion constraints. Project website
at https://energy-based-model.github.io/potentialmotion-plan.

1

Energy A

Energy B

Energy A + B

Figure 1: Illustrative Example of Composing Diffusion Energy
Potentials. Our approach learns different potential functions over
motion planning trajectories q1:N (orange dashed lines). Different
potentials can be combined and optimized to construct new motion
plans that avoid obstacles encoded in both potential functions.

2011). A recent body of works have further explored how
learned neural networks can be integrated with motion planning for accelerated performance (Ichter & Pavone, 2019;
Qureshi et al., 2019; Fishman et al., 2023; Yamada et al.,
2023; Le et al., 2023).
A classical approach towards motion planning is potential
based motion planning (Khatib, 1986; Koren et al., 1991;
Ratliff et al., 2009; 2018; Xie et al., 2020), where both obstacles and goals define energy potentials through which
trajectories are optimized to reach. An advantage of potential based motion planning is that different constraints to
motion planning can be converted into equivalent energy
potentials and directly combined to optimize for motion
plans. However, potential based methods rely on gradient
optimization with respect to local geometry, resulting in
the long-standing local minima issues (LaValle, 2006). In
addition, such motion planning techniques typically require
implicit obstacle representations, which is hard to obtain in
real-world settings.

Introduction

Motion planning is a fundamental problem in robotics and
aims to find a smooth, collision free path between a start
and goal state given a specified configuration space, and is
heavily used across a variety of different robotics tasks such
as manipulation or navigation (Laumond et al., 1998). A variety of approaches exist for motion planning, ranging from
classical sampling based approaches (Kavraki et al., 1996;
Kuffner & LaValle, 2000; Karaman & Frazzoli, 2011; Gammell et al., 2015) and optimization based methods (Ratliff
et al., 2009; Mukadam et al., 2018; Kalakrishnan et al.,

We present a potential based motion planning approach
leveraging diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Ho et al., 2020) where diffusion models are used to parameterize and learn potential landscapes across configuration
space trajectories between start and goal states. These potential functions can be directly inferred from raw perceptual
inputs, removing the need for implicit object representations. Furthermore, the annealed optimization procedure
across a sequence of potential energy landscapes in diffusion
models (Du et al., 2023) can help avoid local minima in optimization. This optimization procedure is further stochastic,
enabling the planner to generate a multitude of motion plans
with diverse morphology for a specific problem, offering

1
Brown University 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Yunhao Luo
<yluo73@cs.brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

