Learning with Partial-Label and Unlabeled Data: A Uniform Treatment for
Supervision Redundancy and Insufficiency

Yangfan Liu * 1 2 Jiaqi Lv * 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2 Ning Xu 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Over the last decade and more, the remarkable progress
in deep neural networks has been primarily driven by the
availability of an enormous amount of manually labeled
data. However, in scenarios with limited labeled data, even
state-of-the-art supervised learning methods often face substantial challenges in performing well. On the other hand,
the collection of massive data with high-quality annotations
is laborious and costly. To mitigate this issue, a prevalent
strategy is resorting to crowd-sourcing labels (Brabham,
2008) to trade off the cost and quality of annotations, which
has highlighted the critical need for developing algorithms
capable of learning from weakly supervised data (Zhou,
2017).

One major challenge in weakly supervised learning is learning from inexact supervision, ranging
from partial labels (PLs) with redundant information to the extreme of unlabeled data with insufficient information. While recent work has
made significant strides in specific inexact supervision contexts, supervision forms typically coexist in complex combinations. This is exemplified
in semi-supervised partial label learning, where
PLs act as the exclusive supervision in a semisupervised setting. Current strategies addressing
combined inexact scenarios are usually composite,
which can lead to incremental solutions that essentially replicate existing methods. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to uniformly tackle both
label redundancy and insufficiency, derived from
a mutual information-based perspective. We design a label channel that facilitates dynamic label
exchange within the candidate label sets, which
identifies potential true labels and filters out likely
incorrect ones, thereby minimizing error accumulation. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method over existing state-of-theart PL and semi-supervised learning approaches
by directly integrating them. Furthermore, our
extended experiments on partial-complementary
label learning underscore the flexibility of our uniform treatment in managing diverse supervision
scenarios.

Inexact supervision (Zhou, 2017) is an important type of
weak supervision, considering scenarios where supervision information is not as exact as desired. Inexact supervised classification is typically exemplified by partial
labels (PLs) (Nguyen & Caruana, 2008; Cour et al., 2011;
Zhang et al., 2017; Lv et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2020) and
complementary labels (CLs) (Ishida et al., 2017; Yu et al.,
2018; Ishida et al., 2019; Gao & Zhang, 2021) — a PL for
an instance is a set of candidate labels, where a fixed but
unknown candidate is the true label, and a CL specifies one
class that an instance does not belong to. Thus, PLs offer
redundant information that obscures the true label, and CLs
are the extreme case of PLs by offering minimal guidance
on the true label. In contrast, unlabeled data serve as the
opposite extreme, generally necessitating integration with a
small amount of supervised data for a slight supervision, i.e.,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Laine & Aila, 2017; Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Berthelot et al., 2019; Sohn et al.,
2020). For specific forms of supervision, existing learning
paradigms have been extensively developed, such as partial
label learning (PLL), complementary label learning (CLL),
and SSL, with corresponding techniques being elaborately
tailored. However, in reality, forms of supervision rarely
exist in isolation. Rather, they often co-occur in varied
combinations, requiring flexible learning frameworks to effectively integrate and leverage multiple disparate sources
of data to navigate the complexities of the real world.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Laboratory of New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education,
China. Correspondence to: Ning Xu <xning@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Semi-supervised partial label learning (SSPLL) (Wang
1

