LoRAP: Transformer Sub-Layers Deserve Differentiated Structured
Compression for Large Language Models

Guangyan Li 1 Yongqiang Tang 1 † Wensheng Zhang 1 2 †

Abstract

generation (Brown et al., 2020). As the size increases,
LLMs can handle more complex tasks and even display
emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022). However, the large
size of these models poses challenges in deployment and inference, which require massive memory and computational
resources. For instance, the largest LLaMA (Touvron et al.,
2023a) consists of 70 billion parameters and ChatGPT is
even larger at the scale of 175 billion parameters.

Large language models (LLMs) show excellent
performance in difficult tasks, but they often require massive memories and computational resources. How to reduce the parameter scale of
LLMs has become research hotspots. In this study,
we get an important observation that the multihead self-attention (MHA) sub-layer of Transformer exhibits noticeable low-rank structure,
while the feed-forward network (FFN) sub-layer
does not. With this regard, we design a novel
structured compression method LoRAP, which organically combines Low-Rank matrix approximation And structured Pruning. For the MHA sublayer, we proposal an input activation weighted
singular value decomposition method and allocate different parameter amounts for each weight
matrix based on the differences in low-rank properties of matrices. For the FFN sub-layer, we propose a gradient-free structured channel pruning
method and save the least important 1% of parameters which actually play a vital role in model performance. Extensive evaluations on zero-shot perplexity and zero-shot task classification indicate
that our proposal is superior to previous structured
compression rivals under multiple compression
ratios. Our code will be released soon.

There have been plentiful techniques to compress the
transformer-based models, including pruning (Han et al.,
2015; Xia et al., 2022; Kurtic et al., 2022), low-rank approximation (Noach & Goldberg, 2020; Hua et al., 2022),
quantization (Frantar et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022; Dettmers
et al., 2023), and knowledge distillation (Saha et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023). The traditional compression methods
usually require fine-tuning the compressed model on concrete tasks to recovery the specific capability of the model.
Nevertheless, the compression for LLMs primarily concentrates on reducing the model size while retaining the general
capability (Ma et al., 2023). Therefore, rudely applying
previous transformer-based compression methods without
specialized consideration might compromise their capacities
for generic tasks (Kojima et al., 2022). More recently, by
virtue of the advantage of directly reducing the parameter
scale, low-rank approximation and pruning have attracted
much attention in the area of large model compression.
Low-rank approximation reduces the parameter size via decomposing the original weight matrix into two smaller matrices. In (Noach & Goldberg, 2020), the authors perform
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) on BERT and utilize knowledge distillation to recovery model performance.
DRONE (Chen et al., 2021) approximates input activations
through SVD in specific tasks. FWSVD (Hsu et al., 2022)
evaluates the importance of weights with the Fisher information and conducts SVD on the weighted matrix. AFM (Yu &
Wu, 2023) decomposes the weight matrix based on the lowrank property of the output activations. LORD (Kaushal
et al., 2023) compresses a 16B code model with AFM and
then restores its performance by LoRA fine-tuning. Very
recently, several efforts attempt to incorporate low-rank
approximation with other compression techniques. LoftQ
(Li et al., 2023a) utilizes a quantized matrix and two low-

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Zeng et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a; Chiang et al., 2023) have revolutionized
the field of natural language processing (NLP), exhibiting
significant advancements in language understanding and
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence
Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Guangzhou University. †Correspondence to: Yongqiang Tang
<yongqiang.tang@ia.ac.cn>, Wensheng Zhang <zhangwenshengia@hotmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

