Decomposable Submodular Maximization in Federated Setting

Akbar Rafiey 1

Abstract

given element decreases as we select more and more elements. Formally, a set function F : 2E → R is submodular if for any S ⊆ T ⊆ E and e ∈ E \ T it holds that
F (S ∪ {e}) − F (S) ≥ F (T ∪ {e}) − F (T ). Decomposable
submodular functions is an important subclass of submodular functions which can be written as sums
PNof several component submodular functions: F (S) = i=1 fi (S), for all
S ⊆ E, where each fi : 2E → R is a submodular function
on the ground set E with |E| = n.

Submodular functions, as well as the sub-class
of decomposable submodular functions, and their
optimization appear in a wide range of applications in machine learning, recommendation systems, and welfare maximization. However, optimization of decomposable submodular functions
with millions of component functions is computationally prohibitive. Furthermore, the component
functions may be private (they might represent
user preference function, for example) and cannot
be widely shared. To address these issues, we
propose a federated optimization setting for decomposable submodular optimization. In this setting, clients have their own preference functions,
and a weighted sum of these preferences needs to
be maximized. We implement the popular continuous greedy algorithm in this setting where
clients take parallel small local steps towards the
local solution and then the local changes are aggregated at a central server. To address the large
number of clients, the aggregation is performed
only on a subsampled set. Further, the aggregation is performed only intermittently between
stretches of parallel local steps, which reduces
communication cost significantly. We show that
our federated algorithm is guaranteed to provide
a good approximate solution, even in the presence of above cost-cutting measures. Finally, we
show how the federated setting can be incorporated in solving fundamental discrete submodular
optimization problems such as Maximum Coverage and Facility Location.

Decomposable submodular functions include some of the
most fundamental and well-studied submodular functions
such as max coverage, graph cuts, welfare maximization etc., and have found numerous applications in machine learning (Dueck and Frey, 2007; Gomes and Krause,
2010; Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi, 2016a;
Mirzasoleiman, Karbasi, Sarkar, and Krause, 2016b; Mirzasoleiman, 2017), economics (Dobzinski & Schapira, 2006;
Feige, 2006; Feige & Vondrák, 2006; Papadimitriou et al.,
2008; Vondrák, 2008), and data summarization and recommender systems (Dueck & Frey, 2007; Gomes & Krause,
2010; Tschiatschek et al., 2014; Lin & Bilmes, 2011). The
main approach in these cases is the centralized and sequential greedy.
The need for scalable and efficient optimization methods,
which do not require collecting raw data in a central server
and ensure secure information collection, is widespread in
applications handling sensitive data such as medical data,
web search queries, salary data, and social networks. In
many such cases, individuals and companies are reluctant to
share their data and collecting their data in a central server
is a violation of their privacy. Moreover, collecting and storing all data on a single server or cluster is computationally
expensive and infeasible for large-scale datasets, particularly when working with high-dimensional data or complex
models. Thus, there is a widespread demand for scalable
optimization algorithms that are both decentralized and prioritize privacy. Below are some examples that motivate the
focus of this paper.

1. Introduction
Submodularity of a set function implies a natural diminishing returns property where the marginal benefit of any
1

Example 1.1 (Welfare Maximization). The welfare maximization problem aims to maximize the overall utility or
welfare of a group of individuals or agents a1 , . . . , aN . In
this problem, there is a set of items or goods E, and each
individual ai has a certain preference or utility expressed as
a submodular function fi : 2E → R+ that assigns a value

Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Akbar Rafiey
<arafiey@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

