A Bias-Variance-Covariance Decomposition
of Kernel Scores for Generative Models
Sebastian G. Gruber 1 2 3 Florian Buettner 1 2 3 4

Abstract
Generative models, like large language models,
are becoming increasingly relevant in our daily
lives, yet a theoretical framework to assess their
generalization behavior and uncertainty does not
exist. Particularly, the problem of uncertainty estimation is commonly solved in an ad-hoc and
task-dependent manner. For example, natural language approaches cannot be transferred to image generation. In this paper, we introduce the
first bias-variance-covariance decomposition for
kernel scores. This decomposition represents a
theoretical framework from which we derive a
kernel-based variance and entropy for uncertainty
estimation. We propose unbiased and consistent
estimators for each quantity which only require
generated samples but not the underlying model
itself. Based on the wide applicability of kernels,
we demonstrate our framework via generalization
and uncertainty experiments for image, audio, and
language generation. Specifically, kernel entropy
for uncertainty estimation is more predictive of
performance on CoQA and TriviaQA question answering datasets than existing baselines and can
also be applied to closed-source models.

Answer #1
LLM

Answer #2
Answer #3

Question

Answer #4

Embedding

Figure 1. Top: Illustration of predictive kernel entropy for a generative model. A kernel measures the pairwise similarities (red lines)
of outputs in a vector space. The predictive kernel entropy is then
the negative average kernel value. Bottom: The predictive kernel
entropy shows the best performance among uncertainty approaches
for single-model settings (c.f. Section 5.3).

1. Introduction

(OpenAI, 2023), drug discovery (Paul et al., 2021), and
speech synthesis (Ning et al., 2019). While generative models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating
data that closely resemble real-world samples, they often
fall short in providing the vital and often overlooked aspect
of uncertainty estimation (Wu & Shang, 2020). Uncertainty
estimation in machine learning is a critical component of
model performance assessment and deployment (Hekler
et al., 2023). It addresses the inherent limitations and challenges associated with machine learning based decisions.
For generative models, this may include their propensity
to generate improbable or nonsensical samples (“hallucinations”). Even though uncertainty estimation methods for
natural language question answering tasks exist (Kuhn et al.,
2023), they are ad-hoc without theoretical grounding and

In recent years, generative models have revolutionized daily
lives well beyond the field of machine learning (Kasneci
et al., 2023; Meskó & Topol, 2023). These models have
found applications in diverse domains, including image creation (Ramesh et al., 2021), natural language generation
1

German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Frankfurt/Mainz, a partnership between DKFZ and UCT FrankfurtMarburg, Germany, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 2 German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 3 Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany 4 Frankfurt Cancer Institute (FCI),
Germany. Correspondence to: Sebastian G. Gruber <sebastian.gruber@dkfz.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

