Denoising Autoregressive Representation Learning

Yazhe Li 1 Jorg Bornschein 1 Ting Chen 1 2

Abstract

we anticipate that achieving a lower pre-training loss leads
to superior performance on downstream tasks.

In this paper, we explore a new generative approach for learning visual representations. Our
method, DARL, employs a decoder-only Transformer to predict image patches autoregressively.
We find that training with Mean Squared Error
(MSE) alone leads to strong representations. To
enhance the image generation ability, we replace
the MSE loss with the diffusion objective by using a denoising patch decoder. We show that the
learned representation can be improved by using tailored noise schedules and longer training
in larger models. Notably, the optimal schedule
differs significantly from the typical ones used
in standard image diffusion models. Overall,
despite its simple architecture, DARL delivers
performance remarkably close to state-of-the-art
masked prediction models under the fine-tuning
protocol. This marks an important step towards
a unified model capable of both visual perception and generation, effectively combining the
strengths of autoregressive and denoising diffusion models.

In vision, however, representation learning and image generation often use separate techniques. For learning representations, methods such as contrastive learning (van den
Oord et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2019),
distillation-based self-supervised learning (Grill et al., 2020;
Caron et al., 2021) and masked image modelling (MIM)
(He et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2022) are widely used. Despite
their strengths in learning robust visual and cross-modal
(Radford et al., 2021) representations, as well as their efficient use of model capacity, these methods lack generation
capabilities. Furthermore, the pre-training loss, influenced
by the difficulty of the pre-training task, does not serve as a
reliable indicator of performance on downstream tasks.
In this paper, we investigate the potential of a unified model
capable of both visual perception and generation by combining autoregressive and denoising diffusion models. We
use a straightforward architecture - a decoder-only Transformer - which predicts the next image patch based on a
sequence of previously observed patches. Instead of absolute or learnable positional encoding, we implement relative
positional encodings through the utilization of decomposed
rotary position embedding (2D RoPE). We show that 2D
RoPE improves the performance, in particular for causal
Transformers. When trained with MSE loss, the fine-tuning
performance of the model is not far away from the stateof-the-art representation methods. To enhance the image
generation ability, we introduce a denosing patch decoder
and substitute the MSE loss with the diffusion objective.
Our results demonstrate that model performance depends
on the noise schedule employed during training. When the
noise schedule is more focused on high noise levels, training
with diffusion objective leads to an improvement which becomes more pronounced with extended pre-training epochs.
Due to the concentration on high noise level, the optimal
noise schedule differs significantly from those suitable for
generation purpose (Chen et al., 2020a; Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Chen, 2023; Hoogeboom et al.,
2023). This deviation from image generation models can be
interpreted as the competition for model capacity between
higher-level abstraction and lower-level details. Overall, our
method significantly advances representation learning with
generative pre-training. Under fair comparison conditions,

1. Introduction
With the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs), generative
pre-training has become increasingly popular. Representations learned via next token prediction improves the performance when transferred to a diverse set of downstream tasks
(Radford et al., 2018; 2021; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al.,
2023). Beyond learning representations, the model directly
generates language, acting as a user interface and allowing
for interactive adjustments (Liu et al., 2021). The likelihoodbased pre-training objective enables us to investigate scaling
laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). These
scaling laws predict how a model’s pre-training loss relates
to its capacity and the amount of training data. Generally,
1

Google DeepMind, London, UK. 2 xAI, San Francisco, US.
Work done while at Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yazhe
Li <yazhe@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

