Dr. Strategy: Model-Based Generalist Agents with Strategic Dreaming

Hany Hamed * 1 Subin Kim * 1 Dongyeong Kim 1 Jaesik Yoon 1 2 Sungjin Ahn 1

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) has
been a primary approach to ameliorating the sample efficiency issue as well as to make a generalist
agent. However, there has not been much effort
toward enhancing the strategy of dreaming itself.
Therefore, it is a question whether and how an
agent can “dream better” in a more structured and
strategic way. In this paper, inspired by the observation from cognitive science suggesting that humans use a spatial divide-and-conquer strategy in
planning, we propose a new MBRL agent, called
Dr. Strategy, which is equipped with a novel
Dreaming Strategy. The proposed agent realizes
a version of divide-and-conquer-like strategy in
dreaming. This is achieved by learning a set of
latent landmarks and then utilizing these to learn
a landmark-conditioned highway policy. With the
highway policy, the agent can first learn in the
dream to move to a landmark, and from there it
tackles the exploration and achievement task in a
more focused way. In experiments, we show that
the proposed model outperforms prior pixel-based
MBRL methods in various visually complex and
partially observable navigation tasks.

Figure 1. (Left) In the real world, humans maintain a hierarchical
spatial structure for easy navigation. (Right) Trying to memorize
all the streets on the map can lead to an overwhelming amount
of information, making it difficult to retain the information effectively. (Middle) In contrast, choosing to travel by train to move
between cities and transfer to a taxi at the terminal minimizes the
complexity, allowing one to concentrate on local routes starting
from the terminal near the destination.

agents, such as Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents (Sutton
& Barto, 2018), including robots and virtual agents in games
like Minecraft (Guss et al., 2019). However, these artificial
agents currently have a significant limitation compared to
humans: low sample efficiency. They require much more
experience data than humans (Mnih et al., 2015; 2016). Considering these agents could operate in a real-time physical
world and are susceptible to physical damage, improving
sample efficiency is of top priority. It is particularly more
challenging in more realistic settings where observations
are high-dimensional (e.g., images) and partially observable
(Berner et al., 2019; Vinyals et al., 2019).

1. Introduction

Currently, a primary approach in RL to improving sample efficiency is via model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) (Sutton, 1991; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner
et al., 2020). In this approach, the agent uses experience
data to learn both the representation of the observations and
states as well as the transition dynamics of the environment,
known as a world model. This enables the agent to learn its
policy within an internal model of the world instead of the
real world via planning (or, simulation or dreaming). An
example of such an unsupervised model-based generalist
agent is LEXA (Mendonca et al., 2021).

A crucial capability of generalist agents, such as humans,
is to explore environments and acquire the skills needed to
achieve various goals, continuously and in an open-ended
way. It is particularly important for these agents to become
efficient explorers and achievers in an unsupervised or selfsupervised manner. It enables them to survive and become
more competent in a more scalable way as well as in more
flexible open-ended environments, where future tasks aren’t
predefined but can evolve over time.
This capability is equally important for artificial generalist
2

*
Equal contribution. Ordering determined at random. 1 KAIST
SAP. Correspondence to: Sungjin Ahn <sjn.ahn@gmail.com>.

On the other hand, research in cognitive science suggests
that humans use structured and strategic planning, such as
spatial divide-and-conquer, when tackling complex problems (Chun & Jiang, 1998). For example, when navigating
to a specific location, humans typically break down the task

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

