Provably Neural Active Learning Succeeds via Prioritizing Perplexing Samples

Dake Bu 1 Wei Huang* 2 Taiji Suzuki 3 2 Ji Cheng 1 Qingfu Zhang 1 Zhiqiang Xu 4 Hau-San Wong* 1

Abstract

that their success relies on a substantial amount of data and
extensive labeling efforts. On the other hand, active learning offers various approaches to select a small subset of
unlabeled samples from a large pool of data for labeling
and training, while achieving comparable generalization
performance to learning on the entire dataset (Settles, 2009;
Aggarwal et al., 2014). To enjoy the best of both worlds,
people combine neural networks with active learning, giving rise to Neural Network-based Active Learning (NAL) or
Deep Active Learning (DAL), such that over-parameterized
neural models can work with limited size of labeled data.
As summarized in Takezoe et al. (2023), NAL/DAL incorporates two primary criteria for querying (selecting) unlabeled
samples: uncertainty-based (Roth and Small, 2006; Joshi
et al., 2009) and diversity-based (Sener and Savarese, 2018;
Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019). Also, some studies leverage both criteria to design NAL algorithms (Yin et al., 2017;
Shui et al., 2020).

Neural Network-based active learning (NAL) is a
cost-effective data selection technique that utilizes neural networks to select and train on a
small subset of samples. While existing work
successfully develops various effective or theoryjustified NAL algorithms, the understanding of
the two commonly used query criteria of NAL:
uncertainty-based and diversity-based, remains in
its infancy. In this work, we try to move one step
forward by offering a unified explanation for the
success of both query criteria-based NAL from a
feature learning view. Specifically, we consider a
feature-noise data model comprising easy-to-learn
or hard-to-learn features disrupted by noise, and
conduct analysis over 2-layer NN-based NALs
in the pool-based scenario. We provably show
that both uncertainty-based and diversity-based
NAL are inherently amenable to one and the same
principle, i.e., striving to prioritize samples that
contain yet-to-be-learned features. We further
prove that this shared principle is the key to their
success-achieve small test error within a small
labeled set. Contrastingly, the strategy-free passive learning exhibits a large test error due to the
inadequate learning of yet-to-be-learned features,
necessitating resort to a significantly larger label
complexity for a sufficient test error reduction.
Experimental results validate our findings.

Notably, while various NAL algorithms, based on two query
criteria, have achieved significant empirical success, they
often come without provable performance guarantees. To
overcome this limitation, recent studies (Gu et al., 2014; Gu,
2014; Wang et al., 2022a) came up with theory-driven NAL
algorithms. These studies reformulate the problem into a
subset selection problem or multi-armed bandit problem,
and then utilize theoretical analysis techniques to guarantee the test performance. However, the internal mechanism
remains not well understood on why the two widely used
query criteria in the NAL family work so well, which naturally leads us to the following questions.

Essential Questions

1. Introduction

1. What is the theoretical rationale behind the success
of the two query criteria-based NAL algorithms, namely
uncertainty-based and diversity-based?
2. Whether and how do the two query criteria of NAL
connect to each other intrinsically?

In the deep learning era, we witness the power of neural
networks in representation learning. It is also well-known
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan 3 Department of Mathematical Informatics, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 4 Mohamed bin Zayed
University of Artificial Intelligence, Masdar, United Arab Emirates. Correspondence to: Wei Huang < wei.huang.vr@riken.jp>,
Hau-San Wong < cshswong@cityu.edu.hk>.

1.1. Our Contribution
To answer the above questions, in this work, we delve into
the feature learning dynamics of NAL algorithms. To
start with, we draw inspiration from the data models in Zou
et al. (2023a); Allen-Zhu and Li (2023); Lu et al. (2023) that
consist of multiple task-related feature patches and noise

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

