Provable Representation with Efficient Planning for Partially Observable
Reinforcement Learning

Hongming Zhang∗ 1 Tongzheng Ren∗ 2 Chenjun Xiao 3 Dale Schuurmans 4 1 Bo Dai 4 5

Abstract

ever, such an assumption typically does not hold in practice.
For example, in chatbot learning (Jiang et al., 2021) or video
game control (Mnih et al., 2013) only dialogue exchanges or
images are observed, from which state information only can
be partially inferred. The violation of full observability can
lead to significant performance degeneration of MDP-based
RL algorithms in such scenarios.

In most real-world reinforcement learning applications, state information is only partially observable, which breaks the Markov decision process
assumption and leads to inferior performance for
algorithms that conflate observations with state.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs), on the other hand, provide a general
framework that allows for partial observability
to be accounted for in learning, exploration and
planning, but presents significant computational
and statistical challenges. To address these difficulties, we develop a representation-based perspective that leads to a coherent framework and
tractable algorithmic approach for practical reinforcement learning from partial observations. We
provide a theoretical analysis for justifying the
statistical efficiency of the proposed algorithm,
and also empirically demonstrate the proposed algorithm can surpass state-of-the-art performance
with partial observations across various benchmarks, advancing reliable reinforcement learning
towards more practical applications.

The Partially Observed Markov Decision Process (POMDP)
(Åström, 1965) has been proposed to extend the classical
MDP formulation by introducing observation variables that
only give partial information about the underlying latent
state (Hauskrecht & Fraser, 2000; Roy & Gordon, 2002;
Chen et al., 2016). This extension greatly expands the practical applicability of POMDPs over MDPs, but the additional
uncertainty over the underlying state given only observations creates a non-Markovian dependence between successive observations, even though Markovian dependence
is preserved between latent states. Consequently, the optimal policy for a POMDP is no longer memoryless but
entire-history dependent, expanding the state complexity
exponentially w.r.t. horizon length. Such a non-Markovian
dependence creates significant computational and statistical
challenges in planning, and in learning and exploration. In
fact, without additional assumptions, computing an optimal
policy for a POMDP with known dynamics (i.e., planning)
is PSPACE-complete (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987),
while the sample complexity of learning for POMDPs grows
exponentially w.r.t. the horizon (Jin et al., 2020a).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) addresses the problem of making sequential decisions that maximize a cumulative reward through interaction and observation in an environment (Mnih et al., 2013; Levine et al., 2016). The Markov
decision process (MDP) has been the standard mathematical
model used for most RL algorithm design. However, the
success of MDP-based RL algorithms (Zhang et al., 2022;
Ren et al., 2023c) relies on an assumption that state information is fully observable, which implies that the optimal
policy is memoryless, i.e., optimal actions can be selected
based purely on the current state (Puterman, 2014). How-

Despite the worst case hardness of POMDPs, given their
importance in practice, there has been extensive work on developing practical RL algorithms that can cope with partial
observations. One common heuristic is to extend MDPbased RL algorithms by maintaining a history window over
observations to encode a policy or value function, e.g., recurrent neural networks (Wierstra et al., 2007; Hausknecht
& Stone, 2015; Zhu et al., 2017). Such algorithms have been
applied to many real-world applications with image- or textbased observations (Berner et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2021),
sometimes even surpassing human-level performance (Mnih
et al., 2013; Kaufmann et al., 2023).

*

Equal contribution 1 University of Alberta 2 UT Austin 3 The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 Google DeepMind
5
Georgia Tech. Correspondence to: Bo Dai <bodai@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

These empirical successes have motivated investigation into
structured POMDPs that allow some of the core compu1

