Conditional Normalizing Flows for Active Learning
of Coarse-Grained Molecular Representations

Henrik Schopmans 1 2 Pascal Friederich 1 2

Abstract
Efficient sampling of the Boltzmann distribution
of molecular systems is a long-standing challenge.
Recently, instead of generating long molecular
dynamics simulations, generative machine learning methods such as normalizing flows have been
used to learn the Boltzmann distribution directly,
without samples. However, this approach is susceptible to mode collapse and thus often does
not explore the full configurational space. In
this work, we address this challenge by separating the problem into two levels, the fine-grained
and coarse-grained degrees of freedom. A normalizing flow conditioned on the coarse-grained
space yields a probabilistic connection between
the two levels. To explore the configurational
space, we employ coarse-grained simulations with
active learning which allows us to update the flow
and make all-atom potential energy evaluations
only when necessary. Using alanine dipeptide
as an example, we show that our methods obtain a speedup to molecular dynamics simulations
of approximately 15.9 to 216.2 compared to the
speedup of 4.5 of the current state-of-the-art machine learning approach.

INN

Conditioning on CG
conﬁguration :

Boltzmann distribution
(a)
Starting
dataset

Train ﬂow

Train PMF
ensemble

Sample higherror points

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The conditional normalizing flow transforms the latent variable z of the latent distribution to the target configuration
xint conditioned on the CG configuration s. (b) Illustration of the
iterative three-step active learning cycle.

2012). Since a typical time step used in all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations is 1-2 fs, covering such time scales is
currently computationally very expensive and infeasible for
many systems of interest.

1. Introduction

Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Kaiserstr. 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany 2 Institute of Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Kaiserstr. 12,
76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. Correspondence to: Pascal Friederich
<pascal.friederich@kit.edu>.

Bottom-up coarse-graining of all-atom simulations introduces effective sites that describe the collective motion of
one or multiple atoms of the all-atom description. The potential of mean force (PMF) allows simulation of the CG
system and averages out many of the fast degrees of freedom, making the PMF smoother than the all-atom potential
energy (Jin et al., 2022). This allows larger time steps to
be used than for typical all-atom simulations. The reduced
number of degrees of freedom, combined with a larger time
step, allows for studying larger systems with extended simulation times.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Next to classical CG force fields such as Martini (Marrink et al., 2023) or UNICORN (Liwo et al., 2020), machine learning (ML) models have been successfully used to

Coarse-graining (CG) of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations is a powerful technique to bridge time and length
scales that are often infeasible to study on an atomistic level.
Numerous processes, especially large-scale conformational
changes in biomolecules such as the folding of proteins, occur on the microseconds to seconds timescale (Spiriti et al.,
1

1

