Practical Performance Guarantees for Pipelined DNN Inference

Aaron Archer * 1 Matthew Fahrbach * 1 Kuikui Liu 2 Prakash Prabhu 1

Abstract
3
stages (CUs)

We optimize pipeline parallelism for deep neural
network (DNN) inference by partitioning model
graphs into k stages and minimizing the running
time of the bottleneck stage, including communication. We give practical and effective algorithms for this NP-hard problem, but our emphasis is on tackling the practitioner’s dilemma of
deciding when a solution is good enough. To this
end, we design novel mixed-integer programming
(MIP) relaxations for proving lower bounds. Applying these methods to a diverse testbed of 369
production models, for k ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64},
we empirically show that these lower bounds are
strong enough to be useful in practice. Our lower
bounds are substantially stronger than standard
combinatorial bounds. For example, evaluated via
geometric means across a production testbed with
k = 16 pipeline stages, our MIP formulations
raise the lower bound from 0.4598 to 0.9452, expressed as a fraction of the best partition found.
In other words, our improved lower bounds close
the optimality gap by a factor of 9.855x.

2

1

i11
0

w11

i13

w13

o13

i23

w23

o23

i12

w12

o12 i22

w22

o22 i32

w32

o32

i21

w21

o21

w31

o31

w41

o41

o11
t

i31
2t

i41
3t

4t

time

Figure 1. Inference pipeline from startup to steady state with k = 3
stages. Each inference batch is represented with the same color as
it advances through the pipeline. Values ib` , wb` , ob` are the times
needed for stage ` to get its input for batch b, process it, and flush
its output. Stage 2 is the bottleneck, i.e., t = i∗2 + w∗2 + o∗2 , and
limits system throughput. Empty space (white) denotes idle time.

on lower bound methods for proving per-instance approximation ratios.
ML inference handles two main types of data: model parameters (weights learned during training) and activations
(intermediate outputs of the model, e.g., from hidden layers).
Keeping activations in fast memory (e.g., SRAM) is critical,
so ML compilers often treat it as a hard constraint. Model
parameters can be streamed from slow memory, but caching
them in fast memory greatly boosts performance. When we
partition an end-to-end inference computation into a linear
pipeline with k stages and process each stage on a different
CU, we increase the amount of fast memory at our disposal
by a factor of k, allowing us to cache more parameters and
support larger activations (and hence larger models and/or
batch sizes). However, this introduces two main challenges:
(1) CUs must send their outputs downstream, often via a
slow and contended data channel, so we need to minimize
communication overhead; and (2) we must balance the running time across all stages of the partition since the overall
throughput is governed by the bottleneck stage.

1. Introduction
Large-scale machine learning (ML) workloads rely on distributed systems and specialized hardware accelerators, e.g.,
graphics processing units (GPUs) and tensor processing
units (TPUs). Fully utilizing this hardware, however, remains an increasingly important challenge. ML accelerators have a small amount of fast memory co-located with
each computational unit (CU), and a much larger amount
of slow memory that is accessed via an interconnect shared
among the CUs. Achieving peak performance for deep neural network (DNN) training and inference requires the ML
compiler and/or practitioner to pay significant attention to
where intermediate data is stored and how it flows between
CUs. This work addresses pipeline partitioning for DNNs
to maximize inference throughput, with a particular focus

1.1. Practioner’s dilemma
Suppose you are an ML engineer who has been tasked with
partitioning a model graph for pipelined inference as illustrated in Figure 1. We explain the practitioner’s dilemma
with a toy example. Assume you are searching for the best
way to partition a model among 8 processors, and you discover a solution where the bottleneck processor takes 10ms
to finish. In this case, the pipeline finishes one inference
every 10ms, so the throughput is 1 inference / 10ms = 100
inferences per second, and the latency of a single inference

*
Equal contribution 1 Google 2 MIT. Correspondence to:
Matthew Fahrbach <fahrbach@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

