Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search with Window Filters

Joshua Engels 1 Benjamin Landrum 2 Shangdi Yu 1 Laxman Dhulipala 2 Julian Shun 1

Abstract

problems. They especially tout their support of ANNS with
metadata filtering as a key differentiating application.

We define and investigate the problem of c-approximate
window search: approximate nearest neighbor search
where each point in the dataset has a numeric label,
and the goal is to find nearest neighbors to queries
within arbitrary label ranges. Many semantic search
problems, such as image and document search with
timestamp filters, or product search with cost filters,
are natural examples of this problem. We propose and
theoretically analyze a modular tree-based framework
for transforming an index that solves the traditional
c-approximate nearest neighbor problem into a data
structure that solves window search. On standard nearest neighbor benchmark datasets with random label
values, adversarially constructed embeddings, and image search embeddings with real timestamps, we obtain
up to a 75× speedup over existing solutions at the same
level of recall.

In this work, we are primarily interested in a difficult generalization of the c-approximate nearest neighbor problem
that we term Window Search (see Definition 3.3). Window
search is similar to ANNS, except queries are accompanied
by a “window filter”, and the goal is to find the nearest neighbor to the query that has a label value within the filter. This
problem has a large number of immediate applications. For
instance, in document and image search, each item may be
accompanied by a timestamp, and the user may wish to filter
to an arbitrary time range (e.g., they may wish to search for
hiking pictures, but only from last summer, or forum posts
about a bug, but only in the days after a new version was
released). Another application is product catalogs, where
a user may wish to filter search results by cost. Finally,
we note that a large class of emerging applications is large
language model retrieval augmented generation, where by
storing and retrieving information LLMs can reduce hallucinations and improve their reasoning (Peng et al., 2023);
window search may be critical when the LLM needs to
recall something stored on a certain date or range of dates.

1. Introduction
The nearest neighbor search problem has been widely studied for more than 30 years (Arya & Mount, 1993). Given
a dataset D, the problem requires the construction of an
index that can efficiently answer queries of the form “what
is the closest vector to x in D?” Solving this problem exactly degrades to a brute force linear search in high dimensions (Rubinstein, 2018), so instead both theoreticians and
practitioners focus on the relaxed c-approximate nearest
neighbor search problem (ANNS), which asks “what is a
vector that is no more than c times farther away from x than
the closest vector to x in D?”

Although this problem has many motivating examples, there
is a dearth of papers examining it in the literature. Some vector databases analyze window search-like problem instances
as an additional feature of their system, but this analysis
is typically secondary to their main approach and too slow
for large-scale real-world systems; as far as we are aware,
we are the first to propose, analyze, and experiment with a
non-trivial solution to the window search problem.

Recent advances in vector embeddings for text, images, and
other unstructured data have led to a surge in research and
industry interest in ANNS. This trend is reflected by a proliferation of commercial vector databases: Pinecone (Pinecone
Systems, Inc., 2024), Vearch (vea, 2022), Weaviate (wea,
2022), Milvus (mil, 2022), and Vespa (ves, 2022), among
others. These databases offer hyper-parameter tuning, metadata storage, and solutions to a variety of related search

Our contributions include the following:
1. We formalize the c-approximate window search problem
and propose and test the first non-trivial solution that uses
the unique nature of numeric label based filters.
2. We design multiple new algorithms for window search,
including a modular tree-based framework and a labelspace partitioning approach.
3. We prove that our tree-based framework solves window
search and give runtime bounds for the general case and
for a specific instantiation with the Vamana ANNS algorithm (Jayaram Subramanya et al., 2019). We also
analyze optimal partitioning strategies for the label-space
partitioning approach.

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, CSAIL 2 University
of Maryland.
Correspondence to: Joshua Engels <jengels@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

