Sparsest Models Elude Pruning: An Exposé of Pruning’s Current Capabilities

Stephen Zhang 1 Vardan Papyan 1

Abstract
Pruning has emerged as a promising approach
for compressing large-scale models, yet its effectiveness in recovering the sparsest of models has
not yet been explored. We conducted an extensive series of 485,838 experiments, applying a
range of state-of-the-art pruning algorithms to a
synthetic dataset we created, named the Cubist
Spiral. Our findings reveal a significant gap in
performance compared to ideal sparse networks,
which we identified through a novel combinatorial
search algorithm. We attribute this performance
gap to current pruning algorithms’ poor behaviour
under overparameterization, their tendency to induce disconnected paths throughout the network,
and their propensity to get stuck at suboptimal
solutions, even when given the optimal width
and initialization. This gap is concerning, given
the simplicity of the network architectures and
datasets used in our study. We hope that our research encourages further investigation into new
pruning techniques that strive for true network
sparsity.

Figure 1. Sparse Model Visualization. Visualization of a sparse
model, discovered through our combinatorial search algorithm,
trained on the Cubist Spiral dataset. The first two squares on the
left denote the input variables, while the final, larger square depicts
the output from the classifier. The intermediate squares reveal postactivation states which are connected by edges, corresponding to
entries in weight matrices. At the top of each square, there is a tiny
square that is colored according to the bias of the corresponding
neuron. Blue is used to represent a positive value, orange a negative
value, and white – a value of zero.

used. For the same reason, analyzing and interpreting pruning’s effects on trained models has been challenging which
has allowed for potential shortcomings to go unnoticed.
This paper aims to scrutinize how closely various pruning
algorithms approach the ideal, sparsest network, defined
as the model with the fewest nonzero parameters that can
achieve a specific target accuracy, and reveal the true efficacy
of current pruning techniques.

1. Introduction
The burgeoning complexity of state-of-the-art deep learning models has made their training and deployment prohibitively expensive. To counteract this increasing demand
for resources, model compression has become increasingly
important in optimizing the computational efficiency of
these networks. Among these techniques, a popular and
proven option is network pruning which induces sparsity in
the model parameters (Hoefler et al., 2021).

1.1. Method Overview
To achieve our goals, we engineer the following tools that
will be the basis for our analysis:
Cubist Spiral A synthetic dataset named the Cubist Spiral,
depicted in Figure 2b. The simplicity inherent in the
dataset leads to interpretable sparse models that are
amenable to visualization and analysis.

Whilst pruning is effective, it is difficult to assess how close
current pruning algorithms are to obtaining the sparsest of
models due to the complexity of the datasets and models
1

Combinatorial Search A novel combinatorial search algorithm that searches across model sparsity masks for
an optimal and maximally sparse model. Diverging
from existing naive benchmarks such as random pruning, where the pruned weights are selected randomly,
our algorithm leverages structured sparsity to perform

Department of Mathematics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Stephen Zhang
<stephenn.zhang@mail.utoronto.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

