Learning-Efficient Yet Generalizable Collaborative Filtering
for Item Recommendation
Yuanhao Pu 1 Xiaolong Chen 1 Xu Huang 2 Jin Chen 3 Defu Lian 2 4 Enhong Chen 2 4

Abstract

iors to predict user preferences. The objective functions
in CF for item recommendation tasks, which performs recommendation with implicit feedback, can be separated into
two tracks: sampling methods and non-sampling methods.
Sampling methods, such as BPR (Rendle et al., 2012), select a subset of items as negative samples to help distinguish
positive samples, significantly reducing computational complexity and speeding up the training process. Non-sampling
methods leverage all un-interacted items as negatives for
comparison, ensuring more accurate ranking performance
over all items. Typical objective functions include Softmax
Loss and Weighted Squared Loss. Softmax Loss aims to
maximize the probability of interacted items compared with
uninteracted items (Sun et al., 2019; Rendle, 2021), whose
optimization goal is consistent with ranking metrics such as
Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) (Bruch
et al., 2019; Ravikumar et al., 2011), endowing it with significant advantages for item recommendation.

The weighted squared loss is a common component in several Collaborative Filtering (CF) algorithms for item recommendation, including the
representative implicit Alternating Least Squares
(iALS). Despite its widespread use, this loss function lacks a clear connection to ranking objectives such as Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG),
posing a fundamental challenge in explaining
the exceptional ranking performance observed
in these algorithms. In this work, we make a
breakthrough by establishing a connection between squared loss and ranking metrics through
a Taylor expansion of the DCG-consistent surrogate loss—softmax loss. We also discover a new
surrogate squared loss function, namely RankingGeneralizable Squared (RG2 ) loss, and conduct thorough theoretical analyses on the DCGconsistency of the proposed loss function. Later,
we present an example of utilizing the RG2 loss
with Matrix Factorization (MF), coupled with a
generalization upper bound and an ALS optimization algorithm that leverages closed-form solutions over all items. Experimental results over
three public datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the RG2 loss, exhibiting ranking performance on par with, or even surpassing, the softmax loss while achieving faster convergence.

The Weighted Squared Loss, commonly referred to as
the loss in Weighted Regularized Matrix Factorization
(WRMF) (Hu et al., 2008; Pan et al., 2008), is widely employed in item recommendation. This loss assigns a fixed
value of 1 to interacted items and smaller values, accompanied by lower weights, to un-interacted items. The research community has widely acknowledged such type of
non-sampling method, which incorporates all un-interacted
items into the training process, due to its superior ranking
performance (Rendle, 2021; Chen et al., 2023; 2020; Yuan
et al., 2021). By considering all instances, this approach
contributes to better distinguishing between interacted and
un-interacted items, leading to improved recommendation
accuracy. The effectiveness of the weighted squared loss
can be observed in the continued competitive performance
of iALS (Rendle et al., 2021; 2022), which utilizes this loss,
compared to more recent approaches such as SLIM (Ning
& Karypis, 2011), EASE (Steck, 2019), and VAE (Liang
et al., 2018). iALS consistently demonstrates strong rankingoriented metrics, despite being developed over a decade ago.
Moreover, the simplicity of the weighted squared loss function also allows for an applicable derivation (Bayer et al.,
2017; Takács & Tikk, 2012), leading to more efficient convergence with the help of optimization methods leveraging
closed-form solutions or higher-order gradients. Compared

1. Introduction
Collaborative filtering is a typical technique in item recommendations that leverages similarities between user behav1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University
of Science and Technology of China, China 2 School of Computer
Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of
China, China 3 School of Business and Management, Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 4 State
Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, China. Correspondence
to: Defu Lian <liandefu@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

