SceneCraft: An LLM Agent for Synthesizing 3D Scenes as Blender Code

Ziniu Hu 1 2 Ahmet Iscen 2 Aashi Jain 2 Thomas Kipf 2 Yisong Yue 1 David A Ross 2 Cordelia Schmid 2
Alireza Fathi 2

Abstract
This paper introduces SceneCraft, a Large Language Model (LLM) Agent converting text descriptions into Blender-executable Python scripts
which render complex scenes with up to a hundred 3D assets. This process requires complex
spatial planning and arrangement. We tackle
these challenges through a combination of advanced abstraction, strategic planning, and library
learning. SceneCraft first models a scene graph
as a blueprint, detailing the spatial relationships
among assets in the scene. SceneCraft then writes
Python scripts based on this graph, translating
relationships into numerical constraints for asset layout. Next, SceneCraft leverages the perceptual strengths of vision-language foundation
models like GPT-V to analyze rendered images
and iteratively refine the scene. On top of this
process, SceneCraft features a library learning
mechanism that compiles common script functions into a reusable library, facilitating continuous self-improvement without expensive LLM
parameter tuning. Our evaluation demonstrates
that SceneCraft surpasses existing LLM-based
agents in rendering complex scenes, as shown by
its adherence to constraints and favorable human
assessments. We also showcase the broader application potential of SceneCraft by reconstructing
detailed 3D scenes from the Sintel movie and
guiding a video generative model with generated
scenes as intermediary control signal.

Figure 1. Examples comparing SceneCraft’s output against a
BlenderGPT baseline for different queries.

tion. Recent 3D generative models like DreamFusion (Poole
et al., 2022) and Magic3D (Lin et al., 2023) have made great
progress in transforming text to a 3D neural representation
of an object. However, these works fall short of composing
entire scenes with multiple assets due to dataset scale limitations and domain specificity. In this work, we are inspired
by how human artists typically adopt a holistic process for
designing 3D scenes, where they take an iterative, step-bystep approach that includes storyboarding, 3D modeling,
texturing, rigging, layout, animation, and rendering, using
professional software such as Blender (ble). This iterative
process grants the artists in studios a nuanced control over
each asset’s placement and movement — a level of control
not yet achieved by existing models.

1. Introduction
Transforming natural language descriptions into 3D scenes
is a key technology for industries like architectural design,
game development, virtual reality, and cinematic produc1
California Institute of Technology 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Ziniu Hu <acgbull@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

