Flexible Residual Binarization for Image Super-Resolution

Yulun Zhang * 1 Haotong Qin * 2 Zixiang Zhao 2 Xianglong LiuB 3 Martin Danelljan 2 Fisher Yu 2

Abstract
Binarized image super-resolution (SR) has attracted much research attention due to its potential to drastically reduce parameters and operations. However, most binary SR works binarize network weights directly, which hinders highfrequency information extraction. Furthermore,
as a pixel-wise reconstruction task, binarization
often results in heavy representation content distortion. To address these issues, we propose a
flexible residual binarization (FRB) method for
image SR. We first propose a second-order residual binarization (SRB), to counter the information loss caused by binarization. In addition to
the primary weight binarization, we also binarize the reconstruction error, which is added as a
residual term in the prediction. Furthermore, to
narrow the representation content gap between
the binarized and full-precision networks, we
propose Distillation-guided Binarization Training (DBT). We uniformly align the contents of
different bit widths by constructing a normalized
attention form. Finally, we generalize our method
by applying our FRB to binarize convolution and
Transformer-based SR networks, resulting in two
binary baselines: FRBC and FRBT. We conduct
extensive experiments and comparisons with recent leading binarization methods. Our proposed
baselines, FRBC and FRBT, achieve superior performance both quantitatively and visually.

Urban100: img 001
Params (K) / Ops (G)

SRResNet
1515 / 146.1

BNN
372 / 79.2

ReActNet
372 / 79.2

FRBC (ours)
372 / 79.2

FRBT (ours)
115 / 5.4

Figure 1. Visual samples of image SR (×4) by lightweight image
SR methods. SRResNet (Ledig et al., 2017) is a full-precision (i.e.,
32-bit) model and is used as a backbone for binarization (i.e., 1-bit)
by BNN (Courbariaux et al., 2016), ReActNet (Liu et al., 2020),
and our FRBC. We also binarize SwinIR S (Liang et al., 2021)
and denote it as FRBT. We provide the parameter (i.e., Params
(K)) and operation numbers (i.e., Ops (G)). We set the input size as
3×320×180 for Ops calculation. Our FRBC and FRBT achieve
better visual reconstruction than other binary ones. Our results are
more faithful to that of the full-precision SRResNet.

dates for the same LR input. To address this problem, deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and Transformers
have been investigated for high-quality reconstrutions (Dong
et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2016; Lim et al., 2017; Zhang & Patel, 2018; Zhang et al., 2018b; Liang et al., 2021). However,
most of them require extensive computational resources,
which are usually not friendly for resource-limited devices.
In those cases, neural network compression techniques are
eagerly needed to significantly reduce model complexity.
As one of the most promising network compression techniques, binary neural networks (BNNs), where both the
network weights and activations are binarized (i.e., 1-bit binarization), are usually chosen for model deployment (Martinez et al., 2020; Rastegari et al., 2016). Theoretically, BNN
enjoys 32× parameter compression ratio and up to 58×
computation operation reduction (Rastegari et al., 2016).
Such practical characteristics make BNN highly efficient
for embedded devices (Ding et al., 2019) and friendly for
memristor-based hardwares (Liu et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Given a full-precision low-resolution (LR) input, single image super-resolution (SR) aims to obtain its high-resolution
(HR) counterpart by reconstructing more details. Essentially,
image SR is ill-posed, as there exist multiple HR candi*

HR
×4

Despite the above-mentioned advantages of BNN, the severe performance drop hinders it from being widely deployed (Liu et al., 2020). Such a problem is particularly
critical in binarized image SR, where dense pixel-wise predictions are required and the feature size is usually very
large. The performance drop mainly comes from two parts:
weights and activations binarization. (1) The weights are binarized from full-precision (i.e., 32-bit) to 1-bit, being hard

1

Equal contribution MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 ETH Zürich,
Switzerland 3 Beihang University, China. Correspondence to:
B
Xianglong Liu <xlliu@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

