Multi-View Stochastic Block Models
Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Tommaso d’Orsi * 1 2 Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Rajai Nasser * 1

Abstract

the growing attention in applied fields to multi-view or multilayer clustering (Paul & Chen, 2016; Corneli et al., 2016;
Han et al., 2015; De Bacco et al., 2017; Khan & Maji, 2019;
Zhong & Pun, 2021; Hu et al., 2019; Abavisani & Patel,
2018; Kim et al., 2016; Gujral et al., 2020; Ni et al., 2016;
De Santiago et al., 2023; Papalexakis et al., 2013; Gujral &
Papalexakis, 2018; Gorovits et al., 2018). In practice it is in
fact observed that while a single data source only offers a
specific characterization of the underlying objects, leading
to a coarse partition of the data, a careful combination of
multiple views often allows a semantically richer network
structure to emerge (Fu et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2023). For
a practical example, consider the task of clustering users of
a social network platform like Facebook, Instagram or X.
To solve such task one could simply cluster the friendship
graph, or one could cluster such graph by looking together
at the friendship graph, the co-like graph (a graph where two
users are connected if they like the same picture/video), the
co-comment graph (a graph where two users are connected
if they comment on the same post), the co-repost graph (a
graph where two users are connected if they repost the same
post) and so on and so forth. In practice, one would expect
the second approach to work better in many settings because
it provides a more fine-grained description of the behaviors
of the users.

Graph clustering is a central topic in unsupervised learning with a multitude of practical applications. In recent years, multi-view graph clustering has gained a lot of attention for its applicability to real-world instances where one has
access to multiple data sources. In this paper we
formalize a new family of models, called multiview stochastic block models that captures this
setting. For this model, we first study efficient
algorithms that naively work on the union of multiple graphs. Then, we introduce a new efficient
algorithm that provably outperforms previous approaches by analyzing the structure of each graph
separately. Furthermore, we complement our results with an information-theoretic lower bound
studying the limits of what can be done in this
model. Finally, we corroborate our results with
experimental evaluations.

1. Introduction
Clustering graphs is a fundamental topic in unsupervised
learning. It is used in a variety of fields, including data
mining, social sciences, statistics, and more. The goal of
graph clustering is to partition the vertices of the graph into
disjoint sets so that similar vertices are grouped together
and dissimilar vertices lie in different clusters. In this context, several notions of similarity between vertices have
been studied throughout the years resulting in different clustering objectives and clustering algorithms (Von Luxburg,
2007; Ng et al., 2001; Bansal et al., 2004; Goldberg, 1984;
Dasgupta, 2016).

Despite the large number of basic applications, very little
is known on the theoretical aspect of the problem. Several works (Paul & Chen, 2016; Corneli et al., 2016; Han
et al., 2015; De Bacco et al., 2017) consider the multi-layer
stochastic block models where the goal is to identify k
communities given several instances (i.e., layer or view)
of the stochastic block model, each with k communities.
In this paper, we would like to work in a more general
and more realistic setup, where there are k communities
but each instance only provides partial information about
these k communities. Very recently and concurrently to
us, (De Santiago et al., 2023) introduced the multi-view
stochastic block model. In this model, one is given in input multiple graphs, each coming from a stochastic block
model, and the goal is to leverage the information contained
in the graphs to recover the underlying clustering structure.
More precisely, given a vector of labels1 z where the labels capture the clustering assignment and are in [k], and

Despite the rich literature, most of the algorithmic results
in graph clustering only focus on the setting where a single
graph is presented in input. This is in contrast with the
increasing practical importance of multimodality and with
*

1
Equal contribution
Google Research 2 BIDSA, Bocconi.
Correspondence to:
Tommaso d’Orsi <tommaso.dorsi@unibocconi.it>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

We write random variables in boldface.

