The Effect of Weight Precision
on the Neuron Count in Deep ReLU Networks

Songhua He * 1 Periklis A. Papakonstantinou * 2

Abstract

count. If instead of our exponential time preprocessing algorithm one uses any polynomial time
algorithm, then it is impossible to non-trivially
reduce the neuron count, regardless of the high
weight precision.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become pivotal in machine learning, but the impact of weight
precision, such as in networks with rectified linear
units (ReLU), remains underexplored. We analytically investigate the interplay of three key factors:
the precision of ReLU network weights, the number of neurons, and the time of the preprocessing
algorithm that generates the network description.
Our study, which, to the best of our knowledge, is
the first formal work on weight precision, yields
three main results.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been intensively studied and, in the last decade, have become widely popular.
In this work, we revisit the resources a DNN is using. We
show that the standard notion of network size, which is the
number of neurons in a ReLU network, allows networks to
have unreasonably high computational power using only a
small number of neurons and high weight precision. This
means that in addition to the number of neurons, one should
take into account the numerical precision of the weights of
the network.

(1) We present an exponential time preprocessing
algorithm that showcases the possibility of trading
ReLU nodes for weight precision. Specifically,
our method achieves an exponential reduction in
neuron count when computing any function of
high complexity with boolean input encoding.
What is the implication of the above result in
theoretical and practical works?

A ReLU network is an edge-weighted graph whose nodes
(neurons) are ReLU functions (σ(x) = x, x > 0 and
σ(x) = 0, x ≤ 0) evaluated over the weighted sum of their
inputs. If we view it as a circuit, a ReLU network encodes
a real-valued function. To compare with boolean models,
we study ReLU networks on boolean inputs, which is not
an actual restriction in a world of finite precision. In the
real world, all real-valued problems are compiled in binary.
This means that for every ReLU network with real-weights
there exists an equivalent ReLU network with boolean inputs. Thus, it formally suffices to study the computational
capabilities of neural networks on boolean problems.

(2) In theory of computing, in general, there is
no free lunch. In our case, if you significantly
reduce the number of neurons then you should
pay the cost in weight precision. To address this,
we introduce a notion of network size that considers weight precision in addition to the network’s
number of neurons. We establish that under this
redefined notion of network size, it is generally
impossible to exchange neurons for weight precision in ReLU networks of the same (redefined)
size.

Prior to our work, there were many excellent works that
studied the computational power of various neural networks
architectures both theoretically, e.g. (Siegelmann & Sontag,
1992; 1994; Siegelmann, 1999; Chen et al., 2018; Pérez
et al., 2019) and empirically in finite precision settings,
e.g. (Weiss et al., 2018). To the best of our knowledge, our
work is the first to consider formally and in a comprehensive
fashion the computational power of neural networks in terms
of the precision of their weights.

(3) In practice, we show that high weight precision alone cannot help in reducing the neuron
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA 2 Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers University,
New Brunswick, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Songhua He
<songhua0110@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Allowing high precision or equivalently large-number arithmetic often makes a computational model unreasonably
1

