NExT-GPT: Any-to-Any Multimodal LLM

Shengqiong Wu 1 Hao Fei 1 Leigang Qu 1 Wei Ji 1 Tat-Seng Chua 1
with certain technologies, such as ChatGPT for text generation (OpenAI, 2022a) and diffusion models for visual
generation (Fan et al., 2022). Among these, the rise of Large
Language Models (LLMs) has been particularly remarkable,
e.g., Flan-T5 (Chung et al., 2022), Vicuna (Chiang et al.,
2023), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023) and Alpaca (Taori
et al., 2023), showcasing their formidable human-level language reasoning and decision-making capabilities, shining
a light on the path of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI).
Our world is inherently multimodal, and humans perceive
the world with different sensory organs for varied modal
information, such as language, images, videos, and sounds,
which often complement and synergize with each other.
With such intuition, the purely text-based LLMs have recently been endowed with other modal understanding and
perception capabilities of image, video, audio, etc.

Abstract
While recently Multimodal Large Language Models (MM-LLMs) have made exciting strides, they
mostly fall prey to the limitation of only inputside multimodal understanding, without the ability to produce content in multiple modalities. As
we humans always perceive the world and communicate with people through various modalities,
developing any-to-any MM-LLMs capable of accepting and delivering content in any modality
becomes essential to human-level AI. To fill the
gap, we present an end-to-end general-purpose
any-to-any MM-LLM system, NExT-GPT. We
connect an LLM with multimodal adaptors and
different diffusion decoders, enabling NExT-GPT
to perceive inputs and generate outputs in arbitrary combinations of text, image, video, and
audio. By leveraging the existing well-trained
high-performing encoders and decoders, NExTGPT is tuned with only a small amount of parameter (1%) of certain projection layers, which
not only benefits low-cost training but also facilitates convenient expansion to more potential
modalities. Moreover, we introduce a modalityswitching instruction tuning (MosIT) and manually curate a high-quality dataset for MosIT, based
on which NExT-GPT is empowered with complex cross-modal semantic understanding and content generation. Overall, our research showcases
the promising possibility of building a unified
AI agent capable of modeling universal modalities, paving the way for more human-like AI
research in the community. Project website:
https://next-gpt.github.io/

A notable approach involves employing adapters that align
pre-trained encoders in other modalities to textual LLMs.
This endeavor has led to the rapid development of multimodal LLMs (MM-LLMs), such as BLIP-2 (Li et al.,
2023c), Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022), MiniGPT-4 (Zhu
et al., 2023), Video-LLaMA (Zhang et al., 2023c), LLaVA
(Liu et al., 2023b), PandaGPT (Su et al., 2023), and
SpeechGPT (Zhang et al., 2023b). Nevertheless, most of
these efforts pay attention to the multimodal content understanding at the input side. Lately, fewer works have considered multimodal generation, such as Emu (Sun et al., 2023),
D REAMLLM (Dong et al., 2023), GILL (Koh et al., 2023),
SEED (Ge et al., 2023). Notably, these models are confined
to generating interleaved texts and images. We emphasize
that natural human cognition and communication indispensably require seamless transitions between any modalities
of information. This makes the exploration of any-to-any
MM-LLMs critical, i.e., the ability to accept inputs in any
modality and deliver responses in any appropriate modality.
Certain efforts have been made to mimic the human-like
any-to-any modality conversion. Lately, CoDi (Tang et al.,
2023) has made strides in implementing the capability of
simultaneously processing and generating arbitrary combinations of modalities; however, it lacks the reasoning and
decision-making prowess of LLMs as its core, and is also
limited to simple paired content generation. On the other
hand, some efforts, e.g., Visual-ChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023)

1. Introduction
Recently, the topic of Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC) has witnessed unprecedented advancements
1 NExT++ Research Center, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Hao Fei <haofei37@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning,
Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

1

