An Intrinsic Vector Heat Network
Alexander Gao 1 2 Maurice Chu 3 Mubbasir Kapadia 3 Ming C. Lin 2 Hsueh-Ti Derek Liu 1

Abstract

e1

Vector fields are widely used to represent and
model flows for many science and engineering
applications. This paper introduces a novel neural
network architecture for learning tangent vector
fields that are intrinsically defined on manifold
surfaces embedded in 3D. Previous approaches to
learning vector fields on surfaces treat vectors as
multi-dimensional scalar fields, using traditional
scalar-valued architectures to process channels
individually, thus fail to preserve fundamental intrinsic properties of the vector field. The core idea
of this work is to introduce a trainable vector heat
diffusion module to spatially propagate vectorvalued feature data across the surface, which we
incorporate into our proposed architecture that
consists of vector-valued neurons. Our architecture is invariant to rigid motion of the input, isometric deformation, and choice of local tangent
bases, and is robust to discretizations of the surface. We evaluate our Vector Heat Network on
triangle meshes, and empirically validate its invariant properties. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on the useful industrial
application of quadrilateral mesh generation.

p
e0

p
e1

e0

e1

p
e0

Figure 1: The tangent plane Tp M at point p on a manifold
M does not have a canonical choice of basis vectors e0 , e1 .
Our proposed architecture for learning tangent vector fields
is invariant to choice of tangent bases.
channel can be processed independently of the others (e.g.
as with RGB color channels in images). However, the multiple channels of a directional vector must be considered
jointly rather than independently, as they represent entangled properties (length and orientation). As an example, a
simple rotation requires adjusting all channels of the vector
to maintain its length; a scalar-valued neural network does
not inherently disentangle such vector properties. Scalarvalued architectures also disregard fundamental invariances
of tangent vector fields, such as the choice of local tangent
bases in which the vectors are expressed (see Fig. 1). This
prohibits their generalization to unseen data that does not
share the same (arbitrary) choice of bases.
In this work, we present a neural network architecture for
processing tangent vector fields defined on 2-manifolds embedded in R3 . The key idea is to maintain vector-valued
features throughout the architecture, and utilize a trainable
vector heat diffusion process (not to be confused with Diffusion Models (Yang et al., 2022)) to ensure our architecture
maintains necessary invariances for tangent vector field processing. We begin by reviewing necessary background on
tangent vector field processing in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4, we detail our proposed architecture. In Sec. 5, we show that our
approach is invariant to choice of local tangent bases, rigid
transformation, and isometric deformation of the input, and
is robust to different discretizations of the manifold surface.
Finally, in Sec. 6, we highlight an application of our work
in quadrilateral mesh generation for animation.

1. Introduction
Tangent vector fields on Riemannian manifolds are a fundamental ingredient in scientific computation, with applications ranging from modeling physical processes on earth
(Sabaka et al., 2010), to robotic navigation on complex
terrains (van den Berg et al., 2008), to mesh generation
(de Goes et al., 2016). The majority of works on learning
of tangent vector fields rely on neural network architectures
that consist of scalar neurons (e.g., the standard multilayer
perceptron). Despite being straightforward to implement,
these scalar-valued architectures assume that each scalar
1

Roblox Research 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA 3 Roblox Core AI. Correspondence to: Alexander Gao <awgao@umd.edu>.

2. Related Work

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our work is an instance of geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2021) focused on learning tangent vector fields
defined on discrete surfaces embedded in R3 . Such sur1

