Faster Maximum Inner Product Search in High Dimensions

Mo Tiwari 1 Ryan Kang * 1 Je-Yong Lee * 2 Donghyun Lee * 3 Chris Piech 1 Sebastian Thrun 1
Ilan Shomorony† 4 Martin Jinye Zhang† 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
The Maximum Inner Product Search problem (MIPS) is a
ubiquitous task that arises in many contexts, such as information retrieval, augmenting large auto-regressive language
models, and the Matching Pursuit (MP) problem (Shrivastava & Li, 2014; Neyshabur & Srebro, 2015; Yu et al., 2017;
Locatello et al., 2017; Sivic & Zisserman, 2003; Dong et al.,
2012; Boytsov et al., 2016; Borgeaud et al., 2022).

Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) is a
ubiquitous task in machine learning applications.
Given a query vector and n other vectors in d dimensions, the MIPS problem is to find the atom
that has the highest inner product with the query
vector.
√ Existing MIPS algorithms scale at least as
O( d) with respect to d, which becomes computationally prohibitive in high-dimensional settings.
In this work, we present BanditMIPS, a novel randomized algorithm that provably improves
the
√
state-of-the-art complexity from O( d) to O(1)
with respect to d. We validate the scaling of BanditMIPS and demonstrate that BanditMIPS outperforms prior state-of-the-art MIPS algorithms
in sample complexity, wall-clock time, and precision/speedup tradeoff across a variety of experimental settings. Furthermore, we propose
a variant of our algorithm, named BanditMIPSα, which improves upon BanditMIPS by employing non-uniform sampling across coordinates.
We also demonstrate the usefulness of BanditMIPS in problems for which MIPS is a subroutine, including Matching Pursuit and Fourier
analysis. Finally, we demonstrate that BanditMIPS can be used in conjunction with preprocessing techniques to improve its complexity with respect to n. All of our experimental results are reproducible via a 1-line script at
github.com/ThrunGroup/BanditMIPS.

Given a query vector q ∈ Rd and n atom vectors
v1 , . . . , vn ∈ Rd , MIPS aims to find the atom most similar
to the query:
i∗ = arg max viT q

(1)

i∈{1,··· ,n}

For example, in recommendation systems, the query q may
represent a user and the atoms (vi s) represent items with
which the user can interact; MIPS finds the best item for
the user as modeled by their concordance viT q (Amagata &
Hara, 2021; Aouali et al., 2022). In many applications, the
number of atoms n and the feature dimension d can easily
be in the millions, so it is critical to solve MIPS accurately
and efficiently (Hirata et al., 2022).
The naı̈ve approach scales as O(nd), as it evaluates all nd
scalar products. Significant prior work has focused on the
improving the scaling with n, often via heavy preprocessing (Morozov & Babenko, 2018b; Liu et al., 2020); these
approaches are discussed in detail in Section 1.1. However,
fairly little work has focused on improving the complexity
of MIPS algorithms with respect to d; most existing MIPS
algorithms computationally prohibitive in high-dimensional
datasets in domains like e-commerce, genomics, and finance.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 2 Oxford University 3 University
College London 4 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 5 Ray and Stephanie Lane
Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University.
Correspondence to: Mo Tiwari <motiwari@stanford.edu>, Ilan
Shomorony <ilans@illinois.edu>, Martin Jinye Zhang <martinzh@andrew.cmu.edu>.

In this work, we propose BanditMIPS, a state-of-the-art
randomized algorithm for the MIPS problem that scales
as O(1) with respect to d, under general assumptions that
often hold in practice. Intuitively, BanditMIPS performs
adaptive, coordinate-wise sampling to estimate the inner
products viT q for each i. BanditMIPS allocates more samples to “promising” atoms while simultaneously discarding
“unpromsing” atoms quickly. The specific adaptive sampling procedure is motivated by multi-armed bandits (MAB)
(Even-Dar et al., 2006).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

