Feel-Good Thompson Sampling for Contextual Dueling Bandits

Xuheng Li 1 Heyang Zhao 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

probability of the user favoring a certain choice is proportional to the exponential of the reward function, and the
special case where two choices are presented to the user is
called the Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model (Hunter, 2004;
Luce, 2005). The online version of the preference-based
model, called the dueling bandits, has been studied extensively (Yue et al., 2012; Zoghi et al., 2014; Komiyama et al.,
2015) when the set of the action space is fixed and finite
(i.e., the multi-armed dueling bandits). Recently, a more
general model, the (linear) contextual dueling bandit (Saha,
2021; Bengs et al., 2022), has been proposed. This model
has important features including time-varying and possibly infinite action spaces, along with a context-dependent
reward function with a linear structure, which capture important practical situations. A number of algorithms have been
proposed for (linear) contextual dueling bandits, including
MaxInP (Saha, 2021), CoLSTIM (Bengs et al., 2022) and
VACDB (Di et al., 2023), all of which are based on the upper
confidence bound (UCB) technique for exploration.
Under the setting of traditional contextual bandits, Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) is another technique for
exploration apart from UCB-based methods, and superior
empirical performance has been observed when applying
Thompson sampling to various tasks (Chapelle & Li, 2011;
Osband & Van Roy, 2017). Instead of deterministically
learning a model, in Thomson sampling, models are sampled from a posterior distribution constructed on historic
observations. It has been widely studied in both the multiarmed setting (Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; Kaufmann et al.,
2012; Agrawal & Goyal, 2017; Jin et al., 2021) and the linear setting (Agrawal & Goyal, 2013). Later, Zhang (2022)
showed that the frequentist regret of linear Thompson sampling is suboptimal in the worst case and proposed a new
variant of Thompson sampling called Feel-Good Thomson
sampling (FGTS) to overcome this issue. The effectiveness
of FGTS is theoretically justified: when applied to linear
contextual bandits, FGTS can achieve the minimax-optimal
regret bound as UCB-based algorithms like LinUCB (Li
et al., 2010) or OFUL (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).
Despite the success of Thompson sampling algorithms in
traditional contextual bandits, there have been few works
that apply this technique to contextual dueling bandits. The
notable exception is a double Thompson sampling approach
proposed by Wu & Liu (2016). However, this approach is
limited to multi-armed dueling bandits and cannot be modi-

Contextual dueling bandits, where a learner compares two options based on context and receives
feedback indicating which was preferred, extends
classic dueling bandits by incorporating contextual information for decision-making and preference learning. Several algorithms based on the
upper confidence bound (UCB) have been proposed for linear contextual dueling bandits. However, no algorithm based on posterior sampling
has been developed in this setting, despite the empirical success observed in traditional contextual
bandits. In this paper, we propose a Thompson
sampling algorithm, named FGTS.CDB, for linear contextual dueling bandits. At the core of our
algorithm is a new Feel-Good exploration term
specifically tailored for dueling bandits. This term
leverages the independence of the two selected
arms, thereby avoiding a cross term in the analysis. We show that our algorithm achieves
nearly
√
O(d T ), where d
minimax-optimal regret, i.e., e
is the model dimension and T is the time horizon.
Finally, we evaluate our algorithm on synthetic
data and observe that FGTS.CDB outperforms
existing algorithms by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has
become a popular methodology in the alignment of large
language models (LLMs, Ouyang et al. 2022; Diao et al.
2023). In RLHF, it is often easier for the human user to compare two responses than providing a numerical reward/score
based on a common standard. Therefore, existing works on
RLHF (Zhu et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023) focus on a model
where the learning agent has a dataset of users’ preferences
among several choices. The preferences are often assumed
to follow the Plackett-Luce (PL) model (Soufiani et al.,
2014; Khetan & Oh, 2016; Ren et al., 2018), where the
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

