Craftax: A Lightning-Fast Benchmark for Open-Ended Reinforcement Learning

Michael Matthews 1 Michael Beukman 1 Benjamin Ellis 1 Mikayel Samvelyan 2 Matthew Jackson 1
Samuel Coward 1 Jakob Foerster 1

Abstract
Benchmarks play a crucial role in the development and analysis of reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms. We identify that existing benchmarks
used for research into open-ended learning fall
into one of two categories. Either they are too
slow for meaningful research to be performed
without enormous computational resources, like
Crafter, NetHack and Minecraft, or they are not
complex enough to pose a significant challenge,
like Minigrid and Procgen. To remedy this, we
first present Craftax-Classic: a ground-up rewrite
of Crafter in JAX that runs up to 250x faster than
the Python-native original. A run of PPO using 1
billion environment interactions finishes in under
an hour using only a single GPU and averages
90% of the optimal reward. To provide a more
compelling challenge we present the main Craftax
benchmark, a significant extension of the Crafter
mechanics with elements inspired from NetHack1 .
Solving Craftax requires deep exploration, long
term planning and memory, as well as continual
adaptation to novel situations as more of the world
is discovered. We show that existing methods including global and episodic exploration, as well
as unsupervised environment design fail to make
material progress on the benchmark. We believe
that Craftax can for the first time allow researchers
to experiment in a complex, open-ended environment with limited computational resources.

Figure 1. Pixel-based view from Craftax.

ronment (Bellemare et al., 2013) for value based deep RL algorithms, Mujoco (Todorov et al., 2012) for continuous control and the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (Samvelyan
et al., 2019) for multi-agent RL. In the effort towards increasingly general agents, there has arisen a community
focused on benchmarks that exhibit more open-ended dynamics (Stanley et al., 2017), in the form of procedural
world generation, skill acquisition and reuse, long term
dependencies and continual learning. This has motivated
the development of environments like MALMO (Johnson
et al., 2016) (Minecraft), The NetHack Learning Environment (Küttler et al., 2020), MiniHack (Samvelyan et al.,
2021) and Crafter (Hafner, 2021). However, slow runtime
has rendered them inaccessible to current methods without
large-scale computational resources, limiting their practicality to the research community.

1. Introduction
Progress in reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms is driven
in large part by the development and adoption of suitable
benchmarks. Examples include the Arcade Learning Envi1
University of Oxford 2 University College London. Correspondence to: Michael Matthews <michael.matthews@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Simultaneously, as the speed of running an end-to-end compiled RL pipeline has become fully appreciated (Lu et al.,
2022), there has been an explosion of RL environments
implemented in JAX (Freeman et al., 2021; Lange, 2022;
Bonnet et al., 2023; Rutherford et al., 2023; Nikulin et al.,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code
provided
at
https://github.com/
MichaelTMatthews/Craftax.

1

