WAVES: Benchmarking the Robustness of Image Watermarks

Bang An * 1 Mucong Ding * 1 Tahseen Rabbani * 1 Aakriti Agrawal 1 Yuancheng Xu 1 Chenghao Deng 1
Sicheng Zhu 1 Abdirisak Mohamed 1 2 Yuxin Wen 1 Tom Goldstein 1 Furong Huang 1

Abstract

is a signal encoded onto an image to signify its source or
ownership (Al-Haj, 2007; Zhu et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2019; Tancik et al., 2020; Fernandez et al., 2023; Wen et al.,
2023). To avoid degradation of image quality, an invisible
watermark is desired. Many such watermarks are robust
to common image manipulations (Lukas et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023a; Wen et al., 2023; Fernandez et al., 2023), and
adversarial efforts to remove the watermark are complicated
by the difficulty of decoding/extracting the message without
private knowledge of the watermarking scheme (Tancik et al.,
2020; Fernandez et al., 2023). Despite this difficulty, various
watermark removal schemes can still be effective (Zhao et al.,
2023a; Saberi et al., 2023). However, a lack of standardized
evaluations in existing literature (i.e., inconsistent image
quality measures, statistical parameters, and types of attacks)
has resulted in an incomplete picture of the vulnerabilities
and robustness of these algorithms in the real world.

In the burgeoning age of generative AI, watermarks
act as identifiers of provenance and artificial content. We present WAVES (Watermark Analysis via
Enhanced Stress-testing), a benchmark for assessing image watermark robustness, overcoming the
limitations of current evaluation methods. WAVES
integrates detection and identification tasks and
establishes a standardized evaluation protocol comprised of a diverse range of stress tests. The attacks
in WAVES range from traditional image distortions
to advanced, novel variations of diffusive, and
adversarial attacks. Our evaluation examines two
pivotal dimensions: the degree of image quality
degradation and the efficacy of watermark detection after attacks. Our novel, comprehensive evaluation reveals previously undetected vulnerabilities
of several modern watermarking algorithms.
We envision WAVES as a toolkit for the future
development of robust watermarks. The project
is available at https://wavesbench.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Recent and pivotal advancements in text-to-image diffusion
models (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Rombach
et al., 2022) have garnered the attention of the AI community
and the general public. Open-source models such as Stable
Diffusion and proprietary models such as the Dall·E family
and Midjourney have enabled users to produce images that
are of human-produced quality. Consequently, there has
been a strong push in the AI/ML community to develop
reliable algorithms for detecting AI-generated content and
determining its source (Executive Office of the President,
2023). One avenue for maintaining the provenance of generative content is by embedding watermarks. A watermark

Figure 1. WAVES establishes a standardized evaluation framework
that encompasses a comprehensive suite of stress tests including
both existing and newly proposed stronger attacks (denoted by ∗ ).

*
Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically 1 University of Maryland, College Park 2 SAP Labs, LLC. Correspondence to: Bang Ang
<bangan@umd.edu>, Mucong Ding <mcding@umd.edu>, Tahseen
Rabbani <trabbani@umd.edu>.

We present WAVES (Watermark Analysis via Enhanced
Stress-testing), a benchmark for assessing watermark robustness, overcoming the limitations of current evaluation methods. WAVES consists of a comprehensive variety of novel &
realistic attacks, including classical image distortions, image
regeneration, and adversarial attacks. In an effort to stresstest existing/future watermarks, we propose several new attacks such as adversarial embedding attacks, and new variants
of existing attacks such as multi-regeneration attacks.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

WAVES focuses on the sensitivity and robustness of watermark detection, measured by the true positive rate (TPR) at
0.1% false positive rate (FPR), and in the meantime, studies
1

