Efficient Mixture Learning in Black-Box Variational Inference

Alexandra Hotti * 1 2 3 Oskar Kviman * 1 2 Ricky Molén 1 2 Vı́ctor Elvira 4 Jens Lagergren 1 2

Abstract

and variational posteriors, and the exploration of alternative
formulations of the evidence lower bound (ELBO), the typical objective function in VI. Competitive developments
include normalizing flows (NFs; Rezende & Mohamed
(2015); Papamakarios et al. (2021)), hierarchical models
(Burda et al., 2015; Sønderby et al., 2016; Vahdat & Kautz,
2020), autoregressive models (Van Oord et al., 2016), the
VampPrior (Tomczak & Welling, 2018), and the importance
weighted ELBO (IWELBO; Burda et al. (2015)).

Mixture variational distributions in black box variational inference (BBVI) have demonstrated impressive results in challenging density estimation
tasks. However, currently scaling the number
of mixture components can lead to a linear increase in the number of learnable parameters and
a quadratic increase in inference time due to the
evaluation of the evidence lower bound (ELBO).
Our two key contributions address these limitations. First, we introduce the novel Multiple Importance Sampling Variational Autoencoder (MISVAE), which amortizes the mapping from input to
mixture-parameter space using one-hot encodings.
Fortunately, with MISVAE, each additional mixture component incurs a negligible increase in network parameters. Second, we construct two new
estimators of the ELBO for mixtures in BBVI, enabling a tremendous reduction in inference time
with marginal or even improved impact on performance. Collectively, our contributions enable
scalability to hundreds of mixture components
and provide superior estimation performance in
shorter time, with fewer network parameters compared to previous Mixture VAEs. Experimenting with MISVAE, we achieve astonishing, SOTA
results on MNIST. Furthermore, we empirically
validate our estimators in other BBVI settings, including Bayesian phylogenetic inference, where
we improve inference times for the SOTA mixture
model on eight data sets.

Lately, using mixture models as variational distributions
has garnered increased attention (Nalisnick et al., 2016; Kucukelbir et al., 2017; Morningstar et al., 2021; Kviman et al.,
2022; 2023a). Specifically, Kviman et al. (2022) developed
a formulation of the ELBO for uniformly weighted mixtures
inspired by multiple importance sampling (MIS; see Elvira
et al. (2019) for a review), termed MISELBO,1
"
#
A
pθ (x, za )
1 X
Eq (z |x) log 1 PA
LMIS =
,
A a=1 ϕa a
a′ =1 qϕ ′ (za |x)
A

a

(1)
where za is a latent variable, x is observed data, θ represents
the parameters of the generative model pθ (x, ·), A is the
number of mixture components, and ϕa denotes the variational parameters of the a-th mixture component qϕa (·|x).
Mixtures are distinguished by their simple yet expressive
nature, as well as their theoretical foundation. In the BBVI
setting, they have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) results
in applications like image processing and phylogenetics
(Kviman et al., 2023a;b). However, computational complexities (parameter costs and inference times) hinder algorithm
developers from utilizing a large A, ultimately leaving the
full potential (e.g., their universal approximator property
(Kostantinos, 2000)) untapped.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in variational inference (VI) have
focused on enhancing performance through more sophisticated network architectures, formulation of flexible priors

In BBVI-based mixture learning, the number of learnable
parameters typically increases linearly with A at an unpractical rate. For example, in Kviman et al. (2022; 2023a), a
naive approach is used where each new component allocates
a separate encoder network, while in Kviman et al. (2023b),
there is one Bayesian network per component. Moreover,

*
Equal contribution 1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Science for Life Laboratory 3 Klarna 4 University of Edinburgh.
Correspondence to: Alexandra Hotti <hotti@kth.se>, Oskar Kviman <okviman@kth.se>.
2

1
An alternative naming of this lower bound emerges in the
work of Morningstar et al. (2021), where the sampling scheme is
interpreted as stratified sampling. This perspective leads to the
names SELBO or SIWELBO.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

