Performative Prediction with Bandit Feedback:
Learning through Reparameterization

Yatong Chen 1 Wei Tang 2 3 Chien-Ju Ho 4 Yang Liu 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Performative prediction, as introduced by Perdomo et al.,
provides a framework for studying prediction and risk minimization when the data distribution itself changes in response to the deployment of a model. Such phenomena,
usually referred to as ”performativity,” are prevalent in various social prediction contexts, including education, recommendation systems, and criminal prediction, among others
(Perdomo et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023; Hardt et al., 2016;
Dong et al., 2018; Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020). For instance, consider a college admission process that places
significant importance on standardized test scores. This
process can incentivize students to invest more effort in
test preparation, ultimately leading to a pool of applicants
with much higher test scores than initially expected. This
phenomenon is also prevalent in real-world applications,
particularly in large-scale online recommendation systems,
where the high frequency of updates to the recommendation
algorithm can reshape users’ future behavior. For example,
video platforms such as TikTok, Netflix, and YouTube provide personalized recommendations that can influence users’
future preferences and lead to shifts in the user-advertiser interaction patterns, thereby creating a dynamic and evolving
data distribution.

Performative prediction, as introduced by Perdomo et al., is a framework for studying social
prediction in which the data distribution itself
changes in response to the deployment of a model.
Existing work in this field usually hinges on three
assumptions that are easily violated in practice:
that the performative risk is convex over the deployed model, that the mapping from the model
to the data distribution is known to the model
designer in advance, and the first-order information of the performative risk is available. In this
paper, we initiate the study of performative prediction problems that do not require these assumptions. Specifically, we develop a reparameterization framework that reparametrizes the performative prediction objective as a function of the
induced data distribution. We then develop a twolevel zeroth-order optimization procedure, where
the first level performs iterative optimization on
the distribution parameter space, and the second
level learns the model that induces a particular
target distribution at each iteration. Under mild
conditions, this reparameterization allows us to
transform the non-convex objective into a convex
one and achieve provable regret guarantees. In
particular, we provide a regret bound that is sublinear in the total number of performative samples
taken and is only polynomial in the dimension of
the model parameter.

More formally, consider the standard empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem defined by a loss function ℓ, a
model parameter space Θ ⊂ RdΘ where dΘ ∈ Z>0 , an
instance space Z = X × Y , and a fixed data distribution
D over Z. The task is to find a model that minimizes the
empirical risk defined as: ER(θ, D) := Ez∼D [ℓ(z; θ)]. Performative prediction extends this learning task by positing
that the data distribution D is not fixed but is instead a function of the model parameter θ ∈ Θ. Here, we refer to D(·)
as a distribution map, and D(θ) as the data distribution induced by the model θ. The objective is then to minimize the
performative risk, defined as

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, California, United States. 2 Data
Science Institute, Columbia University 3 Department of Decisions,
Operations, and Technology, the Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington
University in St. Louis. Correspondence to: Yang Liu <yangliu@ucsc.edu>.

PR(θ, D(θ)) := Ez∼D(θ) [ℓ(z; θ)] .
Intuitively, the performative prediction risk evaluates the
performance of the model θ on the resulting distribution
D(θ) via the loss function ℓ. When it is clear from the
context, we also use PR(θ) to shorthand the performative

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

