Mobile Attention: Mobile-Friendly Linear-Attention for Vision Transformers

Zhiyu Yao 1 2 Jian Wang 2 Haixu Wu 1 Jingdong Wang 2 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

attention modules that effectively capture global context
(Touvron et al., 2021). However, as shown in Figure 1 (a),
the quadratic complexity O(N 2 D) of the attention module (N is the number of tokens and D is the dimension of
features), which increases with the number of input tokens,
restricts the runtime efficiency of ViTs (Liu et al., 2021). To
overcome this limitation, researchers have proposed linear
attention designs that can reduce the quadratic complexity
of standard ViT attention. These linear attention designs
can be classified into two categories: (i) ViTs with local
attention, where the size of the attention window is limited
(Liu et al., 2021), and attention queries are shared (Arar
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022); (ii) ViTs with kernel-based
linear attention, which approximates the nonlinear softmax
function by decomposing it into separate kernel embeddings,
allowing for a change in matrix computation order to reduce
computational complexity (Wu et al., 2022).

Vision Transformers (ViTs) excel in computer vision tasks due to their ability to capture global
context among tokens. However, their quadratic
complexity O(N 2 D) in terms of token number
N and feature dimension D limits practical use
on mobile devices, necessitating more mobilefriendly ViTs with reduced latency. Multi-head
linear-attention is emerging as a promising alternative with linear complexity O(N Dd), where d
is the per-head dimension. Still, more compute is
needed as d gets large for model accuracy. Reducing d improves mobile friendliness at the expense
of excessive small heads weak at learning valuable
subspaces, ultimately impeding model capability.
To overcome this efficiency-capability dilemma,
we propose a novel Mobile-Attention design with
a head-competition mechanism empowered by
information flow, which prevents overemphasis
on less important subspaces upon trivial heads
while preserving essential subspaces to ensure
Transformer’s capability. It enables linear-time
complexity on mobile devices by supporting a
small per-head dimension d for mobile efficiency.
By replacing the standard attention of ViTs with
Mobile-Attention, our optimized ViTs achieved
enhanced model capacity and competitive performance in a range of computer vision tasks. Specifically, we have achieved remarkable reductions
in latency on the iPhone 12. Code is available at
https://github.com/thuml/MobileAttention.

The popularity of kernel-based linear attention, as shown
in Figure 1, is due to its linear computational complexity
of O(N Dd), where d represents the per-head dimension.
This makes it an ideal choice for mobile devices. Unlike
local attention, linear attention can capture global context
across features over tokens. However, it can be computationally expensive, especially with a large head dimension
(d), while mobile devices have limited memory resources.
The large matrix multiplication between the key and value
in the head dimension requires significant processing and
storage, leading to out-of-memory errors or slow speeds.
As depicted in Figure 1, reducing head dimensions d will
result in lower latency and improved efficiency in linear
attention. Therefore, reducing d is an effective approach to
make linear attention more mobile-friendly, supported both
theoretically and in practical deployment. However, a small
per-head dimension may cause some heads to struggle in
learning valuable subspaces due to limited feature capacity, potentially resulting in trivial representations. These
trivial subspaces can dominate over useful subspaces, impacting the expressiveness of linear attention and the overall
performance of linear ViTs.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved notable success
in various computer vision applications, such as image classification and object detection, due to their powerful selfThis work was done when Zhiyu Yao was intern at Baidu VIS.
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Baidu VIS, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long
<mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

1

To tackle these challenges, we introduce the MobileAttention mechanism, the first kernel-based linear-attention
specifically tailored for mobile devices. Going beyond the
kernel-based linear attention, it leverages a small number

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

