Learning Optimal Projection for Forecast Reconciliation of
Hierarchical Time Series
Asterios Tsiourvas 1 Wei Sun 2 Georgia Perakis 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Yada Zhu 2

Abstract

due to its crucial role in decision-making across various domains (Dai et al., 2017). For instance, in retail, demand
forecasts across different levels of granularity (e.g., product,
store, state, country) are essential for inventory control and
revenue management (Seeger et al., 2016). In the energy and
utility sector, accurate electricity consumption forecasts at
individual, grid, and regional levels are vital for the efficient
operation of power grids (Taieb et al., 2017; 2021).

Hierarchical time series forecasting requires not
only prediction accuracy but also coherency, i.e.,
forecasts add up appropriately across the hierarchy. Recent literature has shown that reconciliation via projection outperforms prior methods
such as top-down or bottom-up approaches. Unlike existing work that pre-specifies a projection
matrix (e.g., orthogonal), we study the problem
of learning the optimal oblique projection from
data for coherent forecasting of hierarchical time
series. In addition to the unbiasedness-preserving
property, oblique projection implicitly accounts
for the hierarchy structure and assigns different
weights to individual time series, providing significant adaptability over orthogonal projection
which treats base forecast errors equally. We examine two broad classes of projections, namely
Euclidean projection and general oblique projections. We propose to model the reconciliation
step as a learnable, structured, projection layer
in the neural forecaster architecture. The proposed approach allows for the efficient learning
of the optimal projection in an end-to-end framework where both the neural forecaster and the
projection layer are learned simultaneously. An
empirical evaluation of real-world hierarchical
time series datasets demonstrates the superior performance of the proposed method over existing
state-of-the-art approaches.

To forecast hierarchical time series, besides accuracy, it is
also critical to ensure coherence, i.e., the forecasts of each
aggregation group are equal to those making up the group.
When individual time series are learned independently, there
is no guarantee that these forecasts would satisfy the aggregation constraints specified by the hierarchy. Previous methods address coherence by forecasting only a single level
of the hierarchy and then reconciling either in a top-down
(Athanasopoulos et al., 2009; Gross & Sohl, 1990; Das et al.,
2023) or bottom-up approach (Kahn, 1998), or by utilizing
a combination of both known as the middle-out method
(Hollyman et al., 2021). There are two issues associated
with this approach. Firstly, the model parameters for each
time series are learned independently of the reconciliation
method that follows. Secondly, since such approaches only
utilize partial data in the hierarchy, valuable information
present at other levels is neglected.
Several notable advances in forecast reconciliation literature
that attempt to combine forecasts across all levels via solving a regression problem are shown to outperform prior
methods (Hyndman et al., 2011; Wickramasuriya et al.,
2019). Panagiotelis et al. (2021) provide a geometric interpretation of these reconciliation methods as specific instances of projections. In particular, Panagiotelis et al.
(2021) show that the method proposed in Hyndman et al.
(2011) is an orthogonal projection, while MinT method from
Wickramasuriya et al. (2019) is a special case of generalized
Euclidean projections. Reconciliation via projections enjoys
desirable properties such as the unbiasedness-preserving
property, i.e., the reconciled forecasts are unbiased if the
initial forecasts are also unbiased.

1. Introduction
A hierarchical time series refers to a collection of time series
that follows a hierarchical aggregation structure. Forecasting hierarchical time series has garnered increasing attention
1

Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 2 IBM Research, USA. Correspondence to: Asterios
Tsiourvas <atsiour@mit.edu>.

Oblique projection (such as generalized Euclidean projection) offers significantly more flexibility in modeling as
the standard orthogonal projection method implicitly treats

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

