Predictive Linear Online Tracking for Unknown Targets

Anastasios Tsiamis * 1 Aren Karapetyan * 1 Yueshan Li 2 Efe C. Balta 1 3 John Lygeros 1

Abstract

autonomous agent be governed by the linear dynamics
xt+1 = Axt + But ,

In this paper, we study the problem of online
tracking in linear control systems, where the
objective is to follow a moving target. Unlike classical tracking control, the target is unknown, non-stationary, and its state is revealed
sequentially, thus, fitting the framework of online non-stochastic control. We consider the case
of quadratic costs and propose a new algorithm,
called predictive linear online tracking (PLOT).
The algorithm uses recursive least squares with
exponential forgetting to learn a time-varying dynamic model of the target. The learned model is
used in the optimal policy under the framework of
receding horizon control. We √
show the dynamic
regret of PLOT scales with O( T VT ), where VT
is the total variation of the target dynamics and T
is the time horizon. Unlike prior work, our theoretical results hold for non-stationary targets. We
implement PLOT on a real quadrotor and provide
open-source software, thus, showcasing one of
the first successful applications of online control
methods on real hardware.

where xt ∈ Rn is the state, and ut ∈ Rm is the control
input, while A ∈ Rn×n and B ∈ Rn×m denote the known
system dynamics. Given a target trajectory rt ∈ Rn×1 ,
t ≥ 0 the goal is finding the optimal control input of the
finite-horizon problem
min

u0:T −1

T
−1
X
t=0


∥xt − rt ∥2Q + ∥ut ∥2R +∥xT − rT ∥2QT , (2)

subject to the dynamics (1), for some total time (horizon)
T . The state, input, and terminal penalties, Q ∈ Rn×n , R ∈
Rm×m , QT ∈ Rn×n , respectively, are design choices.
In classical target tracking, the target state rt is known a
priori and is precomputed. However, in many cases, the
target might be time-varying and unknown. Such scenarios
arise, for example, in the case of adversarial target tracking,
wild animal tracking, moving obstacle avoidance, pedestrian
tracking, etc. In such cases, the target trajectory is generated
by an external unknown dynamical system, also known as
“exosystem” (Nikiforov & Gerasimov, 2022). In this work,
we assume that the target is generated by time-varying, autoregressive (AR) dynamics. Let

1. Introduction


zt = rt⊤

Target tracking is a fundamental control task for autonomous
agents, allowing them to be used in a variety of applications
including environmental monitoring (Aucone et al., 2023),
agriculture (Daponte et al., 2019), and air shows (Schoellig
et al., 2014) to name a few. Typically, an autonomous agent
is given a reference trajectory, which should be tracked with
as little error as possible. In the case of linear systems with
quadratic costs the problem, also known as Linear Quadratic
Tracking (LQT), can be formulated as follows. Let the
*

(1)

···

⊤
rt−p+1

⊤

contain past target states, with p the memory or past horizon
of the dynamics. Then, the target at the next time step is
given by the AR model
rt+1 = St+1 zt ,

(3)

where St ∈ Rn×np is an unkonwn matrix.
Adaptive control has a long history of dealing with dynamical uncertainty (Annaswamy & Fradkov, 2021), where the
goal is to simultaneously control the system and adapt to
the uncertainty. One of the most widely-used algorithms
in the adaptive control literature with ubiquitous applications has been the celebrated Recursive Least Squares (RLS)
algorithm with forgetting factors (Åström et al., 1977).
While adaptive control has been extensively studied in the
stochastic or time-invariant regime (Guo & Ljung, 1995;

1

Equal contribution Automatic Control Laboratory, ETH
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Institute for Dynamic Systems and
Control, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 3 Control and Automation Group, inspire AG, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Anastasios Tsiamis <atsiamis@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

