Robust and Conjugate Gaussian Process Regression

Matias Altamirano 1 François-Xavier Briol 1 Jeremias Knoblauch 1

Abstract

GP
RCGP
True

5.0

To enable closed form conditioning, a common assumption in Gaussian process (GP) regression is
independent and identically distributed Gaussian
observation noise. This strong and simplistic assumption is often violated in practice, which leads
to unreliable inferences and uncertainty quantification. Unfortunately, existing methods for robustifying GPs break closed-form conditioning,
which makes them less attractive to practitioners
and significantly more computationally expensive.
In this paper, we demonstrate how to perform
provably robust and conjugate Gaussian process
(RCGP) regression at virtually no additional cost
using generalised Bayesian inference. RCGP is
particularly versatile as it enables exact conjugate
closed form updates in all settings where standard
GPs admit them. To demonstrate its strong empirical performance, we deploy RCGP for problems
ranging from Bayesian optimisation to sparse variational Gaussian processes.

2.5

Data
Outliers

0.0
−2.5
−5.0
0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

17.5

20.0

Figure 1. The posterior predictive mean of a GP (green) and the
RCGP (blue) on a synthetic dataset where 10% of the data are
uniformly generated outliers. Unlike the RCGP, the GP is adversely
affected.

sive simulators (Santner et al., 2018), Bayesian optimisation
(Shahriari et al., 2015; Garnett, 2021) and Bayesian deep
learning (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; Salimbeni et al.,
2019; Dutordoir et al., 2020). Their use is enabled by a
plethora of packages including GPflow (Matthews et al.,
2017) GPyTorch (Gardner et al., 2018), BoTorch (Balandat et al., 2020), ProbNum (Wenger et al., 2021) and
emukit (Paleyes et al., 2023).
By far the most common use of GPs is in regression. Here,
the observations correspond to noisy realisations from an
unknown latent function that is assumed to be drawn from a
GP prior. To obtain a conjugate GP posterior distribution on
the latent function, the observation noise is usually assumed
to be Gaussian. While assuming Gaussian observation noise
makes the posterior tractable, it also makes inferences nonrobust. In particular, Gaussian noise makes GPs highly
susceptible to extreme values, heterogeneities, and outliers.
This is illustrated in Figure 1 on a synthetic dataset corrupted
with outliers: The standard GP is adversely affected, leading
to considerable deviations between the inferred function and
the ground truth. In many real-world applications and data
sets, the presence of outliers is almost inevitable. They
can occur for a variety of different reasons, including due
to faulty measurements, broken sensors, extreme weather
events, stock market sell-offs, or genetic mutations.

1. Introduction
GPs (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) are one of the most
widely used methods for Bayesian inference on latent functions, especially when uncertainty is required. They have
numerous appealing properties, including that the prior is
relatively interpretable and can be elicited through a choice
of mean and covariance functions, as well as the fact that
they have closed form posteriors under Gaussian likelihoods.
Their convergence is also well understood, even under prior
misspecification (Wynne et al., 2021). Thanks to these advantages, GPs have found applications in diverse problems
including single- and multi-output regression (Bonilla et al.,
2007; Moreno-Muñoz et al., 2018), emulation of expen*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistical Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Matias Altamirano <matias.altamirano.22@ucl.ac.uk>,
François-Xavier Briol <f.briol@ucl.ac.uk>, Jeremias Knoblauch
<j.knoblauch@ucl.ac.uk>.

Existing Work The lack of robustness in GPs is a wellknown fundamental challenge for their widespread application, and a number of methods have been proposed to
address this. Broadly, these fall into two categories. The
first replaces the Gaussian measurement error with more

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

