In-Context Learning Agents Are Asymmetric Belief Updaters

Johannes A. Schubert 1 Akshay K. Jagadish 1 2 Marcel Binz * 1 2 Eric Schulz * 1 2

Abstract

learning abilities of LLMs (Brown et al., 2020). Making
use of the two-alternative forced choice (2AFC; Fechner,
1860) paradigm from cognitive science, we show that incontext learning implements an asymmetric updating rule
when learning about the values of options. In particular, we
find that – when provided with outcomes from freely chosen options – in-context learning exhibits an optimism bias
(Sharot, 2011), meaning that it learns more from positive
than from negative prediction errors. We additionally find
that this effect is mediated by two factors. First, when the
outcome of the unchosen option is also provided, the bias for
that option reverses and the model learns more from negative than from positive prediction errors. Furthermore, when
no agency is implied and the query says someone else does
the sampling instead of you sampled, the bias disappears.
Interestingly, similar behavioral effects have been observed
in human subjects (Lefebvre et al., 2017; Chambon et al.,
2020).

We study the in-context learning dynamics of
large language models (LLMs) using three instrumental learning tasks adapted from cognitive psychology. We find that LLMs update their beliefs
in an asymmetric manner and learn more from
better-than-expected outcomes than from worsethan-expected ones. Furthermore, we show that
this effect reverses when learning about counterfactual feedback and disappears when no agency
is implied. We corroborate these findings by investigating idealized in-context learning agents derived through meta-reinforcement learning, where
we observe similar patterns. Taken together, our
results contribute to our understanding of how incontext learning works by highlighting that the
framing of a problem significantly influences how
learning occurs, a phenomenon also observed in
human cognition.

Why do these tendencies for asymmetric belief updating
emerge in both natural and artificial agents? Previous work
has suggested that asymmetric belief updating might be a
rational strategy to implement as it allows agents to achieve
maximum rewards in a given task. However, these claims
have been limited by the use of a restricted model class
(Lefebvre et al., 2022; Cazé & van der Meer, 2013). To investigate this idea further, we study the behavior of idealized
in-context learning agents trained specifically to solve 2AFC
tasks using meta-reinforcement learning (Meta-RL). MetaRL agents have been shown to implement Bayes-optimal
learning strategies upon convergence (Ortega et al., 2019;
Binz et al., 2023b) and enable us to test if displaying such a
bias is rational. We again find the same behavioral effects in
these agents: (1) they show an optimism bias when only observing outcomes of the chosen option, (2) the bias reverses
when learning about the value of the unchosen option, and
(3) it disappears when the agent has no control about its own
choices.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are powerful artificial systems that excel at many tasks (Radford et al., 2019). They
can, among other things, write code (Roziere et al., 2023),
help to translate from one language to another (Kocmi &
Federmann, 2023), and play computer games (Wang et al.,
2023). Their abilities are so far-reaching that some (Bubeck
et al., 2023) have argued that they “could reasonably be
viewed as an early (yet still incomplete) version of an artificial general intelligence (AGI) system”. At the same time,
they are notoriously difficult to interpret which becomes
especially aggravating as these models permeate through
our society.
In the present paper, we aim to shed light on the in-context
*

Equal contribution 1 Computational Principles of Intelligence
Lab, Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen,
Germany 2 Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Computational Health Center, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to:
Johannes A. Schubert <johannes.schubert@tue.mpg.de>.

Taken together, our results have broad implications for both
natural and artificial agents. We have shown that in-context
learning depends critically on how the problem is framed.
There are many applications where practitioners have control over problem framing, and thus our results suggest that
these design choices must be carefully considered to achieve
desired outcomes. In the context of human cognition, our

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

