Double-Step Alternating Extragradient with Increasing Timescale Separation
for Finding Local Minimax Points: Provable Improvements

Kyuwon Kim 1 Donghwan Kim 1

Abstract

However, solving a nonconvex-nonconcave minimax problem is known to be problematic, even when using a gradient
descent ascent (GDA) method that is a natural extension
of a gradient descent method in minimization. This stands
in stark contrast to the remarkable success of the gradient
descent method in machine learning, a success underpinned
by theoretical results; under mild assumptions, the gradient
descent finds local minimum and escapes strict saddle points
with probability one (Lee et al., 2016; 2019). Therefore,
the goal of this paper is to establish a comparable theory in
nonconvex-nonconcave minimax optimization.

In nonconvex-nonconcave minimax optimization,
two-timescale gradient methods have shown their
potential to find local minimax (optimal) points,
provided that the timescale separation between
the min and the max player is sufficiently large.
However, existing two-timescale variants of gradient descent ascent and extragradient methods face
two shortcomings, especially when we search for
non-strict local minimax points that are prevalent
in modern overparameterized setting. In specific,
(i) these methods can be unstable at some nonstrict local minimax points even with sufficiently
large timescale separation, and even (ii) computing a proper amount of timescale separation is
infeasible in practice. To remedy these two issues, we propose to incorporate two simple but
provably effective schemes, double-step alternating update and increasing timescale separation,
into the two-timescale extragradient method, respectively. Under mild conditions, we show that
the proposed methods converge to non-strict local minimax points that all existing two-timescale
methods fail to converge.

Nonconvex-nonconcave minimax problems in most machine learning applications are sequential games and thus
have an intrinsic order between the min-player x and maxplayer y (Fiez et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020). While such order
is negligible in a convex-concave setting, if we disregard
this order in a nonconvex-nonconcave setting, for example
in GAN, the undesirable mode collapse phenomenon can
arise (Goodfellow, 2016). Nevertheless, a proper definition of local optimal point in minimax problems that takes
account of the intrinsic order between the players was not
widely recognized until (Fiez et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020).
Accordingly, Jin et al. (2020) proposed the first proper notion of local optimal points, named local minimax points,
for the sequential games, which differs from and includes
the commonly employed notion of Nash equilibrium in simultaneous games.

1. Introduction
The significance of minimax problems in the machine learning community has grown considerably, since generative
adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018), multi-agent reinforcement learning (Wai et al., 2018), fair classification (Martinez
et al., 2020) and sharpness-aware minimization (Foret et al.,
2021), are formulated as

To find such local minimax (optimal) points, Jin et al. (2020)
considered a two-timescale GDA (Heusel et al., 2017) that
updates with different step sizes (timescales) for each variable x and y. In specific, Jin et al. (2020) analyzed that the
GDA with a sufficiently large timescale separation can find
local minimax points, using dynamical system theory. However, it faces two challenges. The first limitation arises from
the non-degeneracy assumption on ∇2yy f required in (Jin
et al., 2020), which neglects the non-strict local minimax
points that are ubiquitous in the modern overparameterized
setting (Cooper, 2021; Liu et al., 2022). The second is that
Jin et al. (2020) have not specified how large one should
choose an appropriate timescale separation to guarantee the
convergence to the local minimax points.

min max f (x, y).
x

y

1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to:
Kyuwon Kim <kkw4053@kaist.ac.kr>, Donghwan Kim <donghwankim@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The partial answers to resolve the aforementioned two lim1

