Chatbot Arena: An Open Platform for Evaluating LLMs by Human Preference

Wei-Lin Chiang * 1 Lianmin Zheng * 1 Ying Sheng 2 Anastasios N. Angelopoulos 1 Tianle Li 1 Dacheng Li 1
Banghua Zhu 1 Hao Zhang 3 Michael I. Jordan 1 Joseph E. Gonzalez 1 Ion Stoica 1
Question Source

Abstract
Ground Truth

Large Language Models (LLMs) have unlocked
new capabilities and applications; however, evaluating the alignment with human preferences still
poses significant challenges. To address this issue, we introduce Chatbot Arena, an open platform for evaluating LLMs based on human preferences. Our methodology employs a pairwise
comparison approach and leverages input from
a diverse user base through crowdsourcing. The
platform has been operational for several months,
amassing over 240K votes. This paper describes
the platform, analyzes the data we have collected
so far, and explains the tried-and-true statistical
methods we are using for efficient and accurate
evaluation and ranking of models. We confirm
that the crowdsourced questions are sufficiently
diverse and discriminating and that the crowdsourced human votes are in good agreement with
those of expert raters. These analyses collectively
establish a robust foundation for the credibility
of Chatbot Arena. Because of its unique value
and openness, Chatbot Arena has emerged as
one of the most referenced LLM leaderboards,
widely cited by leading LLM developers and
companies. The platform is publicly available
at https://chat.lmsys.org.

Evaluation
Metric
Human Preference

Static

Live

MMLU, HellaSwag, GSM-8K

Codeforces Weekly Contests

MT-Bench, AlpacaEval

Chatbot Arena

Figure 1. Classification of LLM benchmarks: We categorize
along two dimensions: whether the questions are from a static
dataset or a live, fresh source, and whether the evaluation metric relies on ground truth or (approximated) human preferences.
MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020), HellaSwag (Zellers et al., 2019),
GSM-8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023b),
and AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023) are common examples of static
benchmarks. Chatbot Arena is the one introduced in this paper.

fail to capture the nuanced and diverse aspects of these models, particularly in assessing their alignment with human
preferences in real-world, open-ended tasks.
To assess the performance of LLMs, the research community
has introduced a variety of benchmarks. These benchmarks
can be categorized based on two factors: the source of questions (either static or live) and the evaluation metric (either
ground truth or human preference). According to these factors, benchmarks can be classified into four categories, as
shown in Figure 1. While a range of benchmarks is beneficial, the most prevalent current method for evaluating LLMs
remains a static, ground-truth-based evaluation, partly because such evaluations are inexpensive and reproducible.
However, these static, ground-truth-based benchmarks exhibit several limitations. Firstly, the questions within these
benchmarks are not open-ended, hindering the ability to
capture the flexible and interactive use found in real-world
settings (Zheng et al., 2023b). Secondly, the test sets in
these benchmarks are static, meaning they can become contaminated over time, which undermines the reliability of
the evaluation results (Yang et al., 2023). Furthermore, for
many complex tasks, establishing a definitive ground truth
is not only challenging but sometimes unattainable. Consequently, current benchmarks fail to adequately address the
needs of state-of-the-art LLMs, particularly in evaluating
user preferences. Thus, there is an urgent necessity for an
open, live evaluation platform based on human preference
that can more accurately mirror real-world usage.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have significantly expanded their capabilities beyond traditional natural language processing boundaries, addressing a
broad array of general tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Gemini et al.,
2023; Touvron et al., 2023). These developments underscore
the potential of LLMs but also have raised concerns with respect to performance evaluation. Current benchmarks often
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Berkeley 2 Stanford 3 UCSD. Correspondence to: Wei-Lin Chiang <weichiang@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Creating such a benchmark platform entails significant challenges. It requires the collection of live, fresh, and diverse
1

