High-Performance Temporal Reversible Spiking Neural Networks with O(L)
Training Memory and O(1) Inference Cost

Jiakui Hu∗ 1 Yao Man∗ 2 Xuerui Qiu 2 3 Yuhong Chou 4 Yuxuan Cai 5 Ning Qiao 6 Yonghong Tian 1 7 Bo Xu 2
Guoqi Li† 2 8

1. Introduction

Abstract

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are promised to be a lowpower alternative to Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs),
thanks to their brain-inspired neuronal dynamics and spikebased communication (Roy et al., 2019; Schuman et al.,
2022). Spiking neurons fuse spatio-temporal information
through intricate dynamics and fire binary spikes as outputs
when their membrane potential crosses the threshold (Maass,
1997). Spike-based communication enables the event-driven
computational paradigm of SNNs and has extremely high
power efficiency in neuromorphic chips such as TrueNorth
(Merolla et al., 2014), Loihi (Davies et al., 2018), Tianjic
(Pei et al., 2019), and Speck (Yao et al., 2024b).

Multi-timestep simulation of brain-inspired Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) boost memory requirements during training and increase inference
energy cost. Current training methods cannot simultaneously solve both training and inference
dilemmas. This work proposes a novel Temporal
Reversible architecture for SNNs (T-RevSNN) to
jointly address the training and inference challenges by altering the forward propagation of
SNNs. We turn off the temporal dynamics of most
spiking neurons and design multi-level temporal
reversible interactions at temporal turn-on spiking neurons, resulting in a O(L) training memory.
Combined with the temporal reversible nature, we
redesign the input encoding and network organization of SNNs to achieve O(1) inference energy
cost. Then, we finely adjust the internal units and
residual connections of the basic SNN block to
ensure the effectiveness of sparse temporal information interaction. T-RevSNN achieves excellent
accuracy on ImageNet, while the memory efficiency, training time acceleration, and inference
energy efficiency can be significantly improved
by 8.6×, 2.0×, and 1.6×, respectively. This work
is expected to break the technical bottleneck of
significantly increasing memory cost and training time for large-scale SNNs while maintaining
high performance and low inference energy cost.
Source code and models are available at: https:
//github.com/BICLab/T-RevSNN.

By discretizing the nonlinear differential equation of spiking
neurons into iterative versions (Wu et al., 2018; Neftci et al.,
2019), SNNs can be trained directly using BackPropagation
Through Time (BPTT) and surrogate gradient (Wu et al.,
2018; Neftci et al., 2019). Multi-timestep simulation requires a memory of O(L × T ) for SNN training, where L is
the layer and T is the timestep. In particular, in static vision
tasks, such as image classification, it is common practice
(Wu et al., 2019; Deng et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2022; Yao
et al., 2023d; Rathi & Roy, 2023) to exploit the dynamics of
SNNs by repeating the inputs to achieve high performance.
In this case, the inference energy is O(T ).
As an example, training spiking ResNet-19 with 10 timestep
takes about 20× more memory than ResNet-19 (Fang et al.,
2023). Numerous efforts have been made to solve the memory dilemma. The mainstream idea is to decouple the training of SNNs from the timestep, e.g., modify the way the
BPTT in the temporal (Xiao et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2023;
Eshraghian et al., 2023), training with T = 1 and fine-tune
to multiple timesteps (Lin et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023d).
With respect to scaling down timesteps during inference,
one idea is to fine-tune a trained multi-timestep model to a
single timestep (Chowdhury et al., 2021), or employ additional controllers to adjust inference timesteps adaptively
(Yao et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2024).

*

Equal contribution 1 Peking University, Beijing, China
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 School of Future Technology, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 4 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, HongKong, China 5 01.AI, Beijing, China
6
SynSense AG Corporation, Zurich, Switzerland 7 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangzhou, China 8 Key Laboratory of Brain
Cognition and Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Guoqi Li <guoqi.li@ia.ac.cn>.
2

However, none of them can simultaneously achieve cheap
training memory and low inference energy because they
tend to optimize only in one direction. In this work, we

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

