Online Cascade Learning for Efficient Inference over Streams

Lunyiu Nie 1 Zhimin Ding 2 Erdong Hu 2 Christopher Jermaine 2 Swarat Chaudhuri 1

Abstract

It was so touching and
beautiful. I strongly
recommend seeing for all.

Large Language Models (LLMs) have a natural
role in answering complex queries about data
streams, but the high computational cost of LLM
inference makes them infeasible in many such
tasks. We propose online cascade learning as an
approach to address this challenge. The objective
here is to learn a “cascade” of models, starting
with lower-capacity models (such as logistic regression) and ending with a powerful LLM, along
with a deferral policy that determines the model
to be used on a given input. We formulate the
task of learning cascades online as an imitationlearning problem, where smaller models are updated over time imitating the LLM expert demonstrations, and give a no-regret algorithm for the
problem. Experimental results across four benchmarks show that our method parallels LLMs in
accuracy while cutting down inference costs by
as much as 90% with strong robustness against
input distribution shifts, underscoring its efficacy
and adaptability in stream processing.

LR

😎

Pos

This film is interesting
as an experiment but
tells no cogent story.

🤔

This is the movie for
those who believe cinema
is the seventh art, not an
entertainment business.

😵💫

update

Incoming Queries of
Varying Complexi8es

BERT
-base

update

Neg
GPT3.5
Pos

Figure 1: A sentiment analysis task over a stream of IMDB
movie reviews (Maas et al., 2011). We use the cheapest
logistic regression model (green lines) to process simpler
queries and defer more complex queries to the larger models
(orange & red lines). When the cascade proceeds to the
LLM, the annotations are collected to update the smaller
models online (blue lines).
server with eight A100 GPUs takes 3.6 seconds to process a
document containing 8,192 tokens using the largest Llama
(Touvron et al., 2023a). To process one million such documents per hour would thus require 1,000 A100 servers.
Using Amazon Web Services, this computation would cost
more than 30,000 USD per hour, if it were even possible to
procure the machines required.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (Bommasani et al., 2021;
Touvron et al., 2023b; Brown et al., 2020) hold great promise
as a means of one-pass query answering over text streams.
For example, suppose we have a stream of movie reviews
posted on the internet and would like to retrieve the ones
that are positive (Figure 1). To address this without human
annotations, we can create a prompt for the LLM to identify
the sentiment in a review. The LLM can then use this prompt
to process each statement in sequence.

There are two popular ways to reduce the cost of LLM
inference. The first is to distill a large language model into
a smaller model that can process a document using less
computation (Hinton et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2023; Hsieh
et al., 2023). The second is to use a cascade of models that
use smaller models to process “easier” inputs and reserve
the largest models for the most difficult inputs (Varshney
& Baral, 2022; Chen et al., 2023). However, these existing
proposals assume a model of learning in which a labeled
training set is available beforehand, making them unsuitable
for a streaming setting. In contrast, the streaming setting
requires online learning (Hoi et al., 2021).

However, LLM inference can be extremely expensive, especially in a streaming setup where queries arrive continuously. Based on our benchmarking (Appendix B.1), a GPU
1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 Rice University. Correspondence to: Lunyiu Nie <lynie@utexas.edu>, Swarat Chaudhuri
<swarat@cs.utexas.edu>.

In this paper, we propose online cascade learning to bridge
this gap in the literature. Our goal here is to develop a cascade of models, arrayed from the least to the most complex,
that can process queries in a data stream with optimal costperformance trade-offs. The critical difference from prior

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

