Bootstrapping Fisher Market Equilibrium and First-Price Pacing Equilibrium

Luofeng Liao 1 Christian Kroer 1

Abstract

Fisher market equilibrium model has been used in the tech
industry, such as the allocation of impressions to content in
certain recommender systems (Murray et al., 2020), robust
and fair work allocation in content review (Allouah et al.,
2022); we refer readers to Kroer & Stier-Moses (2022) for
a comprehensive review. Outside the tech industry, Fisher
market equilibria also have applications to scheduling problems (Im et al., 2017), fair course seat allocation (Othman
et al., 2010; Budish et al., 2016), allocating donations to
food banks (Aleksandrov et al., 2015), sharing scarce compute resources (Ghodsi et al., 2011; Parkes et al., 2015;
Kash et al., 2014; Devanur et al., 2018), and allocating
blood donations to blood banks (McElfresh et al., 2020).

The linear Fisher market (LFM) is a basic equilibrium model from economics, which also has
application in fair and efficient resource allocation. First-price pacing equilibrium (FPPE) is
a model capturing budget-management mechanisms in first-price auctions. In certain practical settings such as advertising auctions, there
is an interest in performing statistical inference
over these models. A popular methodology for
general statistical inference is the bootstrap procedure. Yet, for LFM and FPPE there is no existing theory for the valid application of bootstrap procedures. In this paper, we introduce and
devise several statistically valid bootstrap inference procedures for LFM and FPPE. The most
challenging part is to bootstrap general FPPE,
which reduces to bootstrapping constrained Mestimators, a largely unexplored problem. We are
able to devise a bootstrap procedure for FPPE
under mild degeneracy conditions by using the
powerful tool of epi-convergence theory. Experiments with synthetic and semi-real data verify
our theory.

FPPE is a model for budget management in online advertising platforms. In these platforms, advertisers report advertising parameters, such as target audience, conversion locations, and budgets, and then the platform creates a proxy
bidder to bid in individual auctions to maximize advertiser
utilities and manage budgets. A common way to manage
budgets is pacing, in which the platform modifies the advertiser’s bids by applying a shading factor, referred to as
multiplicative pacing. In the case where each auction is a
first-price auction, FPPE captures the outcomes of pacingbased budget-management systems. Conitzer et al. (2022a)
introduced the FPPE notion and showed that FPPE always
exists and is unique. Moreover, FPPE enjoys lots of nice
properties such as being revenue-maximizing among all
budget-feasible pacing strategies, shill-proof (the platform
does not benefit from adding fake bids under first-price auction mechanism) and revenue-monotone (revenue weakly
increases when adding bidders, items or budget).

1. Introduction
The bootstrap (Efron & Tibshirani, 1994; Horowitz, 2001)
is an automatic method for producing confidence intervals
in statistical estimation. The theory of bootstrap has been
extended to many areas of statistics, such as models with
cube-root asymptotics (Cattaneo et al., 2020; Patra et al.,
2018), semi-parametric models (Cheng & Huang, 2010;
Ma & Kosorok, 2005) and so on. However, as far as we
are concerned, there is no theory of bootstrap for competitive equilibrium settings.

Given the wide range of applications of LFM and FPPE,
an inferential theory for LFM and FPPE is useful. Bootstrap, thanks to its convenience and conceptual simplicity,
is a natural candidate as an inferential tool. However, due
to the presence of an equilibrium structure in the dataset,
the validity of bootstrap requires careful theoretical treatments, and practitioners should be cautious about the use
of bootstrap when data arise from market equilibrium. For
example, in Sec 4.2 we show that in the setting of firstprice auction platforms, the traditional multinomial bootstrap may fail to consistently estimate the distribution of
interest. Given the simplicity of resampling, it is fair to say
bootstrap has been used in auction platforms as an infer-

In this paper, we study bootstrap inference in linear Fisher
market (LFM) and first-price pacing equilibrium (FPPE).
1
IEOR, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Luofeng
Liao <ll3530@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

