Adaptive Text Watermark for Large Language Models

Yepeng Liu 1 Yuheng Bu 1

Abstract

AI-generated text for malicious purposes, such as spreading
disinformation, generating fake news, or engaging in plagiarism. The sheer volume and quality of AI-generated text
make it increasingly difficult to discern between human and
AI-generated content. As a solution, implementing a text
watermark on LLMs proves to be an effective method for
detecting AI-generated text.

The advancement of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has led to increasing concerns about the
misuse of AI-generated text, and watermarking
LLM-generated text has emerged as a potential
solution. However, it is challenging to generate
high-quality watermarked text while maintaining
robustness, security, and the ability to detect watermarks without prior knowledge of the prompt
and model. This paper proposes an adaptive text
watermarking strategy to address such a challenge.
To improve the text quality and maintain robustness, we adaptively add watermarking to token
distributions with high entropy measured by an
auxiliary model and keep the low-entropy token
distributions untouched. For the sake of security
and to further minimize the watermark’s impact
on text quality, instead of using a fixed green/red
list generated from a random secret key, which can
be vulnerable to decryption and forgery, we adaptively scale up the output logits based on the semantic embedding of previously generated text using a well designed semantic mapping model. Our
experiments involving various LLMs demonstrate
that our approach achieves comparable robustness
performance to existing watermark methods. Additionally, the text generated by our method has
perplexity comparable to that of un-watermarked
LLMs while maintaining sufficient security.1

Specifically, the watermarking technique encodes certain
patterns into the text generated by LLMs, which are imperceptible to humans but can be detected by the algorithm.
This is usually achieved by introducing well-designed perturbations to the original logits or using a special sampling
method. Kirchenbauer et al. (2023a) design a watermark for
LLM by randomly separating the vocabulary into ‘green’
and ‘red’ lists and increasing the frequency of tokens from
the ‘green’ list. The previously generated token is used as
a secret key to determine the ‘green/red’ list for the next
token. This method achieves good detection performance
when the watermarked text remains unmodified. However,
after modifications such as word replacement and paraphrasing, this method will fail as the ‘green/red’ list cannot be
reliably recovered from the modified text. As it is common
for individuals to alter AI-generated text rather than use it directly, improving the robustness of the watermark becomes
an essential requirement.
To improve the robustness of LLM watermarking, Zhao et al.
(2023) propose to use a fixed ‘green/red’ list for each token,
which is generated from a random secret key shared with the
detector. Both empirical and theoretical evidence demonstrate that this method substantially enhances robustness.
However, more recently, Sadasivan et al. (2023) introduced
a spoofing attack specifically designed to deduce hidden watermark patterns by analyzing the token frequency, thereby
enabling the forgery of watermarked text. Such an attack offers a method for adversaries to circumvent the watermark,
potentially damaging the reputation of the watermarking
system. Regrettably, it has been shown that the algorithm
proposed in Zhao et al. (2023) is vulnerable to spoofing
attack, and one can infer the fixed ‘green’ token list and
forge the watermarked text.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs)
(Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) has ushered in
transformative possibilities but also brings forth potential
challenges. One primary challenge lies in the misuse of
1
University of Florida. Correspondence to: Yepeng Liu
<yepeng.liu@ufl.edu>, Yuheng Bu <buyuheng@ufl.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
yepengliu/adaptive-text-watermark.git.

The aforementioned papers enhance the frequency of tokens
in the ‘green’ list during generation by uniformly adding a
fixed value to the logits of those ‘green’ tokens. This way
1

