Policy Learning for Balancing Short-Term and Long-Term Rewards

Peng Wu 1 Ziyu Shen 1 Feng Xie 1 Zhongyao Wang 2 Chunchen Liu 2 Yan Zeng 1

Abstract

2007); and medical practitioners investigate the impact of
drugs on mortality in chronic diseases such as Alzheimer’s
and AIDS (Fleming et al., 1994). Therefore, learning an
optimal policy for personalized interventions to maximize
long-term rewards holds significant practical implications.

Empirical researchers and decision-makers spanning various domains frequently seek profound
insights into the long-term impacts of interventions. While the significance of long-term outcomes is undeniable, an overemphasis on them
may inadvertently overshadow short-term gains.
Motivated by this, this paper formalizes a new
framework for learning the optimal policy that effectively balances both long-term and short-term
rewards, where some long-term outcomes are allowed to be missing. In particular, we first present
the identifiability of both rewards under mild assumptions. Next, we deduce the semiparametric efficiency bounds, along with the consistency
and asymptotic normality of their estimators. We
also reveal that short-term outcomes, if associated,
contribute to improving the estimator of the longterm reward. Based on the proposed estimators,
we develop a principled policy learning approach
and further derive the convergence rates of regret
and estimation errors associated with the learned
policy. Extensive experiments are conducted to
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
demonstrating its practical applicability1 .

While long-term rewards are crucial, an exclusive focus on
them may compromise short-term rewards, leading to illconsidered and suboptimal policies. Long-term effects can
significantly differ from short-term effects (Kohavi et al.,
2012), and in some cases, they may even exhibit opposing
trends (Chen et al., 2007; Ju & Geng, 2010). For instance,
in video recommendation, the use of clickbait may initially
boost click-through rates (CTR), but over the long term, it
could lead to user churn and negatively impact a company’s
revenue (Wang et al., 2021). In labor economics, individuals who participate in job training programs may initially
experience a temporary decline in income but achieve elevated income levels and improved employment status in the
following years (LaLonde, 1986). However, undue focus on
future rewards would neglect the heavy pressure individuals
can afford, which is unreasonable. Thus, achieving a balance between short-term and long-term rewards is desirable.
This paper aims to learn the optimal policy that balances
both long-term and short-term rewards. Policy learning
refers to identifying individuals who should be given interventions based on their characteristics by maximizing
rewards (Murphy, 2003). Trustworthy policy learning necessitates that the learned policy also adheres to principles
such as beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and explicability (Floridi, 2019; Thiebes et al., 2021; Kaur et al., 2022).
However, the aspect of balancing short-term and long-term
rewards in policy learning has not yet been explored.

1. Introduction
Empirical researchers and decision-makers usually seek profound insights into the long-term impact of interventions.
For example, marketing professionals aim to understand
how incentives influence customer behavior in the long
term (Yang et al., 2023a); IT companies explore the enduring effects of web page designs on user behavior (Hohnhold
et al., 2015); economists examine the long-term impact of
early childhood education on lifetime earnings (Chetty et al.,

Balancing short-term and long-term rewards presents some
special challenges: akin to conventional policy learning
methods, we need to address the confounding bias induced
by factors that affect both treatment and short/long-term outcomes; long-term outcomes are hard to observe and often
suffer from severe missing data due to extended followups, drop-outs, and budget constraints (Athey et al., 2019a;
Kallus & Mao, 2020; Hu et al., 2023); in addition, both
short-term and long-term outcomes are post-treatment variables, with short-term outcomes influencing both the value
and the missing rate of long-term outcomes (Imbens et al.,

1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Technology and
Business University 2 LingYang, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China.
Correspondence to: Yan Zeng <yanazeng013@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Please note that our code is available at https://github.
com/YanaZeng/Short_long_term-Rewards.

1

