A Unified View of FANOVA: A Comprehensive Bayesian Framework for
Component Selection and Estimation

Yosra MARNISSI 1 Maxime LEIBER 1 2

Abstract

linear shapes poses a significant challenge. Two distinct
approaches have emerged to address this problem.

This paper presents a comprehensive Bayesian
framework for FANOVA models. We provide
guidelines for tuning and practical implementation to improve scalability of learning and prediction. Our model is very flexible and can handle different levels of sparsity across and within
decomposition orders, as well as among covariates. This flexibility enables the modeling of complex real-world data while enhancing interpretability. Additionally, it allows our model to unify diverse deterministic and Bayesian non-parametric
approaches into a single equation, making comparisons and understanding easier. Notably, our
model serves as the Bayesian counterpart of several deterministic methods allowing uncertainty
quantification. This general framework unlocks
potential for novel model developments that have
been previously overlooked, such as the proposed
Dirichlet mixing model that addresses limitations
of existing models.

A widely recognized method originating from the kernel
community is the Component Selection and Smoothing Operator (COSSO) (Lin & Zhang, 2003; Storlie et al., 2011;
Touzani & Busby, 2013; Ravikumar et al., 2009; Radchenko
& James, 2010; Zhang & Lin, 2006; Wong et al., 2019).
However, the existing literature on COSSO primarily focuses on estimation, largely overlooking uncertainty. This
is primarily due to the absence of a Bayesian interpretation
for this frequentist approach. In contrast, a separate line
of research has proposed a Bayesian framework employing additive non-parametric models (Linkletter et al., 2006;
Kaufman & Sain, 2010; Scheipl et al., 2012; Chen & Liao,
2020; Wei et al., 2020; Curtis et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2022;
Duvenaud et al., 2011; Durrande et al., 2012; 2013). These
approaches often assign a Gaussian process (GP) or a semiparametric model to each functional component. Some
variants incorporate sparsity models to limit the number
of relevant terms. While both of these approaches aim to
tackle the same problem, there has been a notable lack of
connection between these two research communities.
Contributions: This paper proposes a new comprehensive
Bayesian framework for FANOVA problems, offering several key contributions:

1. Introduction
In many applications, we aim to estimate the function that
links a target output to input covariates. In this paper, we
focus on Functional Analysis of Variance (FANOVA) models, which decompose this regression function into main
and interactions terms (Wahba, 1990; Durrande et al., 2013;
Ginsbourger et al., 2016; Chastaing & Le Gratiet, 2015)
giving insights into the effects of individual covariates and
combinations of covariates. To enhance interpretability, we
often assume that the output depends on only a few key
functional terms (Rudin et al., 2022). However, identifying
the optimal set of these terms and characterizing their non-

• We show that our model is highly flexible, accommodating different levels of sparsity to adapt to real-world
data complexity. Thus, we believe that our contribution
has the potential to inspire future model developments
that may have remained overlooked until now. This
paper introduces one potential model, the Dirichlet,
that showed its efficiency in ultra-sparse settings.
• We demonstrate that our new model unifies deterministic and Bayesian state-of-the-art methods into a single
equation, facilitating their comparison within a common framework. Notably, we demonstrate that our
model serves as the Bayesian counterpart to COSSOlike approaches, enabling the quantification of uncertainty in traditionally deterministic methods.

1
Safran Tech, Digital Sciences & Technologies Department, Châteaufort, France 2 INRIA, DI/ENS, PSL Research University, France. Correspondence to: Yosra Marnissi <marnissi.yosra@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We address various practical implementation challenges and offer insightful implementation tricks and
1

