InterpreTabNet: Distilling Predictive Signals from Tabular Data
by Salient Feature Interpretation

Jacob Si 1 Wendy Yusi Cheng* 1 Michael Cooper* 1 2 Rahul G. Krishnan 1 2

Abstract

working with tabular Electronic Health Records may be interested in determining features that contribute to a patient’s
diagnosis. Furthermore, an insurance underwriter working with tabular client data focuses on determining crucial
factors that influence a client’s risk profile.

Tabular data are omnipresent in various sectors of
industries. Neural networks for tabular data such
as TabNet have been proposed to make predictions while leveraging the attention mechanism
for interpretability. However, the inferred attention masks are often dense, making it challenging
to come up with rationales about the predictive
signal. To remedy this, we propose InterpreTabNet, a variant of the TabNet model that models
the attention mechanism as a latent variable sampled from a Gumbel-Softmax distribution. This
enables us to regularize the model to learn distinct
concepts in the attention masks via a KL Divergence regularizer. It prevents overlapping feature
selection by promoting sparsity which maximizes
the model’s efficacy and improves interpretability
to determine the important features when predicting the outcome. To assist in the interpretation
of feature interdependencies from our model, we
employ a large language model (GPT-4) and use
prompt engineering to map from the learned feature mask onto natural language text describing
the learned signal. Through comprehensive experiments on real-world datasets, we demonstrate
that InterpreTabNet outperforms previous methods for interpreting tabular data while attaining
competitive accuracy.

Despite commendable advancements made by existing models such as TabNet (Arik and Pfister, 2020), there remains
a discernible gap in achieving an integration of accuracy
and interpretability. TabNet’s ability to generate learnable
masks for salient feature interpretation is limited as its interpretation is ambiguous. The considerable overlap between
multiple masks makes it challenging for a user to discern the
salient features used by the model for reasoning at each decision step. Other means of interpreting tabular models, such
as attention weights (Vaswani et al., 2017) and SHAP values
(Lundberg and Lee, 2017) have been criticized for their inconsistency in providing meaningful insights (Roberts et al.,
2022) and the computational intensity required to apply
them to complex datasets (Jain and Wallace, 2019). Additionally, tree-boosting methods such as XGBoost (Chen and
Guestrin, 2016) and LightGBM (Ke et al., 2017) exhibited
limitations in their interpretability aspects when analyzed
through the lens of SHAP values. These models tend to distribute the prediction contribution across an extensive range
of features (Madakkatel and Hyppönen, 2024), leading to a
less sparse representation of feature importance, making it
difficult to identify important features.
The objective of our work is to distill the predictive signals
from tabular data by enhancing the interpretability of the
established TabNet architecture while maintaining competitive accuracy on practical datasets. To do so, we introduce
InterpreTabNet, a modified variant of the TabNet neural
architecture, enabling us to sparsify the identity of the predictive signals. Our work is premised on the hypothesis
that we can map the predictive signals from the TabNet
model onto a collection of sparse attribution masks that encode instance-wise feature significance. The sparsity of our
masks leads to quick and easy identification of the salient
features in the data. Having achieved this, we then enable
post-hoc, text-based interpretability, using large language
models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023) to draw upon rich prior
knowledge related to the application domain (Choi et al.,

1. Introduction
Machine learning methods for tabular data enjoy broad applications in diverse settings like healthcare (Clore et al.,
2014), insurance (Datta, 2020), and finance (Moro et al.,
2012). While predictive performance is key in these settings,
practitioners often aim to translate predictive models into
intelligible insights. For example, a medical practitioner
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute.
Correspondence to: Jacob Si <jacobyhsi@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

