Combinatorial Approximations for Cluster Deletion: Simpler, Faster, and Better

Vicente Balmaseda 1 Ying Xu 2 Yixin Cao 2 Nate Veldt 1

Abstract

adding or deleting a minimum number of edges to convert
a graph into a disjoint union of cliques. This problem is
also known as cluster editing. Designing approximation
algorithms for different variants of correlation clustering
has a long history, and has also seen extensive interest in the
past few years in the machine learning community (Jafarov
et al., 2020; 2021; Bun et al., 2021; Cohen-Addad et al.,
2021; Veldt, 2022; Stein et al., 2023; Davies et al., 2023;
Assadi et al., 2023).

Cluster deletion is an NP-hard graph clustering objective with applications in computational biology
and social network analysis, where the goal is to
delete a minimum number of edges to partition a
graph into cliques. We first provide a tighter analysis of two previous approximation algorithms,
improving their approximation guarantees from 4
to 3. Moreover, we show that both algorithms can
be derandomized in a surprisingly simple way, by
greedily taking a vertex of maximum degree in an
auxiliary graph and forming a cluster around it.
One of these algorithms relies on solving a linear
program. Our final contribution is to design a new
and purely combinatorial approach for doing so
that is far more scalable in theory and practice.

This paper focuses on a variant of correlation clustering
called C LUSTER D ELETION, which seeks a minimum number of edges to delete so that the graph becomes a disjoint set
of cliques. C LUSTER D ELETION was first motivated by applications in clustering gene networks (Ben-Dor et al., 1999)
and arises as an interesting special case of other more general frameworks for clustering (Charikar et al., 2005; Puleo
& Milenkovic, 2015; Veldt et al., 2018). The problem is NPhard, but has been studied extensively from the perspective
of parameterized algorithms (Gramm et al., 2005; Damaschke, 2009; Gao et al., 2013; Böcker & Damaschke, 2011;
Bathie et al., 2022) and approximation algorithms (Charikar
et al., 2005; Dessmark et al., 2007; Puleo & Milenkovic,
2015; Veldt et al., 2018; Veldt, 2022). We provide several
improved theoretical results and practical implementations
for combinatorial algorithms for this task.

1. Introduction
Graph clustering is a fundamental task in graph mining
where the goal is to partition nodes of a graph into disjoint
clusters that have dense internal connections but are only
sparsely connected to the rest of the graph. This has a wide
variety of applications which include detecting communities
in social networks (Fortunato, 2010), identifying related
genes in biological networks based on gene expression profiles (Ben-Dor et al., 1999), and finding groups of pixels in
an image that belong to the same object (Shi & Malik, 2000).
An idealized notion of a cluster in a graph is a set of nodes
that is completely connected internally (i.e., a clique) while
being completely disconnected from the rest of the graph.
Cluster graph modification problems (Shamir et al., 2004)
are a class of graph clustering objectives that seek to edit the
edges in a graph as little as possible in order to achieve this
idealized structure. One widely studied problem is correlation clustering (Bansal et al., 2004), which can be cast as

Previous work. The first approximation algorithm for
C LUSTER D ELETION was based on rounding a linear
programming (LP) relaxation and came with a factor 4approximation guarantee (Charikar et al., 2005). Other
approximation algorithms based on the same canonical LP
were subsequently developed (van Zuylen & Williamson,
2009; Puleo & Milenkovic, 2015), culminating in the
current-best approximation factor of 2 (Veldt et al., 2018).
One limitation of all of these algorithms is that the underlying LP relaxation has O(n3 ) constraints for a graph with
n nodes, and is prohibitively expensive to solve in practice
on large instances. Recently, Veldt (2022) provided faster
approximation algorithms by rounding different and less
expensive lower bounds for C LUSTER D ELETION. The
first was a 4-approximation algorithm based on rounding
an LP relaxation for a related problem called Strong Triadic Cluster (STC) labeling (Sintos & Tsaparas, 2014). The
STC LP relaxation has fewer constraints than the canonical C LUSTER D ELETION LP relaxation, but still provides

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA 2 Department
of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, China. Correspondence to: Vicente Balmaseda <vibalcam@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

