Stochastic Conditional Diffusion Models for Robust Semantic Image Synthesis

Juyeon Ko * 1 Inho Kong * 1 Dogyun Park 1 Hyunwoo J. Kim 1

Abstract

models (Yang et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2020a; Ntavelis et al.,
2020; Tan et al., 2021a) such as conditional GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Mirza & Osindero, 2014). Given a semantic
label map y, these works sample a new image x̂ from the
learned conditional distribution pθ (X|Y = y). As diffusion
models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021) have gained significant attention on various
generation tasks (Ramesh et al., 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol,
2021; Couairon et al., 2023), diffusion models for SIS have
been recently studied by a few works (Wang et al., 2022a;
Xue et al., 2023). Specifically, SDM (Wang et al., 2022b)
embeds the input conditions similarly to SPADE (Park et al.,
2019) and integrates diffusion models into the context of
SIS. LDM (Rombach et al., 2022) learns a diffusion model
on latent vectors with condition encoders.

Semantic image synthesis (SIS) is a task to generate realistic images corresponding to semantic maps (labels). However, in real-world applications, SIS often encounters noisy user inputs. To address this, we propose Stochastic Conditional Diffusion Model (SCDM), which is a
robust conditional diffusion model that features
novel forward and generation processes tailored
for SIS with noisy labels. It enhances robustness
by stochastically perturbing the semantic label
maps through Label Diffusion, which diffuses the
labels with discrete diffusion. Through the diffusion of labels, the noisy and clean semantic maps
become similar as the timestep increases, eventually becoming identical at t = T . This facilitates
the generation of an image close to a clean image,
enabling robust generation. Furthermore, we propose a class-wise noise schedule to differentially
diffuse the labels depending on the class. We
demonstrate that the proposed method generates
high-quality samples through extensive experiments and analyses on benchmark datasets, including a novel experimental setup simulating human errors during real-world applications. Code
is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/SCDM.

SIS has a wide range of real-world applications such as
photo editing or content creation (Chen & Koltun, 2017;
Park et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020a; Tang et al., 2020b).
In practice, SIS often involves noisy input ỹ from users.
For instance, users mark specific areas as the classes they
wish to synthesize, and the marks come with errors such as
jagged edges and incompletely marked areas. Even labels by
professional annotators in benchmark datasets occasionally
contain mistakes and show inconsistency between annotators, and the input from end users would inevitably entail
noise. This poses the gap between the label distributions
for training and inference. Usually, models are trained with
clean labels y in benchmark datasets, whereas generation
is performed with noisy labels ỹ. In the case of diffusion
models, the model is exposed to the erroneous guidance
throughout T timesteps, i.e., t = T to t = 1, generating the
corresponding noisy image.

1. Introduction
Semantic image synthesis (SIS) is a type of image translation that converts a given semantic map (label) into a
photo-realistic image, which is the inverse of semantic segmentation. It is also one of the conditional image generation
tasks with semantic label maps serving as the input conditions. The problem is formulated as approximating the conditional distribution q(X|Y ) where X and Y are the random
variables denoting the image and the semantic map, respectively. SIS is addressed by adopting conditional generative

To minimize the gap, we generate samples with stochastically perturbed labels for both training and inference. Specifically, we propose to diffuse the semantic label map y0 to
y1 , . . ., yT and use them throughout the generation process.
Assume there exists a clean semantic map y corresponding
to the noisy one ỹ. Then, utilizing discrete diffusion with
an absorbing state allows us to make the intermediate noisy
map ỹt and clean map yt gradually become similar, as they
are masked and eventually become identical at t = T . Since
the trajectories y1:T and ỹ1:T provided to the model during
the generation process are similar, i.e., yt and ỹt get closer
than y and ỹ, the generated image is close to the clean

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Korea
University, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Hyunwoo J.
Kim <hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

