R EPOFORMER: Selective Retrieval for Repository-Level Code Completion

Di Wu 1 * Wasi Uddin Ahmad 2 Dejiao Zhang 2 Murali Krishna Ramanathan 2 Xiaofei Ma 2

Abstract

challenging scenario is repository-level code completion,
where a system is required to complete lines, API invocations, or functions in a file from user repositories. For this
task, language models for code (code LMs) have emerged
as a promising solution due to their ability to leverage the
context of the current file to generate coherent code of flexible granularity (Tu et al., 2014; Svyatkovskiy et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021). However, these approaches fail to capture the holistic repository knowledge spanning beyond the
current file, such as user-defined APIs and inter-module
dependencies (Zan et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Ding
et al., 2023). Recently, the retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) paradigm was proposed to bridge the gap: cross-file
contexts such as relevant code snippets or documentations
are retrieved and provided to code LMs as augmentations
to the current file. This approach has shown strong empirical performance and was further advanced by recent
literature through designing better retrieval mechanisms for
prompting black-box code LMs (Lu et al., 2022; Shrivastava
et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023) and adapting the LM to
better leverage structured retrieved contexts such as classes,
functions, or APIs (Ding et al., 2024; Zan et al., 2022).

Recent advances in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) have initiated a new era in repositorylevel code completion. However, the invariable
use of retrieval in existing methods exposes issues in both efficiency and robustness, with a
large proportion of the retrieved contexts proving unhelpful or harmful to code language models
(code LMs). In this paper, we propose a selective
RAG framework to avoid retrieval when unnecessary. To power this framework, we design a selfsupervised learning approach to enable a code LM
to accurately self-evaluate whether retrieval can
improve its output quality and robustly leverage
the potentially noisy retrieved contexts. Using
this LM as both the selective RAG policy and the
generation model, our framework achieves stateof-the-art repository-level code completion performance on diverse benchmarks including RepoEval, CrossCodeEval, and CrossCodeLongEval,
a new long-form code completion benchmark.
Meanwhile, our analyses show that selectively retrieving brings as much as 70% inference speedup
in the online serving setting without harming the
performance. We further demonstrate that our
framework is able to accommodate different generation models, retrievers, and programming languages. These advancements position our framework as an important step towards more accurate
and efficient repository-level code completion.

1

Despite their encouraging performance, existing RAG-based
approaches largely ignore to address a critical question:
Should we always perform retrieval augmentation?
Our findings suggest that the answer is predominantly negative. First, in various code completion tasks, we discover
that up to 80% of the retrievals performed by a standard
RAG method do not enhance the performance of common
code LMs such as CodeGen (Nijkamp et al., 2023b) and
StarCoder (Li et al., 2023b), and many degrade the performance by introducing irrelevant information (Section 5.1).
Second, always retrieving introduces notable inefficiencies.
For moderately sized repositories, sparse retrieval is already
as time consuming as code completion with a 3B code LM
(Section 5.3 and Section 6). This inefficiency is more pronounced with dense retrieval, enterprise-scale repositories,
and iterative RAG methods such as Zhang et al. (2023).

Introduction

Automatic code completion has attracted long-lasting research efforts due to its high practical value in improving
programmer productivity (Ye & Fischer, 2002; Hill & Rideout, 2004; Hellendoorn & Devanbu, 2017). One particularly
*

This work was done during an internship at AWS AI Labs.
University of California Los Angeles 2 AWS AI Labs. Correspondence to: Wasi Uddin Ahmad <wasiahmad@ucla.edu>.

1

In this paper, we challenge the assumption of always retrieving by proposing a novel repository-level code completion
framework underpinned by a selective retrieval mechanism:
the system proactively abstains from performing unneces-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

