Prompting is a Double-Edged Sword:
Improving Worst-Group Robustness of Foundation Models

Amrith Setlur * 1 Saurabh Garg * 1 Virginia Smith 1 Sergey Levine 2

Abstract

with water backgrounds (Blodgett et al., 2016; Barocas
& Selbst, 2016; Hovy & Søgaard, 2015; Tatman, 2017).
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) latches onto these confounders and can consequently fail catastrophically on underrepresented (minority) groups where the confounder is
uncorrelated with the label, e.g., pictures of waterbirds
on land (Lyu et al., 2021; Shah et al., 2020; Nagarajan
et al., 2020). Numerous algorithmic interventions have been
proposed to make ERM models more robust to such confounders (e.g., Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Arjovsky et al., 2019).

Machine learning models fail catastrophically under distribution shift, but a surprisingly effective way to empirically improve robustness to
some types of shift (e.g., Imagenet-A/C) is to use
stronger open-vocabulary classifiers derived from
foundation models. In this work, we first note that
for shifts governed by spurious correlations (features spuriously correlated with the label on the
training data, but not on test), the zero-shot and
few-shot performance of foundation models is no
better than ERM models, and remains unchanged
when pretrained data/model size is scaled. Secondly, even in these situations, foundation models
are quite accurate at predicting the value of the
spurious feature. In a simplified setup, we theoretically analyze both these findings. Specifically,
we show that during contrastive pretraining, the
simplicity bias of foundation models tends to result in the learning of features that mostly rely
on the spurious attribute, compared to more robust features. We leverage these observations to
propose Prompting for Robustness (PfR) which
first uses foundation models to zero-shot predict
the spurious attribute on labeled examples, and
then learns a classifier with balanced performance
across different groups of labels and spurious attribute. Across 5 vision and language tasks, we
show that PfR’s performance nearly equals that of
an oracle algorithm (group DRO) that leverages
human labeled spurious attributes1 .

On the other hand, with the advent of foundation models trained on heterogeneous datasets, we are observing
a paradigm shift in how we learn classifiers. Driven by
their unprecedented zero-shot prediction capabilities, the
common strategy of learning classifiers has been to simply
prompt models with class names directly (Wei et al., 2020;
Brown et al., 2020). In fact, zero-shot prompting sometimes
yields classifiers that are more robust than ERM classifiers
trained on downstream data (Hendrycks et al., 2020; Fang
et al., 2022), e.g., as seen in robustness gains observed on
benchmarks like ImageNet with distribution shifts (Radford
et al., 2021). However, as we show in our work, such gains
do not proportionately transfer to other forms of distribution
shift such as when confounders that are highly predictive
of the label in training distribution are no longer correlated
with the label on test (Yang et al., 2023; Tu et al., 2020; Hall
et al., 2023). Thus, robustness to hidden confounders in the
training data remains an open challenge.
In this work, we aim to improve the performance of foundation models on paritions of the distribution (groups) where
the confounder is not correlated with the label (minority
group). One way is to incorporate downstream labeled
data. Unfortunately, unless we have access to deconfounded
data (without the spurious correlation), simply fine-tuning
naı̈vely would result in the same issues as standard ERM
training, as we confirm experimentally. However, with openvocabulary foundation models, we can provide for robustness by telling the model about the confounder directly (i.e.,
by describing it in a prompt). One natural way to use this
knowledge is to incorporate the description into the classification prompt. However, we observe that even this doesn’t
improve zero-shot robustness (see Sec. 3.2).

1. Introduction
Machine learning classifiers are often trained on datasets
with hidden confounders that are spuriously correlated with
the label. For example, waterbirds tend to occur in pictures
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Amrith Setlur <asetlur@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The code and datasets are available here.

1

