Towards Interpretable Deep Local Learning with Successive Gradient
Reconciliation

Yibo Yang 1 Xiaojie Li 2 3 Motasem Alfarra 1 Hasan Hammoud 1 Adel Bibi 4 Philip Torr 4 Bernard Ghanem 1

Abstract

et al., 2015). First, BP encounters the weight transport problem (Grossberg, 1987), which means the update of each
layer during backward propagation relies on the symmetric
weight used for forward propagation (Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Liao et al., 2016). Second, compared to the brain that updates neurons instantly using local signals, training neural
networks with BP suffers from update locking because the
gradient descent in a layer can be only performed after the
forward and backward propagations of its subsequent layers
(Jaderberg et al., 2017; Frenkel et al., 2021; Dellaferrera &
Kreiman, 2022; Halvagal & Zenke, 2023). Moreover, due to
update locking, all the activations and gradients of a whole
model need to be stored, which is the dominant cause of
the huge memory consumption for training modern neural
networks whose capacity is continually expanding.

Relieving the reliance of neural network training
on a global back-propagation (BP) has emerged
as a notable research topic due to the biological implausibility and huge memory consumption
caused by BP. Among the existing solutions, local
learning optimizes gradient-isolated modules of
a neural network with local errors and has been
proved to be effective even on large-scale datasets.
However, the reconciliation among local errors
has never been investigated. In this paper, we first
theoretically study non-greedy layer-wise training
and show that the convergence cannot be assured
when the local gradient in a module w.r.t. its input is not reconciled with the local gradient in
the previous module w.r.t. its output. Inspired
by the theoretical result, we further propose a local training strategy that successively regularizes
the gradient reconciliation between neighboring
modules without breaking gradient isolation or introducing any learnable parameters. Our method
can be integrated into both local-BP and BP-free
settings. In experiments, we achieve significant
performance improvements compared to previous
methods. Particularly, our method for CNN and
Transformer architectures on ImageNet is able to
attain a competitive performance with global BP,
saving more than 40% memory consumption.

In order to tackle these issues, different approaches are
proposed to relieve the reliance on a global BP (Nøkland,
2016; Clark et al., 2021; Silver et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2023;
Journé et al., 2023; Belilovsky et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2021; Fournier et al., 2023), among which training with local errors is promising due to its less impaired performance.
It divides a neural network into several gradient-isolated
modules and trains each locally. The initial explorations
adopt greedy layer-wise training for a good initialization
before finetuning with BP (Hinton et al., 2006; Bengio et al.,
2006). Later studies show that greedy layer-wise training
can achieve competitive performance on the large scale ImageNet using auxiliary classifiers (Belilovsky et al., 2019).
Since learning sequentially does not enable to optimize the
deep representation simultaneously, recent studies favor the
non-greedy fashion where each layer is updated locally with
a mini-batch data and then passes the output into the next
layer (Belilovsky et al., 2020; Siddiqui et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2021). However, a performance drop is still inevitable
when increasing the number of local modules, and current
studies have not rigorously pinpointed the inherent limitation of local training compared to global BP.

1. Introduction
Back-propagation (BP) has been a crucial ingredient for the
success of deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015). Although
BP is easy to implement and seems indispensable for training deep neural networks, it has been a concern that BP
is distinct from how the brain learns and updates, known
as biological implausibility (Lillicrap et al., 2020; Bengio
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Yibo Yang
<yibo.yang93@gmail.com>.

In this paper, we investigate the defect of non-greedy layerwise training from a view of the reconciliation among local
errors and propose a remedy for it. Consider a local layer
xk = f (xk−1 , θk ), where xk−1 is the input of layer k and
also the output of layer k −1, and θk is the learnable parameters of this layer. Local training optimizes θk independently

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

