Total Variation Distance Meets Probabilistic Inference
Arnab Bhattacharyya 1 Sutanu Gayen 2 Kuldeep S. Meel 3 Dimitrios Myrisiotis 4 A. Pavan 5
N. V. Vinodchandran 6

Abstract

tionships in the graph (Koller & Friedman, 2009). When the
underlying graph is a directed graph, the model is known as
a Bayesian network or Bayes net.

In this paper, we establish a novel connection between total variation (TV) distance estimation and
probabilistic inference. In particular, we present
an efficient, structure-preserving reduction from
relative approximation of TV distance to probabilistic inference over directed graphical models.
This reduction leads to a fully polynomial randomized approximation scheme (FPRAS) for estimating TV distances between same-structure distributions over any class of Bayes nets for which
there is an efficient probabilistic inference algorithm. In particular, it leads to an FPRAS for estimating TV distances between distributions that
are defined over a common Bayes net of small
treewidth. Prior to this work, such approximation
schemes only existed for estimating TV distances
between product distributions. Our approach employs a new notion of partial couplings of highdimensional distributions, which might be of independent interest.

Two fundamental computational tasks on distributions are
distance computation and probabilistic inference. In this
work, we establish a novel connection between these two
seemingly different computational tasks. Using this connection, we design new relative error approximation algorithms
for estimating the statistical distance between Bayes net
distributions with small treewidth.
Total Variation Distance Computation. The distance
computation problem is the following: Given descriptions
of two probability distributions P and Q, compute ρ(P, Q)
for a distance measure ρ. A distance measure of central
importance is the total variation (TV) distance (also known
as the statistical distance). Let P and Q be distributions
over a finite domain D. The total variation distance between
P and Q, denoted by dTV (P, Q), is defined as
dTV (P, Q) = max(P (S) − Q(S)) .
S⊆D

The total variation distance satisfies many basic properties
which makes it a versatile and fundamental measure for
quantifying the dissimilarity between probability distributions. First, it has an explicit probabilistic interpretation:
The TV distance between two distributions is the maximum
gap between the probabilities assigned to a single event by
the two distributions. Second, it satisfies many mathematically desirable properties: It is bounded and lies in [0, 1],
it is a metric, and it is invariant with respect to bijections.
Total variation distance also measures the minimum probability that X ̸= Y among all couplings (X, Y ) between P
and Q. Because of these reasons, the total variation distance
is a central distance measure employed in a wide range of
areas including probability and statistics (Mitzenmacher &
Upfal, 2005), machine learning (Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014), information theory (Cover & Thomas, 2006),
cryptography (Stinson, 1995), data privacy (Dwork, 2006),
and pseudorandomness (Vadhan, 2012).

1. Introduction
Substantial research has been devoted to developing models that represent high-dimensional probability distributions
succinctly. One prevalent approach is through graphical
models. In a graphical model, a graph describes the conditional dependencies among variables and the probability
distribution is factorized according to the adjacency relaThe author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this order should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions. 1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada
4
CNRS@CREATE LTD., Singapore 5 Department of Computer
Science, Iowa State University, USA 6 School of Computing, University of Nebraska - Lincoln, USA. Correspondence to: Sutanu Gayen <sutanu@cse.iitk.ac.in>, Dimitrios Myrisiotis <dimitrios.myrisiotis@cnrsatcreate.sg>.

Probabilistic Inference. Probabilistic inference in graphical models is a fundamental computational task with a
wide range of applications that spans disciplines including statistics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

