Sample-Efficient Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
in the Face of Environmental Uncertainty

Laixi Shi 1 Eric Mazumdar 1 Yuejie Chi 2 Adam Wierman 1

Abstract

vironments. Examples include ecosystem protection (Fang
et al., 2015), board games (Silver et al., 2017), strategic management (Saloner, 1991), and autonomous driving (Zhou
et al., 2020) among many others. One of the most promising algorithmic paradigms for addressing these problems is
that of (deep) multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
(Silver et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Lanctot et al., 2019)
through a decision-making perspective. In full generality, it
allows for agents with misaligned and possibly conflicting
interests to optimize their own long-term rewards in an unknown dynamic environment, while taking one another into
account. As such, MARL can often be modeled as learning
in Markov games (MGs) (Littman, 1994; Shapley, 1953).
Due to the game-theoretic nature of MGs, one often relies on
solution concepts which take the form of equilibria — strategies/policies that are stable under rational deviations for all
agents — like Nash equilibria (NE) (Nash, 1951; Shapley, 1953), correlated equilibria (CE) (Aumann, 1987), and
coarse correlated equilibra (CCE) (Aumann, 1987; Moulin
& Vial, 1978).

To overcome the sim-to-real gap in reinforcement learning (RL), learned policies must maintain robustness against environmental uncertainties. While robust RL has been widely studied in single-agent regimes, in multi-agent environments, the problem remains understudied—
despite the fact that the problems posed by environmental uncertainties are often exacerbated
by strategic interactions. This work focuses on
learning in distributionally robust Markov games
(RMGs), a robust variant of standard Markov
games, wherein each agent aims to learn a policy
that maximizes its own worst-case performance
when the deployed environment deviates within
its own prescribed uncertainty set. This results in
a set of robust equilibrium strategies for all agents
that align with classic notions of game-theoretic
equilibria. Assuming a non-adaptive sampling
mechanism from a generative model, we propose
a sample-efficient model-based algorithm (DRNVI) with finite-sample complexity guarantees
for learning robust variants of various notions
of game-theoretic equilibria. We also establish
an information-theoretic lower bound for solving
RMGs, which confirms the near-optimal sample
complexity of DR-NVI with respect to problemdependent factors such as the size of the state
space, the target accuracy, and the horizon length.

1.1. Environmental uncertainty in MARL
However, the equilibria of MGs can be very sensitive to
environmental perturbations. Environmental uncertainties
caused by system noise, model mismatch, and sim-to-real
gaps can cause dramatic changes to both the qualitative
outcomes of the game as well as agents’ payoffs. While
this problem is present in single-agent RL, the need for
robustness is even more acute in the multi-agent setting
where the game-theoretic interactions can cause instabilities (Slumbers et al., 2023). Indeed, playing an equilibrium
solution learned in the simulated environment might lead
to a catastrophic drop in a single agent’s payoff or even all
agents’ payoffs when the deployed environment deviates
slightly from what is expected (Balaji et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020c; Zeng et al., 2022; Yeh et al., 2021), a point we
illustrate in the following example.

1. Introduction
Many real-world applications of artificial intelligence naturally involve multiple agents in dynamically evolving en1

Department of Computing Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, CA 91125, USA. 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.. Correspondence to: Laixi Shi
<laixis@caltech.edu>.

Example: fishing protection. To emphasize the impact
of model uncertainty in MARL, in Figure 1, we present a concrete example of a simple two-player game that models the
interaction between a fisherman and law enforcement trying
to prevent illegal fishing. The state s ∈ {0, 1, · · · , 100} rep-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

