Multimodal Prototyping for cancer survival prediction

Andrew H. Song 1 2 Richard J. Chen 1 2 Guillaume Jaume 1 2 Anurag Vaidya 1 2 3 Alexander S. Baras 4
Faisal Mahmood 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Patient prognostication – the task of predicting the progression of a disease – is a cornerstone of clinical research and
can help identify novel biomarkers indicative of disease
progression (Song et al., 2023; 2024b). Prognostication
is often cast as predicting survival based on a series of
assays describing the patient’s medical state. Due to the
complexity and diverse aspects of prognostication, multimodal approaches that combine histology and omics data,
such as transcriptomics (Acosta et al., 2022), are particularly
promising. Histology is represented through whole-slide
images (WSIs), which offer a detailed spatial depiction of
the tissue, such as a tumor, with resolutions that can exceed 105 × 105 pixels. Differently, transcriptomics is often
delineated through bulk RNA sequencing, which provides
insights into gene expression. The complementary information in both modalities was shown to be predictive of survival and can be used to inform disease progression (Chen
et al., 2022; Lipkova et al., 2022; Steyaert et al., 2023). However, the distinct characteristics of each modality present
challenges in effectively integrating them together.

Multimodal survival methods combining gigapixel histology whole-slide images (WSIs) and
transcriptomic profiles are particularly promising for patient prognostication and stratification.
Current approaches involve tokenizing the WSIs
into smaller patches (> 104 patches) and transcriptomics into gene groups, which are then integrated using a Transformer for predicting outcomes. However, this process generates many
tokens, which leads to high memory requirements for computing attention and complicates
post-hoc interpretability analyses. Instead, we
hypothesize that we can: (1) effectively summarize the morphological content of a WSI by
condensing its constituting tokens using morphological prototypes, achieving more than 300×
compression; and (2) accurately characterize cellular functions by encoding the transcriptomic
profile with biological pathway prototypes, all
in an unsupervised fashion. The resulting multimodal tokens are then processed by a fusion
network, either with a Transformer or an optimal
transport cross-alignment, which now operates
with a small and fixed number of tokens without approximations. Extensive evaluation on six
cancer types shows that our framework outperforms state-of-the-art methods with much less
computation while unlocking new interpretability analyses. The code is available at https:
//github.com/mahmoodlab/MMP.

WSI modeling is typically done with multiple instance learning (MIL) (Ilse et al., 2018; Campanella et al., 2019; Lu
et al., 2021). This method involves (1) extracting the set of
patches that constitute the WSI (> 104 per WSI), (2) feeding them through a pre-trained patch encoder to generate
patch embeddings, and (3) aggregating the patch embeddings with a pooling network. In contrast, transcriptomics
modeling can be done using a feed-forward neural network,
treating each gene expression as a tabular data entry, or by
grouping them into coarse gene families (Chen et al., 2021;
Zhou & Chen, 2023; Xu & Chen, 2023) or biological pathways (Elmarakeby et al., 2021; Jaume et al., 2024). The
set of patch embeddings and gene groups can then be seen
as tokens, which can be fed to a Transformer to derive a
multimodal representation used for outcome prediction.

1
Mass General Brigham, Boston, MA, USA. 2 Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 4 Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.. Correspondence to: Andrew H.
Song <asong@bwh.harvard.edu>, Faisal Mahmood <faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu>.

However, fusing large numbers of tokens with a Transformer
is computationally expensive, and most approaches resort
to attention approximation (Shao et al., 2021; Jaume et al.,
2024), cross-attention (Chen et al., 2021; Zhou & Chen,
2023; Xu & Chen, 2023), or token subsampling (Wulczyn
et al., 2020; Xu & Chen, 2023). Even when employing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

