Sparse Cocktail: Every Sparse Pattern Every Sparse Ratio All At Once

Zhangheng Li 1 Shiwei Liu 2 3 Tianlong Chen 4 Ajay Kumar Jaiswal 1 Zhenyu Zhang 1 Dilin Wang 5
Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi 5 Shiyu Chang 6 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are boosted by the ever-larger model
size (Brown et al., 2020; Ramesh et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022;
Jumper et al., 2021). Despite their impressive performance,
these gigantic models require prohibitive costs to train and
infer, pushing the model size beyond the reach of common
hardware. Sparsity serves as a leading concept to shrink
model sizes with a negligible performance drop. By pruning
a large fraction of parameters from a well-trained neural network, the resulting sparse neural networks enjoy significant
computational and memory reduction at inference (Mozer &
Smolensky, 1989; Han et al., 2015; Molchanov et al., 2016).
Recently, as the financial and environmental costs of model
training grow exponentially (Strubell et al., 2019; Patterson et al., 2021), people start to pursue training efficiency
by inducing sparsity during the early training phase (Gale
et al., 2019; You et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021b) or before
training (Mocanu et al., 2018; Evci et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2018; Tanaka et al., 2020). These sparse training approaches
launch the new pursuit of end-to-end saving potential for
both training and inference stages.

Sparse Neural Networks (SNNs) have received
voluminous attention for mitigating the explosion
in computational costs and memory footprints
of modern deep neural networks. Most state-ofthe-art training approaches seek to find a single
high-quality sparse subnetwork with a preset sparsity pattern and ratio, making them inadequate
to satisfy platform and resource variability. Recent approaches attempt to jointly train multiple
subnetworks (we term as “sparse co-training”)
with a fixed sparsity pattern, to allow switching
sparsity ratios subject to resource requirements.
In this work, we expand the scope of sparse cotraining to cover diverse sparsity patterns and multiple sparsity ratios at once. We introduce Sparse
Cocktail, the first sparse co-training framework
that co-trains a suite of sparsity patterns simultaneously, loaded with multiple sparsity ratios
which facilitate harmonious switch across various
sparsity patterns and ratios at inference depending
on the hardware availability. More specifically,
Sparse Cocktail alternatively trains subnetworks
generated from different sparsity patterns with a
gradual increase in sparsity ratios across patterns
and relies on an unified mask generation process
and the Dense Pivot Co-training to ensure the
subnetworks of different patterns orchestrate their
shared parameters without canceling each other’s
performance. Experiment results on image classification, object detection, and instance segmentation illustrate the favorable effectiveness and flexibility of Sparse Cocktail, pointing to a promising
direction for sparse co-training. Code is available
at github.com/VITA-Group/SparseCocktail.

While many sparse training methods aim to pinpoint a singular optimal sparse subnetwork for a specific sparsity pattern
(e.g., unstructured, semi-structured, or structured) and ratio
(i.e., the percentage of zero elements), they often fall short
in accommodating the diverse platform and resource constraints encountered in the real-world deployment of sparse
neural networks. Relying on post-training pruning tailored
to each hardware or constraint can be impractical, as it necessitates a unique pruning strategy for every scenario and
many resource-limited platforms cannot sustain multiple
model alternatives. In response, emerging research offers
methods that extract multiple sparse subnetworks from a
single training cycle (Chen et al., 2021; Peste et al., 2021;
Miao et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Dao et al., 2022). These
resulting dense or sparse subnetworks can be swiftly toggled
per inference requirements. We refer to those methods as
sparse co-training for simplicity.

1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Eindhoven University of Technology 3 University of Oxford 4 University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill 5 Meta 6 University of California, Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Zhangheng Li <zoharli@utexas.edu>.

Early sparse co-training efforts (Yu et al., 2018; Yu & Huang,
2019; Yang et al., 2021) embed smaller subnetworks (with
higher channel-level sparsity) within larger ones (with lower
channel-level sparsity). This joint training with selective

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

