Breadth-First Exploration on Adaptive Grid for Reinforcement Learning

Youngsik Yoon 1 Gangbok Lee 2 Sungsoo Ahn 1 2 Jungseul Ok 1 2

Abstract

goals, whereas other RL frameworks often require separate
policies for different tasks. Besides the inherent versatility,
it also enables the hierarchical RL (Vezhnevets et al., 2017;
Nachum et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020) which decomposes
a daunting long-horizon goal into a series of manageable
short-horizon subgoals so that the agent can exploit more
confident and learnable transitions between subgoals than
the direct transition to the ultimate goal.

Graph-based planners have gained significant attention for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL), where they construct a graph consisting of confident transitions between subgoals as
edges and run shortest path algorithms to exploit
the confident edges. Meanwhile, identifying and
avoiding unattainable transitions are also crucial
yet overlooked by the previous graph-based planners, leading to wasting an excessive number of
attempts at unattainable subgoals. To address
this oversight, we propose a graph construction
method that efficiently manages all the achieved
and unattained subgoals on a grid graph adaptively discretizing the goal space. This enables
a breadth-first exploration strategy, grounded in
the local adaptive grid refinement, that prioritizes
broad probing of subgoals on a coarse grid over
meticulous one on a dense grid. We conducted a
theoretical analysis and demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach through empirical evidence, showing that only BEAG succeeds in complex environments under the proposed fixed-goal
setting. 1

Recent advancements in goal-conditioned RL have witnessed the emergence of graph-based RL equipped with
graph-based planners for this subgoal-based decomposition (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2019; Bagaria
et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022). At a high
level, these planners construct a graph that encapsulates confident transitions between subgoals as edges. They employ
shortest-path algorithms to leverage the confident edges.
However, there is a significant caveat: these graphs comprise only subgoals in the replay buffer, which the agent
has achieved in prior, i.e., the previous planners disregard
unattained subgoals consisting of failed ones in history and
unexplored ones over the goal space. The oversight of
such unattained subgoals leads to wasteful expenditure of
samples to repeatedly attempt similar unexplored or even
impossible subgoals rather than to explore novel ones, as
exemplified in Figure 1.

1. Introduction

In response to this challenge, we propose Breadth-first
Exploration on Adaptive Grid (BEAG) for graph-based RL.
Our key idea is to manage both achieved and unattained
subgoals on a grid graph, adaptively discretizing the goal
space during the training process. Our subgoal management
assesses the achievability of all the subgoals on the grid,
including unattained ones, and then probes the subgoals in
a planned order. This systemically prevents consecutive
attempts to unachievable subgoals, whereas the previous
method, e.g., (Lee et al., 2022), expend attempts to randomly ransack unexplored subgoals, as shown in Figure 1.

Many real-world sequential decision-making problems can
be framed as the task of targeting a given goal, e.g., the navigation of walking robots (Schulman et al., 2015; Nachum
et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2019) and the manipulation of
objects using robotic arms (Levine et al., 2016; Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2018). Goal-conditioned
reinforcement learning (RL) (Schaul et al., 2015; Nasiriany
et al., 2019) aims to solve these problems using a goalconditioned policy designed to maximize the return with
respect to the target goal. This offers a versatile policy for
a variety of distinct problems, described by corresponding

Specifically, we devise a breadth-first exploration strategy
grounded on local adaptive grid refinement. This strategy
first explores subgoals on a coarse grid and then refines
the grid selectively around the local of unattained subgoals.
The benefits are twofold: (i) it prioritizes broad probing
on a coarse grid over extensive searching on a dense grid;

1

Department of CSE, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH, Pohang, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to: Jungseul Ok <jungseul@postech.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

https://github.com/ml-postech/BEAG

