Proprietary + Confidential

Genie: Generative Interactive Environments
Jake Bruce * 1 Michael Dennis * 1 Ashley Edwards * 1 Jack Parker-Holder * 1 Yuge (Jimmy) Shi * 1
Edward Hughes 1 Matthew Lai * 1 Aditi Mavalankar 1 Richie Steigerwald 1 Chris Apps 1 Yusuf Aytar 1
Sarah Bechtle 1 Feryal Behbahani 1 Stephanie Chan 1 Nicolas Heess 1 Lucy Gonzalez 1 Simon Osindero 1
Sherjil Ozair 1 Scott Reed 1 Jingwei Zhang 1 Konrad Zolna 1 Jeff Clune 1 2 Nando de Freitas 1 Satinder Singh 1
Tim Rocktäschel * 1

Abstract
We introduce Genie, the first generative interactive environment trained in an unsupervised manner from unlabelled Internet videos. The model
can be prompted to generate an endless variety
of action-controllable virtual worlds described
through text, synthetic images, photographs, and
even sketches. At 11B parameters, Genie can
be considered a foundation world model. It is
comprised of a spatiotemporal video tokenizer,
an autoregressive dynamics model, and a simple
and scalable latent action model. Genie enables
users to act in the generated environments on
a frame-by-frame basis despite training without
any ground-truth action labels or other domainspecific requirements typically found in the world
model literature. Further the resulting learned
latent action space facilitates training agents to
imitate behaviors from unseen videos, opening the
path for training generalist agents of the future.

Figure 1: Diverse trajectories: Genie is a generative model that
can be used as an interactive environment. The model can be
prompted in various ways, either with a generated image (top) or a
hand-drawn sketch (bottom). At each time step, the model takes a
user-provided latent action to generate the next frame, producing
trajectories with interesting and diverse character actions.

1. Introduction

2022). Early signs indicate video generation will be yet
another frontier, with recent results suggesting that such
models may also benefit from scale (Blattmann et al., 2023a;
Esser et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2022a; Hong et al., 2023). Still,
there remains a gulf between the level of interactions and
engagement of video generative models and language tools
such as ChatGPT, let alone more immersive experiences.

The last few years have seen an emergence of generative
AI, with models capable of generating novel and creative
content. Driven by breakthroughs in architectures such as
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), advances in hardware,
and a recent focus on scaling models and datasets, we can
now generate coherent, conversational language (Brown
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2018; 2019), as well as crisp and
aesthetically pleasing images from a text prompt (Ramesh
et al., 2021; 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,

What if, given a large corpus of videos from the Internet,
we could not only train models capable of generating novel
images or videos, but entire interactive experiences? In
this work we propose generative interactive environments,
a new paradigm for generative AI whereby interactive environments can be generated from a single text or image
prompt. Our approach, Genie, is trained from a large dataset
of over 200,000 hours of publicly available Internet gaming
videos and, despite training without action or text annotations, is controllable on a frame-by-frame basis via a learned

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind 2 University of
British Columbia. Correspondence to: Project Leads: Ashley
Edwards <edwardsashley@google.com>, Jack Parker-Holder
<jparkerholder@google.com>, Tech Lead: Jake Bruce <jacobbruce@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

