Data-Efficient Molecular Generation with Hierarchical Textual Inversion
Seojin Kim 1 Jaehyun Nam 1 Sihyun Yu 1 Younghoon Shin 2 Jinwoo Shin 1

Abstract

to its strong relationship in achieving important applications,
such as drug discovery (Segler et al., 2018; Bongini et al.,
2021) and material design (Hamdia et al., 2019; Tagade
et al., 2019). However, generating molecules poses a challenge due to their highly complicated nature and the vast
size of the input space (Drew et al., 2012). To tackle this
issue, several works have considered training deep generative models to learn the molecule distribution using large
molecular datasets (Jin et al., 2018; Kong et al., 2022; Ahn
et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2023). This is inspired by the recent breakthroughs of generative models in other domains,
e.g., images and videos (Rombach et al., 2022; Singer et al.,
2022; Yu et al., 2023), in learning high-dimensional data
distributions. Intriguingly, such deep molecular generation
methods have demonstrated reasonable performance (Jin
et al., 2020; Ahn et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2022) on the largescale benchmarks (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014; Polykovskiy
et al., 2020) in finding chemically valid and novel molecules,
showing great potential to solve the challenge.

Developing an effective molecular generation
framework even with a limited number of
molecules is often important for its practical
deployment, e.g., drug discovery, since acquiring task-related molecular data requires expensive and time-consuming experimental costs. To
tackle this issue, we introduce Hierarchical textual Inversion for Molecular generation (HIMol), a novel data-efficient molecular generation
method. HI-Mol is inspired by the importance
of hierarchical information, e.g., both coarseand fine-grained features, in understanding the
molecule distribution. We propose to use multilevel embeddings to reflect such hierarchical features based on the adoption of the recent textual
inversion technique in the visual domain, which
achieves data-efficient image generation. Compared to the conventional textual inversion method
in the image domain using a single-level token
embedding, our multi-level token embeddings
allow the model to effectively learn the underlying low-shot molecule distribution. We then
generate molecules based on the interpolation
of the multi-level token embeddings. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of HIMol with notable data-efficiency. For instance,
on QM9, HI-Mol outperforms the prior state-ofthe-art method with 50× less training data. We
also show the effectiveness of molecules generated by HI-Mol in low-shot molecular property prediction. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Seojin-Kim/HI-Mol.

Unfortunately, existing molecular generation frameworks
tend to fail in limited data regimes (Guo et al., 2022). This
restricts the deployment of existing approaches to practical scenarios, because task-related molecular data for the
target real-world applications are often insufficient to train
such molecular generative models. For example, drug-like
molecules for a specific organ are inherently scarce in nature (Schneider & Fechner, 2005; Altae-Tran et al., 2017),
and the drug-likeness of each candidate molecule should
be verified through years of extensive wet experiments and
clinical trials (Drews, 2000; Hughes et al., 2011). This timeconsuming and labor-intensive data acquisition process of
new task-related molecules limits the number of training
data available for a model to learn the desired molecule
distribution (Stanley et al., 2021). Thus, it is often crucial
to develop an effective data-efficient molecular generation
framework, yet this direction has been overlooked in the
field of deep molecular generation (Guo et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Finding novel molecules has been a fundamental yet crucial
problem in chemistry (Xue et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019b) due

In this paper, we aim to address the aforementioned shortcomings of existing molecular generation frameworks in the
low-shot regimes by designing a method to leverage knowledge in a limited number of molecules extensively. To this
end, inspired by the chemical prior that molecules can be hierarchically clustered (Alexander et al., 2011), we introduce
multi-level embeddings that capture coarse- and fine-grained

1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST) 2 Korea University. Correspondence to: Seojin Kim
<osikjs@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

