Asymmetry in Low-Rank Adapters of Foundation Models

Jiacheng Zhu 1 Kristjan Greenewald 2 3 Kimia Nadjahi 1 Haitz Sáez de Ocáriz Borde 4
Rickard Brüel Gabrielsson 1 Leshem Choshen 1 3 Marzyeh Ghassemi 1 Mikhail Yurochkin 2 3 Justin Solomon 1

Abstract

eters (c.f. Lialin et al., 2023). The effectiveness of PEFT
demonstrates that updating even a tiny fraction of the parameters can retain and enrich the capabilities of pretrained
models. Indeed, fine-tuning has become a necessary ingredient of modern ML; for example, the PEFT package (HuggingFace, Year) has supported more than 4.4k projects since
its creation in November 2022.

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning optimizes large,
pre-trained foundation models by updating a subset of parameters; in this class, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is particularly effective. Inspired by
an effort to investigate the different roles of LoRA
matrices during fine-tuning, this paper characterizes and leverages unexpected asymmetry in the
importance of low-rank adapter matrices. Specifically, when updating the parameter matrices of a
neural network by adding a product BA, we observe that the B and A matrices have distinct functions: A extracts features from the input, while
B uses these features to create the desired output. Based on this observation, we demonstrate
that fine-tuning B is inherently more effective
than fine-tuning A, and that a random untrained
A should perform nearly as well as a fine-tuned
one. Using an information-theoretic lens, we also
bound the generalization of low-rank adapters,
showing that the parameter savings of exclusively
training B improves the bound. We support
our conclusions with experiments on RoBERTa,
BART-Large, LLaMA-2, and ViTs. The code and
data is available at https://github.com/
Jiacheng-Zhu-AIML/AsymmetryLoRA

Among PEFT methods, low-rank adaptation (LoRA) (Hu
et al., 2021) has become increasingly popular, which leverages the assumption that over-parameterized models have
a low intrinsic dimension (Aghajanyan et al., 2021). To
update a neural network, LoRA trains a subset of the parameters (usually attention) by representing weight matrices as
W0 + ∆W , where W0 is the fixed weight matrix from the
pre-trained model and ∆W is a low-rank update. Compared
to full fine-tuning, LoRA considerably reduces the number
of trainable parameters and memory requirements and often
achieves similar or better performance.
Most LoRA implementations factor ∆W = BA and optimize for A and B, where A and B have fewer rows and
columns (resp.) than ∆W ; this approach was proposed
by Hu et al. (2021). With this set of variables, the standard LoRA training procedure—where A is initialized to
a random matrix and B is initialized to zero—exhibits an
interesting asymmetry, which is leveraged in some empirical
follow-ups (Zhang et al., 2023a; Kopiczko et al., 2024). In
particular, while training B is critical for the performance
of LoRA, even a randomly initialized A seems to suffice for
strong performance. On the other hand, reversing the roles
of A and B substantially decreases performance.

1. Introduction
Foundation models for data-rich modalities such as text and
imagery have achieved significant success by pre-training
large models on vast amounts of data. While these models are designed to be general-purpose, it is often necessary to fine-tune them for downstream tasks. However, the
huge size of foundation models can make fine-tuning the
entire model impossible, inspiring parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods that selectively update fewer param-

Delving into this empirical suggestion from prior work, this
paper demonstrates that LoRA’s components are inherently
asymmetric. In fact, the asymmetry occurs even for linear
models (§4.1.1). Indeed, our theoretical (§4) and empirical
analysis (§5) suggests that fixing A to a random orthogonal
matrix can yield similar performance to full LoRA training,
and that this adjustment may even promote generalization.
This observation is backed by a comprehensive empirical
study, leading to practical suggestions for improving parameter efficiency and generalization of LoRA models. Our
contributions are as follows:

1

MIT CSAIL 2 IBM Research 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Jiacheng Zhu
<zjc@mit.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We provide simple theoretical and empirical analysis
1

