Skill Set Optimization:
Reinforcing Language Model Behavior via Transferable Skills

Kolby Nottingham 1 Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder * 2 Bhavana Dalvi Mishra * 2
Sameer Singh 1 Peter Clark 2 Roy Fox 1

Abstract

Task: Measure the melting temp of chocolate.
State: You see chocolate and a stove.

Large language models (LLMs) have recently
been used for sequential decision making in interactive environments. However, leveraging environment reward signals for continual LLM actor improvement is not straightforward. We propose Skill Set Optimization (SSO) for improving LLM actor performance through constructing
and refining sets of transferable skills. SSO constructs skills by extracting common subtrajectories with high rewards and generating subgoals
and instructions to represent each skill. These
skills are provided to the LLM actor in-context
to reinforce behaviors with high rewards. Then,
SSO further refines the skill set by pruning skills
that do not continue to result in high rewards.
We evaluate our method in the classic videogame
NetHack and the text environment ScienceWorld
to demonstrate SSO’s ability to optimize a set of
skills and perform in-context policy improvement.
SSO outperforms baselines by 40% in our custom NetHack task and outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art in ScienceWorld by 35%.

LLM Actor

move chocolate to stove

State: You see a stove with chocolate.
LLM Actor

activate stove

State: You see a stove with melted chocolate.
LLM Actor

use thermometer on chocolate

State: The thermometer reads 40 C.
SSO
Task: Measure the melting
temp of water.
State: You see a stove
and a freezer with ice.

LLM Actor
use thermometer

Melt substance:
1. Move substance
to stove
2. Activate stove

LLM Actor
move ice to stove

Figure 1: Example of a interactive text task and skill.

provide a success signal upon measuring the substance’s
temperature and intermediate rewards for completing subgoals such as activating the stove. However, finetuning an
LLM actor directly using a traditional RL policy gradient is
often impractical with contemporary LLMs and impossible
with black-box closed-source LLMs. Instead, we explore a
new paradigm of in-context policy improvement.

1. Introduction
Large Language Model (LLM) actors have been deployed
in interactive domains such as robotics (Ichter et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2022a;b), games (Nottingham et al., 2023a;b),
and programming (Chen et al., 2022). Similar to the reinforcement learning (RL) setting, these domains often provide a reinforcement signal in the form of reward, task success, or user feedback. For example, the task in Figure 1 may

In natural language processing (NLP) tasks, in-context learning improves task performance by editing LLM inputs with
instructions (Brown et al., 2020), task examples (Wei et al.,
2021), or auxiliary tasks (Wei et al., 2022). However, interactive domains require sequential decision making with
long trajectories and complex credit assignment (see Section 3), so naively applying in-context learning techniques
generalizes poorly and does not scale well. Instead, recent
approaches for improving LLM actors construct a “memory” of knowledge about the world (Majumder et al., 2023),
skills (Wang et al., 2023a), or task insights (Shinn et al.,
2023) to use in-context for policy improvement.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California
Irvine, Irvine CA, United States 2 Allen Institute for AI, Seattle
Washington, United States. * Equal contribution. Correspondence
to: Kolby Nottingham <knotting@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

