Autoencoding Conditional Neural Processes for Representation Learning

Victor Prokhorov 1 Ivan Titov 1 2 N. Siddharth 1 3

Abstract

CNP

Conditional neural processes (CNPs) are a flexible and
efficient family of models that learn to learn a stochastic process from data. They have seen particular application in contextual image completion—observing
pixel values at some locations to predict a distribution
over values at other unobserved locations. However,
the choice of pixels in learning CNPs is typically either
random or derived from a simple statistical measure
(e.g. pixel variance). Here, we turn the problem on
its head and ask: which pixels would a CNP like to
observe—do they facilitate fitting better CNPs, and do
such pixels tell us something meaningful about the underlying image? To this end we develop the Partial
Pixel Space Variational Autoencoder (PPS-VAE), an
amortised variational framework that casts CNP context as latent variables learnt simultaneously with the
CNP. We evaluate PPS-VAE over a number of tasks
across different visual data, and find that not only can
it facilitate better-fit CNPs, but also that the spatial
arrangement and values meaningfully characterise image information—evaluated through the lens of classification on both within and out-of-data distributions.
Our model additionally allows for dynamic adaption of
context-set size and the ability to scale-up to larger images, providing a promising avenue to explore learning
meaningful and effective visual representations.

E

E

E

E

Figure 1: (top) The PPS-VAE framework. (bottom) Examples of meaningful context points induced by the encoder.
completion. Given a context set, a set of ordered pairs—
observed pixel values and their image coordinates—CNPs
learn to impute the other, unobserved, pixels.
While prior work on CNPs primarily focusses on model
choices such as inductive biases that allow capturing various
properties of the context set better (Gordon et al., 2020) or
dependencies between the unobserved pixel values (Garnelo
et al., 2018b), we explore a key dual question—regarding
the context set itself. Where the context set is typically
chosen at random, or derived from some simple statistic
(e.g. pixel variance) to train the CNP, we ask: which pixels
would a CNP like to observe? Do such pixels allow betterfitting of CNPs, and do they tell us something meaningful
about the underlying image? We explore these questions
from the frame of representation learning, where the context
can be viewed as latent representations of the image—one
that happens to exist in the data space.

1. Introduction
Conditional neural processes (Garnelo et al., 2018a, CNPs)
are a family of models that learn distribution over functions.
In contrast to conventional approaches such as Gaussian
processes, which are effective but become computationally
expensive once the data size increases, CNPs are both flexible regarding the functions they approximate, thanks to
being neural networks, and scalable to large datasets. In the
visual domain, they have been used for contextual image
1

D

From a purely representation-learning perspective, one can
relate the question above with that of learning (a) a discrete feature selector as in Concrete Autoencoder (Balın
et al., 2019, CAE) and (b) a discrete latent ‘code’, as first
established in (van den Oord et al., 2017, VQ-VAE), and subsequently popularised by approaches like DALL-E (Ramesh
et al., 2021). Where the CAE employs a global feature selector, we approximate a posterior distribution and where

2

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh ILLC, University of Amsterdam 3 The Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to:
Victor Prokhorov <email: victorprokhorov91@gmail.com, code:
https://github.com/exlab-research/pps-vae>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

