Rethinking Adversarial Robustness in the Context of the Right to be Forgotten

Chenxu Zhao * 1 Wei Qian * 1 Yangyi Li 1 Aobo Chen 1 Mengdi Huai 1

Abstract

to have their data completely removed from a system, especially sensitive systems such as those do with finance
or healthcare (Nguyen et al., 2022). Recent regulations
(e.g., the well-known European Union’s GDPR (Voigt &
Von dem Bussche, 2017)) now compel organizations to give
users “the right to be forgotten”, i.e., the right to have all
or part of their data deleted from a system on request (Liu
et al., 2024b; Che et al., 2023; Chourasia & Shah, 2023;
Zhang et al., 2022b; Graves et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2023; Brophy & Lowd, 2021; Liu et al., 2023a).
The most straightforward approach is to retrain the model
on all data except the portion that has been removed, but this
approach is in general impractical since the computational
resources consumed are usually costly. Thus, aiming to
efficiently remove data as well as their contribution to the
model, a new machine learning privacy protection research
direction has emerged, called machine unlearning.

The past few years have seen an intense research
interest in the practical needs of the “right to be
forgotten”, which has motivated researchers to
develop machine unlearning methods to unlearn a
fraction of training data and its lineage. While existing machine unlearning methods prioritize the
protection of individuals’ private data, they overlook investigating the unlearned models’ susceptibility to adversarial attacks and security breaches.
In this work, we uncover a novel security vulnerability of machine unlearning based on the
insight that adversarial vulnerabilities can be bolstered, especially for adversarially robust models.
To exploit this observed vulnerability, we propose a novel attack called Adversarial Unlearning
Attack (AdvUA), which aims to generate a small
fraction of malicious unlearning requests during
the unlearning process. AdvUA causes a significant reduction of adversarial robustness in the
unlearned model compared to the original model,
providing an entirely new capability for adversaries that is infeasible in conventional machine
learning pipelines. Notably, we also show that
AdvUA can effectively enhance model stealing
attacks by extracting additional decision boundary information, further emphasizing the breadth
and significance of our research. We also conduct
both theoretical analysis and computational complexity of AdvUA. Extensive numerical studies
are performed to demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the proposed attack.

Numerous research efforts have been dedicated to addressing the challenge of data removal in inefficient retraining.
Two prominent research fields that have emerged in this context are exact unlearning (Yan et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022b;
Brophy & Lowd, 2021; Bourtoule et al., 2021b; Qian et al.,
2022) and approximate unlearning (Tarun et al., 2023; Jia
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2021; Neel
et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021). Exact unlearning aims to
completely reverse the effects of the previously learned data
points. Instead of aiming for a perfect reversal of the learned
data, approximate unlearning seeks to achieve a reasonably
close approximation. This can be beneficial in situations
where complete unlearning is computationally expensive
or impractical, providing a compromise between removal
efficiency and performance retention.
However, current machine unlearning methods exhibit an
important limitation as they primarily concentrate on efficiently removing the effects of specific data instances from
a trained machine learning model. Consequently, it remains
uncertain whether these existing techniques might unexpectedly influence the adversarial robustness of the associated
machine learning models. Note that adversarial robustness,
in the context of machine learning, refers to the ability of
a trained model to maintain its accuracy and performance
even when it is exposed to deliberately perturbed input data
known as adversarial examples (Li et al., 2019; Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Szegedy et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2021). Despite

1. Introduction
In recent years, many countries have raised concerns about
protecting personal privacy. In practice, users may choose
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Iowa
State University, United States. Correspondence to: Mengdi Huai
<mdhuai@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

