Networked Inequality: Preferential Attachment Bias in
Graph Neural Network Link Prediction

Arjun Subramonian 1 Levent Sagun 2 Yizhou Sun 1

Abstract

CS2

Graph neural network (GNN) link prediction is
increasingly deployed in citation, collaboration,
and online social networks to recommend academic literature, collaborators, and friends. While
prior research has investigated the dyadic fairness
of GNN link prediction, the within-group (e.g.,
queer women) fairness and “rich get richer” dynamics of link prediction remain underexplored.
However, these aspects have significant consequences for degree and power imbalances in networks. In this paper, we shed light on how degree
bias in networks affects Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) link prediction. In particular, we
theoretically uncover that GCNs with a symmetric normalized graph filter have a within-group
preferential attachment bias. We validate our theoretical analysis on real-world citation, collaboration, and online social networks. We further
bridge GCN’s preferential attachment bias with
unfairness in link prediction and propose a new
within-group fairness metric. This metric quantifies disparities in link prediction scores within
social groups, towards combating the amplification of degree and power disparities. Finally, we
propose a simple training-time strategy to alleviate within-group unfairness, and we show that it is
effective on citation, social, and credit networks.

CS1

CS5

CS4

CS3

E DU1

Figure 1: An academic collaboration network where nodes
are Computer Science (CS) and Education (E DU) researchers, solid edges are current or past collaborations,
and dashed edges are collaborations recommended by a
GCN. Circular nodes are women and square nodes are men.

raised concerns about the unfairness of GNN LP (Li et al.,
2021; Current et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022). This unfairness
is often attributed to graph structure, including the stratification of social groups; for example, online networks are usually segregated by ethnicity (Hofstra et al., 2017). However,
most fair GNN LP research has focused on dyadic fairness,
i.e., satisfying some notion of parity between inter-group
and intra-group link predictions. This formulation neglects:
1) LP dynamics within social groups (Kasy & Abebe, 2021);
and 2) the “rich get richer” effect, i.e., the prediction of links
at a higher rate with high-degree nodes (Barabási & Albert,
1999). In the context of friend recommendation systems,
the “rich get richer” effect can increase the number of links
formed with high-degree individuals, which boosts their
influence on other individuals in the network, and thus their
power (Bashardoust et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Link prediction (LP) using GNNs is increasingly leveraged
to recommend friends in social networks (Fan et al., 2019;
Sankar et al., 2021), as well as by scholarly tools to recommend academic literature in citation networks (Xie et al.,
2021). In recent years, graph learning researchers have

In this paper, we shed light on how degree bias in networks
affects GCN LP (Kipf & Welling, 2017). We theoretically
and empirically find that GCNs with a symmetric normalized graph filter have a within-group preferential attachment
(PA) bias in LP. Specifically, GCNs often output LP scores
that are approximately proportional to the geometric mean
of the (within-group) degrees of the incident nodes when the
nodes belong to the same social group. (We elaborate on PA
and our motivation in §J.) We focus on GCNs with symmetric and random walk normalized graph filters because they

*

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, University
of California, Los Angeles, USA 2 Meta, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Arjun Subramonian <arjunsub@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

