Bring Your Own (Non-Robust) Algorithm to Solve Robust MDPs
by Estimating The Worst Kernel

Uri Gadot * 1 Kaixin Wang * 1 Navdeep Kumar 1 Kfir Y. Levy 1 Shie Mannor 1 2

Abstract

deployment. Such a mismatch may significantly degrade the
performance of the trained policy (in testing). To deal with
this issue, the robust MDP (RMDP) framework has been
introduced in (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005;
Wiesemann et al., 2013), aiming to learn policies that are
robust to any perturbation of the transition model provided
it lies within an uncertainty set.

Robust Markov Decision Processes (RMDPs) provide a framework for sequential decision-making
that is robust to perturbations on the transition
kernel. However, current RMDP methods are
often limited to small-scale problems, hindering
their use in high-dimensional domains. To bridge
this gap, we present EWoK, a novel online approach to solve RMDP that Estimates the Worst
transition Kernel to learn robust policies. Unlike previous works that regularize the policy or
value updates, EWoK achieves robustness by simulating the worst scenarios for the agent while
retaining complete flexibility in the learning process. Notably, EWoK can be applied on top of any
off-the-shelf non-robust RL algorithm, enabling
easy scaling to high-dimensional domains. Our
experiments, spanning from simple Cartpole to
high-dimensional DeepMind Control Suite environments, demonstrate the effectiveness and applicability of the EWoK paradigm as a practical
method for learning robust policies.

Existing works on learning robust policies in RMDPs often suffer from poor scalability (to high-dimensional domains). Specifically, model-based methods that solve
RMDPs (Wiesemann et al., 2013; Ho et al., 2021; Behzadian
et al., 2021; Derman et al., 2021; Grand-Clément & Kroer,
2021; Kumar et al., 2022) require access to the nominal
transition probability, making it difficult to scale beyond tabular settings. While some recent works (Wang et al., 2022;
Wang & Zou, 2022; Kumar et al., 2022; 2023) introduce
model-free methods that add regularization to the learning
process, the effectiveness of their methods is not validated in
high-dimensional environments. In addition, these methods
are based on particular RL algorithms (e.g., policy gradient,
Q learning), limiting their general applicability. We defer a
more detailed discussion on related works to Section 5.
In this work, we tackle the problem of learning robust policies in RMDPs from an alternative direction. As shown in
Figure 1, unlike previous works that explicitly regularize
the learning process, we propose to approximately sample next states from an Estimated Worst transition Kernel
(EWoK) while leaving the RL part untouched. In RMDPs,
a worst transition kernel is one within the uncertainty set
that leads to the minimal possible return (see Definition 3.1).
Intuitively, EWoK aims to situate the agent in the worst
scenarios for learning policies robust to perturbations. It
can be applied on top of any (deep) RL algorithm, offering
good scalability to high-dimensional domains.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), we are concerned with learning good policies for sequential decision-making problems
modeled as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman,
1994; Sutton & Barto, 2018). MDPs assume that the transition model of the environment is fixed across training and
testing, but this is often violated in practical applications.
For example, when deploying a simulator-trained robot in reality, a notable challenge is the substantial disparity between
the simulated environment and the intricate complexities of
the real world, leading to potential subpar performance upon

Specifically, EWoK builds upon our theoretical insights into
the relationship between a worst transition kernel and the
nominal one. Our characterization of the worst kernel for a
KL-regularized uncertainty set concludes that it essentially
modifies the next-state transition probability of the nominal
kernel, discouraging the transitions to states with higher
values while encouraging transitions to lower-value states.
Using this connection, we are able to sample the next states

*
Code is available at link.
Equal contribution .
Technion 2 NVIDIA Research.
Correspondence to: Uri
Gadot <uri.gad@campus.technion.ac.il>, Kaixin Wang
<kaixin96.wang@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

