Sample-specific Masks for Visual Reprogramming-based Prompting

Chengyi Cai 1 Zesheng Ye 1 Lei Feng 2 Jianzhong Qi 1 Feng Liu 1
Label: Sphynx

Abyssinian

Bengal

59.2% ✔

Abyssinian
77.1% ✔

Maine Coon
76.9% ✘

Medium
Watermarking

Sphynx
✔
67.3%

Abyssinian
54.0% ✔

Maine Coon
72.2%✘

Narrow
Watermarking

American
Russian Blue
Bulldog✘
27.0%✘
56.4%

Bengal
70.4% ✔

Abstract
Different Masks

Visual reprogramming (VR) is a prompting technique that aims to re-purpose a pre-trained model
(e.g., a classifier on ImageNet) to target tasks (e.g.,
medical data prediction) by learning a small-scale
pattern added into input images instead of tuning
considerable parameters within the model. The
location of the pattern within input samples is
usually determined by a pre-defined mask shared
across all samples. In this paper, we show that
the shared mask potentially limits VR’s generalization and increases its approximation error due
to the lack of sample-level adaptation. Motivated
by this finding, we design a new framework for
VR called sample-specific multi-channel masks
(SMM). Specifically, SMM employs a lightweight
ConvNet and patch-wise interpolation to generate
sample-specific three-channel masks instead of
a shared and pre-defined mask. Since we generate different masks for individual samples, SMM
is theoretically shown to reduce approximation
error for the target tasks compared with existing
state-of-the-art VR methods. We also empirically
demonstrate its performance gain on both ResNet
and ViT. The success of SMM further highlights
the broader applicability of VR in leveraging the
latent knowledge of pre-trained models for various target tasks. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/tmlr-group/SMM.

Full
Watermarking

Learned
Pattern
Predict Sphynx

Figure 1. Drawback of shared masks over individual images. We
demonstrate the use of watermarking (Wang et al., 2022), a representative VR method, to re-purpose an ImageNet-pretrained
classifier for the OxfordPets dataset, with different shared masks
(full, medium, and narrow) in VR. An evaluation of classification
confidence across three cat images — Sphynx, Abyssinian, and
Bengal — indicates a sample-specific mask preference: Sphynx
with medium, Abyssinian with full, and Bengal with narrow. It
shows that different masks are needed for individual images.

expensive training costs even just to finetune pre-trained
models, visual reprogramming (VR) (Neekhara et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Tsao et al., 2024), or
adversarial reprogramming (Elsayed et al., 2018; Tsai et al.,
2020), has been proposed to reuse pre-trained models on
target tasks. Concretely, VR is a prompting method that
fixes a pre-trained model and only alters the input space
by adding some learnable patterns (usually some noise) to
target images. The location of the patterns to be learned
is usually determined by a pre-defined binary mask that
is shared across all samples (Elsayed et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2021; Tsai et al., 2020; Bahng et al., 2022). The key
benefit of VR methods is that learning the pattern whose
size is around the image size requires much less computing
resource than finetuning considerable parameters within the
model, posing VR as a promising research area in using
pre-trained models (Chen et al., 2023; Tsao et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Recent studies have shown that, by taking advantage of
and re-purposing well-trained/pre-trained models, one can
address new tasks (i.e., target tasks) without training a taskspecific model from scratch (Basu et al., 2023; Kossen et al.,
2023; Mondal et al., 2023). In visual tasks, due to the

In this paper, we show that the shared mask often leads to
poor generalization capability of VR, as demonstrated in
Figures 1 and 2. In both figures, we use a representative VR
method, watermarking (Bahng et al., 2022), to re-purpose an
ImageNet-pretrained classifier to classify images in the OxfordPets datasets (Parkhi et al., 2012). In Figure 1, we first
find that the optimal masks vary among individual images.

1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne 2 Information Systems Technology and Design
Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design. Correspondence to: Feng Liu <fengliu.ml@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

