A Statistical Theory of Regularization-Based Continual Learning

Xuyang Zhao 1 Huiyuan Wang 2 Weiran Huang † 3 4 Wei Lin † 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) in machine learning involves training a model continuously across multiple tasks, constrained
by limited memory. As more tasks are introduced and additional data samples are collected, it is expected that the
model will exhibit enhanced performance on both old and
new tasks. However, due to memory limits, not all past data
can be retained; typically, only a subset of the data or summary statistics are stored. This makes continual learning
more challenging than single-task learning, as it prohibits
the simple pooling of all samples (Parisi et al., 2019). Alternatively, without using exceedingly large long-term memory,
we can view continual learning as an online multi-task problem where a model is sequentially fitted to data provided
for each task. However, such an approach may result in
poor performance of the current model on previous tasks, a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey
& Cohen, 1989; Goodfellow et al., 2014). Clearly, forgetting information from earlier tasks undermines the overall
effectiveness of the model.

We provide a statistical analysis of regularizationbased continual learning on a sequence of linear
regression tasks, with emphasis on how different regularization terms affect the model performance. We first derive the convergence rate for
the oracle estimator obtained as if all data were
available simultaneously. Next, we consider a
family of generalized ℓ2 -regularization algorithms
indexed by matrix-valued hyperparameters, which
includes the minimum norm estimator and continual ridge regression as special cases. As more
tasks are introduced, we derive an iterative update formula for the estimation error of generalized ℓ2 -regularized estimators, from which we
determine the hyperparameters resulting in the
optimal algorithm. Interestingly, the choice of
hyperparameters can effectively balance the tradeoff between forward and backward knowledge
transfer and adjust for data heterogeneity. Moreover, the estimation error of the optimal algorithm
is derived explicitly, which is of the same order
as that of the oracle estimator. In contrast, our
lower bounds for the minimum norm estimator
and continual ridge regression show their suboptimality. A byproduct of our theoretical analysis is
the equivalence between early stopping and generalized ℓ2 -regularization in continual learning,
which may be of independent interest. Finally, we
conduct experiments to complement our theory.

There are two goals of continual learning algorithms. One
is the forward knowledge transfer, which focuses on transferring knowledge from previous tasks to make learning on
new tasks simpler. The other is the backward knowledge
transfer (Lin et al., 2023), which aims to address the issue
of catastrophic forgetting when learning new tasks and keep
the overall performance improving over time. From a statistical perspective, the main difficulty in these two goals
is heterogeneity among tasks, i.e., the data distribution can
vary across different tasks. In the presence of heterogeneity,
the forward and backward knowledge transfer can contradict
each other, between which a trade-off will arise (Lin et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024). An ideal CL algorithm should
properly balance the knowledge extracted from old tasks
and the information contained in new samples to achieve
both forward and backward knowledge transfer.

1
School of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Statistical Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Department
of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 3 MIFA Lab, Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China. † Correspondence
to: Weiran Huang <weiran.huang@outlook.com>, Wei Lin
<weilin@math.pku.edu.cn>. This work was done while the first
author was visiting MIFA Lab.

To resolve the conflict, many algorithms have been proposed
recently. Roughly speaking, these algorithms fall into three
categories: regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Liu & Liu, 2022), replay-based
methods (Chaudhry et al., 2019; Riemer et al., 2019; Jin
et al., 2021), and expansion-based methods (Serra et al.,
2018; Yoon et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021). The common

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

