Socialized Learning: Making Each Other Better Through Multi-Agent
Collaboration
Xinjie Yao * 1 2 3 Yu Wang * 1 2 3 Pengfei Zhu 1 2 3 Wanyu Lin 4 Jialu Li 1 2 3 Weihao Li 5 Qinghua Hu 1 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Every intelligent agent aspires to grow through learning
new knowledge. Although existing continual learning (CL)
paradigms are capable of acquiring new knowledge, they
heavily rely on a substantial amount of data. Looking back
on the history of human development, cultural evolution
is accomplished by continuously learning new abilities beyond existing vital abilities for maintaining one’s own survival (Henrich, 2016; Laland, 2017). In this process, new
abilities are usually acquired by seeking guidance from experienced experts with their knowledge rather than through
a large number of attempts and the collection of relevant
examples. Such an effective learning paradigm is termed socialized learning (SL), which has been studied in cognitive
science (Thompson et al., 2022).

Learning new knowledge frequently occurs in
our dynamically changing world, e.g., humans
culturally evolve by continuously acquiring new
abilities to sustain their survival, leveraging collective intelligence rather than a large number
of individual attempts. The effective learning
paradigm during cultural evolution is termed socialized learning (SL). Consequently, a straightforward question arises: Can multi-agent systems
acquire more new abilities like humans? In contrast to most existing methods that address continual learning and multi-agent collaboration, our
emphasis lies in a more challenging problem:
We prioritize the knowledge in the original expert classes, and as we adeptly learn new ones,
the accuracy in the original expert classes stays
superior among all in a directional manner. Inspired by population genetics and cognitive science, leading to unique and complete development, we propose Multi-Agent Socialized Collaboration (MASC), which achieves SL through
interactions among multiple agents. Specifically,
we introduce collective collaboration and reciprocal altruism modules, organizing collaborative
behaviors, promoting information sharing, and
facilitating learning and knowledge interaction
among individuals. We demonstrate the effectiveness of multi-agent collaboration in an extensive
empirical study. Our code will be publicly available at https://github.com/yxjdarren/SL.

Among the paradigms in machine learning, CL is the most
relevant one for SL. It addresses the challenges of obtaining
new knowledge while retaining old one over time (De Lange
et al., 2021; Masana et al., 2022). However, CL focuses
on an individual agent and seriously relies on large-scale
training samples, making it difficult to learn as effectively
as humans. Another alternative is federated learning (FL),
which is a distributed learning paradigm (Zhang et al.,
2021b; Li et al., 2023a). Compared to CL, FL acquires
knowledge from multiple clients through aggregating different agents, leveraging knowledge in multiple agents. FL
is primarily designed to integrate the knowledge of agents
working on similar tasks, making it highly sensitive to data
heterogeneity. This sensitivity is particularly pronounced
in scenarios where there are significant differences in categories and knowledge among multiple agents (Shi et al.,
2023). Therefore, existing learning paradigms are limited
in realizing effective collective learning.

*
Equal contribution 1 College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 2 Engineering Research Center of
City Intelligence and Digital Governance, Ministry of Education
of the People’s Republic of China, Tianjin, China 3 Haihe Lab
of ITAI, Tianjin, China 4 Department of Computing, The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China 5 Department
of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, United States.
Correspondence to: Pengfei Zhu <zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn>.

The existing paradigms struggle to learn new knowledge
through interaction like humans. Due to diverse environments, individuals inherently exhibit significant heterogeneity. For models, the heterogeneity in data and models can
lead to dimensional collapse when interactions are limited
to the parameter space. Complete avoidance of data interaction is not necessary in many real-world scenarios without strong data privacy settings, such as emergency rescue
situations. However, data interaction requires high com-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

