Uncertainty-Aware Reward-Free Exploration with General Function
Approximation

Junkai Zhang * 1 Weitong Zhang * 1 Dongruo Zhou 2 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

ponent of RL is exploration, which requires the agent to
explore different states and actions before finding a nearoptimal policy. Traditional exploration strategy involves
iteratively executing a policy guided by a specific reward
function, limiting the trained agent to solving only the single task for which it was trained. Designing an efficient
exploration strategy agnostic to reward functions is crucial,
as it prevents the agent from repeated learning under different reward functions, thereby avoiding inefficiency and
potential intractability in sample complexity.
To achieve this goal, Jin et al. (2020a) introduced a twophase RL framework known as “reward-free exploration”
(RFE) for the basic tabular MDP setting. In this framework,
the agent only interacts with the environment in the first
phase without reward. Upon receiving the specific reward
in the second phase, the algorithm returns a near-optimal
policy without further interactions. The overall framework
is displayed in Figure 1. A series of subsequent works extended the idea to more complex settings, such as linear
MDPs (Wang et al., 2020; Zanette et al., 2020; Wagenmaker
et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022) and linear mixture MDPs
(Zhang et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023).
RFE diverges from classical RL approaches by not relying on a specific reward function for exploration. Instead,
RFE utilizes an “intrinsic reward”, a.k.a., pseudo-reward
function, defined based on all previously explored samples.
This encourages the agent to venture into unexplored states
and actions. In particular, in the realm of deep RL where
no structural assumptions are made, recent studies (Pathak
et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018b; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Lee
et al., 2019; Pathak et al., 2019; Liu & Abbeel, 2021a;b)
have developed RFE (a.k.a., unsupervised RL) algorithms
by employing various intrinsic reward functions, demonstrating promising performance in finding the near-optimal
policy.
Despite the success of intrinsic reward functions in facilitating RFE, the design of these functions in prior studies
could be further optimized. For example, Kong et al. (2021)
defined an intrinsic reward based on the maximum difference between function pairs that show similarity in past
data. This approach essentially treats each collected sample
equally. It is a well-established principle in RL that in order to achieve optimal sample efficiency, different samples

Mastering multiple tasks through exploration and
learning in an environment poses a significant
challenge in reinforcement learning (RL). Unsupervised RL has been introduced to address
this challenge by training policies with intrinsic rewards rather than extrinsic rewards. However, current intrinsic reward designs and unsupervised RL algorithms often overlook the heterogeneous nature of collected samples, thereby
diminishing their sample efficiency. To overcome this limitation, in this paper, we propose a
reward-free RL algorithm called GFA-RFE. The
key idea behind our algorithm is an uncertaintyaware intrinsic reward for exploring the environment and an uncertainty-weighted learning process to handle heterogeneous uncertainty in different samples. Theoretically, we show that in order
to find an ϵ-optimal policy, GFA-RFE needs to
e 2 log NF (ϵ) dim(F)/ϵ2 ) number of
collect O(H
episodes, where F is the value function class with
covering number NF (ϵ) and generalized eluder
dimension dim(F). Such a result outperforms all
existing reward-free RL algorithms. We further
implement and evaluate GFA-RFE across various
domains and tasks in the DeepMind Control Suite.
Experiment results show that GFA-RFE outperforms or is comparable to the performance of
state-of-the-art unsupervised RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been the source of
many breakthroughs in games (e.g., Atari game (Mnih et al.,
2013) and Go game (Silver et al., 2016)) and robotic control
(Levine et al., 2016) over the last ten years. A key com*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, Indiana University Bloomington, Indiana,
USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

