Transport of Algebraic Structure to Latent Embeddings

Samuel Pfrommer 1 Brendon G. Anderson 1 Somayeh Sojoudi 1

Abstract

ematical operations from the underlying algebraic structure
(e.g., set union when the underlying objects are sets) to be
applied directly to latent embeddings in a way that respects
axiomatic laws.

Machine learning often aims to produce latent embeddings of inputs which lie in a larger, abstract
mathematical space. For example, in the field of
3D modeling, subsets of Euclidean space can be
embedded as vectors using implicit neural representations. Such subsets also have a natural algebraic structure including operations (e.g., union)
and corresponding laws (e.g., associativity). How
can we learn to “union” two sets using only their
latent embeddings while respecting associativity?
We propose a general procedure for parameterizing latent space operations that are provably
consistent with the laws on the input space. This
is achieved by learning a bijection from the latent
space to a carefully designed mirrored algebra
which is constructed on Euclidean space in accordance with desired laws. We evaluate these
structural transport nets for a range of mirrored
algebras against baselines that operate directly on
the latent space. Our experiments provide strong
evidence that respecting the underlying algebraic
structure of the input space is key for learning
accurate and self-consistent operations.

The importance of respecting mathematical structure has
motivated machine learning developments of immense importance. Indeed, much of geometric deep learning is directly driven by symmetries in underlying objects (Bronstein
et al., 2021). Graph neural networks learn functions that
provably respect equivariance or invariance properties under
node-relabeling graph isomorphisms (Maron et al., 2018;
Azizian & Lelarge, 2020). The seminal DeepSet architecture
enforces permutation invariance, reflecting the unordered
nature of its finite set inputs (Zaheer et al., 2017). Convolutional filters are also known to be approximately equivariant
to translations in input images—a structure which naturally
mirrors that of the underlying image manifold (Cohen &
Welling, 2016; Cohen et al., 2019; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018).
This work is a first attempt to transport general algebraic
structures from input data onto learned latent embeddings.
We outline a general procedure for defining algebraic operations on the latent space that respect laws on the source
space (input space). Defining operations directly on latent
space embeddings, rather than using the original source
objects, is crucial for computational efficiency and compatibility with larger ML workflows. There has been some
interest in algebraic and category theoretic approaches to
the study of specific computational architectures and automatic differentiation (Martin-Maroto & de Polavieja, 2018;
Shiebler et al., 2021; Sennesh et al., 2023), as well as in
the application of ML to computational problems arising
in algebra (He & Kim, 2023). However, to the best of our
knowledge, our work provides the first general method to
transport algebraic structures to learned embeddings.

1. Introduction
Algebraic structure underpins a wide range of interesting
mathematical objects such as sets, functions, distributions,
and symbolic strings. In machine learning (ML), these objects are often learned and subsequently embedded into Euclidean space for downstream tasks: consider embeddings
of implicit neural representations (INRs) for sets (De Luigi
et al., 2023), hypernetworks for functions (Ha et al., 2017),
conditional embeddings of generative architectures for probability distributions (Sohn et al., 2015; Winkler et al., 2019;
Nichol et al., 2021), and text embeddings for strings (Wang
et al., 2022; Devlin et al., 2018). Our goal is to enable math-

We discuss our ideas using the language of universal algebra, which studies algebraic structures as general pairings
of a set with a collection of operations (Burris & Sankappanavar, 1981). We note that universal algebra is subsumed
within category theory. As the universal algebraic perspective is sufficient here, we avoid generalizing to more complex category-theoretic frameworks.

1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Samuel Pfrommer <sam.pfrommer@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Source code for our experiments is available on GitHub.

1

