UGrid: An Efficient-And-Rigorous Neural Multigrid Solver for Linear PDEs

Xi Han 1 Fei Hou 2 3 Hong Qin 1

Abstract

solvers with the multigrid method (Briggs & McCormick,
2000) significantly enhances the performance for large-scale
problems. Yet, the historical reliance on legacy generic numerical solvers has circumscribed possible integration of
big data knowledge and exhibits sub-optimal efficiency for
certain PDE formulations. In contrast, recent deep neural
methods have the potential to learn such knowledge from big
data and endow numerical solvers with compact structures
and high efficiency, and have achieved impressive results
(Marwah et al., 2021). However, many currently available
neural methods treat deep networks as black boxes. Other
neural methods are typically trained in a fully supervised
manner on loss functions that directly compare the prediction and the ground truth solution, confining the solution
space and resulting in numerical oscillations in the relative
residual error even after convergence. These methods generally have challenges unconquered including, a lack of sound
mathematical backbone, no guarantee of correctness or convergence, and low accuracy, thus unable to handle complex,
unseen scenarios.

Numerical solvers of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are of fundamental significance to
science and engineering. To date, the historical
reliance on legacy techniques has circumscribed
possible integration of big data knowledge and
exhibits sub-optimal efficiency for certain PDE
formulations, while data-driven neural methods
typically lack mathematical guarantee of convergence and correctness. This paper articulates a
mathematically rigorous neural solver for linear
PDEs. The proposed UGrid solver, built upon the
principled integration of U-Net and MultiGrid,
manifests a mathematically rigorous proof of both
convergence and correctness, and showcases high
numerical accuracy, as well as strong generalization power to various input geometry/values and
multiple PDE formulations. In addition, we devise a new residual loss metric, which enables
self-supervised training and affords more stability
and a larger solution space over the legacy losses.

Motivation and Method Overview. Inspired by (Hsieh
et al., 2019)’s prior work on integrating the structure of
multigrid V-cycles (Briggs & McCormick, 2000) and UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) with convergence guarantee,
and to achieve high efficiency and strong robustness, we
aim to fully realize neural methods’ modeling and computational potential by implanting the legacy numerical methods’
mathematical backbone into neural methods in this paper. In
order to make our new framework fully explainable, we propose the UGrid framework (illustrated in Fig. 1) based on the
structure of multigrid V-cycles for learning the functionality
of multigrid solvers. We also improve the convolutional
operators originating from (Hsieh et al., 2019) to incorporate arbitrary boundary conditions and multiple differential
stencils without modifying the overall structure of the key
iteration process, and transform the iterative update rules
and the multigrid V-cycles into a concrete Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) structure.

1. Introduction
Background and Major Challenges. PDEs are quintessential to various computational problems in science, engineering, and relevant applications in simulation, modeling, and
scientific computing. Numerical solutions play an irreplaceable role in common practice because in rare cases do PDEs
have analytic solutions, and many general-purpose numerical methods have been made available. Iterative solvers
(Saad, 2003) are one of the most-frequently-used methods to
obtain a numerical solution of a PDE. Combining iterative
1
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
(SUNY), Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. 2 Key Laboratory of
System Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences) and State Key
Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. 3 University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. Correspondence to: Xi Han <xihan1@cs.stonybrook.edu>, Fei Hou
<houfei@ios.ac.cn>, Hong Qin <qin@cs.stonybrook.edu>.

Key Contributions. The salient contributions of this paper comprise: (1) Theoretical insight. We introduce a novel
explainable neural PDE solver founded on a solid mathematical background, affording high efficiency, high accuracy,
and strong generalization power to linear PDEs; (2) New
loss metric. We propose a residual error metric as the loss

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

