Robust Multi-Task Learning with Excess Risks

Yifei He 1 Shiji Zhou 2 Guojun Zhang 3 Hyokun Yun 4 Yi Xu 4 Belinda Zeng 4 Trishul Chilimbi 4 Han Zhao 1 4

Abstract

the nature of learning multiple tasks simultaneously, the
problem is often tackled by aggregating multiple objectives
into a scalar one via a convex combination. Despite various
efforts to achieve more balanced training, a crucial aspect
that often remains overlooked is robustness to label noise.
Label noise is ubiquitous in real-world MTL problems as
the tasks are drawn from diverse sources, introducing variations in data quality (Hsieh & Tseng, 2021; Burgert et al.,
2022). The presence of label noise can negatively impact
the performance of all tasks trained jointly, leading to suboptimal performance across the board. Addressing this issue
is essential for the robust and reliable deployment of MTL
models in real-world scenarios.

Multi-task learning (MTL) considers learning
a joint model for multiple tasks by optimizing a
convex combination of all task losses. To solve
the optimization problem, existing methods use
an adaptive weight updating scheme, where
task weights are dynamically adjusted based on
their respective losses to prioritize difficult tasks.
However, these algorithms face a great challenge
whenever label noise is present, in which case
excessive weights tend to be assigned to noisy
tasks that have relatively large Bayes optimal
errors, thereby overshadowing other tasks and
causing performance to drop across the board. To
overcome this limitation, we propose Multi-Task
Learning with Excess Risks (ExcessMTL), an
excess risk-based task balancing method that
updates the task weights by their distances to
convergence instead. Intuitively, ExcessMTL
assigns higher weights to worse-trained tasks that
are further from convergence. To estimate the
excess risks, we develop an efficient and accurate
method with Taylor approximation. Theoretically,
we show that our proposed algorithm achieves
convergence guarantees and Pareto stationarity.
Empirically, we evaluate our algorithm on
various MTL benchmarks and demonstrate its
superior performance over existing methods in
the presence of label noise. Our code is available
at https://github.com/yifei-he/ExcessMTL.

In this work, we study label noise in MTL by delving into a
practical scenario where one or more tasks are contaminated
by label noise due to the heterogeneity of data collection
processes. Under label noise, scalarization (static weighted
combination) is not robust because it overlooks the dataset
quality. In fact, scalarization is prone to overfitting to a
subset of tasks so that it cannot achieve a balanced solution
among tasks, especially for under-parametrized models (Hu
et al., 2023). Similarly, existing adaptive weight updating
methods are vulnerable to label noise. These methods aim
at prioritizing difficult tasks during training, and the difficulty is typically measured by the magnitude of each task
loss (Chen et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Sagawa et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2021c). Namely, they assign higher weights to the
tasks with higher losses. However, the high loss may stem
from label noise rather than insufficient training. For instance, if a task has noise in labels, its loss will be high, yet
it provides no informative signal for the learning process.
To address this challenge, we propose Multi-Task Learning with Excess Risks (ExcessMTL), which is robust to
label noise while retaining the benefit of prioritizing worsetrained tasks. It dynamically adjusts the task weights based
on their distance to convergence. Specifically, we define
the distance to be excess risks, which measure the gap of
loss between the current model and the optimal model in the
hypothesis class. In the presence of different noise levels
among tasks, the converged task-specific losses are likely to
differ and are not guaranteed to be low. On the other hand,
with proper training, excess risks for all tasks will approach
0. Thus, excess risks provide the true improvement ceiling
achievable through model training or refinement, making

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) aims to train a single model to
perform multiple related tasks (Caruana, 1997). Due to
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Chamapign, Urbana, IL, USA 2 Department of Automation,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 School of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada 4 Amazon, Seattle,
WA, USA. Correspondence to: Yifei He <yifeihe3@illinois.edu>,
Han Zhao <hanzhao@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

