CauDiTS: Causal Disentangled Domain Adaptation of Multivariate Time Series

Junxin Lu 1 Shiliang Sun 1 2

Abstract

Inter-Variables Non-Causal Correlations
Inter-Variables Causal Relationships

Time Shortcut Features

Unsupervised domain adaptation of multivariate
time series aims to train a model to adapt its classification ability from a labeled source domain
to an unlabeled target domain, where there are
differences in the distribution between domains.
Existing methods extract domain-invariant features directly via a shared feature extractor, neglecting the exploration of the underlying causal
patterns, which undermines their reliability, especially in complex multivariate dynamic systems.
To address this problem, we propose CauDiTS,
an innovative framework for unsupervised domain adaptation of multivariate time series. CauDiTS adopts an adaptive rationale disentangler
to disentangle domain-common causal rationales
and domain-specific correlations from variable
interrelationships. The stability of causal rationales across domains is vital for filtering domainspecific perturbations and facilitating the extraction of domain-invariant representations. Moreover, we promote the cross-domain consistency of
intra-class causal rationales employing the learning strategies of causal prototype consistency and
domain-intervention causality invariance. CauDiTS is evaluated on four benchmark datasets,
demonstrating its effectiveness and outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

Source

Source

class 1

class 2

class

Common and
Invariant

Shift

Target

Target
(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Across source→target domains, (a) time shortcut
features show shift, (b) variable interrelationships involve
non-causal correlations (99K) and causal relationships (99K).
Causal relationships are domain-common and invariant, referred to as causal rationales. (c) Different classes of multivariate time series data possess distinct domain-common
causal rationales.

et al., 2016a; Ozyurt et al., 2022), and climate monitoring
(Li et al., 2021), are significantly improved. Unfortunately,
domain shift is a common challenge for practical application
of multivariate time series. Especially, the performance of a
multivariate time series model degrades when trained and
deployed across two domains with distinct data distributions
and operating environments. For instance, due to the differences of latitude, topography, and land-sea distribution,
weather prediction models relying on long-term multivariate
time series from one location may struggle to generalize
well to other locations.

1. Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been extensively investigated in vision and text tasks to alleviate the
adverse impacts of domain shift (Sun & Saenko, 2016; Chen
et al., 2020; Rahman et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Ganin
et al., 2016). Existing UDA works for multivariate time
series are comparatively few, which can be roughly categorized into two groups: (i) transferring UDA methods designed for vision (Singh, 2021; Long et al., 2015; Shu et al.,
2018) and text tasks (Dai et al., 2008), or fine-tuning a pretrained model from the source domain to the target domain
(Hu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022; Yang & Hong, 2022);
(ii) employing common backbone networks, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Purushotham et al., 2017),
temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) (Bai et al., 2018),

Multivariate time series data play a crucial role in various
domains, e.g., finance, healthcare, weather, and energy. By
capturing systematic trends over dynamically changing variables, the performance of multiple applications, such as
traffic volume forecasting (Bai et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2023), disease prediction (Deng et al., 2020; Purushotham
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China. 2 Department of Automation,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence
to: Shiliang Sun <slsun@cs.ecnu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

