What Will My Model Forget?
Forecasting Forgotten Examples in Language Model Refinement

Xisen Jin 1 Xiang Ren 1

Abstract

model (Raffel, 2023). Although a few steps of parameter updates are usually sufficient to correct errors (De Cao
et al., 2021), a main obstacle is catastrophic forgetting,
i.e., massive misprediction of previously learned examples (Robins, 1995). To combat forgetting, a prevalent practice in model refinement or continual learning algorithms is
to replay previously learned examples, most of which rely
on random sampling from upstream training data (de Masson D’Autume et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2022). However, such
practice has shortcomings that (1) they lack interpretability
on what previously learned examples are affected due to
model updates, and (2) they achieve inferior performance
as the replayed examples are not properly targeted.

Language models deployed in the wild make errors. However, simply updating the model with
the corrected error instances causes catastrophic
forgetting—the updated model makes errors on
instances learned during the instruction tuning or
upstream training phase. Randomly replaying upstream data yields unsatisfactory performance and
often comes with high variance and poor controllability. To this end, we try to forecast upstream
examples that will be forgotten due to a model
update for improved controllability of the replay
process and interpretability. We train forecasting models given a collection of online learned
examples and corresponding forgotten upstream
pre-training examples. We propose a partially
interpretable forecasting model based on the observation that changes in pre-softmax logit scores
of pretraining examples resemble that of online
learned examples, which performs decently on
BART but fails on T5 models. We further show
a black-box classifier based on inner products of
example representations achieves better forecasting performance over a series of setups. Finally,
we show that we reduce forgetting of upstream
pretraining examples by replaying examples that
are forecasted to be forgotten, demonstrating the
practical utility of forecasting example forgetting.

Few works have tried to analyze or forecast forgotten examples in model updates. Existing work demonstrated the existence of examples that are more prone to forgetting (Toneva
et al., 2018; Tirumala et al., 2022; Maini et al., 2022); however, they do not interpret how interactions between two
examples contribute to forgetting, i.e., why learning one
example causes forgetting of the other. For PTLMs, such
interaction is intriguing to humans, as exemplified in Figure 1, where learning an example about public relations
causes forgetting of an example in paraphrase detection.
This opens up a novel and challenging task of forecasting
forgetting based on interactions of two examples without
running expensive and repetitive inferences with PTLMs.
The goals of this work are twofold: (1) shedding light on
how interactions between two examples contribute to forgetting, and (2) developing effective methods that forecast
example forgetting. Toward the goal of interpretability, we
explore forecasting forgetting with an interpretable model.
With empirical study, we demonstrate the phenomenon of
“logit-change transfer”, i.e., the changes in pre-softmax logits of upstream pretraining examples proportionally copy
that of online learned examples while fixing an error, causing forgetting of the upstream pretraining example. Motivated by this finding, we build a partially interpretable
forecasting model that learns how much logit changes are
transferred based on the similarity of two examples. Similar techniques have been applied to track the dynamics of
logits during continual learning in recent works (Ramasesh
et al., 2020; Karakida & Akaho, 2021; Evron et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
While pretrained language models (PTLMs) have achieved
remarkable success in various downstream tasks, it is inevitable that models deployed in the wild still make errors (Lin et al., 2022b; OpenAI, 2023). Fixing errors without retraining the model, known as model refinement (Yao
et al., 2021), is crucial for the long-term usability of the
1
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Xisen
Jin <xisenjin@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

