Offline Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning Scales to Large Models

Jost Tobias Springenberg * 1 Abbas Abdolmaleki * 1 Jingwei Zhang * 1 Oliver Groth * 1 Michael Bloesch * 1
Thomas Lampe * 1 Philemon Brakel * 1 Sarah Bechtle * 1 Steven Kapturowski * 1 Roland Hafner * 1
Nicolas Heess 1 Martin Riedmiller 1

Abstract

han et al., 2022; Octo Model Team et al., 2023). Although
impressive, these examples come with the drawback that
high-quality (’expert’ demonstration) data is needed for
training. While such high quality data is readily available
for language and vision domains via the internet, in robotics
(and other real world domains) expert data is scarce and
expensive to obtain – and in many cases not available in
the first place. It is thus desirable to use different training
methods, such as reinforcement learning (RL), that can utilize sub-optimal data or data generated without a human in
the loop, i.e. generated by an agent, – which can be more
readily available – while retaining scaling benefits.

We show that offline actor-critic reinforcement
learning can scale to large models – such as transformers – and follows similar scaling laws as supervised learning. We find that offline actor-critic
algorithms can outperform strong, supervised, behavioral cloning baselines for multi-task training
on a large dataset; containing both sub-optimal
and expert behavior on 132 continuous control
tasks. We introduce a Perceiver-based actorcritic model and elucidate the key features needed
to make offline RL work with self- and crossattention modules. Overall, we find that: i) simple
offline actor critic algorithms are a natural choice
for gradually moving away from the currently predominant paradigm of behavioral cloning, and ii)
via offline RL it is possible to learn multi-task policies that master many domains simultaneously,
including real robotics tasks, from sub-optimal
demonstrations or self-generated data.

However, training large behaviour models via offline RL
methods1 is a largely unexplored area of research. While
first explorations of applying pure Q-learning on larger
multi-task datasets exist (Kumar et al., 2022a; Chebotar
et al., 2023) they either consider non-transformer models
of moderate size (Kumar et al., 2022a) or adapt relatively
small models and incur significant computational overhead
during training (Chebotar et al., 2023). What is missing
is a clear recipe detailing how to scale offline RL to large
transformers accompanied by an efficient model.

1. Introduction

In this work we provide such a recipe and introduce the
Perceiver-Actor-Critic (PAC) approach outlined in Figure 1.
We show that a specific class of offline RL algorithms (offline
actor-critic methods) can indeed scale to large models and
datasets without incurring a large additional computational
cost. In addition we etablish, for the first time, that offline
RL follows similar scaling laws to those observed in the
supervised learning regime (Henighan et al., 2020; Kaplan
et al., 2020). We further establish that this class of methods
is ideally suited for slowly moving away from supervised
BC towards RL during training, allowing us to run large
and expensive experiments without fear of instability and to
adapt our method depending on the quality of the data.

In recent years, scaling both model and dataset sizes has led
to multiple breakthroughs in machine learning. In particular,
generative pre-training of large (vision-)language models
on web-scale data is now the standard way to solve many
language and vision tasks (OpenAI, 2023; Alayrac et al.,
2022) and generative models of images and music have,
in the last years, reached unprecedented quality (Rombach
et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2023).
Recent work on scaling up policy learning for control has
shown that, when similar model architectures are used (e.g.
transformers), supervised behaviour cloning (BC) from
large datasets can lead to surprisingly capable multi-task
policies (Reed et al., 2022; Bousmalis et al., 2023; Bro-

We introduce a simple offline actor-critic algorithm that optimises a KL-regularized RL objective and can be seen as a
simplified variant of MPO/DIME (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018;

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Deepmind. Correspondence to:
Jost Tobias Springenberg <springenberg@google.com>.

1

This is in contrast to online RL of transformer models which
is often applied when large language models are fine-tuned with
RLHF, but is prohibitively expensive in real-world settings.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

