Local Causal Structure Learning in the Presence of Latent Variables

Feng Xie 1 Zheng Li 1 Peng Wu 1 Yan Zeng 1 Chunchen Liu 2 Zhi Geng 1

Abstract

social science (Spirtes et al., 2000), epidemiology (Hernán
& Robins, 2010), biology (Glymour et al., 2019), and neuroscience (Smith et al., 2011; Sanchez-Romero et al., 2019).
The discovered causal relationships are useful for predicting
the behavior of a system under external interventions, which
is a crucial step in both understanding and manipulating that
system (Pearl, 2009). Learning such relations from purely
observational data is challenging, especially when latent
confounders can be present (Spirtes & Zhang, 2016).

Discovering causal relationships from observational data, particularly in the presence of latent
variables, poses a challenging problem. While current local structure learning methods have proven
effective and efficient when the focus lies solely
on the local relationships of a target variable,
they operate under the assumption of causal sufficiency. This assumption implies that all the
common causes of the measured variables are
observed, leaving no room for latent variables.
Such a premise can be easily violated in various
real-world applications, resulting in inaccurate
structures that may adversely impact downstream
tasks. In light of this, our paper delves into the
primary investigation of locally identifying potential parents and children of a target from observational data that may include latent variables.
Specifically, we harness the causal information
from m-separation and V-structures to derive theoretical consistency results, effectively bridging
the gap between global and local structure learning. Together with the newly developed stop rules,
we present a principled method for determining
whether a variable is a direct cause or effect of
a target. Further, we theoretically demonstrate
the correctness of our approach under the standard causal Markov and faithfulness conditions,
with infinite samples. Experimental results on
both synthetic and real-world data validate the
effectiveness and efficiency of our approach.

There exists work in the literature that has attempted to
recover causal structure among observed variables in the
presence of latent variables. Spirtes et al. (2000) proposed
the seminal FCI (Fast Causal Inference) algorithm that can
learn a partial ancestral graph (PAG) 1 in the presence of latent variables by performing conditional independence tests.
Later, a faster algorithm, called Really Fast Causal Inference (RFCI), was developed (Colombo et al., 2012). Other
interesting developments along this line include (Claassen
& Heskes, 2011; Claassen et al., 2013; Raghu et al., 2018;
Akbari et al., 2021; Mokhtarian et al., 2023). These works
focus on learning the whole causal graph rather than the
local causal graph. However, in many real-world scenarios,
researchers are usually interested in the local causal relationships (Walters et al., 2007; Peter & Davidson, 2011; Ma
et al., 2023).
Several contributions have been made to learn the local
causal structure other than the global causal structure. For
instance, the Local Causal Discovery (LCD) algorithm
(Cooper, 1997) and its variants (Silverstein et al., 2000;
Mani & Cooper, 2004) are proposed to find causal edges
among every four-variable set in a causal graph. Although
these algorithms primarily aim to identify a subset of causal
edges through specific structures among all variables, our
focus is on discovering all causal edges adjacent to a single
target variable. Yin et al. (2008) and Zhou et al. (2010)
designed the PCD-by-PCD to find sets of parents, children,
and maybe some of the descendants (PCD) of variables of
the target variable. Later, Wang et al. (2014) proposed a
more efficient approach, called MB-by-MB, for discovering
direct cause and effect variables of the target. Additional

1. Introduction
Inferring causal relations, known as causal discovery, has
drawn much attention in several fields, such as computer
science (Jonas et al., 2017; Pearl, 2018; Schölkopf, 2022),
1
Department of Applied Statistics, Beijing Technology and
Business University, Beijing, China 2 LingYang Co.Ltd, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yan Zeng
<yanazeng013@btbu.edu.cn>.

1

A PAG represents a Markov equivalence class of maximal
ancestral graphs (MAGs) which encode the causal relations among
the observed variables. See the example in Figure 1 or Section 3.1
for more details.

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

