Unveiling Privacy, Memorization, and Input Curvature Links

Deepak Ravikumar 1 Efstathia Soufleri 1 Abolfazl Hashemi 1 Kaushik Roy 1

Abstract
Deep Neural Nets (DNNs) have become a pervasive tool for solving many emerging problems.
However, they tend to overfit to and memorize
the training set. Memorization is of keen interest
since it is closely related to several concepts such
as generalization, noisy learning, and privacy. To
study memorization, Feldman (2019) proposed a
formal score, however its computational requirements limit its practical use. Recent research has
shown empirical evidence linking input loss curvature (measured by the trace of the loss Hessian
w.r.t inputs) and memorization. It was shown to be
∼ 3 orders of magnitude more efficient than calculating the memorization score. However, there is
a lack of theoretical understanding linking memorization with input loss curvature. In this paper,
we not only investigate this connection but also
extend our analysis to establish theoretical links
between differential privacy, memorization, and
input loss curvature. First, we derive an upper
bound on memorization characterized by both differential privacy and input loss curvature. Second,
we present a novel insight showing that input loss
curvature is upper-bounded by the differential privacy parameter. Our theoretical findings are further validated using deep models on CIFAR and
ImageNet datasets, showing a strong correlation
between our theoretical predictions and results
observed in practice.

Figure 1. Our theoretical framework provides upper bounds in
Theorems 5.1, 5.3, and 5.4. These are visualized as links between
Differential Privacy, Memorization, and Input Loss Curvature.

literature has focused on understanding memorization in
DNNs (Zhang et al., 2017; Arpit et al., 2017; Carlini et al.,
2019; Feldman & Vondrak, 2019; Feldman & Zhang, 2020;
Feldman, 2019). This is crucial given the implications to
several connected areas such as generalization (Zhang et al.,
2021; Brown et al., 2021), noisy learning (Liu et al., 2020),
identifying mislabelled examples (Maini et al., 2022), identifying rare and hard examples (Carlini et al., 2019), privacy
(Feldman, 2019), risks from membership inference attacks
(Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2022) and more.
To study memorization several metrics have been suggested.
Carlini et al. (2019) proposed a combination of five metrics
to analyze memorization. Alternatively, Jiang et al. (2020)
proposed using a computationally efficient proxy to C-score,
a metric closely related to the stability-based memorization (Feldman, 2019). The stability-based memorization
score proposed by Feldman (2019) measures the change in
expected output probability when the sample under investigation is removed from the training dataset. Additionally,
unlike other proposed metrics, Feldman (2019) provides a
strong theoretical framework for understanding memorization. This theory was then tested in practice in a subsequent
paper (Feldman & Zhang, 2020). However, their method
involved training thousands of models and is thus computationally infeasible in most real applications.

1. Introduction
Machine learning and deep learning approaches have become state-of-the-art solutions in many learning tasks such
as computer vision, natural language processing, etc. However, Deep Neural Nets (DNNs) are prone to over-fitting
and memorization. An increasingly larger number of recent
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47906. Correspondence to:
Deepak Ravikumar <dravikum@purdue.edu>.

In a recent paper, Garg et al. (2023) suggested a new proxy
using input loss curvature to measure the stability-based
memorization score proposed in Feldman (2019). To measure input loss curvature they suggested using the trace of

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

