MorphGrower: A Synchronized Layer-by-layer Growing Approach for
Plausible Neuronal Morphology Generation

Nianzu Yang * 1 Kaipeng Zeng * 1 Haotian Lu 1 Yexin Wu 1 Zexin Yuan 2 Danni Chen 2 Shengdian Jiang 3
Jiaxiang Wu 4 Yimin Wang 2 Junchi Yan 1

1. Introduction and Related Works

Abstract
Neuronal morphology is essential for studying
brain functioning and understanding neurodegenerative disorders. As acquiring real-world morphology data is expensive, computational approaches for morphology generation have been
studied. Traditional methods heavily rely on
expert-set rules and parameter tuning, making
it difficult to generalize across different types of
morphologies. Recently, MorphVAE was introduced as the sole learning-based method, but its
generated morphologies lack plausibility, i.e., they
do not appear realistic enough and most of the
generated samples are topologically invalid. To
fill this gap, this paper proposes MorphGrower,
which mimicks the neuron natural growth mechanism for generation. Specifically, MorphGrower
generates morphologies layer by layer, with each
subsequent layer conditioned on the previously
generated structure. During each layer generation,
MorphGrower utilizes a pair of sibling branches
as the basic generation block and generates branch
pairs synchronously. This approach ensures topological validity and allows for fine-grained generation, thereby enhancing the realism of the final
generated morphologies. Results on four realworld datasets demonstrate that MorphGrower
outperforms MorphVAE by a notable margin. Importantly, the electrophysiological response simulation demonstrates the plausibility of our generated samples from a neuroscience perspective.
Our code is available at https://github.
com/Thinklab-SJTU/MorphGrower.

Neurons are the building blocks of the nervous system and
constitute the computational units of the brain (Yuste, 2015).
The morphology of neurons plays a central role in brain functioning (Torben-Nielsen & De Schutter, 2014) and has been
a standing research area dating back to a century ago (Cajal,
1911). The morphology determines which spatial domain
can be reached for a certain neuron, governing the connectivity of the neuronal circuits (Memelli et al., 2013).
A mammalian brain typically has billions of neurons (Kandel et al., 2000), and the computational description and
investigation of the brain functioning require a rich number
of neuronal morphologies (Lin et al., 2018). However, it
can be very expensive to collect quality neuronal morphologies due to its complex collecting procedure with three key
steps (Parekh & Ascoli, 2013): i) histological preparation,
ii) microscopic visualization, and iii) accurate tracing. Such
a procedure is known to be labor-intensive, time-consuming
and potentially subject to human bias and error (Schmitz
et al., 2011; Choromanska et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2020).
Efforts have been made to generate plausible neuronal morphologies by computational approaches, which are still
immature. Traditional neuronal morphology generation
methods which mainly aim for generation from scratch,
can be classified into two main categories: sampling
based (Samsonovich & Ascoli, 2005; da Fontoura Costa
& Coelho, 2005; Farhoodi & Kording, 2018) and growthrule based (Shinbrot, 2006; Krottje & Ooyen, 2007; Stepanyants et al., 2008) methods. Sampling-based methods
do not consider the biological processes underlying neural
growth (Zubler & Douglas, 2009). They often generate from
a simple morphology and iteratively make small changes
via e.g. Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo. They suffer from high
computation overhead. As for the growth-rule-based methods, they simulate the neuronal growth process according
to some preset rules or priors (Koene et al., 2009; Cuntz
et al., 2010; Kanari et al., 2022) which can be sensitive to
hyperparameters.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence & Department of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Lab
of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Guangdong Institute
of Intelligence Science and Technology 3 SEU-ALLEN Joint
Center, Institute for Brain and Intelligence, Southeast University 4 XVERSE Technology. Correspondence to: Yimin Wang
<ywang@gdiist.cn>, Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Beyond the above traditional methods, until very recently,
a learning-based method MorphVAE (Laturnus & Berens,
1

