Simple Ingredients for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Edoardo Cetin 1 Andrea Tirinzoni 2 Matteo Pirotta 2 Alessandro Lazaric 2 Yann Ollivier* 2 Ahmed Touati* 2
AWAC - Humanoid Stand

Abstract

Figure 1. The AWAC algorithm learns to stand when
trained on data generated by
an agent learning to either
stand, walk, or run, but completely fails on the union of
these three datasets.

60

Offline reinforcement learning algorithms have
proven effective on datasets highly connected to
the target downstream task. Yet, by leveraging
a novel testbed (MOOD) in which trajectories
come from heterogeneous sources, we show that
existing methods struggle with diverse data: their
performance considerably deteriorates as data
collected for related but different tasks is simply
added to the offline buffer. In light of this finding, we conduct a large empirical study where we
formulate and test several hypotheses to explain
this failure. Surprisingly, we find that targeted
scale, more than algorithmic considerations, is
the key factor influencing performance. We show
that simple methods like AWAC and IQL with increased policy size overcome the paradoxical failure modes from the inclusion of additional data in
MOOD, and notably outperform prior state-of-theart algorithms on the canonical D4RL benchmark.

Normalized return

50
40
30

run → stand
walk → stand
run+walk+stand → stand
stand → stand

20
10
0

0

1

2

3

Train step

4

5
×106

generating policy, while Advantage Weighted Actor Critic
(AWAC, Nair et al., 2020) seeks a policy maximizing the
data likelihood weighted by its exponentiated advantage
function. Later extensions of AWAC also modify the critic
loss to avoid querying actions outside the given data by
learning a value function, e.g., by expectile regression in Implicit Q-learning (IQL, Kostrikov et al., 2022) and Gumbel
regression in Extreme Q-learning (XQL, Garg et al., 2023).
This class of methods can be easily integrated with online
fine-tuning, even leading to several successful applications
for real-world tasks (Lu et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2023).
However, current offline RL methods still fail in simple settings. Hong et al. (2023b;c) showed that if the data contains
many low-return and few high-return trajectories, policy
constrained methods are unnecessarily conservative and fail
to learn good behavior. Singh et al. (2023) report a similar
effect on heteroskedastic datasets where the variability of
behaviors differs across different regions of the state space.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) holds the promise of
overcoming the costs and dangers of direct interaction with
the environment by training agents exclusively on logged
data. However, naively applying off-policy algorithms to
this setting has been shown prone to instabilities due to their
natural tendency to extrapolate beyond the given data (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019). To address this issue,
policy constrained methods propose minimal modifications
to off-policy actor-critic algorithms aimed at keeping the
learned policy close to the data distribution (Levine et al.,
2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Nair et al., 2020; Kostrikov
et al., 2022; Garg et al., 2023; Fujimoto et al., 2023). For
instance, TD3+Behavior Cloning (TD3+BC, Fujimoto &
Gu, 2021) achieves this by regularizing the actor loss with
the divergence between the learned policy and the dataEqual contribution 1 Sakana AI, Tokyo, Japan, work done at
Meta 2 FAIR at Meta, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Edoardo
Cetin <edo@sakana.ai>.

Realistic scenarios often involve data coming from many
heterogeneous sources, such as agents trained for different
tasks or demonstrations of diverse behaviors (Lu et al., 2022;
Wagener et al., 2022). Despite the richness of these data, we
show, through a novel testbed (MOOD), that existing offline
RL methods can still fail: simply concatenating datasets
collected from different tasks significantly and consistently
hurts performance. Counter-intuitively, this happens even
for tasks where training succeeds on any of the individual
subsets. This is strikingly shown in the example in Fig. 1
with the Humanoid environment: using offline datasets collected for the run, walk, or stand tasks is enough to learn to
stand, yet, simply combining them into a single multi-task
superset leads AWAC to near-zero performance.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In light of this observation, our contributions are as follows. 1) We introduce MOOD, a new testbed for offline RL
based on the DeepMind Control suite (Tassa et al., 2018)

*

1

