Learning Label Shift Correction for Test-Agnostic Long-Tailed Recognition

Tong Wei 1 2 Zhen Mao 1 2 Zi-Hao Zhou 1 2 Yuanyu Wan 3 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract

Wei & Gan, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Its central challenge
revolves around addressing the detrimental effects of label
distribution shifts between training and test datasets. Most
existing methods tackle this challenge through three key
strategies: 1) data manipulation during training (Zhou et al.,
2020; Kang et al., 2020), 2) enhancing representation learning (Zhong et al., 2021; Cui et al., 2021), and 3) optimizing
unbiased loss functions (Menon et al., 2021; Ren et al.,
2020). These methods aim to ensure that learned models
excel not only in the majority class but also in handling the
minority class.

Long-tail learning primarily focuses on mitigating
the label distribution shift between long-tailed
training data and uniformly distributed test
data. However, in real-world applications, we
often encounter a more intricate challenge
where the test label distribution is agnostic.
To address this problem, we first theoretically
establish the substantial potential for reducing
the generalization error if we can precisely
estimate the test label distribution. Motivated
by the theoretical insight, we introduce a
simple yet effective solution called label shift
correction (LSC). LSC estimates the test label
distribution within the proposed framework
of generalized black box shift estimation, and
adjusts the predictions from a pre-trained model
to align with the test distribution. Theoretical
analyses confirm that accurate estimation of
test label distribution can effectively reduce the
generalization error. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches,
especially when confronted with non-uniform test
label distribution. Notably, the proposed method
is general and complements existing long-tail
learning approaches, consistently improving their
performance. The source code is available at
https://github.com/Stomach-ache/
label-shift-correction.

In the realm of long-tail learning, a prevalent assumption
is that the test data adhere to a uniform label distribution
(Cao et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2019; Jamal et al., 2020; He
et al., 2022). However, real-world scenarios, such as those
in autonomous driving and recommender systems, often
challenge this assumption. Models trained on data from one
area may be deployed in another area with a markedly different data distribution. Consequently, the label distribution of
test data can diverge significantly from that of training data
(Alexandari et al., 2020a; Garg et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2023). This divergence may manifest in
various forms, including a similar long-tailed distribution or
an inverse distribution. Existing long-tail learning methods
tend to falter in such situations.
To enhance model generalization, we delve into the task
of test-agnostic long-tail learning in this paper. Recent efforts in this direction include LADE (Hong et al., 2021)
which relies on the assumption of accessible true test label
distribution–an impractical requirement in most real-world
scenarios. SADE (Zhang et al., 2022), on the other hand,
introduces three skill-diverse experts to simulate different
label distributions. A weighted ensembling of these experts, guided by an unsupervised self-supervised learning
objective on test data, is leveraged to tackle more possible
distributions. In fact, the multi-expert ensemble has been
demonstrated effective not only in test-agnostic but also
in conventional long-tail learning (Wang et al., 2021b; Li
et al., 2022). In this paper, we go beyond the confines of
a multi-expert ensemble and introduce a versatile method
that seamlessly integrates with existing long-tail learning
techniques, consistently enhancing their performance.

1. Introduction
Long-tail learning has garnered significant attention due to
its prevalence in real-world applications (Deng et al., 2021;
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China 3 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China. Correspondence to: Tong Wei
<weit@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To address the challenge of unknown test label distribu-

1

