RNAFlow: RNA Structure & Sequence Design via
Inverse Folding-Based Flow Matching

Divya Nori 1 Wengong Jin 2

Abstract

lock the full potential of RNA therapeutics, there is a pressing need for developing deep learning models to automatically design RNAs that bind with a protein of interest
(Sanchez de Groot et al., 2019).

The growing significance of RNA engineering in
diverse biological applications has spurred interest in developing AI methods for structure-based
RNA design. While diffusion models have excelled in protein design, adapting them for RNA
presents new challenges due to RNA’s conformational flexibility and the computational cost of
fine-tuning large structure prediction models. To
this end, we propose RNAFlow, a flow matching model for protein-conditioned RNA sequencestructure design. Its denoising network integrates an RNA inverse folding model and a pretrained RosettaFold2NA network for generation
of RNA sequences and structures. The integration of inverse folding in the structure denoising
process allows us to simplify training by fixing
the structure prediction network. We further enhance the inverse folding model by conditioning
it on inferred conformational ensembles to model
dynamic RNA conformations. Evaluation on
protein-conditioned RNA structure and sequence
generation tasks demonstrates RNAFlow’s advantage over existing RNA design methods.

Current state-of-the-art biomolecular structure design methods are based on diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Yim
et al., 2023b) or flow matching (Lipman et al., 2022; Bose
et al., 2023). For example, RFDiffusion (Watson et al., 2023)
fine-tuned RoseTTAFold (Baek et al., 2021) to generate
novel protein structures that meet complex constraints, including conditional generation of protein binders. While we
can adopt a similar approach for conditional RNA structure
generation by fine-tuning a protein-nucleic acid structure
prediction network like RoseTTAFold2NA (RF2NA) (Baek
et al., 2023), there are two major caveats. First, RNAs exhibit a high degree of conformational flexibility, which is often the key to their biological function (Ganser et al., 2019).
A generative model that outputs a single static structure may
bottleneck the downstream sequence generation process,
since an ideal sequence should account for desired RNA
dynamics. Second, fine-tuning a large structure prediction
network is computationally expensive, motivating a method
that applies a pre-trained model like RF2NA directly.
In this paper, we propose RNAFlow, a flow matching model
for RNA sequence-structure design. The denoising network in RNAFlow is composed of an RNA inverse folding
model and a pre-trained RF2NA network. In each iteration,
RNAFlow first generates a RNA sequence given a noisy
protein-RNA complex and then uses RF2NA to fold into
a denoised RNA structure. For computational efficiency,
we train the inverse folding model to minimize the flow
matching objective while keeping RF2NA fixed. RNAFlow
offers three advantages over previous methods like RFDiffusion. First, RNAFlow generates an RNA sequence and
its structure simultaneously. Second, it is much easier to
train because we do not fine-tune a large structure prediction network. Third, our framework enables us to model
the dynamic nature of RNA structures for inverse folding.
Specifically, we utilize the final few structure predictions
from inference trajectories as an effective approximation of
an RNA conformational ensemble and enhance our inverse
folding model to condition on dynamic RNA conformations.

1. Introduction
In recent years, RNA molecules have been engineered for
versatile and controllable functions in biological systems
(Dykstra et al., 2022), ranging from synthetic riboswitch
sensors that modulate gene expression to aptamers that bind
with protein targets (Thavarajah et al., 2021; Vezeau et al.,
2023; Keefe et al., 2010). However, experimental methods for high-throughput RNA selection like SELEX (Gold,
2015) remain time-consuming and labor-intensive. To un1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Divya Nori <divnor80@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

