How Far Can Fairness Constraints Help Recover From Biased Data?

Mohit Sharma 1 Amit Jayant Deshpande 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Fairness in machine learning has been an important qualitative and quantitative research topic for more than a decade
(Barocas et al., 2019; Mehrabi et al., 2021). Several quantitative fairness metrics and various bias mitigation techniques developed over the years are available to practitioners as open-source fairness toolkits (Bellamy et al., 2018).
Fairness-accuracy trade-offs often seem inevitable, and bias
mitigation guarantees can fail when there is a mismatch
between train and test data distributions; it is a double
whammy when we get neither the desired accuracy nor
the desired fairness on deployment. Hence, it is important
to understand the role of fair classification and fairness constraints when the training data in machine learning pipelines
has systematic biases (Blum & Stangl, 2019; Konstantinov
& Lampert, 2022; Schrouff et al., 2022).

A general belief in fair classification is that fairness constraints incur a trade-off with accuracy,
which biased data may worsen. Contrary to this
belief, Blum & Stangl (2019) show that fair classification with equal opportunity constraints even
on extremely biased data can recover optimally
accurate and fair classifiers on the original data
distribution. Their result is interesting because it
demonstrates that fairness constraints can implicitly rectify data bias and simultaneously overcome
a perceived fairness-accuracy trade-off. Their
data bias model simulates under-representation
and label bias in underprivileged population, and
they show the above result on a stylized data distribution with i.i.d. label noise, under simple conditions on the data distribution and bias parameters.

Blum & Stangl (2019) propose a model for data bias that
simulates systematic under-representation of the underprivileged group and label bias/flip on the underprivileged positive population. Applying this data bias model to a stylized data distribution with i.i.d. label noise, they prove a
recovery result that makes the following high-level point:
careful choice of fairness constraints can implicitly rectify
even extreme data bias and overcome a perceived fairnessaccuracy trade-off. Formally, for their stylized distribution with i.i.d. label noise, they prove that the optimal fair
classifier satisfying equal opportunity on a biased (or biasinduced) data distribution coincides with the Bayes optimal
classifier (that also happens to be perfectly fair) on the original data distribution, if the bias parameters satisfy certain
simple conditions. Their proof is tailored to equal opportunity constraints and uses a careful case analysis and iterative
argument that is not amenable to arbitrary distributions or
hypothesis classes. They also show a specific distribution
where a similar result fails to hold if we use demographic
parity constraints instead of equal opportunity constraints.

We propose a general approach to extend the result of Blum & Stangl (2019) to different fairness
constraints, data bias models, data distributions,
and hypothesis classes. We strengthen their result,
and extend it to the case when their stylized distribution has labels with Massart noise instead of
i.i.d. noise. We prove a similar recovery result for
arbitrary data distributions using fair reject option
classifiers. We further generalize it to arbitrary
data distributions and arbitrary hypothesis classes,
i.e., we prove that for any data distribution, if the
optimally accurate classifier in a given hypothesis
class is fair and robust, then it can be recovered
through fair classification with equal opportunity
constraints on the biased distribution whenever
the bias parameters satisfy certain simple conditions. Finally, we show applications of our technique to time-varying data bias in classification
and fair machine learning pipelines.

We take a significantly different approach and observe that
the regression function for group-aware classification (i.e.,
the positive class probability conditioned on the input features and sensitive attribute) undergoes a linear fractional
transformation when we apply various data bias models,
including the one proposed by Blum & Stangl (2019). This
observation plays an important role in our proofs because

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research India.
1
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi, India
2
Microsoft Research India. Correspondence to: Mohit Sharma
<mohits@iiitd.ac.in>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

