Hypergraph-enhanced Dual Semi-supervised Graph Classification

Wei Ju 1 Zhengyang Mao 1 Siyu Yi∗ 2 Yifang Qin 1 Yiyang Gu 1 Zhiping Xiao 3 Yifan Wang 4
Xiao Luo 3 Ming Zhang∗ 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

In this paper, we study semi-supervised graph
classification, which aims at accurately predicting
the categories of graphs in scenarios with limited
labeled graphs and abundant unlabeled graphs.
Despite the promising capability of graph neural networks (GNNs), they typically require a
large number of costly labeled graphs, while a
wealth of unlabeled graphs fail to be effectively
utilized. Moreover, GNNs are inherently limited
to encoding local neighborhood information using message-passing mechanisms, thus lacking
the ability to model higher-order dependencies
among nodes. To tackle these challenges, we propose a Hypergraph-Enhanced DuAL framework
named HEAL for semi-supervised graph classification, which captures graph semantics from the
perspective of the hypergraph and the line graph,
respectively. Specifically, to better explore the
higher-order relationships among nodes, we design a hypergraph structure learning to adaptively
learn complex node dependencies beyond pairwise relations. Meanwhile, based on the learned
hypergraph, we introduce a line graph to capture
the interaction between hyperedges, thereby better mining the underlying semantic structures. Finally, we develop a relational consistency learning
to facilitate knowledge transfer between the two
branches and provide better mutual guidance. Extensive experiments on real-world graph datasets
verify the effectiveness of the proposed method
against existing state-of-the-art methods.

Graph classification, which involves identifying the class
labels of graphs, is a significant problem with diverse practical applications in various fields. Data originating from
domains such as bioinformatics, chemoinformatics, and social network analysis, can naturally be represented as graphs.
For example, molecules in chemoinformatics can be represented as graphs by viewing atoms as nodes and chemical
bonds between pairs of atoms as edges. The objective of this
task is to effectively recognize the class label of each graph,
such as predicting the quantum mechanical properties (Hao
et al., 2020; Ju et al., 2023a) and assessing the functionality
of chemical compounds (Kojima et al., 2020).
To solve this problem, early methods leverage the idea of
graph kernels that compute a similarity measure between
graphs by comparing their substructures (Kashima et al.,
2003; Shervashidze et al., 2009; 2011), and have been
proven to effectively capture the structural properties of
graphs. Despite their efficacy, graph kernels may face challenges in scalability and computational efficiency when
dealing with large datasets or complex graphs. Recently,
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Ju
et al., 2024a) have emerged as a prominent and powerful
paradigm for graph classification (Mao et al., 2023; Yi et al.,
2023b; Luo et al., 2023c). The key idea of GNNs is to learn
effective graph representations by iteratively aggregating
information from neighboring nodes (Gilmer et al., 2017),
which have achieved remarkable success.
However, most prevailing methods typically follow the
framework of supervised learning, which demands a substantial amount of labeled graphs to train GNN models.
However, in the field of graph analytics, obtaining labeled
graphs can be a costly endeavor. Annotating graph data requires expert domain knowledge, manual efforts, and often
extensive human involvement, making the process timeconsuming and expensive. For instance, molecular labels
are often acquired through costly Density Functional Theory
(DFT) calculations or generated from complex experiments
in the field of chemistry (Hao et al., 2020; Ju et al., 2023a).
This scarcity of labeled graphs and the high cost of annotation pose significant challenges for developing accurate and
robust GNNs for graph classification.

1

School of Computer Science, National Key Laboratory for
Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University-Anker
Embodied AI Lab, Peking University, China 2 School of Statistics and Data Science, Nankai University, China 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
4
School of Information Technology & Management, University
of International Business and Economics, China. Correspondence to: Siyu Yi <siyuyi@mail.nankai.edu.cn>, Ming Zhang
<mzhang cs@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

