Reference Neural Operators: Learning the Smooth Dependence of Solutions of
PDEs on Geometric Deformations
Ze Cheng 1 Zhongkai Hao 2 Xiaoqiang Wang 1 Jianing Huang 1 Youjia Wu 1 Xudan Liu 1 Yiru Zhao 1
Songming Liu 2 Hang Su 2

Abstract
For partial differential equations on domains of
arbitrary shapes, existing works of neural operators attempt to learn a mapping from geometries
to solutions. It often requires a large dataset of
geometry-solution pairs in order to obtain a sufficiently accurate neural operator. However, for
many industrial applications, e.g., engineering design optimization, it can be prohibitive to satisfy
the requirement since even a single simulation
may take hours or days of computation. To address this issue, we propose reference neural operators (RNO), a novel way of implementing neural
operators, i.e., to learn the smooth dependence
of solutions on geometric deformations. Specifically, given a reference solution, RNO can predict
solutions corresponding to arbitrary deformations
of the referred geometry. This approach turns out
to be much more data efficient. Through extensive experiments, we show that RNO can learn
the dependence across various types and different
numbers of geometry objects with relatively small
datasets. RNO outperforms baseline models in
accuracy by a large lead and achieves up to 80%
error reduction.

Figure 1. Comparison between two approaches. (Left) Neural operators map directly from geometries/functions a to solutions u,
which often requires large amount of data to cover various geometries. (Right) Alternatively, given a reference solution ur on Ωr ,
we hope to query solutions to various deformations of its geometry.
Let φ : Ωr 7→ Ωq be a smooth deformation, a reference neural
operator can predict the difference between the queried solution
and the pushforward of the reference solution δu = uq − ur ◦ φ−1 .

1. Introduction

2023; Bi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023b; Pathak et al.,
2022). One of the greatest advantages of neural operators is
fast inference speed, which may reduce computational cost
by orders of magnitude while maintaining good accuracy.
These methods deal with problems on fixed domains, e.g.,
Earth. However, for engineering design, e.g., sensitivity
analysis, optimization and robustness study, iterations of
solving PDEs on deformable domains are required. Existing
works (Shukla et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022a; 2023; Hao et al.,
2023) of neural operators on deformable domains attempt to
learn a mapping from geometry space to solution space (GS) of PDEs. Such methods require large amount of training
data to achieve satisfying accuracy. Unlike some physics
simulation problems in fixed domains, such as weather forecasting where climate data is available from research of

Recently, neural operators (Lu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020a;
Bhattacharya et al., 2021; Nelsen & Stuart, 2021; Patel
et al., 2021) as surrogate models for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) have rapidly gained attention due
to the success in many applications in physics simulation,
e.g., weather forecasting, fluid dynamics, etc. (Wang et al.,
1
Bosch (China) Investment Co., Ltd. 2 Dept. of Comp. Sci.
& Techn., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint
ML Center, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Hang Su
<suhangss@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

