Position: Foundation Agents as the Paradigm Shift for Decision Making

Xiaoqian Liu 1 2 Xingzhou Lou 3 2 Jianbin Jiao 4 Junge Zhang 2

Abstract

ing (IL), planning and search as well as optimal control.
Recent advances in these algorithms have achieved superhuman performance in mastering the game of Go (Silver
et al., 2017), playing video games (Schwarzer et al., 2023),
and robotic locomotion and manipulation (Brohan et al.,
2022). However, traditional approaches to decision making
exhibit limited sample efficiency and poor generalization.
For instance, expert systems heavily rely on human knowledge and manual crafting, and conventional RL methods
necessitate agent training from scratch for each task.

Decision making demands intricate interplay between perception, memory, and reasoning to discern optimal policies. Conventional approaches
to decision making face challenges related to low
sample efficiency and poor generalization. In contrast, foundation models in language and vision
have showcased rapid adaptation to diverse new
tasks. Therefore, we advocate for the construction
of foundation agents as a transformative shift in
the learning paradigm of agents. This proposal
is underpinned by the formulation of foundation
agents with their fundamental characteristics and
challenges motivated by the success of large language models (LLMs). Moreover, we specify
the roadmap of foundation agents from large interactive data collection or generation, to selfsupervised pretraining and adaptation, and knowledge and value alignment with LLMs. Lastly, we
pinpoint critical research questions derived from
the formulation and delineate trends for foundation agents supported by real-world use cases,
addressing both technical and theoretical aspects
to propel the field towards a more comprehensive
and impactful future.

In contrast, foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) in
language and vision achieve rapid adaptation to a wide variety of tasks with minimal fine-tuning or prompting. These
models, pretrained on vast and diverse datasets, demonstrate
unprecedented capabilities in understanding and generating
text (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023), image (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2023) and some multimodalities (Reed et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2023). Therefore,
this position paper argues that foundation agents as generally capable agents across physical and virtual worlds,
will be the paradigm shift for decision making, akin to
LLMs as general-purpose language models to solve linguistic and knowledge-based tasks.
To arrive at this position, we first identify three fundamental
characteristics of foundation agents: (1) a unified representation of variables involved in decision process, including state-action spaces, feedback signals (e.g., rewards or
goals) and environment dynamics, (2) a unified policy interface across tasks and domains from robotics and game
play to healthcare and beyond, and (3) interactive decisionmaking in physical and virtual worlds by reasoning about
behaviors, handling environment stochasticity and uncertainty, and potentially navigating competitive or cooperative
multi-agent scenarios. These characteristics constitute the
uniqueness and challenges for foundation agents1 , empowering them with multi-modality perception, multi-task and
cross-domain adaptation as well as few- or zero-shot generalization. Particularly, foundation agents exhibit enhanced
credit assignment and planning in scenarios requiring longhorizon reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022; 2023)
and involving sparse rewards or partial observability (Meng

1. Introduction
Human life is all about making decisions. Intelligent agents
have been developed to help humans with real-world decision making, such as traffic control (Liang et al., 2019),
energy management (Nakabi & Toivanen, 2021), and drug
discovery (Zhou et al., 2019). Prevalent paradigms to train
agents include reinforcement learning (RL), imitation learn1

School of Integrated Circuits, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Electronic, Electrical and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Junge Zhang <jgzhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Distinctions from task-specific agents and recent LLM-based
agents can be found in Appendix A.

1

