Hieros: Hierarchical Imagination on Structured State Space Sequence World
Models
Paul Mattes 1 Rainer Schlosser 1 Ralf Herbrich 1

Abstract

that maximizes the expected cumulative reward in an environment (Sutton & Barto, 2018). The agent interacts with
the environment by taking actions and receiving observations and rewards. The goal of the agent is to learn a policy
that maximizes the expected cumulative reward. The agent
can learn this policy by interacting with the environment and
observing rewards, which is called model-free RL. Some
agents also learn a model of their environment and learn a
policy based on simulated environment states. This is called
model-based RL (Moerland et al., 2023).

One of the biggest challenges to modern deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms is sample efficiency. Many approaches learn a world
model in order to train an agent entirely in imagination, eliminating the need for direct environment interaction during training. However, these
methods often suffer from either a lack of imagination accuracy, exploration capabilities, or runtime efficiency. We propose H IEROS, a hierarchical policy that learns time abstracted world
representations and imagines trajectories at multiple time scales in latent space. H IEROS uses an
S5 layer-based world model, which predicts next
world states in parallel during training and iteratively during environment interaction. Due to the
special properties of S5 layers, our method can
train in parallel and predict next world states iteratively during imagination. This allows for more
efficient training than RNN-based world models
and more efficient imagination than Transformerbased world models. We show that our approach
outperforms the state of the art in terms of mean
and median normalized human score on the Atari
100k benchmark, and that our proposed world
model is able to predict complex dynamics very
accurately. We also show that H IEROS displays
superior exploration capabilities compared to existing approaches.

However, a significant hurdle encountered by RL algorithms
is the lack of sample efficiency (Micheli et al., 2023). The
demand for extensive interactions with the environment to
learn an effective policy can be prohibitive in many realworld applications (Yampolskiy, 2018). In response to this
challenge, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has emerged
as a promising solution. DRL leverages neural networks
to represent and approximate complex policies and value
functions, allowing it to tackle a wide array of problems and
environments effectively.
One such approach is the concept of “world models”. World
models aim to create a simulated environment within which
the agent can generate an infinite amount of training data,
thereby reducing the need for extensive interactions with
the real environment (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). However,
a key prerequisite for world models is the construction of
precise models of the environment, a topic that has garnered substantial research attention (Hafner et al., 2022b;
2020; Kaiser et al., 2019). The idea of learning models of
the agent’s environment has been around for a long time
(Nguyen & Widrow, 1990; Schmidhuber, 1990; Jordan &
Rumelhart, 1992). After being popularized by Ha & Schmidhuber (2018), world models have since evolved and diversified to address the sample efficiency problem more effectively. Most prominently, the DreamerV1-3 models (Hafner
et al., 2020; 2022c; 2023) have achieved state-of-the-art
results in multiple benchmarks such as Atari100k (Bellemare et al., 2013) or Minecraft (Kanitscheider et al., 2021).
These models use a recurrent state space model (RSSM)
(Hafner et al., 2022b) to learn a latent representation of the
environment. The agent then uses this latent representation to train in imagination. Recently, Transformers have
gained popularity as backbones for world models, due to

1. Introduction
Learning behavior from raw sensory input is a challenging
task. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a field of machine
learning that aims to solve this problem by learning a policy
1
Digital Engineering Faculty, Hasso Plattner Institute,
University of Potsdam, Germany.
Correspondence to:
Paul Mattes <paul.mattes@student.hpi.de>, Rainer Schlosser
<rainer.schlosser@hpi.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

