Recurrent Distance Filtering for Graph Representation Learning

Yuhui Ding 1 Antonio Orvieto 2 Bobby He 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Λ

Abstract

2

Graph neural networks based on iterative onehop message passing have been shown to struggle in harnessing the information from distant
nodes effectively. Conversely, graph transformers allow each node to attend to all other nodes
directly, but lack graph inductive bias and have
to rely on ad-hoc positional encoding. In this
paper, we propose a new architecture to reconcile these challenges. Our approach stems from
the recent breakthroughs in long-range modeling provided by deep state-space models: for a
given target node, our model aggregates other
nodes by their shortest distances to the target
and uses a linear RNN to encode the sequence
of hop representations. The linear RNN is parameterized in a particular diagonal form for stable
long-range signal propagation and is theoretically
expressive enough to encode the neighborhood
hierarchy. With no need for positional encoding, we empirically show that the performance
of our model is comparable to or better than that
of state-of-the-art graph transformers on various
benchmarks, with a significantly reduced computational cost. Our code is open-source at https:
//github.com/skeletondyh/GRED.

Λ

Λ
Λ
Target
node v

Λ

I
Diagonal linear RNN output

Λ

3

Λ

2

Λ

2

Figure 1. Illustration of the filtering effect on the neighborhood,
induced by the linear RNN. The filter weight is determined by the
eigenvalues Λ of the transition matrix and the shortest distance to
the target node. We expand on this in Section 3.

representation of a target node by aggregating the representations of its neighbors. Despite progress in semi-supervised
node classification tasks (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Veličković
et al., 2018), MPNNs have been shown to have difficulty in
effectively harnessing the information of distant nodes (Alon
& Yahav, 2021; Dwivedi et al., 2022b). To reach a node
that is k hops away from the target node, an MPNN needs
at least k layers. As a result, the receptive field for the
target node grows exponentially with k, including many
duplicates of nodes that are close to the target node. The
information from such an exponentially growing receptive
field is compressed into a fixed-size representation, making
it insensitive to the signals from distant nodes (a.k.a. oversquashing (Topping et al., 2022; Di Giovanni et al., 2023)).
This limitation may hinder the application of MPNNs to
tasks that require long-range reasoning.

1. Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous for representing complex interactions
between individual entities, such as in social networks (Tang
et al., 2009), recommender systems (Ying et al., 2018) and
molecules (Gilmer et al., 2017), and have thus attracted
a lot of interest from researchers seeking to apply deep
learning to graph data. Message passing neural networks
(MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017) have been the dominant approach in this field. These models iteratively update the

Inspired by the success of attention-based transformer architectures in modeling natural languages (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Devlin et al., 2019) and images (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021), several recent works have adapted transformers for
graph representation learning to address the aforementioned
issue (Ying et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022;
Ma et al., 2023). Graph transformers allow each node to
attend to all other nodes directly through a global atten-

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen, MPI-IS, Tübingen AI Center. Correspondence to:
Yuhui Ding <yuhui.ding@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

