Learning to Reach Goals via Diffusion

Vineet Jain 1 2 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 2

Abstract

ward function. Ideally, a generalist agent should acquire
a repertoire of skills that can be applied across a range
of tasks. Goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) (Kaelbling, 1993;
Schaul et al., 2015; Chane-Sane et al., 2021) is a paradigm
to learn general policies that can reach arbitrary target states
within an environment without requiring extensive retraining. The reward function is sparse and binary—that is a
reward of one for reaching the desired goal and zero reward
otherwise— eliminating the need for hand-engineered reward functions. The sparse reward function necessitates
intensive exploration, which can be infeasible and often
unsafe in practical settings. Concurrently, offline RL has
gained attention in recent years for learning policies from
large amounts of pre-collected datasets without any environmental interaction (Levine et al., 2020; Prudencio et al.,
2023). In recent years, the size of offline RL datasets has
steadily increased, allowing agent skills to scale with data
(Guss et al., 2019; Mathieu et al., 2021). Combining offline and goal-conditioned RL can potentially enhance both
generalization and scalability in practical scenarios.

We present a novel perspective on goalconditioned reinforcement learning by framing
it within the context of denoising diffusion models. Analogous to the diffusion process, where
Gaussian noise is used to create random trajectories that walk away from the data manifold, we
construct trajectories that move away from potential goal states. We then learn a goal-conditioned
policy to reverse these deviations, analogous to
the score function. This approach, which we call
Merlin1 , can reach specified goals from arbitrary
initial states without learning a separate value
function. In contrast to recent works utilizing diffusion models in offline RL, Merlin stands out as
the first method to perform diffusion in the state
space, requiring only one “denoising” iteration
per environment step. We experimentally validate our approach in various offline goal-reaching
tasks, demonstrating substantial performance enhancements compared to state-of-the-art methods
while improving computational efficiency over
other diffusion-based RL methods by an order of
magnitude. Our results suggest that this perspective on diffusion for RL is a simple and scalable
approach for sequential decision making2 .

However, offline GCRL introduces new challenges. Many
existing methods rely on learning a value function (Yang
et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022), which estimates the expected
discounted return for a given state-action pair. During training, policies often generate actions that are not present in the
offline dataset, leading to inaccuracies in the value function
estimation. These inaccuracies, compounded over time, can
cause policies to diverge (Levine et al., 2020). The value
estimation problem is further exacerbated by a sparse binary
reward signal common in goal-conditioned settings. Previous attempts to address this problem involve constraints
on policies or conservative value function updates (Kumar
et al., 2019; 2020), which compromise policy performance
(Levine et al., 2020) and make generalization challenging.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful paradigm for
agents to learn behaviors supervised by only a reward signal. However, the agent usually excels in accomplishing
a specific task, and this process requires constructing a re1

To tackle the GCRL problem of reaching specified goal
states from arbitrary initial states, this paper draws inspiration from diffusion models - a powerful class of generative
models that can map random noise in high-dimensional
spaces to target data samples through iterative denoising
(Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). Building
upon the idea of introducing controlled noise to destroy the
structure of the target data distribution, we employ a similar
strategy for GCRL by constructing trajectories that move
away from desired goals during the learning process. A goal-

Department of Computer Science, McGill University,
Montréal, Canada 2 Mila - Quebec Artificial Institute Institute, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Vineet Jain
<jain.vineet@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
In Arthurian legends, Merlin the Wizard is said to have lived
backward in time, which gave him the ability to predict the future.
2
Code for Merlin is available at https://github.com/
vineetjain96/merlin.

1

