Successor Features for Efficient Multi-Subject Controlled Text Generation

Meng Cao * 1 2 3 Mehdi Fatemi * 4 Jackie Chi Kit Cheung 1 2 5 Samira Shabanian 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the advent of large-scale pretrained language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020a;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022b) as a novel paradigm for natural language generation
(NLG), characterized by an enhanced ability to produce diverse and realistic textual outputs. However, the black-box
nature of deep neural networks poses a significant challenge
in controlling the generation process (Zhang et al., 2022).
Controllability is an indispensable aspect of NLG, especially in scenarios where the generated text must adhere
to specific criteria, such as being factually accurate, avoiding offensive language, or personalizing to a specific user
(Liang et al., 2021; Perez et al., 2022; Sheng et al., 2021;
Salemi et al., 2023). This necessity is amplified as these
models gain popularity and are increasingly employed in
practical applications.

While large language models (LLMs) have
achieved impressive performance in generating
fluent and realistic text, controlling the generated
text so that it exhibits properties such as safety,
factuality, and non-toxicity remains challenging.
Existing decoding-based controllable text generation methods are static in terms of the dimension
of control; if the target subject is changed, they
require new training. Moreover, it can quickly
become prohibitive to concurrently control multiple subjects. To address these challenges, we
first show that existing methods can be framed
as a reinforcement learning problem, where an
action-value function estimates the likelihood of
a desired attribute appearing in the generated
text. Then, we introduce a novel approach named
SF-G EN, which leverages the concept of successor features to decouple the dynamics of LLMs
from task-specific rewards. By employing successor features, our method proves to be memoryefficient and computationally efficient for both
training and decoding, especially when dealing
with multiple target subjects. To the best of our
knowledge, our research represents the first application of successor features in text generation. In
addition to its computational efficiency, the resultant language produced by our method is comparable to the SOTA (and outperforms baselines) in
both control measures as well as language quality, which we demonstrate through a series of experiments in various controllable text generation
tasks.

One class of methods for controllable NLG involves finetuning the language model on a filtered dataset or updating
it with adversarial samples (Gururangan et al., 2020; Keskar
et al., 2019; Dinan et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020). However,
as LMs grow in size and commercial utilization, fine-tuning
can become impractical or impossible. An alternative approach to controllable NLG employs methods that adjusts
the token probability distribution at each decoding step using one or more trained discriminators (Dathathri et al.,
2020; Yang & Klein, 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Krause et al.,
2021; Schick et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2023; Arora et al.,
2022; Zhang & Song, 2022). These methods only function
at inference time, thus obviating the need to update the LM’s
parameters. However, these methods associate each target
subject with a dedicated discriminator model, requiring the
training of new discriminators whenever the target subject
changes. Moreover, when there are multiple dimensions of
controls, the efficiency of these methods decreases, as the
training and inference time doubles accordingly.

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, McGill
University 2 Mila – Québec AI Institute 3 Work was done during
internship at Microsoft Research 4 Wand X 5 Canada CIFAR AI
Chair 6 Parts of this work were done during the author’s affiliation with Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Meng Cao
<meng.cao@mail.mcgill.ca>.

In this work, we propose a novel framework for controllable text generation, aimed at disentangling the language
model’s dynamics from the task-specific objectives. We
first frame controllable text generation as a reinforcement
learning (RL) task where a value function is learned to estimate the probabilities of target attributes appearing in the
complete generated text. The learned value function is sub-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

