Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents

Xingyao Wang 1 Yangyi Chen 1 Lifan Yuan 1 Yizhe Zhang 2 Yunzhu Li 1 Hao Peng 1 Heng Ji 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as a pivotal
breakthrough in natural language processing (NLP). When
augmented with action modules that allow access to APIs,
their action space expands beyond conventional text processing, allowing LLMs to acquire capabilities such as tool
invocation and memory management (Mialon et al., 2023;
Schick et al., 2023) and venture into real-world tasks such as
controlling robots (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023; Ma
et al., 2023) and performing scientific experiments (Bran
et al., 2023).

Large Language Model (LLM) agents, capable
of performing a broad range of actions, such
as invoking tools and controlling robots, show
great potential in tackling real-world challenges.
LLM agents are typically prompted to produce actions by generating JSON or text in a pre-defined
format, which is usually limited by constrained
action space (e.g., the scope of pre-defined
tools) and restricted flexibility (e.g., inability to
compose multiple tools). This work proposes
to use executable Python code to consolidate
LLM agents’ actions into a unified action space
(CodeAct). Integrated with a Python interpreter,
CodeAct can execute code actions and dynamically revise prior actions or emit new actions
upon new observations through multi-turn interactions. Our extensive analysis of 17 LLMs on APIBank and a newly curated benchmark shows that
CodeAct outperforms widely used alternatives
(up to 20% higher success rate). The encouraging
performance of CodeAct motivates us to build
an open-source LLM agent that interacts with environments by executing interpretable code and
collaborates with users using natural language. To
this end, we collect an instruction-tuning dataset
CodeActInstruct that consists of 7k multi-turn interactions using CodeAct. We show that it can
be used with existing data to improve models in
agent-oriented tasks without compromising their
general capability. CodeActAgent, finetuned from
Llama2 and Mistral, is integrated with Python interpreter and uniquely tailored to perform sophisticated tasks (e.g., model training) using existing
libraries and autonomously self-debug1 .

We inquire: how to effectively expand LLM agents’ action
space for solving complex real-world problems? Much
existing research has examined using text (Yao et al., 2022b;
Park et al., 2023, inter alia) or JSON (Qin et al., 2023b;
Chase, 2022, inter alia) to produce actions (e.g., tool uses
in Fig. 1 top left). However, both methods typically suffer
from constrained scope of action spaces (actions are usually
tailored for specific tasks) and restricted flexibility (e.g.,
inability to compose multiple tools in a single action). As an
alternative approach, several work (Liang et al., 2022; Singh
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a) demonstrate the potential
of using LLMs to generate code to control robots or game
characters. However, they typically rely on pre-specified
control primitives and hand-engineered prompts and, more
importantly, struggle to dynamically adjust or emit actions
based on new environmental observation and feedback.
This work proposes CodeAct, a general-purpose framework that allows LLMs to generate executable Python code
as actions (Fig. 1 top right). CodeAct is designed to handle
a variety of applications and comes with unique advantages:
(1) Integrated with a Python interpreter, CodeAct can execute code actions and dynamically adjust prior actions
or emit new action based on observations (e.g., code
execution results) it receives through multiple turns of
interactions.
(2) Code actions allow LLM to leverage existing software
packages. CodeAct can use readily available Python
packages for an expanded action space instead of handcrafted task-specific tools (Yuan et al., 2023; Shen et al.,
2023). It also allows LLM to use automated feedback
(e.g., error messages) implemented in most software to
improve task-solving by self-debugging its generated

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign 2 Apple. Correspondence to: Xingyao Wang
<xingyao6@illinois.edu>, Heng Ji <hengji@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
The code, data, model, and demo are available at https:
//github.com/xingyaoww/code-act.

1

