Unveiling and Harnessing Hidden Attention Sinks: Enhancing Large Language
Models without Training through Attention Calibration

Zhongzhi Yu * 1 Zheng Wang * 1 Yonggan Fu 1 Huihong Shi 1 Khalid Shaikh 1 Yingyan (Celine) Lin 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Attention is a fundamental component behind
the remarkable achievements of large language
models (LLMs). However, our current understanding of the attention mechanism, especially
regarding how attention distributions are established, remains limited. Inspired by recent studies
that explore the presence of attention sink in the
initial token, which receives disproportionately
large attention scores despite their lack of semantic importance, this work delves deeper into this
phenomenon. We aim to provide a more profound understanding of the existence of attention
sinks within LLMs and to uncover ways to enhance the achievable accuracy of LLMs by directly optimizing the attention distributions, without the need for weight finetuning. Specifically,
this work begins with comprehensive visualizations of the attention distributions in LLMs during
inference across various inputs and tasks. Based
on these visualizations, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to discover that (1) attention
sinks occur not only at the start of sequences but
also within later tokens of the input, and (2) not
all attention sinks have a positive impact on the
achievable accuracy of LLMs. Building upon
our findings, we propose a training-free Attention Calibration Technique (ACT) that automatically optimizes the attention distributions on the
fly during inference in an input-adaptive manner.
Extensive experiments validate that ACT consistently enhances the accuracy of various LLMs
across different applications. Specifically, ACT
achieves an average improvement of up to 7.30%
in accuracy across different datasets when applied
to Llama-30B. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/GATECH-EIC/ACT.

In recent days, large language models (LLMs) have garnered
significant attention due to their impressive performance
across a wide range of tasks (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; OpenAI, 2023a; Waisberg et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2023b). One of the key components contributing to the remarkable performance of LLMs is the attention mechanism,
which effectively identifies relationships among tokens in a
sequence. This ability enables LLMs to comprehend intricate contexts and details, greatly enhancing their capacity to
process and generate text that closely resembles human language (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2018). However,
despite the immense potential of the attention mechanism,
our current understanding of how attention distributions are
established and their relationship to the achievable performance of LLMs remains inadequately explored.

*
Equal contribution 1 Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Yingyan (Celine) Lin <celine.lin@gatech.edu>.

In our endeavor to address the aforementioned three questions, we make the following contributions:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We conduct comprehensive visualizations of the attention distributions in LLMs across a variety of tasks
and inputs. To the best of our knowledge, we are the

Along this direction, a pioneering study, StreamLLM (Xiao
et al., 2023), has undertaken an initial investigation and
improved our understanding of attention distributions by
uncovering the existence of attention sinks. In particular,
they find that the initial token of an input text receives a
disproportionately large attention score, despite often lacking semantic significance. This phenomenon arises from
the visibility of the initial token to almost all subsequent
tokens in autoregressive language modeling, causing them
to become the recipients of these “unnecessary” attention
values. Motivated by the impact of attention sinks on attention distributions, we aim to delve deeper into their general
existence to gain a better understanding of how they affect
LLMs’ reasoning and generation capabilities. This, in turn,
will inspire new strategies to enhance the achievable accuracy of LLMs. To achieve this goal, we pose the following
three intriguing research questions: Q1: Does an attention
sink only exist in the initial token? Q2: Will preserving
attention sinks always benefit LLMs’ accuracy in different
scenarios? Q3: Can we enhance LLMs’ accuracy by solely
manipulating attention sinks without any weight finetuning?

1

