Nash Incentive-compatible Online Mechanism Learning
via Weakly Differentially Private Online Learning

Joon Suk Huh 1 Kirthevasan Kandasamy 1

Abstract

price auction or a posted price mechanism to sell an item.
In both cases, to maximize revenue (objective), the seller
requires knowledge of the distribution of buyers’ (agents)
valuations (types) for the item.

We study a multi-round mechanism design problem, where we interact with a set of agents over
a sequence of rounds. We wish to design an
incentive-compatible (IC) online learning scheme
to maximize an application-specific objective
within a given class of mechanisms, without prior
knowledge of the agents’ type distributions. Even
if each mechanism in this class is IC in a single round, if an algorithm naively chooses from
this class on each round, the entire learning process may not be IC against non-myopic buyers
who appear over multiple rounds. On each round,
our method randomly chooses between the recommendation of a weakly differentially private
online learning algorithm (e.g., Hedge), and a
commitment mechanism which penalizes nontruthful behavior. Our method is IC and achieves
1+h
O(T 2 ) regret for the application-specific objective in an adversarial setting, where h quantifies
the long-sightedness of the agents. When compared to prior work, our approach is conceptually
simpler, it applies to general mechanism design
problems (beyond auctions), and its regret scales
gracefully with the size of the mechanism class.

However, in practice, this type distribution is often unknown
a priori. Consequently, learning an optimal mechanism
from data has been one of the central themes in the intersection of machine learning and game theory. Several prior
works have studied learning optimal mechanisms from an
i.i.d. dataset of types in offline settings (Cole & Roughgarden, 2014; Daskalakis et al., 2014; Balcan et al., 2016;
2018). In this work, our focus is on online settings, where
there is a stream of types and objectives, and the goal is to
design no-regret learning procedures which need to trade-off
between exploring candidate mechanisms in a mechanism
class, while simultaneously exploiting current knowledge
to maximize the desired objective (Kleinberg & Leighton,
2003; Blum & Hartline, 2005).
This problem of online mechanism learning has a distinctive
challenge: the data sources are themselves strategic agents
endowed with their own long-term utilities when interacting
with the mechanism over multiple rounds. These agents may
misreport their type for their own long-term benefit. This is
detrimental to learners who will be unable to estimate the
true frequency of types and optimize the given objective.
In particular, even if a multi-round mechanism is IC in a
single round, it does not necessarily translate to IC over
the entire learning process. Agents may find it beneficial
to misreport their type in the early rounds while incurring
some short-term loss, so as to manipulate later outcomes in
their favor, resulting in long-term gains.

1. Introduction
In mechanism design, a social planner designs a protocol,
where a set of agents report their type to the mechanism,
and the mechanism chooses an outcome based on the reported types. It is often desirable, if not necessary, that a
mechanism be incentive-compatible (IC), i.e. it is in the best
interest for each agent to report their types truthfully. When
designing the mechanism, we are interested in optimizing
some application-specific objectives. This typically requires
knowledge of the distribution on agents’ types. As examples, consider a seller who wishes to design either a reserve

To illustrate this, consider designing a revenue-optimal
posted price mechanism (PPM)1 , where a seller has an infinite supply of a single item. The seller chooses a price p
without revealing it to the buyers. The buyers report their
value, and the seller sells the item to those whose value
exceeds p and charges them p. This mechanism is IC on any
single round. However, if the seller naively repeats this over
a sequence of rounds, and uses reported values from previ-

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin–
Madison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Joon Suk Huh
<joon@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

This description is different, yet equivalent to another common
interpretation of the PPM, where the seller announces the price p
and buyers buy if their value is larger than p.

1

