Information Flow in Self-Supervised Learning

Zhiquan Tan 1 Jingqin Yang 2 Weiran Huang 3 4 Yang Yuan 2 4 5 Yifan Zhang 2

Abstract

ing is SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020), which employs the
InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018) to facilitate the learning
process. Interestingly, Oord et al. (2018) show that InfoNCE
loss can serve as a surrogate loss for the mutual information
between two augmented views. Unlike contrastive learning
which needs to include large amounts of negative samples to
“contrast”, another line of work usually operates without explicitly contrasting with negative samples which are usually
called feature decorrelation-based learning (Garrido et al.,
2022), e.g., BYOL (Grill et al., 2020), SimSiam (Chen & He,
2021), Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021), VICReg (Bardes
et al., 2021), etc. These methods have garnered attention
from researchers seeking to explore alternative avenues for
SSL beyond contrastive approaches.

In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of two dual-branch (Siamese architecture) selfsupervised learning approaches, namely Barlow
Twins and spectral contrastive learning, through
the lens of matrix mutual information. We prove
that the loss functions of these methods implicitly optimize both matrix mutual information and
matrix joint entropy. This insight prompts us to
further explore the category of single-branch algorithms, specifically MAE and U-MAE, for which
mutual information and joint entropy become the
entropy. Building on this intuition, we introduce
the Matrix Variational Masked Auto-Encoder (MMAE), a novel method that leverages the matrixbased estimation of entropy as a regularizer and
subsumes U-MAE as a special case. The empirical evaluations underscore the effectiveness of MMAE compared with the state-of-the-art methods,
including a 3.9% improvement in linear probing
ViT-Base, and a 1% improvement in fine-tuning
ViT-Large, both on ImageNet.

On a different path, the masked autoencoder (MAE) (He
et al., 2022) introduces a different way to tackle selfsupervised learning. Unlike contrastive and feature
decorrelation-based methods that learn useful representations by exploiting the invariance between augmented views,
MAE employs a masking strategy to have the model deduce the masked patches from visible patches. Therefore,
the representation of MAE carries valuable information for
downstream tasks.
At first glance, these three types of self-supervised learning methods may seem distinct, but researchers have made
progress in understanding their connections. Garrido et al.
(2022) establish a duality between contrastive and feature
decorrelation-based methods, shedding light on their fundamental connections and complementarity. Additionally,
Balestriero & LeCun (2022) unveil the links between popular feature decorrelation-based SSL methods and dimension reduction methods commonly employed in traditional
unsupervised learning. These findings contribute to our understanding of the theoretical underpinnings and potential
applications of feature decorrelation-based SSL techniques.
However, compared to connections between contrastive and
feature decorrelation-based methods, the relationship between MAE and contrastive or feature decorrelation-based
methods remains largely unknown. To the best of our knowledge, (Zhang et al., 2022b) is the only paper that relates
MAE to the alignment term in contrastive learning.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has demonstrated remarkable advancements across various tasks, including image
classification and segmentation, often surpassing the performance of supervised learning approaches (Chen et al.,
2020; Caron et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Zbontar et al.,
2021; Bardes et al., 2021). Broadly, SSL methods can be
categorized into three types: contrastive learning, feature
decorrelation-based learning, and masked image modeling.
One prominent approach in contrastive self-supervised learn1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China 2 IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 3 MIFA
Lab, Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai,
China 5 Shanghai Qizhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yang Yuan <yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Yifan Zhang
<zhangyif21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Though progress has been made in understanding the existing self-supervised learning methods, the tools used

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

