A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory of Very Long Contexts

Kuang-Huei Lee 1 Xinyun Chen 1 Hiroki Furuta 1 John Canny 1 Ian Fischer 1

Abstract

A very very long
text ……
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………
…………………

Current Large Language Models (LLMs) are not
only limited to some maximum context length,
but also are not able to robustly consume long
inputs. To address these limitations, we propose
ReadAgent, an LLM agent system that increases
effective context length up to 20× in our experiments. Inspired by how humans interactively
read long documents, we implement ReadAgent
as a simple prompting system that uses the advanced language capabilities of LLMs to (1) decide what content to store together in a memory
episode, (2) compress those memory episodes
into short episodic memories called gist memories, and (3) take actions to look up passages in the
original text if ReadAgent needs to remind itself
of relevant details to complete a task. We evaluate ReadAgent against baselines using retrieval
methods, using the original long contexts, and
using the gist memories. These evaluations are
performed on three long-document reading comprehension tasks: QuALITY, NarrativeQA, and
QMSum. ReadAgent outperforms the baselines
on all three tasks while extending the effective
context window by 3.5 − 20×.

page 1
page 2
page 3

1. Episode
Pagination

page N

2. Gisting
Q: Why did John … ?
3. Lookup

(Episodic) Gist Memory
[page 1] gist
[page 2] gist

[page N] gist

Figure 1. ReadAgent workflow.

interrelated books.
We posit that an underlying reason for this gap is inherent
in the differences in reading approaches. Typically, we
use LLMs to consume the exact given content word-byword and the process is relatively passive. On the other
hand, humans read and reason over long text differently.
First, the exact information tends to be forgotten quickly,
whereas the fuzzier gist information, i.e. the substance
irrespective of exact words, from past readings lasts much
longer (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995b;a; Reyna, 2012)1 . Second,
human reading is an interactive process. When we need to
remind ourselves of relevant details in order to complete a
task, such as answering a question, we look them up in the
original text.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) are
highly capable of language understanding, but the amount
of text that LLMs are able to read at one time is constrained.
Not only is there an explicit context length limitation, but
it has also been found that performance of LLMs tends
to decline with increasingly long inputs even when they
don’t actually exceed the explicit context window (Liu et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2023). In contrast, humans can read, understand, and reason over very long texts, such as a series of

We think that using the fuzzy gist memory to capture global
context and attending to local details together enables hu-

Project website and demo: read-agent.github.io. Contribution statements: Appendix A. 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Kuang-Huei Lee <leekh@google.com>, Ian Fischer
<iansf@google.com>.

1
Fuzzy-trace theory (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995b) posits that
people form two types of memory representations about a past
event – verbatim and gist memories. Gist memories, often episodic,
are fuzzy memories of past events, whereas verbatim memories
contain details of past events. People prefer to reason with gists
rather than with verbatim memories (Reyna, 2008).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

