Risk-Sensitive Reward-Free Reinforcement Learning with CVaR

Xinyi Ni 1 Guanlin Liu 1 Lifeng Lai 1

Abstract

Despite exploration being widely recognized as a vital aspect of RL, simple randomized exploration strategies often
fail due to high sample complexity (Li, 2012). While research by (Dann & Brunskill, 2015; Dann et al., 2017; Azar
et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018) demonstrates that stochastic exploration can be sample-efficient, applying these algorithms
across different reward functions can lead to inefficiencies.
To address this, (Jin et al., 2020) introduces the concept of
reward-free RL, in which the goal is to approximate the
near optimal policy under any reward function after a single
phase of exploration, enhancing the efficiency and adaptability of the learning process. (Jin et al., 2020) also derives
upper and lower bounds of the sample complexity of the
risk-free approach.

Exploration is a crucial phase in reinforcement
learning (RL). The reward-free RL paradigm, as
proposed by (Jin et al., 2020), offers an efficient
method to design exploration algorithms for riskneutral RL across various reward functions with a
single exploration phase. However, as RL applications in safety critical settings grow, there’s an
increasing need for risk-sensitive RL, which takes
potential risks into consideration for decisionmaking. Yet, efficient exploration strategies for
risk-sensitive RL remain underdeveloped. This
study presents a novel risk-sensitive reward-free
framework based on Conditional Value-at-Risk
(CVaR), designed to effectively address CVaR RL
for any given reward function through a single
exploration phase. We introduce an efficient algorithm named CVaR-RF-UCRL, which is shown
to be (ϵ, p)-PAC,
 with asample complexity upper
bounded by Õ

Building on these insights, subsequent studies such
as (Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Kaufmann et al.,
2021; Ménard et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Miryoosefi
& Jin, 2022) have sought tighter upper bounds and more
practical algorithms. The focus of these existing rewardfree RL research has been predominantly on the risk-neutral
approach, in which the goal is to maximize the average total
(discounted) reward. In practical scenarios especially in
those safety critical scenarios, however, decision-makers often have risk preferences that aim to mitigate low-probability
but high-impact outcomes. Thus, the need to consider risks
beyond solely optimizing for the average becomes important, leading to the development of risk-sensitive RL.

S 2 AH 4
ϵ2 τ 2

with τ being the risk tol 2 2
erance parameter. We also prove a Ω S ϵAH
2τ
lower bound for any CVaR-RF exploration algorithm, demonstrating the near-optimality of our
algorithm. Additionally, we propose the planning
algorithms: CVaR-VI and its more practical variant, CVaR-VI-DISC. The effectiveness and practicality of our CVaR reward-free approach are
further validated through numerical experiments.

In risk-sensitive RL, the objective function is shaped by
applying risk measures to reward functions (Delage & Mannor, 2010; Bäuerle & Ott, 2011; La & Ghavamzadeh, 2013;
Shen et al., 2014; Fei et al., 2020; Prashanth et al., 2022;
Ying et al., 2022), thus is also significantly dependent on
the exploration phase. Various risk measures have been
extensively analyzed and adopted in RL frameworks (Chow
& Ghavamzadeh, 2014; Chow et al., 2015; Tamar et al.,
2015b;a; Chow et al., 2017; Keramati et al., 2020; Ni &
Lai, 2022a;b; Hau et al., 2023). One widely used class
of risk measures is coherent risk measures, which satisfy
a set of natural and desirable properties: 1) monotonicity,
2) translation invariance, 3) subadditivity, 4) positive homogeneity, ensuring rationality and reliability in capturing
risk preferences (Artzner et al., 1999; Tamar et al., 2015a).
Despite these advancements, efficient exploration, particularly in contexts without a predefined reward function,

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), agents learn optimal actions by iteratively interacting with the environment and
leveraging feedback from reward signals. A critical part of
this learning process is exploration, where agents navigate
through states to effectively gather environment information.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Daivs, Davis, USA. Correspondence to: Xinyi
Ni <xni@ucdavis.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

