Vector Quantization Pretraining for EEG Time Series with Random Projection
and Phase Alignment

Haokun Gui 1 Xiucheng Li 1 Xinyang Chen 1

Abstract

tion (Zarei et al., 2023; Guharoy et al., 2023). Clinically,
EEG-based disorder diagnoses are mostly performed by
a well-trained clinician who visually examines a patient’s
EEG observation over long periods ranging from minutes to
hours (Tavares, 2020), which is extremely labor-intensive
and time-consuming. Hence, it is highly appealing to design
automated algorithms to accurately detect and classify the
underlying disorders from the EEG signals.

In this paper, we propose a BERT-style selfsupervised learning model, VQ-MTM (Vector
Quantization Masked Time-Series Modeling), for
the EEG time series data analysis. At its core,
VQ-MTM comprises a theoretically grounded
random-projection quantization module and a
phase-aligning module guided by the Time-PhaseShift Equivariance of Fourier Transform, the
two modules can generate well-defined semantic units (akin to words in natural language) for
the corrupted and periodic time series, thus offering robust and consistent learning signals for
the EEG self-supervised learning. VQ-MTM
also owns low model complexity and can easily adapt to large-scale datasets. We conduct
experiments on five real-world datasets including two large-scale datasets to verify the efficacy
of our proposed model, the experiment results
show that VQ-MTM is able to consistently surpass
the existing methods by large margins on both
seizure detection and classification tasks. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
HaokunGUI/VQ_MTM.

Motivated by its immense practical importance, many supervised learning automated diagnosis models (Raghu et al.,
2020; Gupta et al., 2021) have been developed in the past
years. These methods have achieved promising results in
cases where a large amount of labeled data is available.
However, certain disorder types are rare in nature, which
poses a serious challenge for these supervised learning models. Moreover, with the advances in data acquisition technology, an increasing amount of EEG data is being accumulated, and a large fraction of EEG data is generally normal
signals (Obeid & Picone, 2016), which are simply abandoned by these methods.
The pretrain-finetune paradigm has proven remarkably effective in natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019;
Chiang et al., 2023) and computer vision (Bao et al., 2022;
He et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021). To exploit these vast quantities of unlabeled EEG data, the self-supervised learning approaches are also employed in EEG data analysis (Banville
et al., 2020; Mohsenvand et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2022)
and have been reported to be useful in enhancing model
performance. In addition, EEG data is a special sort of time
series data, and the advances in time series self-supervised
learning (Wu et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023)
can also be applied to boost EEG data analysis.

1. Introduction
Electroencephalogram (EEG) measures the dynamics of
the electrical activity of the brain in a non-invasive way.
It finds a wide spectrum of applications in diagnosing various neurological and psychiatric disorders (Schomer &
Lopes da Silva, 2017; Hämäläinen et al., 1993) in medical
practice. In particular, it plays a central role in seizure—
the most common neurological disease affecting 50 million
people worldwide (WHO, 2023)—detection and classifica-

Despite their performance gain, the present self-supervised
methods for EEG often fall short concerning one of these
desiderata. The successes of the self-supervised learning
schemes in NLP can largely be credited to their contextual
representation learning capability achieved by learning to
predict or infer unseen tokens (words) in a context. However, 1) there lack of well-defined semantic units (words) in
the EEG time series data. One feasible solution is to adopt
the same strategy of MAE (Masked AutoEncoder) (He et al.,
2022), i.e., partitioning the time series into patches and

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China. Correspondence
to: Xiucheng Li <lixiucheng@hit.edu.cn>, Xinyang Chen
<chenxinyang@hit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

