Prospective Side Information for Latent MDPs

Jeongyeol Kwon 1 Yonathan Efroni 2 Shie Mannor 3 4 Constantine Caramanis 5

Abstract

stated. From a decision making perspective this idea serves
as a reminder that in many environments an observer is
being presented with side information at the beginning of
an interaction that will be of value only in later use. Mathematically, this can be modelled as a contextual decision
problem with initial side information. Such natural problem
has been studied for the fully observed, Markovian setting,
when an agent has access to the contextual side information (Jiang et al., 2017; Modi et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019).
Such a problem was additionally studied in the partially
observed setting, when the contextual information exists but
is not observable by the agent (Chadès et al., 2012; Hallak
et al., 2015; Brunskill & Li, 2013; Chatterjee et al., 2020;
Steimle et al., 2018; Kwon et al., 2021), a setting that was
also referred as Latent MDPs (LMDPs) in prior literature.

In many interactive decision-making problems,
there is contextual side information that remains
fixed within the course of an interaction. This
problem has been studied quite extensively under
the assumption the context is fully observed, as
well as in the opposing limit when the context
is unobserved, a special type of POMDP also referred to as a Latent MDP (LMDP). In this work,
we consider a class of decision problems that interpolates between the settings, namely, between the
case the context is fully observed, and the case the
context is unobserved. We refer to this class of decision problems as LMDPs with prospective side
information. In such an environment an agent
receives additional, weakly revealing, information on the latent context at the beginning of each
episode. We show that, surprisingly, this problem is not captured by contemporary POMDP
settings and is not solved by RL algorithms designed for partially observed environments. We
then establish that any sample efficient algorithm
2/3
must suffer at least
√ Ω(K )-regret, as opposed
to standard Ω( K) lower bounds. We design
an algorithm with a matching upper bound that
depends only polynomially on the problem parameters. This establishes exponential improvement
in the sample complexity relatively to the existing
LMDP lower bound, when prospective information is not given (Kwon et al., 2021).

An LMDP can model real world problems where there exists an unobserved latent context, e.g., in dialogue, recommender or in healthcare systems, when complete information on a user or patient is not given, yet, each user remains
fixed within each episodic interaction. Recently, Kwon et al.
(2021; 2023) derived exponential worst-case lower bounds
in the number of contexts for this subclass of POMDPs. This
implies that, in general, near optimal policy of an LMDP
cannot be learned efficiently when the number of latent
context is large.
In this work, we study a natural sub-class of LMDPs in
which weakly revealing information on the latent context is
given to an agent at the beginning of the interaction. That
can be thought of as an intermediate regime between the
case the contextual side information is given to the case
it is hidden and latent, as in general LMDPS. We refer to
this class of environments as LMDP with Prospective Side
Information, or as LMDP-Ψ. We introduce this class of
problems, study lower bounds and matching upper bounds
for this class, and show this setting can be learned efficiently,
unlike general LMDPs.

1. Introduction
"If in the first act you have hung a pistol on the wall, then in
the following one it should be fired." A. Chekhov famously
1
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, Wisconsin, USA 2 Meta
AI, New York, USA 3 Electrical Engineering, Technion, Haifa,
Israel 4 NVIDIA 5 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to:
Jeongyeol Kwon <jeongyeol.kwon@wisc.edu>, Yonathan Efroni
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.

Motivating Example. Consider a navigation task where
the goal location is randomly selected at the beginning of an
episode from a small set of goal locations. Without further
assumptions, also an optimal policy of such POMDP will
perform poorly, and may not reach the goal state with high
probability. A natural way to improve the performance of
an agent is to supply it with additional hints about the goal

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

