Triple Changes Estimator for Targeted Policies

Sina Akbari 1 Negar Kiyavash 1

Abstract

Y 0 (t1 )

Y 0 (t1 )

D=0

D=1

Figure 1. No drift assumption of CiC framework. Mappings T0
and T1 are assumed to be identical.

and Imbens, 2006; Sofer et al., 2016; Callaway et al., 2021;
Roth and Sant’Anna, 2023).
The DiD estimator hinges on the assumption of parallel
trends, which states that the (average) outcome of both the
control and treatment groups share exactly the same evolution trend in the absence of the treatment. Mathematically
speaking, this assumption translates to
E[Y 0 (t1 ) − Y 0 (t0 ) | D = 1] = E[Y 0 (t1 ) − Y 0 (t0 ) | D = 0],
(1)

where Y 0 (t) denotes the potential outcome associated with
the absence of the treatment at time t, and D denotes the
assigned treatment. In particular, D = 1 and D = 0 represent the treatment and control groups, respectively. The
validity of this assumption can be challenged, and parallel
trends might get violated due to unobserved time-varying
factors or dynamic changes in the study context. This violation may result in biased estimates. As a response to
potential deviations from parallel trends, researchers have
turned to more flexible models, such as the triple difference
framework (Gruber, 1994). The triple difference estimator
can be formulated as the difference between two DiD estimators. Intuitively, the difference of two DiD estimators
is unbiased, provided both estimators have the same bias.
Indeed, sole purpose of of subtracting the second DiD estimator is to debias the first one. Despite the prevalent use of
the triple difference estimator, especially over the last two
decades (Raifman et al., 2018; Sakurai and Theodoro, 2020;
Han et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2020; Tai-Seale et al., 2001),
only recently a formal presentation of the framework and its
identification assumptions was provided (Olden and Møen,
2022).

1. Introduction
In the domains of econometrics and quantitative social sciences, the difference-in-differences (DiD) estimator and its
extensions have emerged as indispensable tools for estimating causal effects in observational studies. With its roots
traced back to the work of Snow (1855) and further popularized by seminal works such as Ashenfelter and Card
(1984) and Card and Krueger (1993), DiD has provided a
reliable method for evaluating the effect of policy interventions over time. In particular, DiD stands out in studies
where inference based on controlling for confounders or using instrumental variables is deemed unsuitable, and where
pre-treatment information is available. Researchers have
actively pursued various extensions of the DiD estimator,
aimed at enhancing its applicability and robustness (Athey
1
EPFL, Switzerland.
<sina.akbari@epfl.ch>.

T1 = T0

The renowned difference-in-differences (DiD)
estimator relies on the assumption of ‘parallel
trends,’ which may not hold in many practical
applications. To address this issue, economists
are increasingly considering the triple difference
estimator as a more credible alternative. Both
DiD and triple difference are limited to assessing
average effects exclusively. An alternative avenue is offered by the changes-in-changes (CiC)
estimator, which provides an estimate of the entire counterfactual distribution by relying on assumptions imposed on the distribution of potential
outcomes. In this work, we extend the triple difference estimator to accommodate the CiC framework, presenting the ‘triple changes estimator’
and its identification assumptions, thereby expanding the scope of the CiC paradigm. Subsequently,
we empirically evaluate the proposed framework
and apply it to a study examining the impact of
Medicaid expansion on children’s preventive care.

Y 0 (t0 )

T0

Y 0 (t0 )

Correspondence to: Sina Akbari

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

