HumanTOMATO: Text-aligned Whole-body Motion Generation

Ailing Zeng
∗

♢

Shunlin Lu∗†♠♢ Ling-Hao Chen∗†♣♢
Jing Lin†♣♢ Ruimao Zhang♠ Lei Zhang♢ Heung-Yeung Shum♣♢

Co-first author. Listing order is random.
♦

{shunlinlu0803, thu.lhchen}@gmail.com

♣

Tsinghua University

†

This work was done when S. Lu, L.H. Chen, and J. Lin were research interns at IDEA.

International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)

♠

School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-SZ)
Corresponding authors: R. Zhang and H.-Y. Shum, Project lead: A. Zeng.

Project page: https://lhchen.top/HumanTOMATO

(a) stand and shush, angrily.

(b) Yang-style 40 form Tai Chi Competition routine step 34, happily.

Figure 1: The proposed HumanTOMATO can generate text-aligned whole-body motions with vivid and harmonious face,
hand, and body motion. We show two generated motion keyframes based on the given texts.

Abstract

GPT for fine-grained body and hand motion reconstruction and generation with two structured
codebooks; and (2) a pre-trained text-motionalignment model to help generated motion align
with the input textual description explicitly. Comprehensive experiments verify that our model has
significant advantages in both the quality of generated motions and their alignment with text.

This work targets a novel text-driven whole-body
motion generation task, which takes a given textual description as input and aims at generating
high-quality and diverse facial expressions, hand
gestures, and body motions simultaneously. Previous works on text-driven motion generation
tasks mainly have two limitations: they ignore
the key role of fine-grained hand and face controlling in vivid whole-body motion generation,
and lack a good alignment between text and motion. To address such limitations, we propose
a Text-aligned whOle-body Motion generATiOn
framework, named HumanTOMATO, which is
the first attempt to our knowledge towards applicable holistic motion generation in this research
area. To tackle this challenging task, our solution
includes two key designs: (1) a Holistic Hierarchical VQ-VAE (aka H2 VQ) and a Hierarchical-

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an explosion of huge demand for
generating high-quality 3D human motions in many scenarios, such as games, films, animation, and robotics. To reduce
laborious efforts in animation creation, recent studies (Tevet
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2022; 2023) attempt to generate human motions with textual description in
a natural interactive way and have achieved rapid progress.
However, the generated motions from existing works are
still unsatisfactory to meet real application needs. The problem is mainly due to two aspects. First, existing text-driven
motion generation models can only generate body-only mo-

.
Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
st

1

