KIVI: A Tuning-Free Asymmetric 2bit Quantization for KV Cache

Zirui Liu * 1 Jiayi Yuan * 1 Hongye Jin 2 Shaochen (Henry) Zhong 1
Zhaozhuo Xu 3 Vladimir Braverman 1 Beidi Chen 4 Xia Hu 1

Abstract

model weight). This reduction in memory usage enables up to 4× larger batch size, bringing
2.35× ∼ 3.47× throughput on real LLM inference workload. The source code is available at
https://github.com/jy-yuan/KIVI.

Efficiently serving large language models (LLMs)
requires batching many requests together to reduce the cost per request. Yet, the key-value (KV)
cache, which stores attention keys and values
to avoid re-computations, significantly increases
memory demands and becomes the new bottleneck in speed and memory usage. This memory demand increases with larger batch sizes and
longer context lengths. Additionally, the inference speed is limited by the size of KV cache,
as the GPU’s SRAM must load the entire KV
cache from the main GPU memory for each token generated, causing the computational core
to be idle during this process. A straightforward
and effective solution to reduce KV cache size
is quantization, which decreases the total bytes
taken by KV cache. However, there is a lack of
in-depth studies that explore the element distribution of KV cache to understand the hardness
and limitation of KV cache quantization. To fill
the gap, we conducted a comprehensive study on
the element distribution in KV cache of popular
LLMs. Our findings indicate that the key cache
should be quantized per-channel, i.e., group elements along the channel dimension and quantize them together. In contrast, the value cache
should be quantized per-token. From this analysis, we developed a tuning-free 2bit KV cache
quantization algorithm, named KIVI. With the
hardware-friendly implementation, KIVI can enable Llama (Llama-2), Falcon, and Mistral models to maintain almost the same quality while using 2.6× less peak memory usage (including the

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong
performance across a wide range of tasks (Brown et al.,
2020; Taylor et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2023). However, their
deployment is very costly, requiring a large number of hardware accelerators such as GPUs. Given these substantial
costs, one natural way to reduce the cost per request is to
combine a sufficient number of requests together for batch
processing. However, in this batch inference scenario, the
key-value cache (KV cache), which holds the attention keys
and values during generation to prevent re-computations, is
becoming the new memory and speed bottleneck. This bottleneck becomes more pronounced with larger batch sizes
and longer context lengths. For instance, in 540B PaLM,
with a batch size of 512 and a context length of 2048, KV
cache alone can take 3TB. This is 3 times the size of the
model’s parameters (Pope et al., 2023). Also, the GPU
SRAM has to load the whole KV cache from the GPU device memory for every token generated, during which the
computational cores are idle. Thus, reducing KV cache size
in LLMs while maintaining accuracy is important.

Equal contribution. The order of authors is determined by
flipping a coin. 1 Department of Computer Science, Rice University 2 Department of Computer Science, Texas A&M University 3 Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of
Technology 4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Zirui Liu
<zl105@rice.edu>, Jiayi Yuan <jy101@rice.edu>.

Existing works towards this problem can be roughly divided
into three categories. First, some work suggests reducing
the number of heads in KV cache, such as multi-query
attention (Shazeer, 2019) and multi-group attention (Ainslie
et al., 2023). However, these methods require either training
the model from scratch or fine-tuning the existing model.
Second, another research line reduces KV cache size by
evicting unimportant tokens (Zhang et al., 2023). Third,
some other works try to solve this problem from the system
perspective, e.g., offloading KV cache (Sheng et al., 2023)
or extending virtual memory and paging techniques into the
attention mechanism (Kwon et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To reduce the size of KV cache, the most simple and effective way is to reduce the total bytes taken by KV cache,
namely, quantization. Unlike the well-studied weight quan-

*

1

