Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?
Measuring the Human Generalization Function

Keyon Vafa 1 Ashesh Rambachan 2 Sendhil Mullainathan 2

Abstract

models — by prespecifying a task and evaluating on a relevant benchmark — undersells the capabilities of LLMs:
LLMs are capable of performing many tasks, not all of
which can be enumerated. Moreover, many of the tasks
that LLMs will be deployed to perform do not have existing
benchmarks. For example, if a business owner wants to
use an LLM to respond to client emails, which benchmark
dataset should they use to evaluate LLMs? Creating a new
benchmark for each possible task is infeasible.

What makes large language models (LLMs)
impressive is also what makes them hard to
evaluate: their diversity of uses. To evaluate these
models, we must understand the purposes they
will be used for. We consider a setting where
these deployment decisions are made by people,
and in particular, people’s beliefs about where an
LLM will perform well. We model such beliefs
as the consequence of a human generalization
function: having seen what an LLM gets right or
wrong, people generalize to where else it might
succeed. We collect a dataset of 19K examples of
how humans make generalizations across 79 tasks
from the MMLU and BIG-Bench benchmarks.
We show that the human generalization function
can be predicted using NLP methods: people
have consistent structured ways to generalize. We
then evaluate LLM alignment with the human
generalization function. Our results show that —
especially for cases where the cost of mistakes
is high — more capable models (e.g. GPT-4) can
do worse on the instances people choose to use
them for, exactly because they are not aligned
with the human generalization function.

Crucially, in many instances, the decisions about where an
LLM will be deployed are made by people. These decisions
are often driven by where they believe a model will perform
well (Lubars & Tan, 2019; Lai et al., 2022). Assessing the
real-world performance of LLMs therefore requires understanding how people form beliefs about their capabilities.
In this paper, we introduce a framework for quantifying
people’s beliefs about LLM capabilities. In our framework,
these beliefs are determined through interaction and evolve
via a human generalization function: humans ask questions,
observe how an LLM responds, and make inferences about
how it would respond to other questions. This is an act
of human generalization, similar to how humans judge
the expertise of other people based on prior interactions.
For example, people may expect that a model that can
answer college physics questions is capable of answering
elementary math questions, but make no inferences about
its ability to answer questions about Japanese literature.

1. Introduction

We propose an alignment problem based on the human
generalization function: the best LLM is the one that allows
humans to make the most reliable inferences about where
it will succeed. We show that misalignment with the human
generalization function can have harmful consequences for
deployment: a misaligned model that outperforms another
model on all individual questions can be less effective if
a human deploys it to answer questions it is not capable of
answering.

Large language models (LLMs) afford a remarkable diversity of uses. This diversity offers immense promise: the
same model can be used to help software engineers write
code and to summarize a doctor’s notes from a clinical
appointment. However, this same diversity poses an evaluation problem: how should we evaluate a model that seems
capable of doing many things?
Evaluating LLMs in the same way as supervised learning

To study the human generalization function empirically, we
collect data about the generalizations people make about
LLM capabilities. Specifically, we show humans how an
LLM responded to one question, and ask them whether it affects their beliefs about how the same model would respond

1

Harvard University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Keyon Vafa <kvafa@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

