Differentiable Distributionally Robust Optimization Layers

Xutao Ma 1 Chao Ning 1 † Wenli Du 2

Abstract

the uncertainty, and then this prediction is passed to an optimization problem to derive decisions (Ning & You, 2019).
Conventionally, the learning model is trained by minimizing
a prediction loss, i.e., in a prediction-focused way.

In recent years, there has been a growing research
interest in decision-focused learning, which embeds optimization problems as a layer in learning pipelines and demonstrates a superior performance than the prediction-focused approach.
However, for distributionally robust optimization
(DRO), a popular paradigm for decision-making
under uncertainty, it is still unknown how to embed it as a layer, i.e., how to differentiate decisions with respect to an ambiguity set. In this
paper, we develop such differentiable DRO layers for generic mixed-integer DRO problems with
parameterized second-order conic ambiguity sets
and discuss its extension to Wasserstein ambiguity sets. To differentiate the mixed-integer decisions, we propose a novel dual-view methodology by handling continuous and discrete parts of
decisions via different principles. Specifically,
we construct a differentiable energy-based surrogate to implement the dual-view methodology
and use importance sampling to estimate its gradient. We further prove that such a surrogate enjoys
the asymptotic convergency under regularization.
As an application of the proposed differentiable
DRO layers, we develop a novel decision-focused
learning pipeline for contextual distributionally
robust decision-making tasks and compare it with
the prediction-focused approach in experiments.

In recent years, decision-focused learning, also known as
smart predict-and-optimize in operations research (Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2022), has received much research interest
(Mandi et al., 2023; Sadana et al., 2023). Different from
prediction-focused learning, decision-focused learning aims
to train a learning model that minimizes a decision loss,
i.e., improving the decision quality. To implement decisionfocused learning, differentiable optimization layers play
the central role of passing gradient information from the
decision back to the learning model, and this is achieved
by differentiating the decision with respect to the learning
target.
From the learning side, the learning target of most differentiable optimization layer research is a point prediction of
uncertain quantity, and some research learns to predict the
distribution of uncertainty. However, in prior research, the
robustness of prediction is typically ignored, so the decision
made based on this prediction is also in lack of robustness.
As an emerging paradigm for robust decision-making, distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has seen a boom in
both theory and applications in recent years (Delage & Ye,
2010; Wiesemann et al., 2014; Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn,
2018; Rahimian & Mehrotra, 2022). Therefore, to improve
decision quality while preserving robustness, developing
a differentiable DRO layer to learn the ambiguity set in a
decision-focused way is highly desired but has not been
investigated yet.

1. Introduction

From the optimization side, most differentiable optimization layer research focuses on either pure continuous or
pure discrete decisions. However, the decisions in practical
problems are typically mixed-integer. Only Ferber et al.
(2020) developed a mixed-integer linear program (MILP)
layer. However, their approach relies on the specific solution
structure of linear program (LP). Therefore, how to differentiate the mixed-integer decisions for generic mixed-integer
convex optimization remains an unsolved problem.

In real-world scenarios, decision-making problems are typically affected by uncertainties. Therefore, machine learning
techniques are usually leveraged to predict the behavior of
†
Corresponding Author 1 Department of Automation, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 2 The Key Laboratory of Smart Manufacturing in Energy Chemical Process, Ministry of Education, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. Correspondence to: Chao Ning
<chao.ning@sjtu.edu.cn>.

To fill the aforementioned research gaps, this paper develops the first differentiable DRO layers with mixed-integer
decisions. That is, the learning target is an ambiguity set

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

