Position: Considerations for Differentially Private Learning
with Large-Scale Public Pretraining

Florian Tramèr 1 Gautam Kamath 2 3 Nicholas Carlini 4

Abstract

protects against the model memorizing training data. But
current approaches to differentially private learning scale
poorly, and greatly sacrifice the model’s useful generalization capabilities in order to provably prevent memorization.

The performance of differentially private machine
learning can be boosted significantly by leveraging the transfer learning capabilities of nonprivate models pretrained on large public datasets.
We critically review this approach. We primarily
question whether the use of large Web-scraped
datasets should be viewed as differential-privacypreserving. We further scrutinize whether existing
machine learning benchmarks are appropriate for
measuring the ability of pretrained models to generalize to sensitive domains. Finally, we observe
that reliance on large pretrained models may lose
other forms of privacy, requiring data to be outsourced to a more compute-powerful third party.

To address this issue, a growing line of work suggests to
augment differentially private learning algorithms with access to public data (Abadi et al., 2016; Papernot et al., 2019;
Tramèr & Boneh, 2021; Yu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Arora
& Ré, 2022; De et al., 2022; Mehta et al., 2023; Kurakin
et al., 2022; Panda et al., 2022; Nasr et al., 2023b; Tang et al.,
2024). The goal is to first use large troves of non-privacysensitive data to learn generic features—independent from
any data owner’s private data—which can then be efficiently
finetuned with DP on sensitive data.
For example, suppose a company wishes to train a model
on a corpus of chat messages from its end users. While the
content of these messages is sensitive, the general structure
of a chat message (i.e., syntax, grammar, etc.) is not sensitive. Thus, the company may wish to leverage a model that
was pretrained on a large public corpus of text (preferably
including chat conversations) and then finetune this model
on the specific sensitive content of the end users’ messages.

1. Introduction
While machine learning models have made tremendous
progress at learning generalizable concepts from data at
scale, these models also frequently memorize parts of their
training data (Feldman, 2020; Feldman & Zhang, 2020;
Shokri et al., 2017). This poses a threat when the model’s
training data contains privacy-sensitive information, as deployed models may regurgitate memorized private data (Carlini et al., 2019; 2021; Somepalli et al., 2023).

Even in the the absence of any privacy concerns this pretraining and transfer learning approach has become the
de-facto strategy for achieving state-of-the-art results across
a variety of challenging tasks in computer vision and natural language processing. Here, a generic “foundation
model” (Bommasani et al., 2021) is first pretrained on massive and weakly curated data—typically scraped from the
public Internet. Thereafter, the model can be efficiently finetuned on various downstream tasks (Radford et al., 2019).
Generative models such as large language models even exhibit powerful in-context learning abilities, where the model
“learns” new tasks at inference time solely on the basis of a
small number of examples (Brown et al., 2020).

Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) offers a formal solution to this problem. Informally, training a model
with (user-level) differential privacy offers a guarantee that
the model will not depend too heavily on the sensitive data
contributed by any one individual. Among other threats, this
*

Authors listed in reverse alphabetical order. A version
of this paper, unconstrained by page limits, is available on
arXiv (Tramèr et al., 2022). 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland 2 Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
3
Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 4 Google DeepMind,
Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to: Florian Tramèr <florian.tramer@inf.ethz.ch>, Gautam Kamath <g@csail.mit.edu>,
Nicholas Carlini <nicholas@carlini.com>.

The impressive performance of foundation models naturally
places these models as ideal candidates for private learning.
Indeed, as the pretraining data comes from publicly available sources, the pretrained model is fully independent of
individuals’ privacy-sensitive target data. And since these
models learn new tasks extremely (sample)-efficiently, they

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

