EquiPocket: an E(3)-Equivariant Geometric Graph Neural Network for Ligand
Binding Site Prediction

Yang Zhang 1 Zhewei Wei 1 Ye Yuan 2 Chongxuan Li 1 Wenbing Huang 1

Abstract

Protein Atom
Surface Probe
Binding Site

Predicting the binding sites of target proteins
plays a fundamental role in drug discovery. Most
existing deep-learning methods consider a protein
as a 3D image by spatially clustering its atoms
into voxels and then feed the voxelized protein
into a 3D CNN for prediction. However, the CNNbased methods encounter several critical issues:
1) defective in representing irregular protein structures; 2) sensitive to rotations; 3) insufficient to
characterize the protein surface; 4) unaware of
protein size shift. To address the above issues, this
work proposes EquiPocket, an E(3)-equivariant
Graph Neural Network (GNN) for binding site
prediction, which comprises three modules: the
first one to extract local geometric information
for each surface atom, the second one to model
both the chemical and spatial structure of protein and the last one to capture the geometry of
the surface via equivariant message passing over
the surface atoms. We further propose a dense
attention output layer to alleviate the effect incurred by variable protein size. Extensive experiments on several representative benchmarks
demonstrate the superiority of our framework to
the state-of-the-art methods. Related codes can
be found at the link https://github.com/
fengyuewuya/EquiPocket.

Chemical Info

(a) CNN-based methods

Local Geometry

(b) Our EquiPocket

Figure 1: Illustrative comparison between previous CNNbased methods (voxelization) and our EquiPocket.

referred to as binding sites/pockets on the target protein
structures. In-silico ligand binding site prediction forms an
indispensable and even the first step for various tasks. For
example, the predicted binding sites (or pockets) on the protein greatly facilitates downstream tasks, including proteinligand docking (Zhang et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023) and
structure-based molecular generation (Isert et al., 2023).
Through the past years, various computational methods for
ligand binding site detection have emerged, broadly categorized (Macari et al., 2019) into geometry-based (Levitt &
Banaszak, 1992; Le Guilloux et al., 2009; Dias et al., 2017),
probe-based (Laurie & Jackson, 2005; Faller et al., 2015),
and template-based methods (Brylinski & Skolnick, 2008;
Toti et al., 2018). These methods exploit hand-crafted algorithms guided by domain knowledge or external templates,
leading to insufficient expressivity in representing proteins.
Lately, machine-learning methods like P2rank (Krivák &
Hoksza, 2018) utilize Random Forest with surface geometry
for prediction, which are still limited by the hand-crafted
features and insufficiently-expressive models. Motivated by
the breakthrough of deep learning, Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have been applied successfully for ligand
binding site prediction (Kandel et al., 2021). Typical works
include DeepSite (Jiménez et al., 2017), DeepPocket (Aggarwal et al., 2021), DeepSurf (Mylonas et al., 2021), RecurPocket (Li et al., 2022) and etc (Semwal et al., 2023).
The CNN-based methods consider a protein as a 3D image
by spatially clustering its atoms into the nearest voxels, and
then model the binding site prediction as a object detection

1. Introduction
Nearly all biological and pharmacological processes in living systems involve interactions between receptors (i.e. target proteins) and ligands (i.e. small molecules) (Rang, 2006).
These interactions take place at specific regions that are
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University
of China, beijing, China 2 Beijing Institute of Technology, China.
Correspondence to: Zhewei Wei <zhewei@ruc.edu.cn>, Wenbing
Huang <hwenbing@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

