Differentiable Annealed Importance Sampling Minimizes The
Jensen-Shannon Divergence Between Initial and Target Distribution

Johannes Zenn 1 2 3 Robert Bamler 1 2

Abstract

dynamics to move the samples towards a target distribution.

Differentiable annealed importance sampling
(DAIS), proposed by Geffner & Domke (2021)
and Zhang et al. (2021), allows optimizing, among
others, over the initial distribution of AIS. In this
paper, we show that, in the limit of many transitions, DAIS minimizes the symmetrized KL divergence (Jensen-Shannon divergence) between
the initial and target distribution. Thus, DAIS can
be seen as a form of variational inference (VI)
in that its initial distribution is a parametric fit to
an intractable target distribution. We empirically
evaluate the usefulness of the initial distribution
as a variational distribution on synthetic and realworld data, observing that it often provides more
accurate uncertainty estimates than standard VI
(optimizing the reverse KL divergence), importance weighted VI, and Markovian score climbing
(optimizing the forward KL divergence).

We show theoretically that, in the limit of many transitions,
DAIS minimizes the symmetrized Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Kullback & Leibler, 1951), also known as JensenShannon divergence, between its initial and target distribution. The Jensen-Shannon divergence is the sum of the
reverse and the forward KL divergence. While the reverse
KL divergence, used in VI, is known to be mode-seeking,
the forward KL divergence, used in Markovian Score Climbing (MSC) (Naesseth et al., 2020), is typically associated
with a mass-covering behavior (Murphy, 2023). The JensenShannon divergence averages between both divergences.
We empirically analyze implications of this theoretical result
by asking: “How useful is the initial distribution q0 of DAIS
as a parametric approximation of the target distribution?”
This question corresponds to an inference scheme (which we
denote by DAIS0 ) that is identical to DAIS at training time
(i.e., it moves particles sampled from q0 along an MCMC
chain). At inference time, however, DAIS0 only uses q0 ,
omitting expensive AIS steps. Here, we refer to fitting
the model parameters as “training” and running the model
on test data as “inference”. Generally, we do not expect
DAIS0 to match the performance of DAIS. However, DAIS0
has the advantage of providing an explicit and compact
representation of the approximate target distribution.

1. Introduction
Annealed importance sampling (AIS) (Neal, 2001)
allows
R
estimating the normalization constant Z := f (z) dz of
an unnormalized distribution f (z). In probabilistic machine learning, AIS can be used for Bayesian model selection (Knuth et al., 2015), whereR the goal is to maximize
the marginal likelihood p(x) = p(z, x) dz over a family
of candidate probabilistic models p. Here, p(z, x) is the
model’s joint distribution over latent variables z and (fixed)
observed data x. In this paper, we investigate the initial
distribution of AIS or, more specifically, differentiable AIS
(DAIS) (Geffner & Domke, 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). DAIS
combines aspects of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
and Variational Inference (VI): it draws samples from a
(variational) initial distribution q0 and then follows MCMC

We call a distribution explicit if it has an analytic expression
(as opposed to, e.g., an algorithmic prescription for sampling from it). It is often stated that an explicit expression
for the exact Bayesian posterior p(z | x) = p(z, x)/p(x) is
intractable in large models, since calculating p(x) is prohibitively expensive. However, this adage misses an important point. Even if we had an oracle that told us the value of
p(x), the explicit expression for the exact posterior would
typically be far too complicated to be of any practical use
in downstream tasks because it would, in general, have one
term per data point. We argue that we are actually interested
in a compact approximation of the posterior distribution, i.e.,
a tractable parameterized distribution that one can efficiently
evaluate and sample from. Having a compact approximate
posterior enables various downstream applications, such as
continual learning (Nguyen et al., 2018), pruning in BNNs
(Xiao et al., 2023), and compression of neural networks

1

Tübingen AI Center 2 University of Tübingen 3 IMPRSIS. Correspondence to: Johannes Zenn <johannes.zenn@unituebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

