A Provable Decision Rule for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xinsong Ma 1 Xin Zou 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

real-world scenarios, these models often struggle with outof-distribution (OOD) inputs from a different distribution
that the network has not been exposed to during training.
To ensure the reliability and safety of sensitive applications,
such as medical diagnosis (Frolova et al., 2022) and finance
(Özbayoglu et al., 2020), the OOD inputs should be identified and not be predicted with high confidence during testing
time (Nguyen et al., 2015). Such a task is referred to as OOD
detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017).

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection task plays
the key role in reliable and safety-critical applications. Existing researches mainly devote to designing or training the powerful score function but
overlook investigating the decision rule based on
the proposed score function. Different from previous work, this paper aims to design a decision
rule with rigorous theoretical guarantee and well
empirical performance. Specifically, we provide a
new insight for the OOD detection task from a hypothesis testing perspective and propose a novel
generalized Benjamini Hochberg (g-BH) procedure with empirical p-values to solve the testing
problem. Theoretically, the g-BH procedure controls false discovery rate (FDR) at pre-specified
level. Furthermore, we derive an upper bound of
the expectation of false positive rate (FPR) for
the g-BH procedure based on the tailed generalized Gaussian distribution family, indicating that
the FPR of g-BH procedure converges to zero in
probability. Finally, the extensive experimental
results verify the superiority of g-BH procedure
over the traditional threshold-based decision rule
on several OOD detection benchmarks.

OOD detection has gained significant attention recently and
a plethora of literature has emerged to address this issue (Liu
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Hendrycks
et al., 2022; Djurisic et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). In the
current literature, the OOD detection task is formulated as
the following decision problem. For an input x, the decision
rule is:
(
ID,
if s(x) ≥ s∗
ϕ(x) =
(1)
OOD, if s(x) < s∗
where s(·) denotes the score function and the threshold s∗ is
empirically selected so that the ture positive rate (TPR) on
ID validation set 1 is 95% before testing. Given the choice
of threshold s∗ , we call the decision rule in Eq. (1) empirical decision rule (e-DR). Existing OOD detection methods
mainly devote to obtaining a powerful score function and
then apply the e-DR in Eq. (1) to identify the OOD examples
directly. Factually, the decision rule is extremely significant
for the OOD detection task, since it may be directly used
in sensitive applications such as self-driving (Huang et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2022). However, these state-of-the-art approaches are lack of the systematic investigation into the
decision rule. Besides, the e-DR is empirical, thus its outputs are not covered by any rigorous theoretical guarantee.
Then a natural question arise:

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have attained remarkable
achievements in a broad range of challenging problems
from image classification (He et al., 2016b), speech recognition (Amodei et al., 2016), to machine translation (Dankers
et al., 2022). The excellent performance of these models
lie in the promising generalization on the in-distribution
(ID) inputs that are drawn from the same distribution as the
examples used to train the model. Nevertheless, in the open

How to design an decision rule with rigorous theoretical guarantee and superior empirical performance?

1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

This paper aims to systematically study the above question.
Different from previous OOD detection literature, we investigate the OOD detection problem from the statistical

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

In practical application, the testing data is unknown and we
can not guarantee that the TPR on test set is 95%. Therefore, the
threshold is selected using the ID validation set.

1

