Reinforcement Learning within Tree Search for Fast Macro Placement

Zijie Geng 1 Jie Wang 1 Ziyan Liu 1 Siyuan Xu 2 Zhentao Tang 2
Mingxuan Yuan 2 Jianye Hao 2 3 Yongdong Zhang 1 Feng Wu 1

Abstract

(a) Global Search Tree

Macro placement is a crucial step in modern chip
design, and reinforcement learning (RL) has recently emerged as a promising technique for improving the placement quality. However, existing RL-based techniques are hindered by their
low sample efficiency, requiring numerous online rollouts or substantial offline expert data to
achieve bootstrap, which are often impractical in
industrial scenarios. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel sample-efficient framework,
namely EfficientPlace, for fast macro placement.
EfficientPlace integrates a global tree search algorithm to strategically direct the optimization process, as well as a RL agent for local policy learning to advance the tree search. Experiments on
commonly used benchmarks demonstrate that EfficientPlace achieves remarkable placement quality within a short timeframe, outperforming recent
state-of-the-art approaches.

(b) Local RL Rollouts

Pruned

Best solution

Frontiers
MCTS
(Exploration)

(c)

Global
Tree Search

RL
(Exploitation)
Guide
Advance

Local
Policy Learning

Placement
Solutions

Figure 1. The bi-level framework in EfficientPlace. (a) HighLevel Global Search Tree. It includes a search tree to explore the
placement space. It identifies promising nodes (called frontiers),
and prunes less valuable nodes, thus pinpointing potential areas
for optimization. (b) Low-Level Local RL Rollouts. It employs
a RL agent to exploit the identified promising nodes, promoting
the evolution of solutions. (c) Synergistic Bi-Level Interaction.
The global tree search strategically guides the local policy towards
promising nodes, enhancing learning efficiency. Conversely, local
policy learning advances the tree search by effectively exploiting
these nodes, leading to the optimal placement solutions.

1. Introduction
Macro placement is a crucial step in modern chip design,
as it significantly impacts the overall quality of the final
chip (MacMillen et al., 2000; Markov et al., 2012). This
task is essentially a large-scale optimization problem, which
requires determining the positions of macros (i.e., rectangular circuit modules) on a chip canvas (i.e., a rectangular
container) without any overlap (Wang et al., 2009). Due
to the lengthy workflow of chip design, designers often
rely on surrogate metrics that effectively reflect the final
results to guide the optimization process in macro placement. Among these metrics, a commonly adopted metric

is the half-perimeter wirelength (HPWL), which provides
an approximation for the routing wirelength and is widely
used to measure the placement quality (Rabaey et al., 2002;
Lai et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023). Despite the simplification
of the surrogate metrics, the macro placement task remains
challenging due to the vast design space, which can even
significantly surpass that of sophisticated strategy games
such as Go (Mirhoseini et al., 2021).
Existing macro placement methods mainly fall into two
categories: optimization-based methods and reinforcement learning (RL)-based methods (Lai et al., 2023).
Optimization-based methods employ traditional optimization algorithms, such as simulated annealing (SA) (Vashisht
et al., 2020) and evolutionary algorithms (EA) (Shi et al.,
2023) to directly address the large-scale optimization problem, exploring the design space to identify near-optimal
solutions. However, they often necessitate a post-processing

This work was done when Zijie Geng was an intern at Huawei.
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS & MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Noah’s Ark Lab,
Huawei, China 3 Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to: Jie Wang <jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

