Understanding MLP-Mixer as a Wide and Sparse MLP

Tomohiro Hayase 1 Ryo Karakida 2

Abstract

the performance of dense MLP layers (Neyshabur et al.,
2014; d’Ascoli et al., 2019; Neyshabur, 2020; Golubeva
et al., 2021; Pellegrini & Biroli, 2022). For instance, Golubeva et al. (2021) reported that the prediction performance
improves by increasing both the width and the sparsity of
connectivity when the number of trainable parameters is
fixed. The MLP-Mixer is another noteworthy direction of
recent developments in MLP-based architectures (Tolstikhin
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2022). It does not rely on convolutions or self-attention and is entirely composed of MLP
layers; instead, it utilizes MLPs applied across spatial locations or feature channels. This can be regarded as an MLP
that applies fully connected (FC) layers on both sides of
the feature matrix. Despite its simplicity, the MLP-Mixer
achieved a performance on image classification benchmarks
comparable to that of more structured deep neural networks.

Multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is a fundamental
component of deep learning, and recent MLPbased architectures, especially the MLP-Mixer,
have achieved significant empirical success. Nevertheless, our understanding of why and how the
MLP-Mixer outperforms conventional MLPs remains largely unexplored. In this work, we reveal
that sparseness is a key mechanism underlying
the MLP-Mixers. First, the Mixers have an effective expression as a wider MLP with Kroneckerproduct weights, clarifying that the Mixers efficiently embody several sparseness properties explored in deep learning. In the case of linear
layers, the effective expression elucidates an implicit sparse regularization caused by the model
architecture and a hidden relation to Monarch
matrices, which is also known as another form
of sparse parameterization. Next, for general
cases, we empirically demonstrate quantitative
similarities between the Mixer and the unstructured sparse-weight MLPs. Following a guiding
principle proposed by Golubeva, Neyshabur and
Gur-Ari (2021), which fixes the number of connections and increases the width and sparsity, the
Mixers can demonstrate improved performance.

However, there are few studies on experimental and theoretical attempts to understand MLP-Mixer’s internal mechanisms (Yu et al., 2022; Sahiner et al., 2022). This contrasts
with the extensive elucidation of explicit or implicit biases
in other modern architectural components (Neyshabur et al.,
2014; Bjorck et al., 2018; Cordonnier et al., 2019). To further advance the MLP-based architecture, it will be crucial
to unveil the underlying mechanism of the MLP-Mixer and
to address questions such as: What different inductive biases does the MLP-Mixer have compared to a naive MLP?
Which architectural factors significantly contribute to their
superior performance?

1. Introduction

In this study, we reveal that the sparseness, which is seemingly a distinct research concept, is the key mechanism
underlying the MLP-Mixer. One can see that the MLPMixer is a wider MLP with sparsity inherently embedded
as an inductive bias. This equivalence also provides a quantitative understanding that appropriate token and channel
sizes maximizing the sparsity can improve the prediction
performance. The detailed contributions are summarized as
follows:

Multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and its variants are fundamental components of deep learning employed in various problems and for understanding the basic properties of neural networks. Despite their simplicity and long history (Rosenblatt,
1958; Schmidhuber, 2015), it has become apparent only
recently that there is still significant room for improvement
in the predictive performance of MLP-based architectures.
The sparseness is known as a key direction for enhancing
1

Metaverse Lab, Cluster Inc. 2 Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST. Correspondence to: Tomohiro Hayase
<t.hayase@cluster.mu>, Ryo Karakida <karakida.ryo@aist.go.jp>.

• We first identify an effective expression of MLP-Mixer
as an MLP by vectorizing the mixing layers (in Section
3). It is composed of the permutation matrix and the
Kronecker product and provides an interpretation of
mixing layers as an extremely wide MLP with sparse
(structured) weights.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

