An Empirical Study Into What Matters for Calibrating Vision–Language Models

Weijie Tu 1 Weijian Deng 1 Dylan Campbell 1 Stephen Gould 1 Tom Gedeon 1 2 3

Abstract

2023), such as dataset creation (Nguyen et al., 2022), reproducible scaling laws (Cherti et al., 2023), compositional
relationships between objects and attributes (Yuksekgonul
et al., 2022), robust fine-tuning approaches (Goyal et al.,
2023), and visual factor-level robustness (Tu et al., 2023).

Vision–Language Models (VLMs) have emerged
as the dominant approach for zero-shot recognition, adept at handling diverse scenarios and
significant distribution changes. However, their
deployment in risk-sensitive areas requires a deep
understanding of their uncertainty estimation capabilities, a relatively uncharted area. In this
study, we explore the calibration properties of
VLMs across different architectures, datasets, and
training strategies. In particular, we analyze
the uncertainty estimation performance of VLMs
when calibrated in one domain, label set or hierarchy level, and tested in a different one. Our
findings reveal that while VLMs are not inherently
calibrated for uncertainty, temperature scaling significantly and consistently improves calibration,
even across shifts in distribution and changes in
label set. Moreover, VLMs can be calibrated with
a very small set of examples. Through detailed
experimentation, we highlight the potential applications and importance of our insights, aiming
for more reliable and effective use of VLMs in
critical, real-world scenarios.

However, their application in risk-sensitive domains necessitates a more rigorous understanding of their uncertainty
estimation capabilities, an area that remains largely underexplored. Model calibration is concerned with ensuring
that the model’s predicted output probabilities correspond to
its empirical frequency of correctness (i.e., accuracy). For
example, a calibrated model that classifies some images as
“cow” with a 50% probability will have misclassified roughly
half. Galil et al. (2023) and Minderer et al. (2021) report that
CLIP models are better calibrated than other models trained
on ImageNet. Notwithstanding this observation, Tu et al.
(2023) point out that they are not always well-calibrated and
attribute this to the impact of the training data distribution
and quantity. Building on this line of research, we study the
calibration properties of various VLMs, each characterized
by different architectures, datasets, and training strategies.
We investigate which factors affect the calibration of VLMs.
Starting from prior research that demonstrates zero-shot
CLIP can be well-calibrated with simple temperature scaling under distribution shifts (Tu et al., 2023), we extend
this analysis to other CLIP variants and exemplar vision–
language models. We then examine whether such a property
persists when the calibration dataset varies in (1) distribution, (2) label set (e.g., CIFAR-10 vs.. ImageNet), (3) hierarchy level (e.g., “Spider” vs.. “Black widow”), (4) the number
of images, and (5) feature-space distance of calibration set
with respect to the target test set.

1. Introduction
Vision–language models (VLMs), such as CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), have achieved remarkable results for a wide range of tasks, such as zero-shot
image recognition (Wortsman et al., 2022), open-vocabulary
object detection (Zhou et al., 2022b; Gu et al., 2021), image captioning (Yu et al., 2022a; Mokady et al., 2021) and
egocentric perception (Zeng et al., 2022). The burgeoning
field of VLMs has been characterized by rapid exploration
along various dimensions (Nguyen et al., 2022; Fang et al.,
2022; Wortsman et al., 2022; Cherti et al., 2023; Tu et al.,

To this end, we evaluate 35 vision–language models. They
have various image–text pre-training frameworks, such as
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and BLIP (Li et al., 2022). They
also have different visual encoder architectures (e.g., ViT
(Shankar et al., 2021) and ConvNeXt (Liu et al., 2022)) and
training dataset distributions and quantities. We assay the
uncertainty estimation of VLMs on three standard image
classification benchmarks: ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009),
CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and DomainNet (Peng
et al., 2019) and 5 types of distribution shift, including reproduction shift (Recht et al., 2019) and sketch shift (Wang

1

The Australian National University 2 Curtin University
University of Óbuda. Correspondence to: Weijie Tu <weijie.tu@anu.edu.au>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

