DetKDS: Knowledge Distillation Search for Object Detectors

Lujun Li 1 Yufan Bao 1 Peijie Dong 2 Chuanguang Yang 3 Anggeng Li 1 Wenhan Luo 1 Qifeng Liu 1 Wei Xue 1
Yike Guo 1
Teacher Detectors

Abstract
Two- stage

In this paper, we present DetKDS, the first framework that searches for optimal detection distillation policies. Manual design of detection distillers becomes challenging and time-consuming
due to significant disparities in distillation behaviors between detectors with different backbones, paradigms, and label assignments. To
tackle these challenges, we leverage search algorithms to discover optimal distillers for homogeneous and heterogeneous student-teacher
pairs. Firstly, our search space encompasses
global features, foreground-background features,
instance features, logits response, and localization response as inputs. Then, we construct omnidirectional cascaded transformations and obtain
the distiller by selecting the advanced distance
function and common weight value options. Finally, we present a divide-and-conquer evolutionary algorithm to handle the explosion of the search
space. In this strategy, we first evolve the best
distiller formulations of individual knowledge inputs and then optimize the combined weights of
these multiple distillation losses. DetKDS automates the distillation process without requiring
expert design or additional tuning, effectively reducing the teacher-student gap in various scenarios. Based on the analysis of our search results,
we provide valuable guidance that contributes
to detection distillation designs. Comprehensive experiments on different detectors demonstrate that DetKDS outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in detection and instance segmentation
tasks. For instance, DetKDS achieves significant
gains than baseline detectors: +3.7, +4.1, +4.0,

One-stage

Anchor - free
Logits

Global

DetKDS3

PKD
FRS
FGD
DeFeat

• KL
• G -IoU
• Pearson
•…

LD

DetKDS2

Instance

GID

Two - stage

One- stage

Transform OP
• Mask
• Attention
• Local
• Scale
•…

Distance OP

DetKDS1

Fgbg

ViT-backbone

Weight OP
Localization

Anchor -free

0.1,1,5,10..

CNN-backbone

Student Detectors

Figure 1. Illustration of DetKDS. Our DetKDS presents the first
distiller search framework for different teacher-student pairs. Our
search space consists of extensive input knowledge, advanced transformations, distance functions, and loss weights, encompassing
almost excellent detection distillation methods (e.g., FGD (Yang
et al., 2022a), Defeat (Guo et al., 2021), GID (Dai et al., 2021),
LD (Zheng et al., 2022), PKD (Cao et al., 2022)).

+3.7, and +3.5 AP on RetinaNet, Faster-RCNN,
FCOS, RepPoints, and GFL, respectively. Code
at: https://github.com/lliai/DetKDS.

1. Introduction
Object detection plays a crucial role in vision tasks (Girshick et al., 2014; Girshick, 2015; Ren et al., 2015; He
et al., 2017), including autonomous driving, security monitoring, and pedestrian detection (Sun et al., 2021; Cao
et al., 2023b;a). However, the computational complexity
and resource requirements of these detectors present challenges for real-time deployment on devices with limited
capabilities (Cao et al., 2019). To address this, knowledge
distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015) has emerged as a
promising way for enhancing smaller student detectors via
information from larger, more powerful teacher detectors.
This transfer of knowledge allows the student detectors to
achieve comparable performance while being more efficient

1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guang Zhou)
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Qifeng Liu <liuqifeng@ust.hk>, Yike
Guo <yikeguo@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

