SPABA: A Single-Loop and Probabilistic Stochastic Bilevel Algorithm Achieving
Optimal Sample Complexity

Tianshu Chu 1 Dachuan Xu 1 Wei Yao 2 3 Jin Zhang 3 2

Abstract

and game theory (Von Stackelberg, 1952). In recent years,
bilevel optimization has gained popularity in the machine
learning community due to its broad range of applications,
including hyperparameter optimization (Pedregosa, 2016;
Mackay et al., 2019; Lorraine et al., 2020), meta-learning
(Franceschi et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2020), and neural architecture search (Liu et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2019). Refer to
recent survey papers (Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024)
for more applications of bilevel optimization in machine
learning, computer vision and signal processing.

While stochastic bilevel optimization methods
have been extensively studied for addressing largescale nested optimization problems in machine
learning, it remains an open question whether the
optimal complexity bounds for solving bilevel optimization are the same as those in single-level
optimization. Our main result resolves this question: SPABA, an adaptation of the PAGE method
for nonconvex optimization in (Li et al., 2021) to
the bilevel setting, can achieve optimal sample
complexity in both the finite-sum and expectation
settings. We show the optimality of SPABA by
proving that there is no gap in complexity analysis
between stochastic bilevel and single-level optimization when implementing PAGE. Notably, as
indicated by the results of (Dagréou et al., 2022),
there might exist a gap in complexity analysis
when implementing other stochastic gradient estimators, like SGD and SAGA. In addition to
SPABA, we propose several other single-loop
stochastic bilevel algorithms, that either match
or improve the state-of-the-art sample complexity
results, leveraging our convergence rate and complexity analysis. Numerical experiments demonstrate the superior practical performance of the
proposed methods.

Bilevel optimization tackles challenges arising from hierarchical optimization, where decision variables in the upper
level are also involved in the lower level. Typically, the
bilevel optimization problems are formulated as
min H(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x))

(1)

s.t. y ∗ (x) := arg min g(x, y),

(2)

x∈Rdx

y∈Rdy

where the upper-level (UL) objective f (x, y) and the lowerlevel (LL) objective g(x, y) are two smooth real valued
functions defined on Rdx × Rdy . In this work, we focus on
the setting where the LL objective g(x, y) is strongly convex
with respect to (w.r.t.) y for any x, and the UL objective
f (x, y) is possibly nonconvex.
A commonly employed strategy for solving bilevel problems
involves utilizing implicit differentiation, which yields the
following expression for the hypergradient:
∇H(x) = ∇1 f (x, y ∗ (x)) − ∇212 g(x, y ∗ (x))z ∗ (x), (3)

−1
where z ∗ (x) = ∇222 g(x, y ∗ (x))
∇2 f (x, y ∗ (x)). The
practical implementation of the gradient descent method
encounters several challenges, including: the computation
of the exact solution y ∗ (x) at the lower level, and the inversion of the Hessian ∇222 g at the point (x, y ∗ (x)). Utilizing
a warm start strategy in the LL updates, results by (Ji et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2023) demonstrate that deterministic bilevel
algorithms based on approximate implicit differentiation
(AID) can achieve a convergence rate of O(ϵ−1 ). The convergence rate matches that of the gradient descent method
for nonconvex single-level optimization.

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization, where one optimization problem is
nested within the constraints of another, has extensive applications in fields such as transportation (Yang & Bell, 2001)
1

Institute of Operations Research and Information Engineering,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, P.R. China
2
National Center for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Mathematics, Southern University of Science and
Technology, Shenzhen, China . Correspondence to: Jin Zhang
<zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, deterministic approaches necessitate the evaluation of the full gradient at every iteration, demanding sub1

