Algorithm of Thoughts:
Enhancing Exploration of Ideas in Large Language Models

Bilgehan Sel 1 Ahmad Al-Tawaha 1 Vanshaj Khattar 1 Ruoxi Jia 1 Ming Jin 1

Abstract

code generation (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021),
and instruction following (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al.,
2022). While early models relied on direct answer strategies (Brown et al., 2020), contemporary research has shifted
towards linear reasoning paths (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022) by breaking problems into
sub-tasks for solution discovery, or harnesses external mechanisms to alter token generation by changing the context
(Zhou et al., 2022a; Drozdov et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023).

Current literature, aiming to surpass the “Chainof-Thought” approach, often resorts to external
modi operandi involving halting, modifying, and
then resuming the generation process to boost
Large Language Models’ (LLMs) reasoning capacities. Due to their myopic perspective, they
escalate the number of query requests, leading
to increased costs, memory, and computational
overheads. Addressing this, we propose the Algorithm of Thoughts—a novel strategy that propels LLMs through algorithmic reasoning pathways. By employing algorithmic examples fully
in-context, this overarching view of the whole
process exploits the innate recurrence dynamics
of LLMs, expanding their idea exploration with
merely one or a few queries. Our technique outperforms earlier single-query methods and even
more recent multi-query strategies that employ
an extensive tree search algorithms while using
significantly fewer tokens. Intriguingly, our results suggest that instructing an LLM using an
algorithm can lead to performance surpassing that
of the algorithm itself, hinting at LLM’s inherent ability to weave its intuition into optimized
searches. We probe into the underpinnings of our
method’s efficacy and its nuances in application.
The code and related content can be found in:
algorithm-of-thoughts.github.io.

Analogous to human cognition (Sloman, 1996; Kahneman,
2011), early LLM strategies seemed to emulate the instantaneous System 1, characterized by its impulsive decisionmaking. In contrast, more recent methodologies like chainof-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b) and least-to-most
prompting (L2M) (Zhou et al., 2022a; Drozdov et al., 2022)
reflect the analytical nature of System 2. Notably, integrating intermediary reasoning steps has yielded improvements
in arithmetic reasoning tasks (Srivastava et al., 2022; Liang
et al., 2022).
However, as tasks shift towards deeper planning and extensive thought exploration, these methods appear restrictive.
Although CoT integrated with Self-Consistency (CoT-SC)
(Wang et al., 2022) enlists multiple LLM outputs for a consensus, the lack of meticulous evaluation can result in model
misdirection. The “Tree of Thoughts” (Yao et al., 2023;
Long, 2023) emerges as a notable solution. While one LLM
is dedicated to idea generation, another steps in to assess
the merit of these ideas, following a halting-assessmentresuming cycle. This iterative process, based on a tree
search, has shown marked effectiveness, especially in tasks
with a breadth of continuations. We see this progression
as akin to humans employing tools to circumvent working
memory limitations, serving as an external augmentation
for LLMs (Mialon et al., 2023; Sel et al., 2023; Gu et al.,
2024a).

1. Introduction
Recent developments in large language models (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023,
inter alia) have spotlighted their efficacy in general problem solving (Huang & Chang, 2022; Suzgun et al., 2022),

On the flip side, this enhanced LLM approach is not without
pitfalls. A prominent downside is the substantial surge in
the number of queries and computational demands. Each
query to online LLM APIs such as GPT-4—a focal point of
our study—incurs a monetary expense (Chen et al., 2023)
but also contributes to latency, a significant limitation especially critical in real-time applications. Cumulative de-

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. Correspondence to: Bilgehan Sel
<bsel@vt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

