Fast Co-Training under Weak Dependence via Stream-Based Active Learning

Ilias Diakonikolas * 1 Mingchen Ma * 1 Lisheng Ren * 1 Christos Tzamos * 1 2

Abstract

Even in the most basic binary classification setting, learning a hypothesis with 0-1 error ϵ requires at least Ω(1/ϵ)
labeled examples. In a number of modern machine learning
applications, the scale of the problem is usually very large,
which makes it very costly to obtain enough labeled data
to fulfill the training requirements. The bottleneck caused
by the scarcity of labeled data is especially pronounced in
applications such as webpage classification, spam detection, or training large language models, where examples
need to be labeled by human experts. As a result, several
models and techniques have been developed to learn with
fewer labeled examples. These include label propagation
(Yarowsky, 1995), transductive learning (Joachims et al.,
1999), and active learning (Dasgupta, 2005). Here we focus
on co-training (Blum & Mitchell, 1998), one of the classical
methods in the area of semi-supervised learning.

Co-training is a classical semi-supervised learning
method which only requires a small number of
labeled examples for learning, under reasonable
assumptions. Despite extensive literature on the
topic, very few hypothesis classes are known to
be provably efficiently learnable via co-training,
even under very strong distributional assumptions.
In this work, we study the co-training problem
in the stream-based active learning model. We
show that a range of natural concept classes are
efficiently learnable via co-training, in terms of
both label efficiency and computational efficiency.
We provide an efficient reduction of co-training
under the standard assumption of weak dependence, in the stream-based active model, to online
classification. As a corollary, we obtain efficient
co-training algorithms with error independent label complexity for every concept class class efficiently learnable in the mistake bound online
model. Our framework also gives co-training algorithms with label complexity Õ(d log(1/ϵ)) for
any concept class with VC dimension d, though
in general this reduction is not computationally efficient. Finally, using additional ideas from online
learning, we design the first efficient co-training
algorithms with label complexity Õ(d2 log(1/ϵ))
for several concept classes, including unions of
intervals and homogeneous halfspaces.

Co-training is a method used when every single example x
can be partitioned into two views x1 , x2 , such that each view
can solely determine the label of x. The high-level idea of
co-training is that instead of trying to learn a single hypothesis h using labeled examples, one tries to find two hypotheses h1 and h2 in each view that maximize their agreement
with each other over a large pool of unlabeled examples,
and are also consistent with a small pool of labeled examples. The framework of co-training has attracted substantial
interest in both theory and application; see, e.g., (Dasgupta
et al., 2001; Abney, 2002; Kumar & Daumé, 2011; Balcan &
Blum, 2010; Liu et al., 2014; Park & Zhang, 2003; Collins
& Singer, 1999; Song et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021).
The power of co-training in classification problems, according to (Abney, 2002; Balcan & Blum, 2010; Blum &
Mansour, 2017), is that under suitable assumptions any pair
of hypotheses (h1 , h2 ) that has large agreement and a balanced prediction over a pool of unlabeled examples must
be close to either the target concept or its negation. Given
this observation, O(log(1/δ)) random labeled examples suffice to break the symmetry with probability 1 − δ. That is,
information-theoretically the label complexity of co-training
does not depend on the accuracy parameter ϵ.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning — the task of learning using a large
pool of random labeled examples — is a standard machine
learning paradigm that has reached substantial maturity.
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA 2 University of
Athens and Archimedes AI, Athens, Greece. Correspondence
to: Mingchen Ma <mingchen@cs.wisc.edu>, Lisheng Ren
<lren29@wisc.edu>.

Despite its low label-complexity, known co-training approaches typically suffer from the perspective of computational efficiency. Specifically, even under very strong distributional assumptions, very few concept classes are known

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

