On Hypothesis Transfer Learning of Functional Linear Models

Haotian Lin 1 Matthew Reimherr 1

Abstract

distribution. However, this may not hold for functional data
under some applications due to collection expenses or other
constraints. Transfer learning (TL)(Torrey & Shavlik, 2010)
leverages additional information from some similar (source)
tasks to enhance the learning procedure on the original (target) task and is an appealing mechanism when there is a
lack of training samples. The goal of this paper is to develop
TL algorithms for functional linear regression (FLR), one of
the most prevalent models in the FDA. The FLR concerned
in this paper is Scalar-on-Function regression, which takes
the form:
Z
Y = α + ⟨β, X⟩L2 + ϵ = α +
X(s)β(s) ds + ϵ,

We study the transfer learning (TL) for the functional linear regression (FLR) under the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) framework,
observing the TL techniques in existing highdimensional linear regression is not compatible
with the truncation-based FLR methods as functional data are intrinsically infinite-dimensional
and generated by smooth underlying processes.
We measure the similarity across tasks using
RKHS distance, allowing the type of information
being transferred to be tied to the properties of
the imposed RKHS. Building on the hypothesis
offset transfer learning paradigm, two algorithms
are proposed: one conducts the transfer when positive sources are known, while the other leverages
aggregation techniques to achieve robust transfer
without prior information about the sources. We
establish asymptotic lower bounds for this learning problem and show the proposed algorithms
enjoy a matching upper bound. These analyses
provide statistical insights into factors that contribute to the dynamics of the transfer. We also
extend the results to functional generalized linear
models. The effectiveness of the proposed algorithms is demonstrated via extensive synthetic
data as well as real-world data applications.

T

where Y is a scalar response, X : T → R and β : T → R
are the square-integrable functional predictor and coefficient
function respectively over a compact domain T ⊂ R, and ϵ
is a random noise with zero mean.
A classical approach to estimating β is to reduce the problem
to classical multivariate linear regression by expanding the
X and β under the same finite basis, like deterministic basis
functions, e.g. Fourier basis, or the eigenbasis of the covariance function of X (Cardot et al., 1999; Yao et al., 2005;
Hall & Hosseini-Nasab, 2006; Hall & Horowitz, 2007),
which we refer to truncation-based FLR methods in this
paper. Conceptually, the offset transfer learning techniques
developed in the existing multivariate/high-dimensional linear regression framework (Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013;
2017; Li et al., 2022; Bastani, 2021) can be applied to
truncation-based FLR methods to conduct transfer learning in FLR, though they lack a theoretical foundation in this
context due to the truncation error inherent in a basis expansion of β. In particular, a key property distinguishing functional data from multivariate data is that they are inherently
infinite-dimensional and generated through smooth underlying processes. Omitting this fact, using finite-dimensional
approximations to β, and leveraging existing multivariate
OTL techniques on the finite coefficients lose the benefit
that data are generated from smooth processes and are less
interpretable for the transfer process; see detailed discussion
in Section 2. Observing these limitations we develop the
first TL algorithms for FLR with statistical convergence rate
guarantees under the supervised learning setting.

1. Introduction
Advances in technologies enable us to collect and process
densely observed data over some temporal or spatial domains, which are coined functional data (Ramsay et al.,
2005; Kokoszka & Reimherr, 2017). While functional data
analysis (FDA) has been proven useful in various fields
like finance, genetics and, etc., and has been researched
widely in the statistical community, its effectiveness relies
on having sufficient training samples drawn from the same
1

Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Haotian Lin
<hzl435@psu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We summarize our main contributions as follows.
1

