High-Probability Convergence for Composite and Distributed Stochastic
Minimization and Variational Inequalities with Heavy-Tailed Noise

Eduard Gorbunov 1 Abdurakhmon Sadiev 2 Marina Danilova 3 Samuel Horváth 1 Gauthier Gidel 4 5
Pavel Dvurechensky 6 Alexander Gasnikov 7 8 3 9 Peter Richtárik 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Many recent works on stochastic optimization have the ultimate goal of bridging the theory and practice in machine
learning. This is mostly reflected in the attempts at the
theoretical analysis of optimization methods under weaker
assumptions than the standard ones. Moreover, some phenomena cannot be explained using classical in-expectation
convergence analysis (see the motivating example from
(Gorbunov et al., 2020a)) that results in the growing interest
in more accurate ways to the analysis of stochastic methods,
for example, high-probability convergence analysis.

High-probability analysis of stochastic first-order
optimization methods under mild assumptions
on the noise has been gaining a lot of attention
in recent years. Typically, gradient clipping is
one of the key algorithmic ingredients to derive
good high-probability guarantees when the noise
is heavy-tailed. However, if implemented naı̈vely,
clipping can spoil the convergence of the popular methods for composite and distributed optimization (Prox-SGD/Parallel SGD) even in the
absence of any noise. Due to this reason, many
works on high-probability analysis consider only
unconstrained non-distributed problems, and the
existing results for composite/distributed problems do not include some important special cases
(like strongly convex problems) and are not optimal. To address this issue, we propose new
stochastic methods for composite and distributed
optimization based on the clipping of stochastic gradient differences and prove tight highprobability convergence results (including nearly
optimal ones) for the new methods. In addition,
we also develop new methods for composite and
distributed variational inequalities and analyze the
high-probability convergence of these methods.

However, despite the significant attention to this topic
(Nazin et al., 2019; Davis et al., 2021; Gorbunov et al.,
2020a; 2022a; Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021; Sadiev et al., 2023;
Nguyen et al., 2023b; Liu & Zhou, 2023; Liu et al., 2023),
several important directions remain unexplored. In particular, all mentioned works either consider unconstrained
problems or consider general composite/constrained minimization/variational inequality problems but have some
noticeable limitations, such as bounded domain assumption,
extra logarithmic factors in the complexity bounds, not optimal (not accelerated) convergence rates, or no analysis
of (quasi-) strongly convex (monotone) case. The importance of composite/constrained formulations for the machine learning community can be justified in many ways.
For example, composite optimization and distributed optimization have a lot of similarities, i.e., one can view a
distributed optimization problem as a special composite
optimization problem (Parikh & Boyd, 2014). Due to the
large sizes of modern machine learning models and datasets,
many important problems can be solved in a reasonable
time only via distributed methods. Moreover, some problems have a distributed nature, e.g., data determining the
problem can be (privately) stored on multiple devices connected with a central server, which is a classical setup for
Federated Learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; Kairouz et al.,
2021). Next, composite formulations are very useful for handling different regularizations popular in machine learning
and statistics (Zou & Hastie, 2005; Shalev-Shwartz & BenDavid, 2014; Beck, 2017). Finally, variational inequalities
are usually considered with constraints as well.

1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence,
UAE 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
KSA 3 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
4
Université de Montréal and Mila, Canada 5 Canada CIFAR AI
Chair 6 Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics,
Germany 7 University Innopolis, Russia 8 Ivannikov Institute for
System Programming RAS, Russia 9 Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, Russia. Correspondence to: Eduard Gorbunov
<eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

