What is the Long-Run Distribution of Stochastic Gradient Descent?
A Large Deviations Analysis

Waïss Azizian 1 Franck Iutzeler 2 Jérôme Malick 1 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 3

Abstract

architectures – from large language models to reinforcement learning and recommender systems. This phenomenal
success is largely owed to the method’s simplicity: given a
smooth function 𝑓 : ℝ𝑑 → ℝ and the associated optimization problem
min 𝑥 ∈ℝ𝑑 𝑓 (𝑥)
(Opt)

In this paper, we examine the long-run distribution
of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in general,
non-convex problems. Specifically, we seek to
understand which regions of the problem’s state
space are more likely to be visited by SGD, and
by how much. Using an approach based on the
theory of large deviations and randomly perturbed
dynamical systems, we show that the long-run distribution of SGD resembles the Boltzmann–Gibbs
distribution of equilibrium thermodynamics with
temperature equal to the method’s step-size and
energy levels determined by the problem’s objective and the statistics of the noise. In particular,
we show that, in the long run, (a) the problem’s
critical region is visited exponentially more often
than any non-critical region; (b) the iterates of
SGD are exponentially concentrated around the
problem’s minimum energy state (which does not
always coincide with the global minimum of the
objective); (c) all other connected components of
critical points are visited with frequency that is exponentially proportional to their energy level; and,
finally (d) any component of local maximizers or
saddle points is “dominated” by a component of
local minimizers which is visited exponentially
more often.

1

the SGD algorithm is given by the simple update rule
𝑥 𝑛+1 = 𝑥 𝑛 − 𝜂 𝑔ˆ𝑛

(SGD)

where 𝜂 > 0 is the method’s step-size, and 𝑔ˆ𝑛 , 𝑛 = 0, 1, . . .
is a stochastic gradient of 𝑓 at 𝑥 𝑛 .
By virtue of its wide applicability, (SGD) and its variants
have been studied extensively in the literature, for both
convex and non-convex objectives. In the non-convex case
(which is the most relevant setting for machine learning), the
basic, no-frills
P guarantees of (SGD) √boil down to bounds of
the form 𝔼 𝑛𝑘=0 ∥∇ 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑘 ) ∥ 2 = O( 𝑛) provided that 𝜂 has
been chosen accordingly [34]. This guarantee suggests that
the sequence 𝑥 𝑛 eventually spends all but a vanishing fraction of time near regions where ∇ 𝑓 is small, but it does not
answer where (SGD) ultimately settles down. In particular,
the following crucial question remains open:
Which critical points of 𝑓 (or components thereof ) are more
likely to be observed in the long run – and by how much?
This question is notoriously difficult because the loss landscape of 𝑓 can be exceedingly complicated – especially in
deep learning problems with hundreds of millions (or even
billions) of parameters. Starting with the negative, 𝑓 may
contain a number of spurious saddle points that is exponentially larger than the number of local minima, and the function values associated with worst-case saddle points may be
considerably worse than those associated with worst-case
local minima [8]. On the flip side, a more positive answer is
provided by the literature on the avoidance of saddle-points
where, under different assumptions for the method’s stepsize and the structure of 𝑓 , it has been shown that the time
spent by 𝑥 𝑛 in the vicinity of strict saddle points is (vanishingly) small; for a representative – but, by necessity, incomplete – list of results, cf. [2, 3, 19, 24, 25, 29, 36, 48, 53, 64]
and references therein.

Introduction

Even though stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been
around for more than 70 years [56], it is still the method of
choice for training a wide array of modern machine learning
1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France 2 Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse,
Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, 31062 Toulouse, France
3 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG,
38000 Grenoble, France. Correspondence to: Waïss Azizian
<waiss.azizian@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

