Provably Efficient Reinforcement Learning for Adversarial Restless
Multi-Armed Bandits with Unknown Transitions and Bandit Feedback
Guojun Xiong 1 Jian Li 1

Abstract

at most B out of N arms can be activated at any decision
epoch, ranging from wireless scheduling (Sheng et al., 2014;
Cohen et al., 2014; Xiong et al., 2022b), resource allocation
(Glazebrook et al., 2011; Larrañaga et al., 2014; Xiong et al.,
2023; 2022d), to healthcare (Killian et al., 2021). Each arm
is described by a Markov decision process (MDP) (Puterman, 1994), and evolves stochastically according to two
different transition kernels, depending on whether the arm is
activated or not. Rewards are generated with each transition.
The goal of the decision maker (DM) is to maximize the total
expected reward over a finite-horizon (Xiong et al., 2022a)
or an infinite-horizon (Wang et al., 2020; Avrachenkov &
Borkar, 2022; Xiong et al., 2022c; Xiong & Li, 2023; Wang
et al., 2024) under the instantaneous activation constraint.

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) play a central role in modeling sequential decision making
problems under an instantaneous activation constraint that at most B arms can be activated at
any decision epoch. Each restless arm is endowed
with a state that evolves independently according
to a Markov decision process regardless of being
activated or not. In this paper, we consider the task
of learning in episodic RMAB with unknown transition functions and adversarial rewards, which
can change arbitrarily across episodes. Further,
we consider a challenging but natural bandit feedback setting that only adversarial rewards of activated arms are revealed to the decision maker
(DM). The goal of the DM is to maximize its total
adversarial rewards during the learning process
while the instantaneous activation constraint must
be satisfied in each decision epoch. We develop a
novel reinforcement learning algorithm with two
key contributors: a novel biased adversarial reward estimator to deal with bandit feedback and
unknown transitions, and a low-complexity index
policy to satisfy the instantaneous
activation con√
straint. We show Õ(H T ) regret bound for our
algorithm, where T is the number of episodes
and H is the episode length. To our best knowl√
edge, this is the first algorithm to ensure Õ( T )
regret for adversarial RMAB in our considered
challenging settings.

The majority of the literature on RMAB consider a stochastic environment, where both the rewards and dynamics of
the environments are assumed to be stationary over time.
However, in real-world applications such as online advertising and revenue management, rewards1 are not necessarily
stationary but can change arbitrarily between episodes (Lee
& Lee, 2023). To this end, we study the problem of learning
a finite-horizon adversarial RMAB (ARMAB) with unknown
transitions over T episodes. In each episode, all arms start
from a fixed initial state, and the DM repeats the followings for a fixed number of H decision epochs: determine
whether or not to activate each arm while the instantaneous
activation constraint must be satisfied, receive adversarial
rewards from each arm, which transits to the next state according to some unknown transition functions. Specifically,
we consider a challenging but natural bandit feedback setting, where the adversarial rewards in each decision epoch
are only revealed to the DM when the state-action pairs are
visited. The goal of the DM is to minimize its regret, which
is the difference between its total adversarial rewards and
the total rewards received by an optimal fixed policy.

1. Introduction
Restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) (Whittle, 1988) has
been widely used to study sequential decision making problems with an “instantaneous activation constraint” that

To achieve this goal, we develop an episodic reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm named UCMD-ARMAB. First, to
handle unknown transitions of each arm, we construct confi-

1

Stony Brook University.
Correspondence to: Guojun Xiong <guojun.xiong@stonybrook.edu>, Jian Li
<jian.li.3@stonybrook.edu>.

1
Although most existing literature on adversarial learning use
the term “loss” instead of “reward”, we choose to use the latter, or
more specifically “adversarial reward” in this paper to be consistent
with RMAB literature. One can translate between rewards and
losses by taking negation.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

