Generative Conditional Distributions by Neural (Entropic) Optimal Transport

Bao Nguyen 1 2 Binh Nguyen 3 Hieu Trung Nguyen 1 4 Viet Anh Nguyen 1

Abstract

distribution also leads to an estimate of the treatment effect
without explicit, additional experiments.

Learning conditional distributions is challenging
because the desired outcome is not a single distribution but multiple distributions that correspond
to multiple instances of the covariates. We introduce a novel neural entropic optimal transport method designed to effectively learn generative models of conditional distributions, particularly in scenarios characterized by limited
sample sizes. Our method relies on the minimax training of two neural networks: a generative network parametrizing the inverse cumulative distribution functions of the conditional
distributions and another network parametrizing
the conditional Kantorovich potential. To prevent overfitting, we regularize the objective function by penalizing the Lipschitz constant of the
network output. Our experiments on real-world
datasets show the effectiveness of our algorithm
compared to state-of-the-art conditional distribution learning techniques. Our implementation can be found at https://github.com/
nguyenngocbaocmt02/GENTLE.

Unfortunately, learning the relationship between the response and the covariate is challenging, especially in highdimensional covariate space or complex dependency settings. Many simple and interpretable methods, such as kernel density estimation, may struggle to capture the complexity of the data-generating conditional distribution accurately (Athey et al., 2021). On the other hand, there are
overly complex (deep neural network) models that perform
well on the training data but generalize poorly to new data;
this overfitting behavior triggers unreliable predictions and
interpretations. Additionally, performing inferences on
these overly complex models can be time-consuming and
environmentally unfriendly. Alternatively, using additional
expert inputs, one can build physically informed simulation models to represent the real physical world. However,
running simulations can be time-consuming, making them
ill-suited for real-time decision-making.
Another critical obstacle underlying conditional distribution learning is that we are not simply learning one distribution; instead, we need to learn a collection of distributions, one conditional distribution for each possible value
of the covariate information. This challenge intensifies because, in reality, the data is scarce. This scarcity is particularly prevalent in healthcare, where privacy concerns or
budget constraints prohibit the collection and dissemination of samples. As an illustrative example, we will consider the Lalonde-Dehjia-Wahba (LDW) (LaLonde, 1986;
Dehejia & Wahba, 1999) dataset, which is a widely used
dataset for analyzing the average treatment effects (Athey
et al., 2021). The LDW dataset comprises 16,177 samples
aggregated from actual experiments and the Current Population Survey. Each observed sample includes nine covariate attributes of a person and a scalar response reporting the
individual’s earnings in 1978. Since two persons may have
the exact attributes, it happens that for a specific covariate
value, there are multiple observations of the response. The
histogram in Figure 1 shows the count numbers per distinct covariates for the LDW dataset. We observe that more
than 13,000 covariates have only one response. This is an
extreme case where we must learn the conditional distribution with a single data point observed at that covariate.
On the other hand, we also observe several popular covari-

1. Introduction
The conditional distribution of a response variable given
the covariate information is a key quantity for numerous
tasks in machine learning and data science. For example,
knowing the conditional distribution of a patient’s health
outcome (the response) given the patient’s characteristics
(the covariate) improves risk assessment and prediction
accuracy and allows personalized interventions wherein
healthcare providers can tailor treatments based on individual patient profiles. It is also a useful tool to evaluate the
effects of a policy in economics (Díaz, 2020; Athey & Imbens, 2015). Access to a response’s conditional probability
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 VinUniversity
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore 4 VinAI Research.
Correspondence to: Bao Nguyen
<bao.nn2@vinuni.edu.vn>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

