KernelSHAP-IQ: Weighted Least Square Optimization for Shapley Interactions

Fabian Fumagalli 1 Maximilian Muschalik 2 3 Patrick Kolpaczki 4 Eyke Hüllermeier 2 3 Barbara Hammer 1
Network Plot (predicted output: 0.99, positive)

Abstract

life

The Shapley value (SV) is a prevalent approach of
allocating credit to machine learning (ML) entities
to understand black box ML models. Enriching
such interpretations with higher-order interactions
is inevitable for complex systems, where the Shapley Interaction Index (SII) is a direct axiomatic
extension of the SV. While it is well-known that
the SV yields an optimal approximation of any
game via a weighted least square (WLS) objective, an extension of this result to SII has been
a long-standing open problem, which even led
to the proposal of an alternative index. In this
work, we characterize higher-order SII as a solution to a WLS problem, which constructs an
optimal approximation via SII and k-Shapley values (k-SII). We prove this representation for the
SV and pairwise SII and give empirically validated conjectures for higher orders. As a result,
we propose KernelSHAP-IQ, a direct extension
of KernelSHAP for SII, and demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance for feature interactions.

i

have

start

my

never

in

forgot

I have never forgot this
movie. All these years
and it has remained in
my life.

remained

this

movie

has

it

all

and

these
years

Figure 1. Positive (red) and negative (blue) feature attributions
(vertices) and interactions (edges) for a movie review excerpt
provided to a sentiment analysis language model. The interaction
of “never” and “forget” highly contributes to the positive sentiment.

1. Introduction

et al., 2020; Wright et al., 2016). As illustrated with Figures 1 and 2, in complex domains like language modeling
(Murdoch et al., 2018), image classification (Tsang et al.,
2018), or bioinformatics (Winham et al., 2012; Wright et al.,
2016), enriching contributions of individuals with interactions among entities is required.

The Shapley value (SV) (Shapley, 1953) is a commonly
used theoretical framework from cooperative game theory to
allocate credit among entities in machine learning (ML) settings. Prevalent ML applications of the SV include feature
attribution (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) for local interpretability, feature importance (Covert & Lee, 2021) for global
interpretability, or data valuation to quantify the worth of
data points (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019). However, in many
application domains, the SV accounting solely for individual entities such as features or data points does not suffice
(Kumar et al., 2020; 2021; Slack et al., 2020; Sundararajan

The SV’s allocation scheme can be generalized to Shapley
interactions and quantify the synergy of groups of entities.
The Shapley Interaction Index (SII) (Grabisch & Roubens,
1999) is a natural axiomatic extension of the SV to any-order
interactions, which yields an exact additive decomposition
of any cooperative game (Grabisch et al., 2000). However,
this decomposition includes an exponential number of components and is not suited for interpretability. As a remedy,
fixing a maximum interaction order k, k-Shapley values
(k-SII) (Bordt & von Luxburg, 2023) aggregate SII up to
order k uniquely and yield an interpretable and efficient
k-additive interaction index. This aggregation fairly distributes the joint payout, e.g. the model’s prediction, to all
individuals and groups of entities up to order k.

1

Bielefeld University, CITEC, D-33619 Bielefeld, Germany
LMU Munich, D-80539 Munich, Germany 3 MCML, Munich
4
Paderborn University, D-33098, Paderborn, Germany. Correspondence to: Fabian Fumagalli <ffumagalli@techfak.unibielefeld.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

