Position: Topological Deep Learning is the New Frontier for Relational Learning

Theodore Papamarkou 1 Tolga Birdal 2 Michael Bronstein 3 Gunnar Carlsson 4 5 Justin Curry 6 Yue Gao 7
Mustafa Hajij 8 Roland Kwitt 9 Pietro Liò 10 Paolo Di Lorenzo 11 Vasileios Maroulas 12 Nina Miolane 13
Farzana Nasrin 14 Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy 15 Bastian Rieck 16 17 Simone Scardapane 11
Michael T. Schaub 18 Petar Veličković 19 10 Bei Wang 20 Yusu Wang 21 Guo-Wei Wei 22 Ghada Zamzmi 23

1. Introduction

Abstract
Topological deep learning (TDL) is a rapidly
evolving field that uses topological features to understand and design deep learning models. This
paper posits that TDL is the new frontier for relational learning. TDL may complement graph representation learning and geometric deep learning
by incorporating topological concepts, and can
thus provide a natural choice for various machine
learning settings. To this end, this paper discusses
open problems in TDL, ranging from practical
benefits to theoretical foundations. For each problem, it outlines potential solutions and future research opportunities. At the same time, this paper
serves as an invitation to the scientific community
to actively participate in TDL research to unlock
the potential of this emerging field.

Traditional machine learning often assumes that the observed data of interest are supported on a linear vector space
and can be described by a set of feature vectors. However,
there is growing awareness that, in many cases, this viewpoint is insufficient to describe several data within the real
world. For example, molecules may be described more appropriately by graphs than feature vectors. Other examples
include three-dimensional objects represented by meshes,
as encountered in computer graphics and geometry processing, or data supported on top of a complex social network
of interrelated actors. Hence, there has been an increased
interest in importing concepts from geometry and topology
into the usual machine learning pipelines to gain further
insights into such types of data in a systematic way.
One of the most prominent examples of this research direction is geometric deep learning (GDL); see (Bronstein
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020; Nguyen &
Wei, 2019). GDL aims to generalize neural networks to
non-Euclidean domains, including manifolds and graphs.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) form a central pillar within
GDL (Wu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020).

1
Department of Mathematics, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. 2 Department of Computing, Imperial College
London, London, UK. 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 4 Department of Mathematics,
Stanford University, Stanford, USA. 5 BlueLightAI Inc, USA.
6
University at Albany, New York, USA. 7 School of Software,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. 8 University of San Francisco,
San Francisco, USA. 9 Department of Artificial Intelligence and Human Interfaces, University of Salzburg, Austria. 10 Department of
Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 11 Department of Information Engineering, Electronics
and Telecommunications, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy. 12 Department of Mathematics, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, USA. 13 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UC Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, USA. 14 Department
of Mathematics, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, Hawai‘i, USA.
15
IBM Corporation New York, USA. 16 Helmholtz Munich, Munich
Germany. 17 Technical University of Munich, Munich Germany.
18
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. 19 Google DeepMind. 20 School of Computing, University of Utah, Utah, USA.
21
Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of
California San Diego, San Diego, USA. 22 Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
23
University of South Florida, Florida, USA. Correspondence to:
Theodore Papamarkou <theo.papamarkou@manchester.ac.uk>.

Topology is concerned with the study of properties that remain invariant under continuous deformations, and affords
a powerful lens through which the global structure of data
can be discerned. By characterizing topological features
(including connected components, loops, and voids across
multiple scales), topological tools such as persistent homology (Carlsson, 2009; Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010) have
become powerful methods to capture essential structures
and patterns that elude conventional methods. The ability to
quantify the topological signatures of data can enhance the
robustness of traditional machine learning models, enabling
them to discern a greater variety of meaningful structures
in diverse and complex datasets. This use of topological
ideas, which often runs under the umbrella of topological
data analysis (TDA), is by now a well-established field of
research. For example, persistent homology has led to victories in the D3R Grand Challenges, a worldwide annual
competition series in computer-aided drug design (Nguyen

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

