Learning Latent Space Hierarchical EBM Diffusion Models

Jiali Cui 1 Tian Han 1

Abstract

crucial to various downstream applications (Havtorn et al.,
2021; Nijkamp et al., 2020b). However, such multi-layer
generator models typically assume the Gaussian prior model,
which can be limited in statistical expressivity by primarily
focusing on the inter-layer relation between layers of latent
variables while largely ignoring the intra-layer relation between latent units within each layer (Cui et al., 2023a;b).
This may result in the prior hole problem (Rosca et al., 2018;
Hoffman & Johnson, 2016; Takahashi et al., 2019; Bauer &
Mnih, 2019) where the non-expressive Gaussian prior fails
to match the aggregated generator posterior.

This work studies the learning problem of the
energy-based prior model and the multi-layer generator model. The multi-layer generator model,
which contains multiple layers of latent variables
organized in a top-down hierarchical structure,
typically assumes the Gaussian prior model. Such
a prior model can be limited in modelling expressivity, which results in a gap between the generator posterior and the prior model, known as the
prior hole problem. Recent works have explored
learning the energy-based (EBM) prior model as a
second-stage, complementary model to bridge the
gap. However, the EBM defined on a multi-layer
latent space can be highly multi-modal, which
makes sampling from such marginal EBM prior
challenging in practice, resulting in ineffectively
learned EBM. To tackle the challenge, we propose
to leverage the diffusion probabilistic scheme to
mitigate the burden of EBM sampling and thus
facilitate EBM learning. Our extensive experiments demonstrate a superior performance of our
diffusion-learned EBM prior on various challenging tasks.

Recent studies (Aneja et al., 2021; Cui et al., 2023a) have
investigated the utilization of the energy-based (EBM) prior
model as a complementary model to address this limitation.
The EBM prior is typically trained with a fixed generator
model (referred to as the Two-Stage learning scheme) to tilt
the non-expressive Gaussian prior to match the generator
posterior. However, learning a single (marginal) EBM is
challenging because the generator posterior is often multimodal, and more importantly, the Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) sampling required to maximize the marginal
EBM likelihood can be difficult, as multiple layers of latent
variables are interwoven and require exploration at different latent scales. In addition, MCMC sampling, such as
Langevin dynamics, usually starts from a noise-initialized
point, which is hard to explore the energy landscape and
mix between different local modes. Therefore, for multilayer latent variables, EBM prior sampling may serve as the
bottleneck for effective EBM learning, which still poses a
challenge.

1. Introduction
The hierarchical generative model with multiple layers of
latent variables (a.k.a., multi-layer generator model) has
made significant progress in learning complex data distribution (Sø nderby et al., 2016; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) and
has garnered particular interest for its top-down hierarchical
structure, where multiple layers of latent variables that are
organized from the top to the bottom layers tend to capture
levels of (hierarchical) data representations, with high-level
semantic representations captured by the latent variables at
the top layers and low-level detail representations by those at
the bottom layers (Maaløe et al., 2019; Child, 2020). Learning such hierarchical representation can be essential and

Inspired by recent diffusion probabilistic frameworks (Ho
et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2023; Du et al.,
2023), we propose learning the EBM prior of multi-layer
latent variables in a diffusion learning scheme. We construct
a series of conditional EBMs prior to gradually matching
the highly multi-modal generator posterior, with each conditional EBM prior only matching perturbed samples at
each step. Compared to marginal EBM prior, such a conditional EBM prior can be less multi-modal, leading to
more tractable conditional likelihood learning. For EBM
sampling, the proposed conditional EBM prior can render
a smoother energy landscape, which mitigates the burden
of MCMC sampling and thus further facilitates effective
EBM learning. However, for multi-layer latent variables,

1
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Tian Han <than6@stevens.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

