A New Computationally Efficient Algorithm to solve Feature Selection for
Functional Data Classification in High-dimensional Spaces

Tobia Boschi 1 Francesca Bonin 1 Rodrigo Ordonez-Hurtado 1 Alessandra Pascale 1 Jonathan Epperlein 1

Abstract

an active domain within statistics and Machine Learning
(ML) that allows working with multivariate longitudinal
measurements by estimating smooth curves from multiple
observations over a continuous domain. This functional
representation facilitates the comparison of different statistical units and variables throughout the entire temporal
domain. FDA has demonstrated its effectiveness in many
recent applications where the emergence of novel technologies, such as brain sensors, DNA sequencers, and wearable
devices, has facilitated the measurement of a large number
of longitudinal variables (Shcherbina et al., 2017; Cremona
et al., 2019; Smuck et al., 2021). In these modern domain
specific applications of FDA, two criticality emerge: 1) high
dimensionality, the number of features may significantly
exceed the number of statistical units (Ovsyannikova et al.,
2020; Paul et al., 2014), 2) data scarcity (Brigato & Iocchi,
2021). The first issue may lead ML and Deep Learning
(DL) models to overfit, the second may lead current feature
selection models to sub-optimal efficiency.
Hence, there is a growing demand for new algorithms able
to i) effectively reduce problem dimensionality and feature
complexity, ii) deal with data scarcity (Zhu et al., 2023),
and iii) preserve computational efficiency (Brigato & Iocchi,
2021).

This paper introduces a novel methodology for
Feature Selection for Functional Classification,
FSFC, that addresses the challenge of jointly performing feature selection and classification of
functional data in scenarios with categorical responses and multivariate longitudinal features.
FSFC tackles a newly defined optimization problem that integrates logistic loss and functional
features to identify the most crucial variables for
classification. To address the minimization procedure, we employ functional principal components and develop a new adaptive version of the
Dual Augmented Lagrangian algorithm. The computational efficiency of FSFC enables handling
high-dimensional scenarios where the number of
features may considerably exceed the number of
statistical units. Simulation experiments demonstrate that FSFC outperforms other machine learning and deep learning methods in computational
time and classification accuracy. Furthermore, the
FSFC feature selection capability can be leveraged to significantly reduce the problem’s dimensionality and enhance the performances of other
classification algorithms. The efficacy of FSFC
is also demonstrated through a real data application, analyzing relationships between four chronic
diseases and other health and demographic factors. FSFC source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/IBM/funGCN.

To address these challenges in instances characterized by
multivariate longitudinal variables and binary categorical
responses, we introduce a new feature selection methodology called Feature Selection for Functional Classification
(FSFC). The key innovative aspects of our work are the
following:
• FSFC has a unique capability to concurrently solve fea-

ture selection and classification for multivariate longitudinal data across multiple statistical units.
• FSFC effectively reduces problem dimensionality by identifying the most relevant variables that allow two classes
to be distinguished. This capability makes it particularly
suitable for high-dimensional scenarios where the number
of features exceeds the number of statistical units.
• We demonstrate the efficacy of FSFC both as a standalone
tool and as a pre-processing step to enhance other ML
and DL methods.

1. Introduction
Many contemporary scientific domains that require the integration and interpretation of time-dependent variables have
recently benefited from Functional Data Analysis (FDA)
(Ramsay & Silverman, 2005; Horváth & Kokoszka, 2012),
1
IBM Research Europe, Dublin. Correspondence to: Tobia
Boschi <tobia.boschi@ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To achieve these objectives, we develop a new optimization
1

