Learning Causal Relations from Subsampled Time Series with Two Time-Slices

Anpeng Wu 1 Haoxuan Li 2 Kun Kuang 1 Keli Zhang 3 Fei Wu 1 4 5

Abstract

1980; Lütkepohl, 2005; Hyvärinen et al., 2010; Runge et al.,
2019; Bussmann et al., 2021; Löwe et al., 2022; Assaad
et al., 2022). Most existing methods can well-identify causal
structures from time series data by modeling these structures
at the system’s timescale, under the assumption of causal
sufficiency. However, in practice, these methods may face
challenges when measurements are sparse and sampled at a
coarser timescale than the causal timescale of the system, as
shown in Figure 1(a,b), there would be numerous missing
time-slices1 between two consecutive measurements (Gong
et al., 2015; Plis et al., 2015b; Hyttinen et al., 2016; Peters
et al., 2017). In such data, it has been demonstrated that full
graph discovery is unidentifiable without prior knowledge
of the subsampling rate and structural functions (Gong et al.,
2015; Plis et al., 2015b; Hyttinen et al., 2016).

This paper studies the causal relations from subsampled time series, in which measurements are
sparse and sampled at a coarser timescale than
the causal timescale of the underlying system.
In such data, because there are numerous missing time-slices (i.e., cross-sections at each time
point) between two consecutive measurements,
conventional causal discovery methods designed
for standard time series data would produce significant errors. To learn causal relations from
subsampled time series, a typical solution is to
conduct different interventions and then make a
comparison. However, full interventions are often expensive, unethical, or even infeasible, particularly in fields such as health and social science. In this paper, we first explore how readily
available two-time-slices data can replace intervention data to improve causal ordering, and propose a novel Descendant Hierarchical Topology
algorithm with Conditional Independence Test
(DHT-CIT) to learn causal relations from subsampled time series using only two time-slices.
Specifically, we develop a conditional independence criterion that can be applied iteratively to
test each node from time series and identify all of
its descendant nodes. Empirical results on both
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our DHT-CIT algorithm.

Recently, many works have been developed to study the
causal ordering of the summary causal graph (Definition
3.1), also known as topological ordering, as depicted in
Figure 1(c.II), in which a node in the ordering can only be
a parent to nodes that appear after it in the same ordering
(Dahlhaus & Eichler, 2003; Teyssier & Koller, 2005; Peters et al., 2014; Loh & Bühlmann, 2014; Park & Klabjan,
2017). To construct precise causal orderings for learning
DAGs of summary causal graph2 , a typical solution is to conduct intervention experiments on each node and then make
a comparison to identify which variables have been influenced by the intervention. As marked in red in Figure 1(b),
intervening on X2t−3 would change the distribution of its
descendants (X3t−3 , X4t−3 ), enabling quick identification of
them. Subsequently, we can construct a causal ordering in
which each node is connected to its descendant nodes. The
acyclicity constraint is automatically maintained because
the causal ordering only represents ancestral and descendant
relationships. However, while intervention experiments can
significantly aid in accurately identifying the causal ordering, full interventions are often costly, ethically problematic,
or even unfeasible (Wang et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Learning causal relations from time series data is a fundamental problem in many fields of science (Granger, 1969;
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China 2 Center for Data Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei,
Shenzhen, China 4 Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang
University, Shanghai, China 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>,
Fei Wu <wufei@zju.edu.cn>.

Besides, while existing ordering-based methods could be
well-generalized to the subsampled time series setting, these
methods typically generate non-unique topological ordering with numerous spurious edges. For example, SCORE
1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2

1

We refer to cross-sections at each time point as one time-slice.
In discussing the summary graph’s DAG, we omit self-loops.

