Provable Contrastive Continual Learning

Yichen Wen * 1 2 Zhiquan Tan * 3 Kaipeng Zheng 1 Chuanlong Xie 2 Weiran Huang † 1 4

Abstract

on old tasks (McClelland et al., 1995), which is known as
catastrophic forgetting.

Continual learning requires learning incremental
tasks with dynamic data distributions. So far, it
has been observed that employing a combination
of contrastive loss and distillation loss for training
in continual learning yields strong performance.
To the best of our knowledge, however, this contrastive continual learning framework lacks convincing theoretical explanations. In this work,
we fill this gap by establishing theoretical performance guarantees, which reveal how the performance of the model is bounded by training
losses of previous tasks in the contrastive continual learning framework. Our theoretical explanations further support the idea that pre-training can
benefit continual learning. Inspired by our theoretical analysis of these guarantees, we propose
a novel contrastive continual learning algorithm
called CILA, which uses adaptive distillation coefficients for different tasks. These distillation coefficients are easily computed by the ratio between
average distillation losses and average contrastive
losses from previous tasks. Our method shows
great improvement on standard benchmarks and
achieves new state-of-the-art performance.

To address the challenge, the literature on continual learning has proposed various approaches. Representation-based
approaches take advantage of representations. As one of
these approaches, self-supervised learning with contrastive
loss has demonstrated notable efficacy in obtaining robust
representations against catastrophic forgetting in continual
learning (Gallardo et al., 2021; Fini et al., 2022). For these
methods based on contrastive loss, the training of representations is often decoupled with the training of the classifier,
unlike methods based on cross-entropy. Specifically, contrastively trained representations suffer less catastrophic forgetting than ones trained by cross-entropy loss (Cha et al.,
2021). Replay-based approaches use buffers to restore a
part of previous data, and train networks using data from a
combination of the current task and the buffer (Lopez-Paz
& Ranzato, 2017). Naturally, these methods are combined
with knowledge distillation strategies to prevent the degradation of information in the network over time (Rebuffi et al.,
2017). Regularization-based approaches introduce regularization terms to the target loss for continual learning to reach
a balance between learning new tasks and preserving information from old tasks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Two main
sub-directions within regularization-based approaches include weight regularization (Ritter et al., 2018) and function
regularization (Li & Hoiem, 2016).

1. Introduction

To achieve effective continual learning, a natural idea is to
combine the three approaches above, and this idea leads to
a new framework called contrastive continual learning (Cha
et al., 2021), as illustrated in Figure 1. This framework focuses on using contrastively learned representations to learn
new tasks and utilizing knowledge distillation to preserve
information from past tasks, with the help of memory buffer
and function regularization. The target loss of this framework contains a contrastive loss and a distillation loss with a
distillation coefficient λ. The training data will be selected
from the combination of the current data and buffered data.
Empirically, this framework has been observed to be efficient, showing promising performance in continual learning
(Cha et al., 2021). Despite the growing attention directed
towards this framework, limited theoretical works have been
proposed to explain its superior performance.

Incrementally learning a sequence of tasks with dynamic
data distributions is a typical setting for continual learning.
We call the learned neural networks “continual learners”.
The main challenge for continual learners is to obtain a
suitable trade-off between learning plasticity and memory
stability. Specifically, excessive focus on learning plasticity
of new tasks often leads to greatly reduced performance
*
Equal contribution 1 MIFA Lab, Qing Yuan Research Institute,
SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Beijing Normal University 3 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory. † Correspondence to: Weiran Huang
<weiran.huang@outlook.com>. This work was conducted during
the period when the first two authors were visiting MIFA Lab.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

