Symmetric Replay Training: Enhancing Sample Efficiency
in Deep Reinforcement Learning for Combinatorial Optimization

Hyeonah Kim 1 Minsu Kim 1 Sungsoo Ahn 2 Jinkyoo Park 1 3

Abstract

Even though solving CO problems with expensive objective functions is frequently found in various fields like drug
discovery or hardware design, it has numerous challenges.

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has significantly advanced the field of combinatorial optimization (CO). However, its practicality is hindered by the necessity for a large number of
reward evaluations, especially in scenarios involving computationally intensive function assessments. To enhance the sample efficiency, we propose a simple but effective method, called symmetric replay training (SRT), which can be easily integrated into various DRL methods. Our
method leverages high-reward samples to encourage exploration of the under-explored symmetric
regions without additional online interactions –
free. Through replay training, the policy is trained
to maximize the likelihood of the symmetric trajectories of discovered high-rewarded samples.
Experimental results demonstrate the consistent
improvement of our method in sample efficiency
across diverse DRL methods applied to real-world
tasks, such as molecular optimization and hardware design.

Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) have
drawn significant attention as an alternative way to solving
CO problems. Various studies have demonstrated remarkable achievements across broad domains, including routing
(Kool et al., 2018; Kwon et al., 2020; Son et al., 2023),
scheduling (Park et al., 2023; Kwon et al., 2021), and material design (Olivecrona et al., 2017; Ahn et al., 2020a;
Bengio et al., 2023). Especially in constructive methods,
where a solution is sequentially built from an empty set, it is
beneficial to guarantee feasibility to practical constraints using a masking strategy. Note that in the constructive method,
a policy generates a trajectory, and the reward is evaluated
in a terminal state, i.e., episodic rewards.
DRL methods generally leverage extensive samples to enhance training stability, assuming reward evaluation is affordable. However, in practice, reward computation can be
costly due to several factors: (1) objective functions often
cannot be defined analytically, requiring computationally
intensive simulations for evaluation, such as in black-box
optimization; or (2) objective functions may be analytically
defined but still demand additional computation, such as
solving another optimization problem (e.g., bi-level optimization). For instance, in molecular optimization, evaluating designed molecules in real-world scenarios involves
costly assessments, such as wet lab experiments (Gao et al.,
2022). In this regard, reducing the number of reward evaluations is significantly beneficial. This discrepancy raises a
straightforward research question: How can we enhance the
sample efficiency of DRL methods for a broad spectrum of
CO problems and methods?

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems arise across diverse industrial domains, but they are notoriously challenging to solve. In CO (e.g., traveling salesman problems;
TSP), the massive discrete solution space often leads to
NP-hardness. Furthermore, CO problems in practical scenarios often involve computationally expensive objective
functions to evaluate (e.g., a black-box function), introducing significant restrictions on the problem-solving process.

This paper proposes a simple yet effective add-on method,
symmetric replay training (SRT), which is a generic method
that leverages the solution-symmetric nature of combinatorial space. In DRL for CO, multiple action sequences (i.e.,
action trajectories) can be mapped to a single combinatorial
solution, and the reward is defined on the terminal state (i.e.,
solution). Previous studies have tried to consider the symmetries in CO, but they utilize numerous samples (Kwon et al.,
2020; Kim et al., 2022b) or assume the specific method (Yao

1

Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, South Korea 2 Pohang University of Science and
Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea 3 OMELET,
Daejeon, South Korea. Correspondence to: Hyeonah Kim
<hyeonah kim@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

