Revisiting Context Aggregation for Image Matting

Qinglin Liu 1 Xiaoqian Lv 1 Quanling Meng 1 Zonglin Li 1 Xiangyuan Lan 2 Shuo Yang 3
Shengping Zhang 1 2 Liqiang Nie 4

Abstract
Traditional studies emphasize the significance of
context information in improving matting performance. Consequently, deep learning-based
matting methods delve into designing pooling
or affinity-based context aggregation modules to
achieve superior results. However, these modules cannot well handle the context scale shift
caused by the difference in image size during
training and inference, resulting in matting performance degradation. In this paper, we revisit
the context aggregation mechanisms of matting
networks and find that a basic encoder-decoder
network without any context aggregation modules can actually learn more universal context aggregation, thereby achieving higher matting performance compared to existing methods. Building on this insight, we present AEMatter, a matting network that is straightforward yet very effective. AEMatter adopts a Hybrid-Transformer
backbone with appearance-enhanced axis-wise
learning (AEAL) blocks to build a basic network
with strong context aggregation learning capability. Furthermore, AEMatter leverages a large
image training strategy to assist the network in
learning context aggregation from data. Extensive experiments on five popular matting datasets
demonstrate that the proposed AEMatter outperforms state-of-the-art matting methods by a large
margin. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/aipixel/AEMatter.

Image and Trimap

Encoder

Context Features

Decoder

Alpha Matte

(a) Basic Encoder-Decoder Matting Network

Context Features

Average Pooling

Pooling-Aggregated Features

(b) Pooling-based Context Aggregation Module

Context Features

Masked Correlation

Affinity Matrix Affinity-Aggregated Features

(c) Affinity-based Context Aggregation Module
Figure 1. Illustration of a basic matting network and context aggregation modules. (a) The basic matting network uses an encoder to
extract context features from inputs, and a decoder to predict alpha
mattes. Our AEMatter also follows this scheme. (b) Pooling-based
context aggregation module uses pooling operations to aggregate
contexts from surrounding regions. (c) Affinity-based context aggregation module uses affinity operations to aggregate contexts
from globally related regions.

1. Introduction
Natural image matting is a classic problem that involves estimating the alpha matte of the foreground in a given image.
This technology has numerous real-world applications, such
as image editing (Chen et al., 2009; 2018) and film postproduction (Gong et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2021). Formally,
a given image I can be represented as a combination of a
foreground F and background B as

1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
of Technology, Weihai, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 Department of Computer Science, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 4 School of Computer Science
and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Shengping Zhang <s.zhang@hit.edu.cn>.

Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi

(1)

where αi is the alpha matte at pixel i. Therefore, matting
involves the challenge of regressing alpha matte α based on
image I. This process not only necessitates distinguishing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

