Characterizing Truthfulness in Large Language Model Generations
with Local Intrinsic Dimension
Fan Yin 1 Jayanth Srinivasa 2 Kai-Wei Chang 1

Abstract
We study how to characterize and predict the
truthfulness of texts generated from large language models (LLMs), which serves as a crucial step in building trust between humans and
LLMs. Although several approaches based on
entropy or verbalized uncertainty have been proposed to calibrate model predictions, these methods are often intractable, sensitive to hyperparameters, and less reliable when applied in generative tasks with LLMs. In this paper, we suggest investigating internal activations and quantifying LLM’s truthfulness using the local intrinsic dimension (LID) of model activations.
Through experiments on four question answering (QA) datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Additionally, we
study intrinsic dimensions in LLMs and their relations with model layers, autoregressive language
modeling, and the training of LLMs, revealing
that intrinsic dimensions can be a powerful approach to understanding LLMs. Code is available
at: https://github.com/fanyin3639/
LID-HallucinationDetection.

Figure 1. Detecting hallucinations with LIDs. LLM representations of correct answers have smaller intrinsic dimensions.

Hence, characterizing and eliciting the truthfulness of model
outputs is a crucial step towards constructing more reliable
LLMs and building user trust in models (Bommasani et al.,
2021; Kadavath et al., 2022; Zou et al., 2023).
Despite its importance, little is known about which information within models most accurately characterizes their
truthfulness. A mainstream of work approaches this through
logit-level entropy-based uncertainty (Gal & Ghahramani,
2016; Malinin & Gales, 2020; Kuhn et al., 2022; Duan
et al., 2023) or verbalized uncertainty (Kadavath et al.,
2022; Zhou et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023). However, computing uncertainty is limited to classification tasks and becomes intractable for generative tasks due to infinite output
space. Moreover, extracting truthfulness only at the output
layer inevitably loses substantial information, leading to
sub-optimal performance.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in various generative natural language
processing (NLP) tasks, including QA, summarization, and
dialogue (Touvron et al., 2023a; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
OpenAI, 2023). However, deploying LLMs to more highstakes scenarios remains limited due to their tendency to
provide plausible but untruthful answers, even when they
are uncertain, also known as hallucinations (Ji et al., 2023).

Other approaches train linear probes to discover truthfulness directions in model internal representations (Azaria
& Mitchell, 2023; Li et al., 2023; Burns et al., 2022; Zou
et al., 2023; Marks & Tegmark, 2023). However, these
truthful directions do not always exist and can vary significantly due to tasks, the layers being used, and the styles of
prompts. Therefore, determining whether a direction would
be beneficial for the task at hand can be cumbersome.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, LA, U.S.A. 2 Cisco Research, U.S.A. Correspondence to: Fan Yin <fanyin20@cs.ucla.edu>, Kai-Wei Chang
<kwchang@cs.ucla.edu>.

In this paper, we delve into the internal representations,
which have been shown to preserve more information and
geometric characteristics. Instead of seeking truthful directions for each task, we leverage a more principled and

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

