Private Vector Mean Estimation in the Shuffle Model:
Optimal Rates Require Many Messages

Hilal Asi 1 Vitaly Feldman 1 Jelani Nelson 2 Huy L. Nguyen 3 Kunal Talwar 1 Samson Zhou 4

Abstract

of sequences of words in smartphone data for predictive
text suggestions, shopping records for financial transactions
or recommendation systems, various medical statistics for
patients from different healthcare institutions, or gradient
updates to be used to train a machine learning model. Thus,
vector mean estimation and vector aggregation are used in
a number of applications, such as deep learning through
federated learning (Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015; Abadi et al.,
2016; McMahan et al., 2017), frequent itemset mining (Sun
et al., 2014), linear regression (Nguyên et al., 2016), and
stochastic optimization (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Cheu et al.,
2022).

We study the problem of private vector mean estimation in the shuffle model of privacy where n
users each have a unit vector v (i) ∈ Rd . We propose a new multi-message protocol that achieves

the optimal error using Õ min(nε2 , d) messages per user. Moreover, we show that any (unbiased) protocol that achieves optimal error requires each user to send Ω(min(nε2 , d)/ log(n))
messages, demonstrating the optimality of our
message complexity up to logarithmic factors.
Additionally, we study the single-message setting and design a protocol that achieves mean
squared error O(dnd/(d+2) ε−4/(d+2) ). Moreover,
we show that any single-message protocol must
incur mean squared error Ω(dnd/(d+2) ), showing
that our protocol is optimal in the standard setting
where ε = Θ(1). Finally, we study robustness to
malicious users and show that malicious users can
incur large additive error with a single shuffler.

Due to the sensitive nature of many of these data types,
recent efforts have concentrated on facilitating federated
analytics while preserving privacy. Differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) has emerged as a widely adopted
rigorous mathematical definition that quantifies the amount
of privacy leaked by a mechanism for any given individual
user. In particular, local differential privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011) demands that the distribution
of the transcript of the communication protocol cannot be
greatly affected by a change in a single distributed user’s
input. This approach enables the distributed collection of
insightful statistics about a population, while protecting the
private information of individual data subjects even with an
untrusted curator who analyzes the collected statistics.

1. Introduction
Vector mean estimation is a fundamental problem in federated learning, where a large number of distributed users
can provide information to collaboratively train a machine
learning model. Formally, there are n users that each have a
real-valued vector v (i) ∈ Rd . In the vector mean estimation
problem,
Pnthe goal is to compute the average of the vectors
v = n1 i=1 v (i) , whereas in the closely related vector aggregation problem,
Pn the goal is to compute the sum of the
vectors nv = i=1 v (i) . As the privacy error scales with
the norms of the vectors, we normalize and thus assume
that ∥v (i) ∥2 ≤ 1. The vectors could represent frequencies

Unfortunately, in order to ensure privacy, the local model
often requires a high amount of noise that results in poor
accuracy of the resulting mechanisms. For example, in the
simple case where v (i) ∈ {0, 1}, i.e., binary summation,
there exist private mechanisms with O (1) additive error in
the central setting where the data curator is trusted
√ (Dwork
et al., 2016), but the additive error must be Ω( n) in the
local model (Beimel et al., 2008; Chan et al., 2012). Consequently, the Encode, Shuffle, Analyze (ESA) model was
proposed as an alternative distributed setting that could potentially result in a lower error (Bittau et al., 2017). The
shuffle model of privacy is a special case of the ESA framework introduced by (Cheu et al., 2019), where a trusted shuffler receives and permutes a set of encoded messages from
the distributed users, before passing them to an untrusted
data curator. (Cheu et al., 2019) and (Erlingsson et al., 2019)

1
Apple 2 UC Berkeley 3 Northeastern 4 Texas A&M University.
Correspondence to: Hilal Asi <hilal.asi94@gmail.com>,
Vitaly Feldman <vitaly.edu@gmail.com>, Jelani Nelson <minilek@berkeley.edu>, Huy L. Nguyen <huylenguyen@gmail.com>, Kunal Talwar <kunal@kunaltalwar.org>,
Samson Zhou <samsonzhou@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

