Neural Image Compression with Text-guided Encoding
for both Pixel-level and Perceptual Fidelity

Hagyeong Lee * 1 Minkyu Kim * 1 Jun-Hyuk Kim 2 Seungeon Kim 2 Dokwan Oh 2 Jaeho Lee 1

Abstract
Recent advances in text-guided image compression have shown great potential to enhance the
perceptual quality of reconstructed images. These
methods, however, tend to have significantly degraded pixel-wise fidelity, limiting their practicality. To fill this gap, we develop a new text-guided
image compression algorithm that achieves both
high perceptual and pixel-wise fidelity. In particular, we propose a compression framework that
leverages text information mainly by text-adaptive
encoding and training with joint image-text loss.
By doing so, we avoid decoding based on textguided generative models—known for high generative diversity—and effectively utilize the semantic information of text at a global level. Experimental results on various datasets show that
our method can achieve high pixel-level and perceptual quality, with either human- or machinegenerated captions. In particular, our method outperforms all baselines in terms of LPIPS, with
some room for even more improvements when
we use more carefully generated captions.
Project Page:
taco-nic.github.io
Code:
github.com/effl-lab/TACO

Figure 1. Pixel-wise fidelity vs. perceptual fidelity, at 0.40 bpp.
We compare pixel-wise and perceptual fidelity of image compression codecs on MS-COCO 30k. The proposed TACO achieves
competitive results in both metrics. The reported figures for Qin
2023 has been measured on MS-COCO 40k, and some figures have
been interpolated from nearest bpp models (: PSNR-focused, ■:
perception-focused, ▲: text-guided, ×: handcrafted).

modern text-guided generative models to synthesize realistic images from the given text prompt (Rombach et al.,
2022). The conventional way to leverage these models is via
text-guided decoding (or textual transform coding; Weissman (2023)): We use text-guided generative model as our
decoder, and the encoding is done by finding a good textual code. The code may consist of a text prompt plus any
additional latent prompt vectors, that can generate the reconstruction that looks close to the original image. As the
text can be represented with a very small number of bits, we
expect such an approach to be very bit-efficient (Shannon,
1951; Bhown et al., 2018; Weissman, 2023).

1. Introduction
How can text improve machine vision? This question has
been asked repeatedly in various domains of visual computing, giving birth to a number of vision-language models
with tremendous multi-modal reasoning and generative capabilities (Radford et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023a).
The value of text has gained much attention in image compression as well, motivated by the astonishing ability of
*
Equal contribution 1 POSTECH 2 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Jaeho Lee
<jaeho.lee@postech.ac.kr>.

Following this intuition, recent works have developed textguided neural image compression codecs that can reconstruct images with high perceptual quality, i.e., either highly
realistic (e.g., low FID) or perceptually similar to the original image (e.g., low LPIPS). One line of work shows that
using pretrained text-guided generative models as decoders

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

