Improving Equivariant Graph Neural Networks on Large Geometric Graphs
via Virtual Nodes Learning

Yuelin Zhang * 1 2 Jiacheng Cen * 1 2 Jiaqi Han * 3 Zhiqiang Zhang 4 Jun Zhou 4 Wenbing Huang 1 2

Abstract
Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
made remarkable success in a variety of scientific applications. However, existing equivariant
GNNs encounter the efficiency issue for large geometric graphs and perform poorly if the input is
reduced to sparse and local graph for speed acceleration. In this paper, we propose FastEGNN,
an enhanced model of equivariant GNNs on large
geometric graphs. The central idea is leveraging
a small ordered set of virtual nodes to approximate the large unordered graph of real nodes. In
particular, we distinguish the message passing
and aggregation for different virtual nodes to encourage mutual distinctiveness, and minimize the
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) between
virtual and real coordinates to realize the global
distributedness. FastEGNN meets all necessary
E(3) symmetries, with certain universal expressivity assurance as well. Our experiments on N body systems (100 nodes), Proteins (800 nodes)
and Water-3D (8000 nodes), demonstrate that
FastEGNN achieves a promising balance between
accuracy and efficiency, and outperforms EGNN
in accuracy even after dropping all edges in real
systems like Proteins and Water-3D. Code is available at https://github.com/dhcpack/FastEGNN.

Figure 1. Our FastEGNN is able to learn distinctive virtual nodes
(denoted in green) that reflect different dynamical patterns of the
protein.

associate each node with specific types of geometric vectors,
such as 3D atom coordinates in molecules, or 3D states
(positions, velocities or spins) of each particle in general
physical systems. Geometric graphs prominently display
symmetries involving translations, rotations, and/or reflections, which arise from the uniformity of the physical laws
governing atom (or particle) dynamics, regardless of absolute position and orientation. When addressing such data,
it’s crucial to integrate the aforementioned symmetries into
the model design, giving rise to the research of equivariant
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Han et al., 2022c; Duval et al., 2023). In recent years, equivariant GNNs have
made remarkable success in scientific applications, including physical dynamics simulation (Wu et al., 2024; Xu et al.,
2024), protein generation (Watson et al., 2023; Ingraham
et al., 2023), and many others.

1. Introduction
Various scientific data, including chemical molecules, proteins, and other particle-based physical systems, often take
the form of geometric graphs (Bronstein et al., 2021). Upon
the typical graph representation, geometric graphs further

Despite fruitful progress, existing equivariant GNNs will encounter the efficiency issue for large geometric graphs which
exist widely in physical dynamics simulation. For instance,
the message exchange in EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021), one
of the most prevailing models, leads to quadratic complexity
regarding the number of nodes for fully-connected graphs,
which is unacceptable in practical scenarios, such as fluid
dynamics simulation, where the number of particles are
usually more than tens of thousands. One natural way to
improve the efficiency is to decrease the edge number by,

*

Equal contribution 1 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 2 Beijing Key Laboratory of
Big Data Management and Analysis Methods 3 Stanford University 4 Ant Group. Correspondence to: Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

