Rethinking Transformers in Solving POMDPs

Chenhao Lu 1 Ruizhe Shi 1 * Yuyao Liu 1 * Kaizhe Hu 1 Simon S. Du 2 Huazhe Xu 1 3 4

Abstract

1997), yielding a hidden state containing past information,
then processing it using existing RL algorithms.

Sequential decision-making algorithms such as
reinforcement learning (RL) in real-world scenarios inevitably face environments with partial
observability. This paper scrutinizes the effectiveness of a popular architecture, namely Transformers, in Partially Observable Markov Decision
Processes (POMDPs) and reveals its theoretical
and empirical limitations. We establish that regular languages, which Transformers struggle to
model, are reducible to POMDPs. This poses a
significant challenge for Transformers in learning POMDP-specific inductive biases, due to their
lack of inherent recurrence found in other models
like RNNs. This paper casts doubt on the prevalent belief in Transformers as sequence models
for RL and proposes to introduce a point-wise
recurrent structure. The Deep Linear Recurrent
Unit (LRU) emerges as a well-suited alternative
for Partially Observable RL, with empirical results highlighting the sub-optimal performance of
Transformer and considerable strength of LRU.
Our code is open-sourced1 .

Regarding the sequence model, Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017), renowned for its achievements in the natural language
processing (NLP) domain (Radford et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023), stands out as a prominent candidate. Transformers have shown a strong ability to handle
contexts in a non-recurrent manner. Compared with their
recurrent counterpart like RNNs, the advantages of Transformers as a sequence model shine in several aspects: 1)
long-term memory capacity, as opposed to RNNs with rapid
memory decay (Ni et al., 2023; Parisotto et al., 2019); 2)
effective representation learning from context for specific
tasks (Micheli et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2022; Robine et al., 2023), benefiting meta-RL or certain
environments (Bellemare et al., 2013); 3) stronger learning
ability on large-scale datasets (Baker et al., 2022).
However, deploying Transformers in Partially Observable
RL introduces challenges, commonly manifesting as sample
inefficiency (Parisotto et al., 2019; Ni et al., 2023). This
issue is similarly observed in computer vision (CV) and
is attributed to the data amount that Transformers require
to learn the problem-specific inductive biases (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021). While it is validated in CV, it remains unknown
whether data amount is the key ingredient in decision making. Hence, a natural question arises: Can Transformers
effectively solve decision-making problems in POMDPs with
sufficient data?

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) in the real world confronts the
challenge of incomplete information (Dulac-Arnold et al.,
2019) due to partial observability, necessitating decisionmaking based on historical data. The design of RL algorithms under partial observability, denoted as Partially Observable RL (Kaelbling et al., 1998; Littman & Sutton,
2001; Li et al., 2015), typically employs a hierarchical structure combining (SEQ, RL). This structure involves firstly
feeding the history into a sequence model SEQ, such as
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) (Elman, 1990) or Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,

In this work, we investigate this critical question and challenge the conventional wisdom. We argue that Transformers
cannot solve POMDP even with massive data. This stance is
inspired by a key observation: While most RNNs are complete for regular languages, Transformers falter to model
them (Delétang et al., 2023; Hahn, 2020b) . A notable example is their struggle with tasks like PARITY, which is
to determine the parity of the occurrence of “1” in a binary
string. We hypothesize that, in POMDPs, this limitation
becomes pronounced due to the close relationship between
regular languages and POMDPs.

*

Equal contribution 1 IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 University of
Washington 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 4 Shanghai AI Lab. Correspondence to: Chenhao Lu <luch21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Huazhe Xu <huazhe xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To elaborate further, regular languages exhibit a direct correspondence with Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) (Carrasco
& Oncina, 1994), and POMDPs can be regarded as HMMs
augmented with an incorporated decision-making process.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
https://github.com/CTP314/TFPORL

1

