Assessing Large Language Models on Climate Information

Jannis Bulian * 1 Mike S. Schäfer * 2 Afra Amini * 1 3 Heidi Lam * 4 Massimiliano Ciaramita * 1 Ben Gaiarin * 1
Michelle Chen Hübscher * 1 Christian Buck * 1 Niels G. Mede * 2 Markus Leippold * 1 5 Nadine Strauß * 2

Abstract

complexity, and inherent uncertainties (Moser, 2016). The
digital media landscape, characterized by soaring amounts
of AI-generated content (Thompson et al., 2024), limited attention spans and adversarial dynamics, further compounds
these challenges (Pearce et al., 2019).

As Large Language Models (LLMs) rise in popularity, it is necessary to assess their capability
in critically relevant domains. We present a comprehensive evaluation framework, grounded in
science communication research, to assess LLM
responses to questions about climate change. Our
framework emphasizes both presentational and
epistemological adequacy, offering a fine-grained
analysis of LLM generations spanning 8 dimensions and 30 issues. Our evaluation task is a
real-world example of a growing number of challenging problems where AI can complement and
lift human performance. We introduce a novel
protocol for scalable oversight that relies on AI
Assistance and raters with relevant education. We
evaluate several recent LLMs on a set of diverse
climate questions. Our results point to a significant gap between surface and epistemological
qualities of LLMs in the realm of climate communication.

While AI’s promise in addressing global climate challenges
is evident through its applications in climate modeling, energy optimization, and disaster management (Rolnick et al.,
2022), its intersection with Natural Language Processing
(NLP) is still under-explored. Given recent advancements
in LLMs (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Gemini Team, 2023) there is hope that generative AI will also help addressing climate information challenges. However, using LLMs to address science-related
information raises factuality concerns (Weidinger et al.,
2021). Eloquence and advanced dialogue behaviors are
trusted by users, even in the absence of trustworthy information (Chiesurin et al., 2023). This makes evaluating LLMs
difficult. Research on evaluating systems that may achieve
or exceed human abilities, or scalable oversight (Amodei
et al., 2016) is so far mostly theoretical (Irving et al., 2018;
Leike et al., 2018; Christiano et al., 2018), with some recent
more practical advances (Michael et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

We introduce a framework based on Science Communication research (Jamieson et al., 2017), to begin evaluating
LLMs’ responses within the climate change context in a
principled way.1 The evaluation relies on raters with relevant educational background. We assess presentational
properties such as style, clarity, linguistic correctness, and
tone. More importantly, we also assess epistemological
issues: accuracy, specificity, completeness, and uncertainty.
To test the relevance of the evaluation, we run an empirical study on a diverse set of 300 climate change-related
questions involving some of the most recent and prominent
LLMs.

As concerns around climate change intensify (Poushter et al.,
2022; WHO, 2021), more and more people turn to digital
media as their primary source of information (Newman et al.,
2021). However, in spite of ubiquitous access to information,
there remains a considerable gap in climate literacy, exacerbated by the spread of mis- and disinformation (Leiserowitz
et al., 2022). The challenge of conveying climate data arises
also from the nature of scientific communication: science,
as an evolving domain, is laden with specialized knowledge,
*

Authors in random order. 1 Google DeepMind 2 IKMZ - Dept.
of Communication and Media Research, University of Zurich,
Switzerland 3 ETH AI Center, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland 4 Google
5
Dept. of Finance, University of Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Jannis Bulian <jbulian@google.com>, Mike S.
Schäfer <m.schaefer@ikmz.uzh.ch>, Massimiliano Ciaramita
<massi@google.com>.

Our main findings are as follows:
• To increase the recall of detected issues and improve
rating quality, it is crucial to introduce scalable oversight protocols that use grounded AI Assistance (cf.
Figure 1). However, while AI assistance demonstrably

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
To aid reproducibility, we provide the exact evaluation protocols and all prompts used to generate data.

1

