HAMLET: Graph Transformer Neural Operator for Partial Differential Equations

Andrey Bryutkin * 1 Jiahao Huang * 2 Zhongying Deng 3 Guang Yang 2 Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb 3
Angelica Aviles-Rivero 3

Abstract

to learn the solution to a PDE directly from the data, without the need for discretisation or meshing. Deep learning
for PDEs is largely changing many fields of science and
engineering, from fluid dynamics and electromagnetics to
finance and healthcare (Liu & Wang, 2019; Kissas et al.,
2020; Sahli Costabal et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020; Raissi
et al., 2019b).

We present a novel graph transformer framework,
HAMLET, designed to address the challenges in
solving partial differential equations (PDEs) using neural networks. The framework uses graph
transformers with modular input encoders to directly incorporate differential equation information into the solution process. This modularity
enhances parameter correspondence control, making HAMLET adaptable to PDEs of arbitrary geometries and varied input formats. Notably, HAMLET
scales effectively with increasing data complexity
and noise, showcasing its robustness. HAMLET is
not just tailored to a single type of physical simulation, but can be applied across various domains.
Moreover, it boosts model resilience and performance, especially in scenarios with limited data.
We demonstrate, through extensive experiments,
that our framework is capable of outperforming
current techniques for PDEs.

Although PINNs and their variants have shown success in
solving PDEs, they still have limitations. These include
limited generalisability across multiple PDE instances, a
lack of discretisation invariance, and an inability to generalise beyond a specific resolution/geometry observed during
training (Wang et al., 2021a; Fuks & Tchelepi, 2020). A
body of researchers has investigated alternatives to mitigate
such limitations, where principles driven by neural operators
are considered. These neural operators directly approximate
the differential operator that underlies the PDE and have
yielded promising outcomes in recent years, especially for
multi-instance learning. However, significant research has
yet to be conducted in this area.
Contributions. We present a novel framework called grapH
trAnsforMer neuraL opEraTor – HAMLET, which aims to
address the challenges in solving PDEs using neural networks. HAMLET stands out as the first framework of its kind,
which employs graph transformers with modular input encoders. Choosing a graph neural network as a foundational
architecture enables the capture of complex interactions
and dynamics more effectively than standard transformers
due to its ability to model intricate spatial relationships and
nonlinear interactions efficiently. This capability is especially crucial in handling rapid changes and high-frequency
information at initial time steps, as demonstrated by our
experimental results. HAMLET has adaptability to irregular
meshes, allowing it to solve discretisation-invariant PDEs.
Furthermore, HAMLET showcases exceptional performance
even when faced with limited data, it is meticulously designed to address the current challenges in the field, underscoring a significant advancement over existing approaches.
Notably, we emphasise:

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionised all domains, including the
solution of partial differential equations (PDEs). Traditional
numerical methods for solving PDEs can be computationally expensive, especially for high-dimensional problems or
those with complex geometries. In recent years, a number
of approaches have been developed to leverage the power of
deep neural networks for PDEs, including Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) e.g. (Raissi et al., 2019a; Karniadakis et al., 2021) and Neural Operators e.g. (Li et al.,
2022b; Lu et al., 2021). These methods use neural networks
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, MIT, USA
Bioengineering Department and Imperial-X, National Heart and
Lung Institute & Cardiovascular Research Centre, Imperial College London, UK. 3 Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Andrey Bryutkin <bryutkin@mit.edu>, Jiahao Huang
<j.huang21@imperial.ac.uk>.
2

We introduce the first graph transformer architecture
(HAMLET) for PDEs, in which we highlight:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

– Our HAMLET framework can effectively handle PDEs
1

