Learning to Stabilize Online Reinforcement Learning in Unbounded State Spaces

Brahma S. Pavse 1 Matthew Zurek 1 Yudong Chen 1 Qiaomin Xie 1 Josiah P. Hanna 1

Abstract

can be completed in some amount of time. However, there
are many real-world sequential decision-making problems
in which we want the learning agent to operate optimally
over an indefinite period of time. For example, in traffic
intersection management, we want a policy that reaches
and stays at the desired state of minimum waiting time
of cars over an indefinite period of time. Such problems
are also common in control of stochastic queue networks
and industrial process control (Srikant & Ying, 2014; Neely,
2010). While it is important that the agent is optimal in these
problems, it is simultaneously important that the learning
agent is stable, meaning that its decisions keep the system
in an acceptable region of the state space near the desired
state (Meyn, 2022).

In many reinforcement learning (RL) applications,
we want policies that reach desired states and then
keep the controlled system within an acceptable
region around the desired states over an indefinite
period of time. This latter objective is called stability and is especially important when the state
space is unbounded, such that the states can be
arbitrarily far from each other and the agent can
drift far away from the desired states. For example, in stochastic queuing networks, where queues
of waiting jobs can grow without bound, the desired state is all-zero queue lengths. Here, a stable
policy ensures queue lengths are finite while an
optimal policy minimizes queue lengths. Since
an optimal policy is also stable, one would expect that RL algorithms would implicitly give us
stable policies. However, in this work, we find
that deep RL algorithms that directly minimize the
distance to the desired state during online training often result in unstable policies, i.e., policies
that drift far away from the desired state. We attribute this instability to poor credit-assignment
for destabilizing actions. We then introduce an
approach based on two ideas: 1) a Lyapunovbased cost-shaping technique and 2) state transformations to the unbounded state space. We conduct an empirical study on various queuing networks and traffic signal control problems and find
that our approach performs competitively against
strong baselines with knowledge of the transition
dynamics. Our code is available here: https:
//github.com/Badger-RL/STOP.

Throughout this paper, we use queuing as a motivating
example for stochastic environments with unbounded state
spaces. In stochastic queuing networks, a server policy must
select from several queues to serve based on the current
number of jobs waiting in each queue and the desired state is
all-zero queue lengths. Ideally, the server keeps the average
length of queues short so that no job must wait a long time
to be served. Jobs arrive continuously and — if the server
makes poor decisions (e.g., serving an empty queue) — then
the average length of the queues can grow infinitely-long.
In this case, an optimal policy minimizes the average queue
length over time, while a stable policy ensures the queue
lengths remain finite. By implication, an optimal policy is
also a stable policy.
Since optimal behavior implies stable behavior, we would
expect that directly trying to be optimal would implicitly
give us stable behavior. However, in this work, we find
that agents that do so actually learn unstable policies on
multiple real-world-inspired domains. In particular, we
empirically show that online deep RL agents that minimize
the optimality cost objective of the domain drift far away
from the desired state. We then propose an approach that
specifically encourages the agent to be stable and optimal.
More concretely, our contributions are as follows:

1. Introduction
Much of the recent progress in reinforcement learning (RL)
has focused on obtaining optimal performance on tasks that

1. We demonstrate that solely minimizing the optimality
cost objective inadequately discourages destabilizing
actions, which leads to the agent taking those actions
early in learning. This challenge is especially problematic in the: 1) online learning setting, where destabiliz-

1

University of Wisconsin–Madison, USA. Correspondence to:
Brahma S. Pavse <pavse@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

