Should we be going MAD?
A Look at Multi-Agent Debate Strategies for LLMs

Andries Smit * 1 Nathan Grinsztajn * 1 Paul Duckworth * 1 Thomas D. Barrett 1 Arnu Pretorius 1

Abstract

rate recall and manipulation of expert or technical knowledge. Following the increase in performance and popularity
of large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023), there is a growing hope that these models could
assist humans in various domains like medicine (Liévin
et al., 2022; Han et al., 2023; Nori et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023a; Singhal et al., 2023), education (Pardos & Bhandari, 2023; Kumar et al., 2024), and law (Lai et al., 2023).
As a way to improve the reasoning abilities of these systems, prompting strategies have received significant attention, starting with few-shot (Brown et al., 2020), and chainof-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022). To
further improve performance, a wide variety of strategies
have been proposed to use interactive reasoning between
multiple LLMs, by either generating answers in parallel to
maintain a form of self-consistency (Wang et al., 2023b),
or promoting models to simulate debate. These multi-agent
approaches have recently seen an uptake in applications, e.g.
language generation (Chan et al., 2023), machine translation
and arithmetic reasoning (Liang et al., 2023), mathematical
and strategic reasoning (Du et al., 2023), negotiation and bargaining (Fu et al., 2023), and notably, medical Q&A (Anil
et al., 2023; Singhal et al., 2023; Nori et al., 2023). How to
best utilize multiple agents for effective interactive reasoning is a prescient research question. However, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no work comparing strategies,
and there is no consensus for selecting one strategy over
another.

Recent advancements in large language models
(LLMs) underscore their potential for responding
to inquiries in various domains. However, ensuring that generative agents provide accurate and
reliable answers remains an ongoing challenge.
In this context, multi-agent debate (MAD) has
emerged as a promising strategy for enhancing
the truthfulness of LLMs. We benchmark a range
of debating and prompting strategies to explore
the trade-offs between cost, time, and accuracy.
Importantly, we find that multi-agent debating systems, in their current form, do not reliably outperform other proposed prompting strategies, such
as self-consistency and ensembling using multiple reasoning paths. However, when performing hyperparameter tuning, several MAD systems,
such as Multi-Persona, perform better. This suggests that MAD protocols might not be inherently
worse than other approaches, but that they are
more sensitive to different hyperparameter settings and difficult to optimize. We build on these
results to offer insights into improving debating
strategies, such as adjusting agent agreement levels, which can significantly enhance performance
and even surpass all other non-debate protocols
we evaluated. We provide an open-source repository to the community with several state-of-theart protocols together with evaluation scripts to
benchmark across popular research datasets.

In this paper, we benchmark various prompting strategies,
which include multi-agent debate (MAD), for answering
multiple-choice questions across a wide range of domains.
We explore the impact on, and trade-offs between, critical
factors such as factual accuracy, time and cost. We provide
an open-source suite of single-agent and MAD implementations for the research community to build upon, with a
unified API to easily build and evaluate MAD systems. Finally, we demonstrate that by utilizing specific prompting
strategies, LLMs exhibit improved reasoning abilities. Concretely, we provide a novel debate prompting strategy able
to modulate the level of agreement between agents during a
debate and improve upon the state-of-the-art for Q&A for a
given model class.

1. Introduction
Truthful question-answering assistants require a plethora
of skills that until recently were considered out-of-reach of
generative language models. Such agents require advanced
natural language reading comprehension, along with accu*
Equal contribution 1 InstaDeep, London UK. Correspondence
to: Paul Duckworth <p.duckworth@instadeep.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

