StableSSM: Alleviating the Curse of Memory in State-space Models through
Stable Reparameterization

Shida Wang 1 Qianxiao Li 1 2

Abstract

former models. State-space models such as S4 (Gu et al.,
2022b), S5 (Smith et al., 2023), LRU (Orvieto et al., 2023b),
RWKV (Peng et al., 2023), RetNet (Sun et al., 2023) and
Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023) offer an alternative approach.
These models are of the recurrent type and excel in longterm memory learning. Their architecture is specifically
designed to capture temporal dependencies over extended
sequences, providing a robust solution for tasks requiring
long-term memory (Tay et al., 2021). One of the advantages
of state-space models over traditional RNNs lies in their
computational efficiency, achieved through the application
of parallel scan algorithms (Martin & Cundy, 2018) and Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) (Tolimieri et al., 1989; Gu et al.,
2022b). Traditional nonlinear RNNs are often plagued by
slow forward and backward propagation, a limitation that
state-space models circumvent by leveraging linear RNN
blocks.

In this paper, we investigate the long-term memory learning capabilities of state-space models
(SSMs) from the perspective of parameterization.
We prove that state-space models without any
reparameterization exhibit a memory limitation
similar to that of traditional RNNs: the target relationships that can be stably approximated by statespace models must have an exponential decaying
memory. Our analysis identifies this “curse of
memory” as a result of the recurrent weights converging to a stability boundary, suggesting that a
reparameterization technique can be effective. To
this end, we introduce a class of reparameterization techniques for SSMs that effectively lift its
memory limitations. Besides improving approximation capabilities, we further illustrate that a
principled choice of reparameterization scheme
can also enhance optimization stability. We validate our findings using synthetic datasets, language models and image classifications.

Traditional linear/nonlinear RNNs exhibit an asymptotically
exponential decay in memory (Wang et al., 2023). This
phenomenon explains the difficulty in both approximation
and optimization to learn long-term memory using RNNs
(also named curse of memory). In practice, empirical results show that SSMs variants like S4 overcome some of the
memory issues. The previous empirical results suggest
that either (i) the “linear dynamics and nonlinear layerwise activation” or (ii) the parameterization inherent
to S4, is pivotal in achieving the enhanced performance.
Current research answers which one is more important. We
first prove an inverse approximation theorem showing that
state-space models without reparameterization still suffer
from the “curse of memory”, which is consistent with empirical results (Wang & Xue, 2023). This rules out the point (i)
as the reason for SSMs’ good long-term memory learning.
A natural question arises regarding whether the reparameterizations are the key to learn long-term memory. We prove a
class of reparameterization functions f , which we call stable reparameterization, enables the stable approximation of
nonlinear functionals. This includes commonly used exponential reparameterization and softplus reparameterization.
Furthermore, we question whether S4’s parameterizations
are optimal. Here we give a particular sense in terms of
optimization stability that they are not optimal. We propose the optimal one and show its stability via numerical

1. Introduction
Understanding long-term memory relationships is fundamental in sequence modeling. Capturing this prolonged memory is vital, especially in applications like
time series prediction (Connor et al., 1994), language models (Sutskever et al., 2011). Since its emergence, transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become the go-to models for language representation tasks (Brown et al., 2020).
However, a significant drawback lies in their computational
complexity, which is asymptotically O(T 2 ), where T is
the sequence length. This computational bottleneck has
been a critical impediment to the further scaling-up of trans1
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore 2 Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials, National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Qianxiao Li <qianxiao@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

