SAMformer: Unlocking the Potential of Transformers in Time Series
Forecasting with Sharpness-Aware Minimization and Channel-Wise Attention

Romain Ilbert * 1 2 Ambroise Odonnat * 1 Vasilii Feofanov 1 Aladin Virmaux 1 Giuseppe Paolo 1
Themis Palpanas 2 Ievgen Redko 1
Reparam
Transformer + SAM

Oracle
Transformer

Abstract
Transformer-based architectures achieved breakthrough performance in natural language processing and computer vision, yet they remain
inferior to simpler linear baselines in multivariate long-term forecasting. To better understand
this phenomenon, we start by studying a toy
linear forecasting problem for which we show
that transformers are incapable of converging
to their true solution despite their high expressive power. We further identify the attention of
transformers as being responsible for this low
generalization capacity. Building upon this insight, we propose a shallow lightweight transformer model that successfully escapes bad local
minima when optimized with sharpness-aware
optimization. We empirically demonstrate that
this result extends to all commonly used realworld multivariate time series datasets. In particular, SAMformer surpasses current state-ofthe-art methods and is on par with the biggest
foundation model MOIRAI while having significantly fewer parameters. The code is available at
https://github.com/romilbert/samformer.

Validation Loss

4.7
2.8
0.8
0

50

Training Epochs

100

Figure 1: Illustration of our approach on synthetic data.
Oracle is the optimal solution, Transformer is a
base transformer, σReparam is a Transformer with
weight rescaling (Zhai et al., 2023) and Transformer
+ SAM is Transformer trained with sharpness-aware
minimization.
Transformer overfits, σReparam
improves slightly but fails to reach Oracle while
Transformer+SAM generalizes perfectly. This motivates SAMformer, a shallow transformer combining SAM
and best practices in time series forecasting.

1. Introduction

gathered sequentially, such as medical data (Čepulionis
& Lukoševičiūtė, 2016), electricity consumption (UCI,
2015), temperatures (Max Planck Institute, 2021), or stock
prices (Sonkavde et al., 2023). A plethora of methods have
been developed for this task, from classical mathematical
tools (Sorjamaa et al., 2007; Chen & Tao, 2021) and statistical approaches like ARIMA (Box & Jenkins, 1990; Box
et al., 1974) to more recent deep learning ones (Casolaro
et al., 2023), including recurrent and convolutional neural
networks (Rangapuram et al., 2018; Salinas et al., 2020;
Fan et al., 2019; Lai et al., 2018a; Sen et al., 2019).

Multivariate time series forecasting is a classical learning
problem that consists of analyzing time series to predict
future trends based on historical information. In particular, long-term forecasting is notoriously challenging due
to feature correlations and long-term temporal dependencies in time series. This learning problem is prevalent
in those real-world applications where observations are
*
Equal contribution 1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Paris, France
LIPADE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Romain Ilbert <romain.ilbert@hotmail.fr>, Ambroise
Odonnat <ambroiseodonnattechnologie@gmail.com>.
2

Recently, the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) became ubiquitous in natural language processing
(NLP) (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Touvron
et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) and computer vision (Doso-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

