A Dynamic Algorithm for Weighted Submodular Cover Problem

Kiarash Banihashem * 1 Samira Goudarzi * 1 MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi * 1 Peyman Jabbarzade * 1
Morteza Monemizadeh * 2

Abstract

problem where the objective is to minimize the sum of
the weight of selected elements chosen from a set subject
to a submodular function constraint. Specifically, given
a set of elements V , a monotone submodular function
f : 2V → R≥0 , and a weight function w : V → R≥0 ,
P
we seek to pick a set S minimizing v∈S w(v) that satisfies f (S) = f (V ).

We initiate the study of the submodular cover
problem in dynamic setting where the elements
of the ground set are inserted and deleted. In the
classical submodular cover problem, we are given
a monotone submodular function f : 2V → R≥0
and the goal is to obtain a set S ⊆ V that minimizes the cost subject to the constraint f (S) =
f (V ). This is a classical problem in computer
science and generalizes the Set Cover problem,
2-Set Cover, and dominating set problem among
others. We consider this problem in a dynamic
setting where there are updates to our set V , in
the form of insertions and deletions of elements
from a ground set V, and the goal is to maintain
an approximately optimal solution with low query
complexity per update. For this problem, we propose a randomized algorithm that, in expectation,
obtains a (1 − O(ϵ), O(ϵ−1 ))-bicriteria approximation using polylogarithmic query complexity
per update.

This problem generalizes various noteworthy problems such
as the set cover problem, 2-set cover, dominating set, and
others. It can also be seen as a dual of the submodular
maximization problem, in which the goal is to maximize
f (S) subject to the constraint |S| ≤ k for some parameter
k.
While the submodular cover problem has been extensively
studied (see (Bar-Ilan et al., 2001) for a survey), the majority
of the algorithms in the literature predominantly depend
on having access to the entire ground set throughout their
execution, which is not a valid assumption in numerous
real-world applications dealing with ever-changing data and
makes them impractical.
Given the mentioned limitation, there has recently been
a surge of interest in reexamining classical problems under a variety of massive data models such as streaming,
distributed, dynamic, and online settings. For submodular maximization, the problem has been considered in the
streaming (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014; Chakrabarti & Kale,
2015; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2018; Kazemi et al., 2019),
distributed (Mirrokni & Zadimoghaddam, 2015; Liu &
Vondrák, 2018), and dynamic (Monemizadeh, 2020; Lattanzi et al., 2020; Chen & Peng, 2022; Duetting et al., 2023;
Banihashem et al., 2023a;b; 2024) settings. Similarly for
submodular cover, recent works have studied the problem
in the distributed, streaming, and scalable settings (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015; Norouzi-Fard et al., 2016; Chen &
Crawford, 2023; Crawford, 2023).

1. Introduction
Submodular optimization is a classical problem in computer
science and machine learning with applications spanning
various domains such as data summarization, active learning,
network inference, video analysis, and facility location (see
(Krause, 2013) for a survey).
The submodular cover problem, initially introduced by
(Wolsey, 1982), is a well-studied classical variant of the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, MD, USA 2 Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, TU Eindhoven, the Netherlands. Correspondence to: Samira Goudarzi <samirag@umd.edu>, Kiarash Banihashem <kiarash@umd.edu>.

Motivated by these advances, we consider the submodular cover in a dynamic setting where the elements of the
ground set are inserted and deleted, and the goal is to always

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

