Data-Efficient Learning via Clustering-Based Sensitivity Sampling:
Foundation Models and Beyond

Kyriakos Axiotis * 1 Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Monika Henzinger * 2 Sammy Jerome * 1 Vahab Mirrokni * 1
David Saulpic * 3 David P. Woodruff * 1 4 Michael Wunder * 1

Abstract

perform. On the other hand, a complete dataset is often not
needed to reach nearly optimal performance (i.e., up to a
small increase in error percentage). A central question then
becomes how to identify the most important data items for
the training or fine-tuning process.

We study the data selection problem, whose aim
is to select a small representative subset of data
that can be used to efficiently train a machine
learning model. We present a new data selection approach based on k-means clustering and
sensitivity sampling. Assuming access to an embedding representation of the data with respect to
which the model loss is Hölder continuous, our
approach provably allows selecting a set of “typical” k + 1/ε2 elements whose average loss corresponds to the average loss of the whole dataset, up
to a multiplicative (1 ± ε) factor and an additive
ελΦk , where Φk represents the k-means cost for
the input embeddings and λ is the Hölder constant.
We furthermore demonstrate the performance and
scalability of our approach on fine-tuning foundation models and show that it outperforms stateof-the-art methods. We also show how it can
be applied on linear regression, leading to a new
sampling strategy that surprisingly matches the
performance of leverage score sampling empirically, while being conceptually simpler and more
scalable.

While uniform sampling often shows surprisingly good performance, it is still suboptimal, especially when dealing with
real datasets that are complex and imbalanced. To better capture the usefulness of the underlying data to train the model,
data selection and active learning methods deduce which
data items are the most relevant for training or fine-tuning,
based on their uniqueness, quality, and the model’s knowledge. There exist several heuristics or greedy approaches
for active learning and data selection (see e.g. (Dasgupta,
2004) or references in (Ren et al., 2021)). State-of-the-art
data selection strategies are uncertainty-based, e.g., margin
or entropy scores, and aim at selecting items for which the
uncertainty of the model is high (e.g., (Balcan et al., 2007)).
However, such purely model-based methods have the additional overhead of requiring evaluating the model on the
whole dataset.
In a celebrated result, Sener and Savarese (Sener & Savarese,
2018) showed that state-of-the-art active learning strategies
are difficult to use in modern training frameworks for the
following reasons:

1. Introduction

1. The training proceeds in batches, which requires the
active learning strategy to pick not only one training
element at a time but a batch of training elements. However, to make the most out of the batch, it is needed to
ensure some diversity in the set of elements sampled,
which often unfortunately anti-correlates with, for example, the margin objective which may lead to picking
near-duplicate elements (see the discussion in (Sener
& Savarese, 2018) for more details).

The growth of both datasets and models to a massive scale
has led to a new generation of machine learning models
with astonishing performance. Yet, the size of these models
and datasets makes their training and fine-tuning extremely
difficult, costly, time-consuming, and so nearly impossible
for most academic institutions or small-scale companies to
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Institute for Science
and Technology Austria (ISTA), Klosterneuburg, Austria 3 CNRS
& IRIF, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France 4 Carnegie Mellon
University. Correspondence to: Vincent Cohen-Addad <cohenaddad@google.com>, David Saulpic <david.saulpic@irif.fr>.

2. The score (i.e., value) of the training elements is obtained through the model. This requires running the
model on the data items to determine which ones to
pick next. Unfortunately, modern models are often
very large and the inference time is particularly costly.
Moreover, margin scores are not well-suited for foun-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

