Delving into the Convergence of Generalized Smooth Minimax Optimization

Wenhan Xian 1 Ziyi Chen 1 Heng Huang 1
where Y ⊆ Rd2 is a convex domain. In this paper we
consider the nonconvex strongly-concave problem where
f (x, y) in nonconvex in x and strongly-concave in y. In this
case, the maximizer y ∗ (x) = arg maxy∈Y f (x, y) is unique
and the primal objective function Φ(x) = f (x, y ∗ (x)) can
be well defined. The convergence criterion is to find a firstorder stationary point of Φ(x) such that ∥∇Φ(x)∥ ≤ ϵ for
some tolerance ϵ. When considering stochastic problems,
function f (x, y) takes the form f (x, y) = Eξ∼D F (x, y; ξ)
where F (x, y; ξ) is the component loss function regarding
sample ξ and D is the data distribution.

Abstract
Minimax optimization is fundamental and important for enormous machine learning applications
such as generative adversarial network, adversarial training, and robust optimization. Recently,
a variety of minimax algorithms with theoretical
guarantees based on Lipschitz smoothness have
been proposed. However, these algorithms could
fail to converge in practice because the requisite
Lipschitz smooth condition may not hold even in
some classic minimax problems. We will present
some counterexamples to reveal this divergence
issue. Thus, to fill this gap, we are motivated to
delve into the convergence analysis of minimax
algorithms under a relaxed Lipschitz smoothness
condition, i.e., generalized smoothness. We prove
that variants of basic minimax optimization algorithms GDA, SGDA, GDmax and SGDmax can
still converge in generalized smooth problems,
and hence their theoretical guarantees can be extended to a wider range of applications. We also
conduct a numerical experiment to validate the
performance of our proposed algorithms.

In recent years, minimax optimization problem is studied
in a variety of research fields. Many deterministic and
stochastic gradient-based methods with non-asymptotic convergence analysis for nonconvex strongly-concave minimax problems have been developed. Among these methods, some algorithms adopt the single-loop structure that
updates x and y at the same frequency, such as Gradient
Descent Ascent (GDA) and Stochastic Gradient Descent
Ascent (SGDA) (Lin et al., 2020a). Some algorithms update
x and y at different frequencies which involves a nested loop
to search the optimal value of the maximizer y for the given
x. Classic examples of double-loop minimax algorithms
are GDmax and SGDmax (Jin et al., 2020). Some methods
adopt more sophisticated structures to pursue better theoretical results (Lin et al., 2020b; Yang et al., 2020). Besides,
some works also investigate the lower bound estimation
of minimax problems (Li et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021)
and some algorithms have been proven to be optimal or
near-optimal (Lin et al., 2020b).

1. Introduction
The minimax problem is attracting growing attention due
to its widespread practical applications in machine learning
such as Generative Adversarial Net (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017), robust
optimization (Chen et al., 2017) and AUC maximization
(Gao et al., 2013). In minimax optimization, variable x aims
to minimize a pay-off loss function f (x, y) : Rd1 × Rd2 →
R while variable y tries to maximize the loss, which can be
formulated as
min max f (x, y),
(1)

Although gradient-based minimax optimization algorithms
have achieved huge success in theoretical region, most of
the analysis frameworks are based on the requirement of
Lipschitz smoothness. Some works conduct the convergence analysis without the Lipschitz smooth assumption for
convex or weakly-convex problems (Rafique et al., 2022)
and achieve competitive results, but the investigation for
nonconvex generalized smooth minimax optimization is
still limited. This drawback will restrict the applications
of minimax optimization algorithms because in some cases
the minimax structure breaks the Lipschitz smooth condition such as distributionally robust optimization (Yan et al.,
2019; Levy et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021), and in some machine learning tasks the objective function itself does not

x∈Rd1 y∈Y

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, United States. Correspondence to: Wenhan Xian <wxian1@umd.edu>, Ziyi Chen <zc286@umd.edu>,
Heng Huang <heng@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

