On the Role of Edge Dependency in Graph Generative Models

Sudhanshu Chanpuriya * 1 Cameron Musco * 2 Konstantinos Sotiropoulos * 3 Charalampos Tsourakakis * 4

Abstract

Chistyakov, 1975), and graphs (Erdös & Rényi, 1960). In
recent decades, random graphs (also known as graph generative models) have become increasingly important for
modeling and understanding complex networks across a
wide range of domains (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010; Frieze
& Karoński, 2016; Janson et al., 2011). Random graph
models provide a way to capture the uncertainty that is inherent in many real-world networks. For example, in the
social sciences, random graphs have been used to study
the spread of information and disease (Keliger et al., 2023)
and the evolution of social networks (Newman et al., 2002).
In economics, random graphs have been used to study the
behavior of financial markets and the spread of economic
shocks (Jackson et al., 2008). In physics, random graphs
have been used to study the behavior of disordered materials,
the spread of traffic jams, and the emergence of synchronization in complex systems (Dorogovtsev & Mendes, 2003).
In drug discovery, random graphs have been used to study
the interaction between drugs and proteins, the design of
new drugs, and the prediction of drug toxicity (Pan et al.,
2022). In bioinformatics, random graphs have been used
to study the structure of DNA and proteins and brain networks (Simpson et al., 2011).

We investigate the trade-off between the representation power of graph generative models and
model overlap, i.e., the degree to which the model
generates diverse outputs versus regurgitating its
training data. In particular, we delineate a nested
hierarchy of graph generative models categorized
into three levels of complexity: edge independent,
node independent, and arbitrarily dependent models. This hierarchy encapsulates a wide range of
prevalent methods. We derive theoretical bounds
on the number of triangles and other short-length
cycles producible by each level of the hierarchy,
finding that more complex dependency structure
allows an improved trade-off between representation power and overlap. We provide instances
demonstrating the asymptotic optimality of our
bounds. Furthermore, we introduce new generative models for each of the three hierarchical
levels, leveraging dense subgraph discovery. Our
evaluation, conducted on real-world datasets, focuses on assessing the output quality and overlap
of our proposed models in comparison to other
popular models. Our results indicate that our
simple, interpretable models provide competitive
baselines to popular generative models. Through
this investigation, we offer a structured and robust
evaluation scheme, thereby facilitating the development of models capable of generating accurate
and edge-diverse graphs.

Deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) has led to the development of new methods for fitting random graph models such
as graph autoencoders (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Simonovsky
& Komodakis, 2018), NetGAN (Bojchevski et al., 2018),
GraphGAN (Wang et al., 2018), GraphRNN (You et al.,
2018), among many others. Such methods are typically
evaluated based on two key dimensions: efficiency and
output quality. Output quality measures how closely the
generated graphs resemble real-world graphs that they aim
to model. A common way to measure output quality is to
measure a model’s tendency to produce graphs that have
similar statistical properties to a target input graph or set
of graphs. Common examples of statistics that are considered include the average degree, maximum degree, degree
assortativity, motif counts, and shortest-path measures. In
terms of motif counts triangles play a major role. This is
due to the fact that triangle density is a hallmark property of
several types of networks, especially social networks, and
plays an important role in network analysis, e.g., Watts &
Strogatz (1998); Yin et al. (2017); Tsourakakis et al. (2017).

1. Introduction
Mathematicians and physicists have long studied random
discrete structures, such as sets, permutations (Kolchin &
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, USA 2 University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst,
USA 3 Meta, Menlo Park, United States 4 Boston University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Sudhanshu Chanpuriya <schanpuriya@umass.edu>, Konstantinos Sotiropoulos
<ksotirop@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Despite the development of the aforementioned sophisti1

