Improving fine-grained understanding in image-text pre-training

Ioana Bica 1 Anastasija Ilić 1 Matthias Bauer 1 Goker Erdogan 1 Matko Bošnjak 1 Christos Kaplanis 1
Alexey A. Gritsenko 2 Matthias Minderer 2 Charles Blundell 1 Razvan Pas, canu 1 Jovana Mitrović 1

Abstract
We introduce SPARse fine-grained Contrastive
alignment (SPARC), a simple method for pretraining more fine-grained multimodal representations from image-text pairs. Given that multiple image patches often correspond to single
words, we propose to learn a grouping of image
patches for every token in the caption. To achieve
this, we use a sparse similarity metric between image patches and language tokens and compute for
each text token a language-grouped vision embedding as the weighted average of patches. The token and language-grouped vision embeddings are
then contrasted through a fine-grained sequencewise loss that only depends on individual samples
and does not require other batch samples as negatives, i.e., more detailed information is encoded
in a computationally inexpensive way. SPARC
combines this fine-grained loss with a contrastive
loss between global image and text embeddings
to learn representations that simultaneously encode global and local information. We thoroughly
evaluate SPARC and show improved performance
over competing approaches both on image-level
tasks relying on coarse-grained information, e.g.
classification, as well as region-level tasks relying
on fine-grained information, e.g., retrieval, object detection, segmentation while also improving
model faithfulness and captioning in foundational
vision-language models.

“cat”

“cat”

·

“and”
“dog”

·
·

“in”

“and”
“dog”

+

“in”

·

“basket”
Sparse cross-modal alignment

Token embeddings

Token embeddings

Language-grouped
vision embeddings

“basket”
Finegrained loss

Figure 1: SPARC learns a language-grouped vision embedding for every token as the alignment-weighted sum of
patches that are most similar to that token. We compute
a sparse similarity metric between patches and tokens of
individual image-text pairs (left) and compute the resulting
alignment weights (middle). We contrast the languagegrouped vision embeddings with token embeddings in a
fine-grained contrastive sequence-wise loss (right).
sentations for a wide range of downstream tasks as well
as for learning vision encoders in multimodal foundation
models (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022a). In particular, these models achieve impressive performance on image-level tasks like classification (Radford
et al., 2021), coarse-grained retrieval and visual question
answering (Alayrac et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). On the
other hand, these models have been shown to discard finegrained visual information (Krojer et al., 2022) and work
poorly on tasks involving localization (Zhong et al., 2022;
Ranasinghe et al., 2022), counting (Paiss et al., 2023) and
understanding spatial relationships between objects (Parcalabescu et al., 2021) or object attributes (Yuksekgonul
et al., 2022). A recent line of work explores incorporating
losses between image patch and text token embeddings (Yao
et al., 2021; Mukhoti et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022) to learn representations encoding more finegrained details. Specifically, these local losses learn soft
correspondences between image patches and text tokens
from image-text pairs by aligning patches corresponding to
individual objects in the image to tokens corresponding to
the words describing these objects.

1. Introduction
Contrastive pre-training from large-scale, noisy image-text
datasets (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021) has become
a widely used paradigm for learning general vision repre*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind, London, UK
Google DeepMind, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Ioana Bica <ioanab@google.com>, Jovana Mitrović <mitrovic@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

While these models have achieved improved performance on
some fine-grained tasks, they are computationally and mem1

