PRISE: LLM-Style Sequence Compression for Learning
Temporal Action Abstractions in Control

Ruijie Zheng 1 2 Ching-An Cheng 3 Hal Daumé III 1 3 Furong Huang 1 Andrey Kolobov 3
The code is available at:
https://ruijiezheng.com/project/PRISE/index.html

Abstract

processing (NLP) over the past decade, much of continuous control research has focused on learning abstractions
from data rather than hand-crafting them. The lion’s share
of these efforts study learning multi-task representations,
which has analogies to representation learning in CV and
NLP and has been tackled by adapting these fields’ models
(see, e.g., DT (Chen et al., 2021) vs. GPT-2 (Radford et al.,
2019)) and methods (see, e.g., R3M (Nair et al., 2022) vs.
InfoNCE (den Oord et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2023a)).

Temporal action abstractions, along with belief
state representations, are a powerful knowledge
sharing mechanism for sequential decision making. In this work, we propose a novel view that
treats inducing temporal action abstractions as a
sequence compression problem. To do so, we
bring a subtle but critical component of LLM
training pipelines – input tokenization via byte
pair encoding (BPE) – to bear on the seemingly
distant task of learning skills of variable time
span in continuous control domains. We introduce an approach called Primitive Sequence Encoding (PRISE) that combines continuous action
quantization with BPE to learn powerful action
abstractions. We empirically show that high-level
skills discovered by PRISE from a multitask set
of robotic manipulation demonstrations significantly boost the performance of Behavior Cloning
on downstream tasks.

On the other hand, learning temporal action abstractions –
representations of multi-step primitive behaviors – has not
benefited nearly as much from such a methodology transfer.
This omission is especially glaring in continuous control,
where complex policies can clearly be decomposed into
versatile lower-level routines such as picking up objects,
walking, etc, and whose popular learning method, Behavior
Cloning (BC) (Arora et al., 2022), has many commonalities
with LLM training.
In this paper, we posit that adapting discrete coding and sequence compression techniques from NLP offers untapped
potential for action representation learning for continuous
control. Specifically, given a pretraining dataset of demonstrations from multiple decision tasks over a continuous action space and a high-dimensional pixel observation space,
we consider the problem of learning temporally extended
action primitives, i.e., skills, to improve downstream learning efficiency of reward-free BC. We show that embedding
continuous actions into discrete codes and then applying
a popular NLP sequence compression method called Byte
Pair Encoding (BPE) (Gage, 1994) to the resulting discretecode sequences identifies variable-timespan action primitives with the property we desire. Namely, in downstream
tasks, policies learned by BC using these action primitives
consistently perform better, often substantially, than policies
learned by BC directly over the original action space.

1. Introduction
High-dimensional observations and decision-making over
complex, continuous action spaces are hallmarks of typical
scenarios in sequential decision-making, including robotics.
A common way of dealing with these complexities is constructing abstractions – compact representations of belief
states and actions that generalize across tasks and make
learning to act in new scenarios robust and data-efficient.
Inspired by techniques that have enabled ground-breaking
progresses in computer vision (CV) and natural language
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park 2 Part of the work done while at Microsoft 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Ruijie Zheng
<rzheng12@umd.edu>.

Our work’s main contribution is Primitive Sequence
Encoding (PRISE), a novel method for learning multi-task
temporal action abstractions that capitalizes on a novel connection to NLP methodology. PRISE quantizes the agent’s

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

