Neural Diffusion Models
Grigory Bartosh 1 Dmitry Vetrov 2 Christian A. Naesseth 1

Abstract

They can for example be used for data augmentation, as
well as for unsupervised learning.

Diffusion models have shown remarkable performance on many generative tasks. Despite recent
success, most diffusion models are restricted in
that they only allow linear transformation of the
data distribution. In contrast, broader family of
transformations can help train generative distributions more efficiently, simplifying the reverse
process and closing the gap between the true negative log-likelihood and the variational approximation. In this paper, we present Neural Diffusion
Models (NDMs), a generalization of conventional
diffusion models that enables defining and learning time-dependent non-linear transformations of
data. We show how to optimise NDMs using
a variational bound in a simulation-free setting.
Moreover, we derive a time-continuous formulation of NDMs, which allows fast and reliable
inference using off-the-shelf numerical ODE and
SDE solvers. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of NDMs through experiments on many image generation benchmarks, including MNIST,
CIFAR-10, downsampled versions of ImageNet
and CelebA-HQ. NDMs outperform conventional
diffusion models in terms of likelihood, achieving
state-of-the-art results on ImageNet and CelebAHQ, and produces high-quality samples.

Diffusion models have emerged as a family of generative
models that excel at several generative tasks (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). They parameterize the data
model through an iterative refinement process, the reverse
process, that builds up the data step-by-step from pure noise.
For training purposes an auxiliary noising process, the forward process, is introduced that successively adds noise to
data. The reverse process is then optimized to resemble
the forward process. Despite success in various domains
(Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Saharia et al.,
2021; Popov et al., 2021; Watson et al., 2022; Trippe et al.,
2023), a key limitation of most existing diffusion models is
that they rely on a fixed and pre-specified forward process
that is unable to adapt to the specific task or data at hand. At
the same time there are many works (Hoogeboom & Salimans, 2023; Rombach et al., 2022; Lipman et al., 2023) that
improve performance of diffusion models by modifications
of the forward processes.
In this paper we develop Neural Diffusion Models (NDMs),
a general framework that enables non-linear, time-dependent
and learnable data transformations. We extend the approach
by Song et al. (2021a) and construct the forward process as
a non-Markovian sequence of latent variables; each latent
variable is constructed through a transformation of the data
to which we then inject noise. This is then leveraged in the
corresponding reverse process. To train NDMs efficiently
we generalize the diffusion objective while keeping it a
simulation-free bound on the log-likelihood. Furthermore,
we derive the time-continuous analogue of the objective
function as well as the stochastic differential equation (SDE)
and ordinary differential equation (ODE) corresponding to
the reverse process.

1. Introduction
Generative models are a powerful class of probabilistic machine learning models with a wide range of applications
from e.g. art and music to medicine and physics (Tomczak,
2022; Creswell et al., 2018; Papamakarios et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2022). Generative models learn to mimic the underlying probability distribution of a given data set and can
generate novel samples that are similar to the original data.

We demonstrate how NDMs generalizes several existing
diffusion models and then propose a new model with learnable transformations of data parameterized by a neural network. To illustrate the empirical properties of NDMs we
provide experimental results on a synthetic data as well as on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, downsampled ImageNet and CelebAHQ image datasets. NDMs consistently outperforms baselines in terms of negative log-likelihood, achieving state-ofthe-art results for diffusion models on ImageNet 32 and 64,
as well as CelebA-HQ.

1
University of Amsterdam 2 Constructor University, Bremen. Correspondence to: Grigory Bartosh <g.bartosh@uva.nl>,
Dmitry Vetrov <dvetrov@constructor.university>, Christian A.
Naesseth <c.a.naesseth@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

