G I LOT: Interpreting Generative Language Models via Optimal Transport

Xuhong Li * 1 Jiamin Chen * 1 Yekun Chai * 1 Haoyi Xiong 1

Abstract
Marginal
Distribution

[ 𝑌! … 𝑌& … 𝑌' ]

While large language models (LLMs) surge with
the rise of generative AI, algorithms to explain
LLMs highly desire. Existing feature attribution
methods adequate for discriminative language
models like BERT often fail to deliver faithful explanations for LLMs, primarily due to two issues:
(1) For every specific prediction, the LLM outputs
a probability distribution over the vocabulary–a
large number of tokens with unequal semantic distance; (2) As an autoregressive language model,
the LLM handles input tokens while generating
a sequence of probability distributions of various
tokens. To address above two challenges, this
work proposes G I LOT that leverages Optimal
Transport approach to measure the distributional
change of all possible generated sequences upon
the absence of every input token, while taking into
account the tokens’ similarity, so as to faithfully
estimate feature attribution for LLMs. We have
carried out extensive experiments on top of Llama
families and their fine-tuned derivatives across
various scales to validate the effectiveness of
G I LOT for estimating the input attributions. The
results show that G I LOT outperforms existing solutions on a number of faithfulness metrics under
fair comparison settings. Source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/holyseven/GiLOT.

𝑌)

…

3

Optimal
Tranport

[ 𝑌!( … 𝑌&( … 𝑌'( ]
𝑌&(

𝑂𝑇(𝑌! , 𝑌"# )

2 Forward & Maginalize

Generative LMs

…
2

Generative LMs
1 Token Mask

Input 𝑥! 𝑥" 𝑥# … 𝑥$ … 𝑥%

𝑥! 𝑥" 𝑥# … 𝑥$ … 𝑥%

Figure 1. Illustration of G I LOT framework.

have spurred phenomenal applications across various domains of human endeavor (Bubeck et al., 2023). Yet, as their
adoption grows, so does the imperative for interpretable
AI. Stakeholders, from developers to end-users, necessitate
methods that can elucidate the decision-making processes
of LLMs for content generation. Such transparency is crucial, not only for enhancing trust and alignment with human
values but also for ensuring reliability and accountability in
automated decision-making (Wang et al., 2023).
A vital in this quest for comprehension lies in the feature
attribution methods that parse the contribution of each input
token to the output. For example, LIME (Ribeiro et al.,
2016) and its variants (Ahern et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021;
Slack et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b) interpret the attribution of a feature as the change of prediction results through
perturbing the feature around a specific data point. In addition, to faithfully attribute a feature to the change of model
predictions, Shapley values have been introduced for fine estimation (Kumar et al., 2020; Sundararajan & Najmi, 2020;
Kwon & Zou, 2022). More specifically, to handle the largescale transformer models, attention-based methods (Chefer
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023) have been
recently proposed to track back the change of predictions to
the input features via attention flows. Recent surveys could
be found at Li et al. (2023a); Xiong et al. (2024).

1. Introduction
The burgeoning field of generative AI has witnessed a
remarkable upsurge in large language models (LLMs),
with advancement across dialogue assistant (Touvron et al.,
2023a;b), code generation (Lozhkov et al., 2024; Chai
et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2024), and multimodal comprehension (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023). These
foundation models, capable of generating human-like text,

While existing approaches sufficed for earlier models and
tasks, they might encounter two challenges when applied
to generative LLMs. Firstly, for every specific prediction,
LLMs output a probability distribution of all possible tokens
or words, wherein the semantic distances between tokens
are neither uniform nor trivially quantifiable (Deudon, 2018;

*

Equal contribution 1 Baidu Inc., Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Haoyi Xiong <haoyi.xiong.fr@ieee.org>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

