Tackling Non-Stationarity in Reinforcement Learning via
Causal-Origin Representation

Wanpeng Zhang 1 Yilin Li 2 Boyu Yang 3 Zongqing Lu 1 4

Abstract

icant performance gains in various domains (Silver et al.,
2018; Mirhoseini et al., 2020). However, a common assumption in many RL algorithms is the stationarity of the
environment, which can limit the applicability in real-world
scenarios characterized by varying dynamics (Padakandla
et al., 2020; Padakandla, 2021). Recent efforts in the metaRL approaches (Finn et al., 2017) have attempted to tackle
this by enabling algorithms to adapt to changes (Poiani
et al., 2021). However, these methods struggle in the face
of more complex and unpredictable environmental dynamics (Sodhani et al., 2022; Feng et al., 2022). Approaches
like FN-VAE (Feng et al., 2022) and LILAC (Xie et al.,
2020) have made strides towards improving RL algorithms
in non-stationary environments by explicitly modeling the
change factors of the environment. Nevertheless, they may
not comprehensively capture the complexity of real-world
non-stationarity. This gap highlights the need for a more
robust approach to handle the intricacies of non-stationary
environments in RL.

In real-world scenarios, the application of reinforcement learning is significantly challenged by
complex non-stationarity. Most existing methods attempt to model changes in the environment
explicitly, often requiring impractical prior knowledge of environments. In this paper, we propose
a new perspective, positing that non-stationarity
can propagate and accumulate through complex causal relationships during state transitions,
thereby compounding its sophistication and affecting policy learning. We believe that this challenge can be more effectively addressed by implicitly tracing the causal origin of non-stationarity.
To this end, we introduce the Causal-Origin
REPresentation (COREP) algorithm. COREP
primarily employs a guided updating mechanism
to learn a stable graph representation for the state,
termed as causal-origin representation. By leveraging this representation, the learned policy exhibits impressive resilience to non-stationarity.
We supplement our approach with a theoretical
analysis grounded in the causal interpretation for
non-stationary reinforcement learning, advocating for the validity of the causal-origin representation. Experimental results further demonstrate
the superior performance of COREP over existing methods in tackling non-stationarity problems.
The code is available at https://github.com/PKURL/COREP.

In this paper, we propose a novel setting for efficiently tackling non-stationarity in RL from a new perspective inspired
by the causality literature (Zhang et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2020). We contend that minor changes in dynamics can
cause significant shifts in observations due to their propagation through intricate causal relationships in the dynamics.
Thus, we need to trace the “causal origin” of these changes.
However, directly constructing a causal graph that captures
such information is a significant challenge due to the inherent instability in non-stationary environments (Strobl,
2019). To address this, we introduce the Causal-Origin
Representation (COREP) algorithm. COREP employs a
guided update mechanism, which enables the learning of a
stable graph representation of state, termed as causal-origin
representation. This representation aims to capture the underlying causal structure in a way that is resilient to the
unpredictable changes characteristic of non-stationary environments, aiding RL algorithms to adapt and learn policies
in such settings.

1. Introduction
Rapid advancements in reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018) have led to signif1
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Center for
Statistical Science, Peking University 3 School of Data Science,
Fudan University 4 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

Specifically, we first propose a novel formulation of nonstationarity in RL as the mixture of decomposed subenvironments. In this formulation, we rewrite dynamics
functions using masks to represent causal relationships, as-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

