M EMORY LLM: Towards Self-Updatable Large Language Models

Yu Wang* 1 Yifan Gao 2 Xiusi Chen 3 Haoming Jiang 2 Shiyang Li 2 Jingfeng Yang 2 Qingyu Yin 2 Zheng Li 2
Xian Li 2 Bing Yin 2 Jingbo Shang 1 Julian McAuley 1

Abstract

In multi-modality scenarios, retrieval-based methods might
require enormous storage space to store all image data (24
images per second for humans) for retrieval purposes. (2)
Model Editing: This class of methods involves making
targeted edits to the model to adapt to new facts while preserving other desired capabilities (Yao et al., 2023). Existing
methods primarily focus on fact-based editing, which is typically limited to single sentences. This limitation becomes
more severe when one attempts to inject new knowledge
in the form of longer and more complicated contexts. (3)
Long Context Methods: Another alternative solution is
to incorporate all the knowledge into the model’s context,
which essentially makes the context into a knowledge base.
This differs from retrieval-based methods in that the context
directly informs the inference of the model. Methods in
this category involve reducing the complexity of attention
operations (Child et al., 2019; Beltagy et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020), and modifying positional embeddings (Press
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023) to handle longer contexts.
However, as complex reasoning tasks are thirsty for massive
up-to-date knowledge, the inevitable context overload with
long context methods becomes infeasible, as long as the
context length is finite.

Existing Large Language Models (LLMs) usually
remain static after deployment, which might make
it hard to inject new knowledge into the model.
We aim to build models containing a considerable
portion of self-updatable parameters, enabling the
model to integrate new knowledge effectively and
efficiently. To this end, we introduce M EMO RY LLM, a model that comprises a transformer
and a fixed-size memory pool within the latent
space of the transformer. M EMORY LLM can
self-update with text knowledge and memorize
the knowledge injected earlier. Our evaluations
demonstrate the ability of M EMORY LLM to effectively incorporate new knowledge, as evidenced
by its performance on model editing benchmarks.
Meanwhile, the model exhibits long-term information retention capacity, which is validated through
our custom-designed evaluations and long-context
benchmarks. M EMORY LLM also shows operational integrity without any sign of performance
degradation even after nearly a million memory
updates. Our code and model are open-sourced
at https://github.com/wangyu-ustc/
MemoryLLM.

In response to the challenges identified above, we introduce M EMORY LLM, a model that embeds a substantial,
fixed-size memory pool within its latent space, which serves
as the self-updatable parameters. Specifically, we build
the memory pool as hidden vectors within each layer of
the transformer. At each layer, the memory pool contains
memory tokens representing compressed knowledge. This
design results in a memory pool that is less redundant than
traditional knowledge bases in retrieval-based methods or
contexts in long-context methods. To update the memory
pool, we devise a self-update mechanism to propagate the
new knowledge to every layer of the memory. During selfupdate, M EMORY LLM only updates a proportion of memory in each layer to absorb the incoming knowledge. This
allows previously stored knowledge to slowly phase out.
These designs ensure M EMORY LLM remains up-to-date
while the old knowledge is slowly forgotten. After curated
training, we update M EMORY LLM nearly a million times
without observing any performance deterioration.

1. Introduction
Despite the impressive performance LLMs demonstrate, a
pivotal issue persists: How should we update the model with
the latest knowledge? Previous solutions can be broadly categorized into three classes: (1) Retrieval-Based Methods:
These methods rely on information retrieval in a knowledge
base (Khandelwal et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2023). They can
yield strong results, but face challenges when redundancy in
the knowledge base presents and suffer the logistical issue
of managing an ever-expanding repository of knowledge.
∗

Work done during the internship at Amazon. 1 UC, San Diego
Amazon 3 UC, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Yu Wang
<yuw164@ucsd.edu>, Yifan Gao <yifangao@amazon.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The evaluation of M EMORY LLM focuses on several key
1

