Minimum-Norm Interpolation Under Covariate Shift

Neil Mallinar * 1 Austin Zane * 2 Spencer Frei 3 Bin Yu 2 4

Abstract

expected to perform well on a different target data distribution, referred to as the “out-of-distribution” (OOD) dataset
(Oglic et al., 2022; D’Amour et al., 2022). There have been
many experimental works on transfer learning with complex
models and datasets (Recht et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2021;
Miller et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Wenzel et al.,
2022; Liang et al., 2023), but remarkably fewer attempts
to study it theoretically, even in the simplest case of linear
models which have been of great interest in recent years
(Dwivedi et al., 2020; Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al.,
2022; Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023).

Transfer learning is a critical part of real-world
machine learning deployments and has been extensively studied in experimental works with overparameterized neural networks. However, even in
the simplest setting of linear regression a notable
gap still exists in the theoretical understanding
of transfer learning. In-distribution research on
high-dimensional linear regression has led to the
identification of a phenomenon known as benign
overfitting, in which linear interpolators overfit
to noisy training labels and yet still generalize
well. This behavior occurs under specific conditions on the source covariance matrix and input
data dimension. Therefore, it is natural to wonder how such high-dimensional linear models behave under transfer learning. We prove the first
non-asymptotic excess risk bounds for benignlyoverfit linear interpolators in the transfer learning
setting. From our analysis, we propose a taxonomy of beneficial and malignant covariate shifts
based on the degree of overparameterization. We
follow our analysis with empirical studies that
show these beneficial and malignant covariate
shifts for linear interpolators on real image data,
and for fully-connected neural networks in settings where the input data dimension is larger
than the training sample size.

There has been an extensive “in-distribution” (ID) theoretical interest in high-dimensional linear regression and
specifically interpolation, meaning a model reaches zero
training loss (Belkin et al., 2019a;b). Frameworks such as
“benign overfitting”, or “harmless interpolation” (Bartlett
et al., 2020; Muthukumar et al., 2020) emerged as an attempt to explain why interpolating neural networks often
do not overfit catastrophically (Zhang et al., 2017). They
found that, in specific cases, overfitting can be “benign”,
meaning that a model interpolates noisy training labels and
yet has vanishing excess risk. In linear regression, this occurs if and only if the training (source) covariance matrix
satisfies very specific conditions. Under these conditions,
the minimum-norm interpolator (MNI) approximately acts
like a ridge regression solution.
This sparked an initial wave of in-distribution theoretical
research into benign overfitting in high-dimensional linear
models (Chatterji et al., 2022; Tsigler & Bartlett, 2023;
Chatterji & Long, 2023), kernel regression (Rakhlin & Zhai,
2019; Haas et al., 2023; Barzilai & Shamir, 2023; Belkin
et al., 2018), and even some shallow neural networks (Frei
et al., 2022a; Kou et al., 2023; Kornowski et al., 2023; Xu
et al., 2024). Although these works were motivated by a
desire to understand overfitting in modern deep learning,
recent works have shown that in many practical settings
of interest, overfitting is not benign (Mallinar et al., 2022;
Haas et al., 2023; Lai et al., 2023). Thus, deeper investigations into the generalization behavior of overfit models are
warranted.

1. Introduction
Practical deployments of machine learning models are almost always in a transfer learning setting, where models
trained on a source data distribution with noisy labels are
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California San Diego, CA, USA 2 Department of Statistics,
University of California Berkeley, CA, USA 3 Department of Statistics, University of California Davis, CA, USA 4 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California
Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Neil Mallinar <nmallina@ucsd.edu>, Austin Zane <austin.zane@berkeley.edu>.

Given the increasing prevalence of overparameterized models, it is natural to ask how such models perform in the
transfer learning setting. There have been some efforts to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

