Pseudo-Calibration: Improving Predictive Uncertainty Estimation in
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Dapeng Hu 1 Jian Liang 2 3 Xinchao Wang 4 Chuan-Sheng Foo 5 1

Abstract

tion of deep learning models (He et al., 2016) from labeled
source domains to an unlabeled target domain with similar
tasks but varying data distributions. Notable progress has
been achieved in developing effective UDA methods (Ganin
& Lempitsky, 2015), practical applications (Tsai et al.,
2018), and real-world settings (Liang et al., 2020a), with a
predominant focus on target domain model accuracy.

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has seen
substantial efforts to improve model accuracy for
an unlabeled target domain with the help of a
labeled source domain. However, UDA models often exhibit poorly calibrated predictive uncertainty on target data, a problem that remains
under-explored and poses risks in safety-critical
UDA applications. The calibration problem in
UDA is particularly challenging due to the absence of labeled target data and severe distribution shifts between domains. In this paper, we
approach UDA calibration as a target-domainspecific unsupervised problem, different from
mainstream solutions based on covariate shift.
We introduce Pseudo-Calibration (PseudoCal), a
novel post-hoc calibration framework. Our innovative use of inference-stage mixup synthesizes
a labeled pseudo-target set capturing the structure of the real unlabeled target data. This turns
the unsupervised calibration problem into a supervised one, easily solvable with temperature
scaling. Extensive empirical evaluations across 5
diverse UDA scenarios involving 10 UDA methods consistently demonstrate the superior performance and versatility of PseudoCal over existing solutions. Code is available at https:
//github.com/LHXXHB/PseudoCal.

However, for a classification model, achieving reliable predictive uncertainty estimation is as crucial as high accuracy, especially in safety-critical decision-making scenarios
like autonomous driving and medical diagnosis (Guo et al.,
2017). A calibrated model should produce probability predictions that accurately reflect correctness likelihood (Guo
et al., 2017). Although predictive uncertainty calibration
has garnered substantial attention in IID supervised learning tasks with deep models (Thulasidasan et al., 2019), the
calibration problem in UDA remained largely unexplored
until a pioneering UDA study (Wang et al., 2020), which
revealed that improved UDA model accuracy comes at the
expense of poor uncertainty calibration on target data. This
phenomenon is vividly illustrated in Figure 1(a), where
increasing target domain accuracy is accompanied by significant overfitting of the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss
during adaptation. The first challenge with UDA calibration is the absence of labeled data in the target domain,
rendering the direct leverage of supervised IID calibration
methods like temperature scaling (Guo et al., 2017) impossible. Another significant challenge arises from severe
domain distribution shifts between source and target. Consequently, UDA models calibrated with only labeled source
data cannot ensure effective calibration for unlabeled data
in the target domain (Wang et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) (Pan & Yang,
2009) has been widely studied for enhancing the generaliza1

To address these challenges, mainstream approaches (Park
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020) treat calibration in UDA as
a covariate shift problem (Sugiyama et al., 2007) across domains. They typically employ importance weighting (Cortes
et al., 2008) to estimate weights for source samples based
on the similarity to target data and then perform sampleweighted temperature scaling with a labeled source validation set. These solutions have obvious drawbacks that
impede effective and efficient model calibration in UDA.
Firstly, importance weighting may not be reliable under

2

Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR, Singapore NLPR
& MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 National University of Singapore
5
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore. Correspondence to: Dapeng Hu <lhxxhb15@gmail.com>, Chuan-Sheng
Foo <chuan_sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

