Compositional Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning

Yixiong Zou 1 Shanghang Zhang 2 Haichen Zhou 1 Yuhua Li 1 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract
Few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) is
proposed to continually learn from novel classes
with only a few samples after the (pre-)training on
base classes with sufficient data. However, this remains a challenge. In contrast, humans can easily
recognize novel classes with a few samples. Cognitive science demonstrates that an important component of such human capability is compositional
learning. This involves identifying visual primitives from learned knowledge and then composing
new concepts using these transferred primitives,
making incremental learning both effective and
interpretable. To imitate human compositional
learning, we propose a cognitive-inspired method
for the FSCIL task. We define and build a compositional model based on set similarities, and then
equip it with a primitive composition module and
a primitive reuse module. In the primitive composition module, we propose to utilize the Centered
Kernel Alignment (CKA) similarity to approximate the similarity between primitive sets, allowing the training and evaluation based on primitive
compositions. In the primitive reuse module, we
enhance primitive reusability by classifying inputs based on primitives replaced with the closest
primitives from other classes. Experiments on
three datasets validate our method, showing it
outperforms current state-of-the-art methods with
improved interpretability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Zoilsen/Comp-FSCIL.

Figure 1. As studied by cognitive science (Biederman, 1987), humans can compositionally learn knowledge by dividing learned
ones into primitives, and then compose them to learn novel knowledge, which leads to the good human capability of incremental
learning with only scarce data. To imitate the human ability of compositional learning, we propose a compositional learning method
for the few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) task. We
briefly plot the primitives automatically found by our methods
with the possible meanings, where we can see good reusability and
interpretability of primitives. Detailed plots are in Fig.7.

man, 2015; He et al., 2016). However, real-world scenarios
present novel knowledge continuously, often with limited
data (Hou et al., 2019; Rebuffi et al., 2017), such as rare
diseases. Addressing this challenge requires models to learn
novel knowledge from just a few samples without forgetting previously learned ones (Castro et al., 2018; Tao et al.,
2020). This necessity gives rise to the Few-Shot ClassIncremental Learning (FSCIL) task (Zhang et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2022). In this task, models are initially (pre)trained on base classes during a base session with sufficient
training data. Then, models learn from novel classes in
incremental sessions with only a few samples, and finally
classify test samples across all encountered classes. While
various approaches, including metric-based ones (Zou et al.,
2022; Zhang et al., 2021), adaptation-based ones (Zhou
et al., 2022; Yibo Yang, 2023), etc. have been explored for
this task, FSCIL remains a challenge due to the scarcity of
training data and the risk of catastrophic forgetting.

1. Introduction
With advancements in hardware, deep neural networks have
demonstrated considerable success across various areas using pre-defined large-scale datasets (Simonyan & Zisser1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In contrast to machines, humans can easily learn from lim1

