Stabilizing Policy Gradients for Stochastic Differential Equations
via Consistency with Perturbation Process

Xiangxin Zhou 1 2 Liang Wang 1 2 Yichi Zhou 3

𝑅(𝑥01 )
𝑅(𝑥0𝟐 )

Abstract
Considering generating samples with high rewards, we focus on optimizing deep neural networks parameterized stochastic differential equations (SDEs), the advanced generative models
with high expressiveness, with policy gradient,
the leading algorithm in reinforcement learning.
Nevertheless, when applying policy gradients to
SDEs, since the policy gradient is estimated on a
finite set of trajectories, it can be ill-defined, and
the policy behavior in data-scarce regions may
be uncontrolled. This challenge compromises the
stability of policy gradients and negatively impacts sample complexity. To address these issues,
we propose constraining the SDE to be consistent
with its associated perturbation process. Since the
perturbation process covers the entire space and
is easy to sample, we can mitigate the aforementioned problems. Our framework offers a general
approach allowing for a versatile selection of policy gradient methods to effectively and efficiently
train SDEs. We evaluate our algorithm on the
task of structure-based drug design and optimize
the binding affinity of generated ligand molecules.
Our method achieves the best Vina score (−9.07)
on the CrossDocked2020 dataset.

1

ill-defined

𝑅(𝑥0𝟑 )
𝑅(𝑥0𝟒 )
Backward SDE (Policy)

𝑡=1

𝑡=0

𝑅(𝑥01 )
𝑅(𝑥0𝟐 )
𝑅(𝑥0𝟑 )
𝑅(𝑥0𝟒 )

Forward SDE (Perturbation)

well-defined

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation and the advantages of our
method. Top: Trajectories sampled by SDE-based policy. The
terminal states (i.e., generated samples at t = 0) are denoted
as x10 , x20 , x30 , x40 . The reward function is denoted as R(·). A
data-scarce region is marked with a red cross. Middle: Marginal
distributions of consistent forward and backward SDEs over time t.
Bottom: Trajectories perturbed from x10 , x20 , x30 , x40 via the forward SDE. In vanilla SDE-based policy gradient methods (top),
due to substantial expense of computation and time required by
SDE simulation, the sampled trajectories and rewards are usually
sparse. Therefore, the policy gradients in data-scarce regions are
ill-defined, leading to instability. The consistency which can be
ensured via score matching allows us to correctly estimate the
policy gradients with sufficient data that can be efficiently sampled
from the forward SDE (i.e., perturbation).

Introduction

Deep neural networks parameterized stochastic differential
equations (SDEs) have garnered significant interest within
the machine learning community, owing to their robust theoretical underpinnings and exceptional expressiveness. Recently, SDEs have taken center stage in generative modeling
(Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b),
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
(NLPR), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CASIA) 3 ByteDance Research. Correspondence to: Yichi Zhou
<zhouyichi.123@bytedance.com>.

with a myriad of applications ranging from image generation to molecule generation, and beyond (see Yang et al.
(2022) for a comprehensive survey). SDE generates samples
by simulating the following process from time 1 to 0:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

dxt = πθ (xt , t)dt + g(t)dω̄
1

(1)

