Neural Collapse in Multi-label Learning with Pick-all-label Loss

Pengyu Li * 1 Xiao Li * 1 Yutong Wang 1 Qing Qu 1

Abstract

utilize the structure for better training and prediction.

We study deep neural networks for the multi-label
classification (M-lab) task through the lens of neural collapse (NC). Previous works have been restricted to the multi-class classification setting and
discovered a prevalent NC phenomenon comprising of the following properties for the last-layer
features: (i) the variability of features within every class collapses to zero, (ii) the set of feature
means form an equi-angular tight frame (ETF),
and (iii) the last layer classifiers collapse to the
feature mean upon some scaling. We generalize
the study to multi-label learning, and prove for
the first time that a generalized NC phenomenon
holds with the “pick-all-label” formulation, which
we term as M-lab NC. While the ETF geometry remains consistent for features with a single
label, multi-label scenarios introduce a unique
combinatorial aspect we term the ”tag-wise average” property, where the means of features with
multiple labels are the scaled averages of means
for single-label instances. Theoretically, under
proper assumptions on the features, we establish
that the only global optimizer of the pick-all-label
cross-entropy loss satisfy the multi-label NC. In
practice, we demonstrate that our findings can
lead to better test performance with more efficient
training techniques for M-lab learning.

Recently, an intriguing phenomenon has been observed in
the terminal phase of training overparameterized deep networks for the task of multi-class (M-clf) classification in
which the last-layer features and classifiers collapse to simple but elegant mathematical structures: all training inputs
are mapped to class-specific points in feature space, and
the last-layer classifier converges to the dual of class means
of the features while attaining the maximum possible margin with a simplex equiangular tight frame (Simplex ETF)
structure (Papyan et al., 2020). See the top row of Figure 1
for an illustration. This phenomenon, termed Neural Collapse (NC), persists across a variety of different network
architectures, datasets, and even the choices of losses (Han
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022b;a; Yaras et al., 2022). The
NC phenomenon has been widely observed and analyzed
theoretically (Papyan et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021; Zhu
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023a) in the context of M-clf learning problems. It is applied to understand transfer learning
(Galanti et al., 2022b; Li et al., 2022), and robustness (Papyan et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2022), where the line of study has
significantly advanced our understanding of representation
structures for M-clf using deep networks.
Our contributions. We demonstrate a general version of
the NC phenomenon in M-lab, and our study provides new
insights into prediction and training for the M-lab problem.
Specifically, our contributions can be highlighted as follows.
• Multi-label neural collapse phenomenon. We show that
the last-layer features and classifier learned via overparameterized deep networks exhibit a more general version
of NC which we term it as multi-label neural collapse (Mlab NC). Specifically, while features linked to single-label
instances retain a Simplex ETF configuration and undergo
collapse, the more complex features with higher label
counts intriguingly represent a scaled ”tag-wise average”
of their single-label counterparts; see the bottom row of
Figure 1 for an illustration. This new pattern, referred to
as multi-label ETF, is consistently observed in the training
of practical neural networks for M-lab tasks.
• Global optimality of M-lab NC. Theoretically, we study
the global optimality of M-lab NC based upon a commonly used pick-all-label loss for M-lab learning. By
treating the last-layer feature as free optimization variables (Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021), we show that

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning showed tremendous success
in classifying problems (LeCun et al., 2015), thanks in part
to its ability to extract salient features from data (Bengio
et al., 2013). While the success extends to multi-label (Mlab) classification, the structures of the learned features in
the M-lab regime is less well-understood. This work aims
to fill this gap by understanding the geometric structures
of features for M-lab learned via deep neural networks and
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
Correspondence to: Qing Qu <qingqu@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

