Distributionally Robust Data Valuation

Xiaoqiang Lin 1 Xinyi Xu 1 Zhaoxuan Wu 2 See-Kiong Ng 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

of each data point to the model performance. The resultant data values are useful in many ways. For example,
in data marketplaces (Yu & Zhang, 2017; Agarwal et al.,
2019), data values can be used to price data. In collaborative machine learning (CML), data values can be used to
determine the participating parties’ contributions to the collaboration/training and fairly reward them (e.g., monetary
rewards) (Sim et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Lin et al.,
2024). Data valuation also finds applications in explainable
machine learning (e.g., dataset debugging) (Koh & Liang,
2017) and active learning (Ghorbani et al., 2021). Of note,
existing works (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019;
Kwon & Zou, 2021; Wang & Jia, 2023) typically define
the value of data based on its improvement of validation
performance.

Data valuation quantifies the contribution of each
data point to the performance of a machine learning model. Existing works typically define the
value of data by its improvement of the validation
performance of the trained model. However, this
approach can be impractical to apply in collaborative machine learning and data marketplace
since it is difficult for the parties/buyers to agree
on a common validation dataset or determine the
exact validation distribution a priori. To address
this, we propose a distributionally robust data valuation approach to perform data valuation without known/fixed validation distributions. Our approach defines the value of data by its improvement of the distributionally robust generalization
error (DRGE), thus providing a worst-case performance guarantee without a known/fixed validation distribution. However, since computing
DRGE directly is infeasible, we propose using
model deviation as a proxy for the marginal improvement of DRGE (for kernel regression and
neural networks) to compute data values. Furthermore, we identify a notion of uniqueness where
low uniqueness characterizes low-value data. We
empirically demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing data valuation approaches in data
selection and data removal tasks on real-world
datasets (e.g., housing price prediction, diabetes
hospitalization prediction).

However, using the performance on a specific validation
dataset for data valuation can be impractical in some cases.
Specifically, in CML and data marketplace, ensuring all
parties/buyers agree on the same validation dataset is difficult since they usually have heterogeneous local data and
validation distributions (Li et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021).
For instance, hospitals collaboratively collect data to train
a model for hospitalization prediction. The value of each
dataset (from different hospitals) depends on the unknown
distribution of future model users (Walker, 2015; Tu et al.,
2022), as new hospitals with varying local validation distributions may join later. Therefore, valuing data based
on a specific validation dataset can misrepresent the data’s
value on the validation distribution of such a hospital that
joins later. Separately, in data marketplaces (e.g., AWS Data
Exchange (Amazon, 2023)), sellers need to price the data before knowing exactly who the buyers are (Just et al., 2023),
meaning the sellers do not know the local validation distributions of these buyers a priori (i.e., no known validation
distribution). In this scenario, existing approaches that require a known validation distribution (Jia et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022) cannot be applied. The core
question is: What perspective should we take to value data
without a fixed and known validation dataset/distribution?

1. Introduction
In machine learning (ML), data is essential to obtaining
good learning performance. Data valuation (Jia et al., 2019;
Ghorbani & Zou, 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2020; Sim et al.,
2020) is introduced to quantify the contribution (i.e., value)
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Zhaoxuan Wu
<wu.zhaoxuan@u.nus.edu>.

Although without a known/fixed validation distribution, it
is still desirable if the data values can indicate some performance guarantee. Specifically, the buyers in the data marketplace (or parties in CML) are still interested in how the data
can benefit them in improving the model performance on

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

