Learning with 3D Rotations: a Hitchhiker’s Guide to SO(3)

A. René Geist 1 2 Jonas Frey 1 3 Mikel Zhobro 1 2 Anna Levina 4 Georg Martius 1 2

Abstract

SO(3)

Many settings in machine learning require the
selection of a rotation representation. However,
choosing a suitable representation from the many
available options is challenging. This paper acts
as a survey and guide through rotation representations. We walk through their properties that
harm or benefit deep learning with gradient-based
optimization. By consolidating insights from
rotation-based learning, we provide a comprehensive overview of learning functions with rotation
representations. We provide guidance on selecting representations based on whether rotations
are in the model’s input or output and whether the
data primarily comprises small angles.

Object

Physics

Object feature space

Rotation
Rotation representation space

Rotation estimation
Feature prediction

Figure 1. Overview on learning with rotations. A neural network
learns a function from a feature space A to a rotation representation
space R or vice versa. When learning with rotations, the properties
of f : R → SO(3) and g : SO(3) → R affect training.

In machine learning, we want to choose the representation
of our data that yields the best test accuracy. However,
recent works (Zhou et al., 2019; Brégier, 2021; Levinson
et al., 2020) suggest that rotation representations with four
or less dimensions do not facilitate sample-efficient learning.
To further complicate matters, empirical findings by Pepe
et al. (2022) suggest that geometric algebra representations
may rival the high-dimensional representations proposed by
Zhou et al. (2019); Levinson et al. (2020). Despite many
recent works discussing the role of rotations in machine
learning, we did not encounter a work that provides a comprehensive overview on the question:

The project code is available at:
github.com/martius-lab/hitchhiking-rotations

1. Introduction
For centuries, researchers explored methods to describe
the rotation of Cartesian coordinate systems in threedimensional Euclidean space. Euler (1765) demonstrated
the necessity of at least three parameters for parameterizing 3D rotations through rotation matrices R ∈ SO(3) as
exemplified by Euler angles. Subsequent discoveries led
to the description of rotation through exponential coordinates and quaternions, which found widespread adoption
in many fields such as control theory, robotics, and computer animations. The choice of a rotation representation for
a specific application depends on its properties, including
human-interpretability, computational costs, and dimensionality. In recent years, the representation’s impact on learning
functions from data has become another significant factor.

What representation of SO(3) is suitable for
neural network regression with gradient-based
optimization?
Besides considering the case in which rotations are in the
models’ output as discussed in Zhou et al. (2019); Brégier
(2021); Levinson et al. (2020), we also detail how one may
learn functions from rotations being in the input. We discuss common rotation representations, using tricks such as
wrapping angle coordinates into sinusoidal transformations,
problems arising from double-cover, and how the choice
of metric affects training. We find that high-dimensional
representations should be the preferred default choice from
a theoretical as well as empirical perspective. As it turns out,
many aspects of a rotation representation influence training
while also vice versa, the setup of machine learning problem
influences the choice of rotation representation.

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Autonomous
learning group, Germany 2 University of Tübingen, Distributed
intelligence lab, Germany 3 Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(ETH Zurich), Robotic systems lab, Switzerland 4 University of
Tübingen, Self-organization of neuronal networks group, Germany.
Correspondence to: A. René Geist <andreas-rene.geist@wsii.unituebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

