Is Epistemic Uncertainty Faithfully Represented
by Evidential Deep Learning Methods?

Mira Jürgens 1 Nis Meinert 2 Viktor Bengs 3 Eyke Hüllermeier 3 Willem Waegeman 1

Abstract

categories: aleatoric and epistemic (Kendall and Gal, 2017;
Hüllermeier and Waegeman, 2021). Since outcomes cannot
be predicted deterministically, we assume for classical supervised learning methods a conditional probability p(y | x)
on Y as the ground truth and train a probabilistic predictor to produce estimates p̂(y | x). These estimates capture
the aleatoric uncertainty about the actual outcome y ∈ Y,
which refers to the inherent randomness that the learner
cannot eliminate. However, this approach does not allow
the learner to express its epistemic uncertainty, which is the
lack of knowledge about how accurately p̂ approximates p.

Trustworthy ML systems should not only return
accurate predictions, but also a reliable representation of their uncertainty. Bayesian methods are
commonly used to quantify both aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainty, but alternative approaches,
such as evidential deep learning methods, have
become popular in recent years. The latter group
of methods in essence extends empirical risk minimization (ERM) for predicting second-order probability distributions over outcomes, from which
measures of epistemic (and aleatoric) uncertainty
can be extracted. This paper presents novel theoretical insights of evidential deep learning, highlighting the difficulties in optimizing second-order
loss functions and interpreting the resulting epistemic uncertainty measures. With a systematic
setup that covers a wide range of approaches for
classification, regression and counts, it provides
novel insights into issues of identifiability and
convergence in second-order loss minimization,
and the relative (rather than absolute) nature of
epistemic uncertainty measures.

To capture both types of uncertainty, a popular choice is
to consider second-order distributions, which map a query
instance x to a probability distribution over all possible
candidate distributions p. This concept forms one of the
core concepts behind Bayesian methods, such as Bayesian
neural networks, together with the incorporation of domain
knowledge via a prior distribution (Depeweg et al., 2018).
However, exact computation of the posterior distribution
can be computationally intractable, particularly when using
deep learning methods. As a result, approximate techniques
such as variational inference and sampling-based methods
have been used extensively (Graves, 2011).
An alternative approach, known as evidential deep learning,
that adopts a direct uncertainty quantification by means of
second-order risk minimization, is currently gaining a lot
of traction (see Table 1 for an overview of the most important methods). This approach takes a frequentist statistics
perspective and introduces specific loss functions to estimate a second-order distribution over p̂(y | x), without the
need for specifying a prior, unlike Bayesian methods. In the
last years, evidential deep learning has been widely used
in applications of supervised learning, and many authors
claim that it is state-of-the-art in downstream ML tasks that
benefit from epistemic uncertainty quantification, such as
out-of-distribution detection (Yang et al., 2022), robustness
to adversarial attacks (Kopetzki et al., 2021) or active learning (Park et al., 2023). However, in all these tasks, one only
needs relative epistemic uncertainty measures, e.g., when an
example attains a higher epistemic uncertainty than a second
example, it is more likely to be out-of-distribution. For specific optimization problems, some authors have expressed

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems are capable of making predictions
based on patterns found in data. However, these patterns
may be incomplete, noisy, or biased, which can lead to errors and inaccuracies in the system’s predictions. To address
this challenge, uncertainty quantification has emerged as a
technique to measure the reliability of a model’s predictions
and the confidence that can be placed in its results. In supervised learning, uncertainty is often classified into two
1
Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modeling, Ghent University, Belgium 2 Institue of Communications
and Navigation, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Neustrelitz, Germany 3 Department of Informatics, University of Munich (LMU), Germany. Correspondence to: Mira Jürgens
<mira.juergens@ugent.be>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

