Quantum Theory and Application of Contextual Optimal Transport

Nicola Mariella 1 Albert Akhriev 1 Francesco Tacchino 2 Christa Zoufal 2 Juan Carlos Gonzalez-Espitia 2 3
Benedek Harsanyi 4 5 Eugene Koskin 1 6 Ivano Tavernelli 2 Stefan Woerner 2 Marianna Rapsomaniki 4
Sergiy Zhuk 1 Jannis Born 4

Abstract

and the OT plan aims to minimize this cost while satisfying certain constraints. OT theory has found applications
across several fields, including biology where it gained popularity in single-cell analysis, an area of research rich in
problems of mapping cellular distributions across distinct
states, timepoints, or spatial contexts (Klein et al., 2023).
Notable biological tasks are reconstructing cell evolution
trajectories (Schiebinger et al., 2019), predicting responses
to therapeutic interventions (Bunne et al., 2023; 2022) and
aligning datasets across different omic modalities (Cao et al.,
2022). From the OT perspective, source and target distributions are measurements of biomolecules of single cells.

Optimal Transport (OT) has fueled machine learning (ML) across many domains. When paired data
measurements (µ, ν) are coupled to covariates, a
challenging conditional distribution learning setting arises. Existing approaches for learning a
global transport map parameterized through a potentially unseen context utilize Neural OT and
largely rely on Brenier’s theorem. Here, we propose a first-of-its-kind quantum computing formulation for amortized optimization of contextualized transportation plans. We exploit a direct link
between doubly stochastic matrices and unitary
operators thus unravelling a natural connection
between OT and quantum computation. We verify our method (QontOT) on synthetic and real
data by predicting variations in cell type distributions conditioned on drug dosage. Importantly
we conduct a 24-qubit hardware experiment on a
task challenging for classical computers and report a performance that cannot be matched with
our classical neural OT approach. In sum, this is a
first step toward learning to predict contextualized
transportation plans through quantum computing.

In many OT applications, data measurements µi (initial
state) and νi (final state) are coupled to a context pi that
induces µi to develop into νi . One thus might aspire to learn
a global transport map T parameterized through pi and thus
facilitate the prediction of target states ν̂j from source states
µj , even for an unseen context pj (cf. Figure 1A). This
work is largely based on Brenier’s theorem (1987) which
postulates the existence of an unique OT map T given by the
gradient of a convex function, i.e., T = ∇fθ . Makkuva et al.
(2020) showed that OT maps between two distributions can
be learned through neural OT solvers by using a minimax
optimization where fθ is an input convex neural network
(ICNN, Amos et al. (2017)). A notable example of such a
neural OT approach is CondOT (Bunne et al., 2022) which
estimates transport maps conditioned on a context variable
and learned from quasi-probability distributions (µi , νi ),
each linked to a context variable pj 1 . Limitations of such
approaches include the dependence on squared Euclidean
cost induced by Brenier’s theorem (Peyré et al., 2019) or the
unstable training due to the min-max formulation in the dual
objective as well as the architectural constraints induced
by the partial ICNN. The Monge Gap (Uscidda & Cuturi,
2023), an architecturally agnostic regularizer to estimate OT
maps with any cost C, overcomes these challenges; however,
unlike CondOT it cannot generalize to new context. This is
resolved in our concurrent work on the Conditional Monge
Gap (Harsanyi et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2008) provides a mathematical framework for finding transportation plans that
minimize the cost of moving resources from a source to a
target distribution. The cost is defined as a distance or a
dissimilarity measure between the source and target points,
1

IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe - Dublin 2 IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe - Zurich, Switzerland 3 Politecnico
di Milano, Milan, Italy 4 IBM Research, IBM Research Europe - Zurich, Switzerland 5 École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 6 University College Dublin,
Ireland. Correspondence to:
<nicola.mariella@ibm.com>,
<jab@zurich.ibm.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

We use "contextual" rather than "conditional" to differentiate from
OT on conditional probabilities (Tabak et al., 2021)

