On the Calibration of Human Pose Estimation
Kerui Gu * 1 Rongyu Chen * 1 Xuanlong Yu 2 Angela Yao 1

Abstract
2D human pose estimation predicts keypoint
locations and the corresponding confidence.
Calibration-wise, the confidence should be
aligned with the pose accuracy. Yet existing
pose estimation methods tend to estimate
confidence with heuristics such as the maximum
value of heatmaps. This work shows, through
theoretical analysis and empirical verification,
a calibration gap in current pose estimation
frameworks. Our derivations directly lead to
closed-form adjustments in the confidence
based on additionally inferred instance size and
visibility. Given the black-box nature of deep
neural networks, however, it is not possible to
close the gap with only closed-form adjustments.
We go one step further and propose a Calibrated
ConfidenceNet (CCNet) to explicitly learn
network-specific adjustments with a confidence
prediction branch. The proposed CCNet, as
a lightweight post-hoc addition, improves
the calibration of standard off-the-shelf pose
estimation frameworks. The project page is at
https://comp.nus.edu.sg/∼keruigu/calibrate pose/
project.html.

Figure 1. Adding our CCNet to detection- (Det) and regression(Reg) based pose estimation improves confidence estimation. The
area under the Precision-Recall curve measures the quality of the
confidence estimate. The orange striped and blue shaded areas
denote the improvement. Random assignment of confidence (Rand
Conf) has a terrible calibration while mAR serve as the upper
bound confidence estimation.

Having well-calibrated confidences that are aligned with
the pose accuracy is important for applications that require
pose estimation. In these applications, the pose can be
used either as an input to a downstream task, such as 3D
mesh recovery (Kolotouros et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022) or
directly for reasoning and decision-making, such as robotics
or autonomous driving (Abdar et al., 2021). Being able to
rely on the confidence is not only useful, e.g. for discarding
low-confidence outputs, but also safety-critical for humanmachine interactions.

1. Introduction
2D human pose estimation (HPE) methods typically predict
keypoint locations and corresponding confidences. The
progress in developing such methods is primarily centred on
improving keypoint location accuracy (Xu et al., 2022; Mao
et al., 2022). The confidence, on the other hand, is estimated
in an ad-hoc manner and based on heuristics such as taking
the maximum value of the keypoint heatmap (Xiao et al.,
2018; Sun et al., 2019) or variance of predictive distribution
(Li et al., 2021a).

How well-calibrated are current pose estimation systems,
and do their confidences align with the actual pose accuracy? One line of work rooted in uncertainty (Bramlage
et al., 2023; Pierzchlewicz et al., 2022) introduces distribution modelling and retrains the pose-estimation network.
The resulting network has more reliable confidence, but
it comes at the expense of pose accuracy. Furthermore,
confidence is evaluated from the perspective of distribution
calibration. Such an approach ignores the alignment of confidence to the accuracy and thus may not serve as helpful
indicators (Kuleshov & Deshpande, 2022).

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, National University
of Singapore 2 U2IS, ENSTA Paris, IP Paris. Correspondence to:
Kerui Gu <keruigu@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

