RMIB: Representation Matching Information Bottleneck for Matching Text
Representations

Haihui Pan 1 2 Zhifang Liao 1 Wenrui Xie 3 Kun Han 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Text matching is a basic task in natural language processing
(NLP). The purpose of this task is to predict the semantic
relationship between two input texts. Text matching can be
applied to many natural language processing scenarios. For
example, in question-and-answer matching, it is necessary
to judge whether the given candidate answers match the
given question (Tan et al., 2016); In natural language reasoning, for a given hypothesis and premise, it is necessary
to judge whether the hypothesis and premise are entailment,
contradiction or neutral (Bowman et al., 2015); In information retrieval, it is necessary to determine the correlation
between the searched information and the returned candidate (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019).

Recent studies have shown that the domain matching of text representations will help improve the
generalization ability of asymmetrical domains
text matching tasks. This requires that the distribution of text representations should be as similar as
possible, similar to matching with heterogeneous
data domains, in order to make the data after feature extraction indistinguishable. However, how
to match the distribution of text representations
remains an open question, and the role of text
representations distribution match is still unclear.
In this work, we explicitly narrow the distribution
of text representations by matching them with the
same prior distribution. We theoretically prove
that narrowing the distribution of text representations in asymmetrical domains text matching is
equivalent to optimizing the information bottleneck (IB). Since the interaction between text representations plays an important role in asymmetrical domains text matching, IB does not restrict the
interaction between text representations. Therefore, we propose the adequacy of interaction and
the incompleteness of a single text representation
on the basis of IB and obtain the representation
matching information bottleneck (RMIB). We theoretically prove that the constraints on text representations in RMIB is equivalent to maximizing
the mutual information between text representations on the premise that the task information is
given. On four text matching models and five text
matching datasets, we verify that RMIB can improve the performance of asymmetrical domains
text matching. Our experimental code is available
at https://github.com/chenxingphh/rmib.

Asymmetrical text matching refers to two input texts from
different domains. For example, the question and the candidate answers can be viewed as being sampled from two different distributions in question-and-answer matching. One
approach of asymmetrical domains text matching is to process text from different domains into text representation
through deep learning models. In the common semantic
space, text representations from different domains have the
same dimensions, so it is easy to define semantic matching functions. The current mainstream approaches mainly
focus on how to design more effective models to increase
the interaction between input texts from different domains
to obtain better text representations (Chen et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2017; Gong et al.; Kim et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2019). In the actual text matching, (Yu et al., 2022) finds an
interesting phenomenon that the text representations from
different domains are usually separated in the early stage of
training. However, with the deepening of training, the text
representations from different domains gradually begin to
mix with each other. The explanation for this phenomenon
is that there is a lexical gap between texts from different domains (Tay et al., 2018), so it is necessary to bridge this gap
in the process of learning, which is similar to cross-modal
matching. Existing researches (Li et al., 2020; Hazarika
et al., 2020) shows that the matching model should generate
domain invariant features, that is, the global distribution of
text representations from different domains in the common
semantic space should be as similar as possible, so as to

*
Equal contribution 1 Central South University, Changsha, China 2 Cheetah Mobile Inc., Beijing, China 3 Datawhale
Org., Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Zhifang Liao
<zfliao@csu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

