Embodied CoT Distillation From LLM To Off-the-shelf Agents

Wonje Choi 1 Woo Kyung Kim 1 Minjong Yoo 1 Honguk Woo 1

Abstract

deduce executable robotic skills in the environment. Several works (Huang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Song et al.,
2023; Singh et al., 2023) explore the grounding of LLMs to
the environment through prompting based on sensory data,
reference trajectories, and available skills. Recently, palme (Driess et al., 2023) expands the embodied reasoning abilities of LLMs to include multimodal data, such as visual observations of the environment. Yet, these approaches, which
directly rely on LLMs for continual short-term decisionmaking, often encounter practical limitations in real-world
applications, particularly when decision-making agents are
required to operate on capacity-constrained, off-the-shelf
devices. The high computational requirements of LLMs
pose a significant challenge in such scenarios.

We address the challenge of utilizing large language models (LLMs) for complex embodied
tasks, in the environment where decision-making
systems operate timely on capacity-limited, offthe-shelf devices. We present D E D ER, a framework for decomposing and distilling the embodied reasoning capabilities from LLMs to efficient,
small language model (sLM)-based policies. In
D E D ER, the decision-making process of LLMbased strategies is restructured into a hierarchy
with a reasoning-policy and planning-policy. The
reasoning-policy is distilled from the data that
is generated through the embodied in-context
learning and self-verification of an LLM, so it
can produce effective rationales. The planningpolicy, guided by the rationales, can render optimized plans efficiently. In turn, D E D ER allows
for adopting sLMs for both policies, deployed on
off-the-shelf devices. Furthermore, to enhance the
quality of intermediate rationales, specific to embodied tasks, we devise the embodied knowledge
graph, and to generate multiple rationales timely
through a single inference, we also use the contrastively prompted attention model. Our experiments with the ALFRED benchmark demonstrate
that D E D ER surpasses leading language planning
and distillation approaches, indicating the applicability and efficiency of sLM-based embodied
policies derived through D E D ER.

The direct end-to-end distillation of an LLM into a more
compact, resource-efficient model, while it appears straightforward, might not be effective for complex embodied
tasks (Dasgupta et al., 2023). This challenge stems from the
requirements of a deep understanding on embodied task features, which inherently demand the long-horizon multi-step
reasoning along with the ability to adapt to time-varying
environment contexts. An embodied agent frequently encounters new and unseen environment information through
its interaction with the surroundings. This continual exposure to a diverse range of environment conditions adds layers
of complexity and variability, which in turn complicates the
distillation process.
Our work is focused on the distillation of LLM-based policies for embodied tasks into off-the-shelf agents that are
only capable of operating small language models (sLMs).
We present D E D ER, an innovative embodied distillation
framework, designed to decompose and distill the embodied
reasoning and decision-making procedures of LLM-based
policies into two distinct small, more manageable models:
reasoning-policy and planning-policy. The reasoning-policy
focuses on understanding and interpreting task requirements
and environment contexts, while the planning-policy concentrates on generating actionable plans based on the insights
provided by the reasoning-policy. This division allows for
the sophisticated functionalities of LLMs to be leveraged
in a more resource-efficient manner, suitable for embodied
agents with capacity-limited, off-the-shelf devices.

1. Introduction
In embodied AI, significant advancements have been made
in applying large language models (LLMs) to task planning.
For example, SayCan (Brohan et al., 2023) combines LLMs’
reasoning capabilities with a reinforcement learning (RL)based affordance model to interpret task instructions and
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea. Correspondence to: Honguk Woo <hwoo@skku.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Achieving the reasoning-policy via LLM distillation

1

