Leveraging (Biased) Information: Multi-armed Bandits with Offline Data

Wang Chi Cheung 1 Lixing Lyu 2

Abstract

learning process. Nevertheless, it is too strong and impractical to assume that the historical dataset and the online model
follow the same probability distribution, given the ubiquity
of distributional shifts. Therefore, it is desirable to design an
adaptive policy that reaps the benefit of offline data if they
closely match the online model, while judiciously ignores
the offline data and learns from scratch otherwise.

We leverage offline data to facilitate online learning in stochastic multi-armed bandits. The probability distributions that govern the offline data
and the online rewards can be different. Without
any non-trivial upper bound on their difference,
we show that no non-anticipatory policy can outperform the UCB policy by (Auer et al. 2002),
even in the presence of offline data. In complement, we propose an online policy MIN-UCB,
which outperforms UCB when a non-trivial upper
bound is given. MIN-UCB adaptively chooses to
utilize the offline data when they are deemed informative, and to ignore them otherwise. MIN-UCB
is shown to be tight in terms of both instance independent and dependent regret bounds. Finally, we
corroborate the theoretical results with numerical
experiments.

Motivated by the above discussions, we consider a stochastic multi-armed bandit model with possibly biased offline
dataset. The entire event horizon consists of a warm-start
phase, followed by an online phase whereby decision making occurs. During the warm-start phase, the DM receives
an offline dataset, consisting of samples governed by a latent
probabiltiy distribution P (off) . The subsequent online phase
is the same as standard multi-armed bandit model, except
that the offline dataset can be incorporated in decision making. The random online rewards are governed by another
latent probabiltiy distribution P (on) . The DM aims to maximize the total cumulative reward earned, or equivalently
minimize the regret, during the online phase.

Keywords: multi-armed bandits, distributional
shift, warm start

Intuitively, when P (off) , P (on) are “far apart”, the DM should
conduct online learning from scratch and ignore the offline
dataset. For example, the vanilla UCB policy by (Auer et al.,
2002) incurs expected regret at most


X log T
,
O
(1)
∆(a)

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit problem (MAB) is a classical model in
sequential decision-making. In traditional models, online
learning is initialized with no historical dataset. However, in
many real world scenarios, historical datasets related to the
underlying model exist before online learning begins. Those
datasets could be beneficial to online learning. For instance,
when a company launch a new product in Singapore, past
sales data in the US could be of relevance. This prompts an
intriguing question: Can we develop an approach that effectively utilizes offline data, and subsequently learns under
bandit feedback? Such approaches carry significant allure,
as they potentially reduce the amount of exploration in the

a:∆(a)>0

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 2 Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Wang Chi Cheung <isecwc@nus.edu.sg>, Lixing Lyu <lyulixing@u.nus.edu>.

where T is the length of online phase, and ∆(a) ≥ 0 is the
difference between the expected reward of an optimal arm
and arm a (also see Section 2). The bound (1) holds for
all P (off) , P (on) . In contrary, when P (off) , P (on) are “sufficiently close”, the DM should incorporate the offline data
into online learning and avoid unnecessary exploration. For
example, when P (off) = P (on) , HUCB1 (Shivaswamy &
Joachims, 2012) and MonUCB (Banerjee et al., 2022) incur
expected regret at most




X
log
T
(2)
O
max
− TS (a)∆(a), 0  ,
∆(a)

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

where TS (a) is the number of offline samples on arm a.
(2) is a better regret bound than (1). However, (2) only

a:∆(a)>0

1

