Absolute Policy Optimization: Enhancing Lower Probability Bound of
Performance with High Confidence

Weiye Zhao * 1 Feihan Li * 1 Yifan Sun 1 Rui Chen 1 Tianhao Wei 1 Changliu Liu 1

Abstract
In recent years, trust region on-policy reinforcement learning has achieved impressive results
in addressing complex control tasks and gaming
scenarios. However, contemporary state-of-theart algorithms within this category primarily emphasize improvement in expected performance,
lacking the ability to control over the worst-case
performance outcomes. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel objective function, optimizing which leads to guaranteed monotonic
improvement in the lower probability bound of
performance with high confidence. Building upon
this groundbreaking theoretical advancement, we
further introduce a practical solution called Absolute Policy Optimization (APO). Our experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
across challenging continuous control benchmark
tasks and extend its applicability to mastering
Atari games. Our findings reveal that APO as well
as its efficient variation Proximal Absolute Policy
Optimization (PAPO) significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art policy gradient algorithms, resulting in substantial improvements in worst-case performance, as well as expected performance.

Figure 1: Explanation of APO principles. Here we
simplify the distribution of rewards to a Gaussian
distribution for displaying. Green and blue represent
the worst case and expectation respectively. Y-axis
represents the distribution of performance samples
introduced in Section 2.2. In comparison to TRPO,
APO is designed to consistently elevate the lower
bound of overall performance.

performance, it fails to exert control over the worst-case performance. Simultaneously, the deployment of reinforcement
learning policies in real-world scenarios demands a high
level of consistency, where the performance distribution
must be carefully controlled to ensure that even under worstcase conditions, undesirable outcomes are avoided. This
is particularly critical in applications such as autonomous
driving and intelligent robot manipulation, where robust
performance is essential to guarantee safety, reliability, and
adherence to desired behaviors.
Distribution control represents a prominent research area
across various domains. Existing works in this field can
be categorized into three main groups: (i) modeling the
entire performance distribution, (ii) controlling worst-case
costs, and (iii) mitigating model discrepancies during generalization. Many distributional RL methods (Bellemare
et al., 2017; Dabney et al., 2017) fall into the first category,
aiming to model the entire distribution of returns (Dabney
et al., 2018). By incorporating more information about the
distribution of rewards into policy gradients, these methods
contribute to more stable and efficient learning (Yang et al.,
2019; Zhou et al., 2020; Kuang et al., 2023; Fujimoto et al.,
2018). While distributional RL is commonly applied in the
context of off-policy methods, the convergence characteristics of these methods are not fully understood, typically
explored under strict assumptions such as infinite sampling
and Q-updates (Fujimoto et al., 2018). It’s important to

1. Introduction
Existing reinforcement learning algorithms focus on improving expected cumulative rewards (referred to as performance). Within this framework, trust region-based onpolicy reinforcement learning algorithms have achieved the
most promising results. However, the representative trustregion policy optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015)
only ensures the monotonic improvement of the expected
*
1
Equal contribution
Robotics Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to:
Weiye
Zhao
<weiyezha@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Changliu
Liu
<cliu6@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

