RODEO: Robust Outlier Detection via Exposing Adaptive Out-of-Distribution
Samples

Hossein Mirzaei 1 Mohammad Jafari 1 Hamid Reza Dehbashi 1 Ali Ansari 1 Sepehr Ghobadi 1 Masoud Hadi 2
Arshia Soltani Moakhar 1 Mohammad Azizmalayeri 1 Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah 1
Mohammad Hossein Rohban 1

Adversarial
Clean

ALOE

Clean

ATD

In recent years, there have been significant improvements in various forms of image outlier detection. However, outlier detection performance
under adversarial settings lags far behind that in
standard settings. This is due to the lack of effective exposure to adversarial scenarios during
training, especially on unseen outliers, leading to
detection models failing to learn robust features.
To bridge this gap, we introduce RODEO, a datacentric approach that generates effective outliers
for robust outlier detection. More specifically, we
show that incorporating outlier exposure (OE) and
adversarial training can be an effective strategy
for this purpose, as long as the exposed training outliers meet certain characteristics, including diversity, and both conceptual differentiability
and analogy to the inlier samples. We leverage
a text-to-image model to achieve this goal. We
demonstrate both quantitatively and qualitatively
that our adaptive OE method effectively generates
“diverse” and “near-distribution” outliers, leveraging information from both text and image domains. Moreover, our experimental results show
that utilizing our synthesized outliers significantly
enhances the performance of the outlier detector,
particularly in adversarial settings.

Adversarial

Abstract

Figure 1. ALOE and ATD are robust outlier detection methods
that utilize the Tiny ImageNet dataset as OE. In this experiment,
while keeping all other aspects of the original methods constant,
we replaced Tiny ImageNet with SVHN, MNIST, and Gaussian
noise and repeated the experiments for both ALOE and ATD. This
replacement led to a notable decline in detection performance for
ALOE and ATD on the CIFAR10 vs. CIFAR100 task, particularly
under adversarial attack conditions. We attribute this performance
drop to the fact that the SVHN, MNIST, and Gaussian Noise
distributions are more distant from CIFAR10 (the inlier distribution
in this task) compared to Tiny ImageNet.

1. Introduction
2021). Robustness against adversarial attacks is another
important machine learning safety feature (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Akhtar & Mian, 2018). Despite the emergence of several promising outlier detection
methods in recent years (Liznerski et al., 2022; Cohen &
Avidan, 2021; Cao & Zhang, 2022), they often suffer significant performance drops when subjected to adversarial
attacks, which aim to convert inliers into outliers and vice
versa by adding imperceptible perturbations to the input
data. In light of this, recently, several robust outlier detection methods have been proposed (Azizmalayeri et al.,

Outlier detection has become a crucial component in the design of reliable open-world machine learning models (Drummond & Shearer, 2006; Bendale & Boult, 2015; Perera et al.,
1
Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 2 Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran. Correspondence to: Mohammad
Hossein Rohban <rohban@sharif.edu>, Hossein Mirzaei <hossein.mirzayee@sharif.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

