OLLIE: Imitation Learning from Offline Pretraining to Online Finetuning
Sheng Yue 1 Xingyuan Hua 1 Ju Ren 1 2 Sen Lin 3 Junshan Zhang 4 Yaoxue Zhang 1 2

Abstract

into two groups: (i) online IL (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Finn
et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2018) that learns imitation policies
in need of continual interactions with the environment and
(ii) offline IL (Pomerleau, 1988; Kim et al., 2022b; Xu et al.,
2022a) that extracts policies only from static demonstration
data. In general, online IL exhibits superior demonstration
efficiency at the cost of interactional expense and potential risk (Jena et al., 2021). Offline IL, in contrast, is more
economical and safe but susceptible to error compounding
owing to the covariate shift (Ross & Bagnell, 2010).

In this paper, we study offline-to-online Imitation
Learning (IL) that pretrains an imitation policy
from static demonstration data, followed by fast
finetuning with minimal environmental interaction. We find the naı̈ve combination of existing
offline IL and online IL methods tends to behave
poorly in this context, because the initial discriminator (often used in online IL) operates randomly
and discordantly against the policy initialization,
leading to misguided policy optimization and unlearning of pretraining knowledge. To overcome
this challenge, we propose a principled offline-toonline IL method, named OLLIE, that simultaneously learns a near-expert policy initialization
along with an aligned discriminator initialization,
which can be seamlessly integrated into online
IL, achieving smooth and fast finetuning. Empirically, OLLIE consistently and significantly
outperforms the baseline methods in 20 challenging tasks, from continuous control to vision-based
domains, in terms of performance, demonstration
efficiency, and convergence speed. This work may
serve as a foundation for further exploration of
pretraining and finetuning in the context of IL.

These two methodological streams have been largely separated thus far, which leads to a natural question: can we
combine online and offline IL to get the better parts of both
worlds? One potential solution here is to learn a reward
function from offline demonstrations and subsequently use
it to guide online policy optimization (Chang et al., 2021;
Watson et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2023). However, due to the
intrinsic covariate shift and reward ambiguity, it is highly
challenging to define and learn meaningful reward functions
without environmental interaction (Xu et al., 2022b).1 As a
result, most offline reward learning methods either struggle
with reward extrapolation errors (Watson et al., 2023) or rely
on complex model-based optimization (Chang et al., 2021;
Yue et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023; Cideron et al., 2023).
Besides, they suffer from hyperparameter sensitivity and
learning instability, and are not scalable in high-dimensional
environments (Garg et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

Inspired by the success of the pretraining and finetuning
paradigm in vision and language (Brown et al., 2020; He
et al., 2022), another promising way is pretraining with existing offline IL methods and finetuning using online IL, e.g.,
employing GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) to refine the policy
pretrained from BC (Pomerleau, 1988). Unfortunately, as
shown in our empirical results in Section 4 (also pointed
out by Sasaki et al. (2019); Jena et al. (2021); Orsini et al.
(2021)), the pretrained policies can hardly help and may
even degrade the performance in comparison with online IL
training from scratch. We find that it is the consequence of
discriminator misalignment – GAIL’s initial discriminator
(acting as a local reward function) performs randomly and
inconsistently against the policy initialization. It thus steers

Imitation Learning (IL) provides methods for learning skills
from demonstrations, proving particularly promising in domains such as robot control, autonomous driving, and natural language processing, where manually specifying reward
functions is challenging but historical human demonstrations are readily accessible (Hussein et al., 2017; Osa et al.,
2018). The current IL methods can be broadly categorized
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing,
China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Houston,
Texas, US 4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Davis, US. Correspondence to: Ju Ren
<renju@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

1

The reward ambiguity refers to the existence of a large set of
reward functions under which the observed policy is optimal.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

