Unsupervised Episode Generation for Graph Meta-learning

Jihyeong Jung 1 Sangwoo Seo 1 Sungwon Kim 2 Chanyoung Park 1 2

Abstract

data, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely used and
have shown remarkable performance (Kipf & Welling, 2017;
Veličković et al., 2018). However, it is well known that
GNNs suffer from poor generalization when only a small
number of labeled samples are provided (Zhou et al., 2019;
Ding et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022b).

We propose Unsupervised Episode Generation
method called Neighbors as Queries (N AQ) to
solve the Few-Shot Node-Classification (FSNC)
task by unsupervised Graph Meta-learning. Doing so enables full utilization of the information of
all nodes in a graph, which is not possible in current supervised meta-learning methods for FSNC
due to the label-scarcity problem. In addition,
unlike unsupervised Graph Contrastive Learning
(GCL) methods that overlook the downstream task
to be solved at the training phase resulting in vulnerability to class imbalance of a graph, we adopt
the episodic learning framework that allows the
model to be aware of the downstream task format,
i.e., FSNC. The proposed NAQ is a simple but
effective unsupervised episode generation method
that randomly samples nodes from a graph to
make a support set, followed by similarity-based
sampling of nodes to make the corresponding
query set. Since NAQ is model-agnostic, any
existing supervised graph meta-learning methods can be trained in an unsupervised manner,
while not sacrificing much of their performance
or sometimes even improving them. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed unsupervised episode generation method for graph meta-learning towards
the FSNC task. Our code is available at: https:
//github.com/JhngJng/NaQ-PyTorch.

To mitigate such issues inherent in the ordinary deep neural
networks, few-shot learning methods have emerged, and the
dominant paradigm was applying meta-learning algorithms
such as MAML (Finn et al., 2017) and ProtoNet (Snell et al.,
2017), which are based on the episodic learning framework (Vinyals et al., 2016). Inspired by these methods,
recent studies proposed graph meta-learning methods (Zhou
et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2020; Huang & Zitnik, 2020; Wang
et al., 2022b) to solve the Few-Shot Node Classification
(FSNC) task on graphs by also leveraging the episodic learning framework, which is the main focus of this study.
Despite their effectiveness, existing supervised graph metalearning methods require abundant labeled samples from diverse base classes for the training. As shown in Figure 1(a),
such label-scarcity causes a severe performance drop of
representative methods (i.e., TENT (Wang et al., 2022b), GMeta (Huang & Zitnik, 2020), ProtoNet (Snell et al., 2017),
and MAML (Finn et al., 2017)) in FSNC. However, gathering enough labeled data and diverse classes may not be
possible, and is costly in reality. More importantly, as these
methods depend on a few labeled nodes from base classes,
while not fully utilizing all nodes in the graph, they are
also vulnerable to noisy labels in base classes (Figure 1(b)).
In this respect, unsupervised methods are indispensable to
fundamentally address the label-dependence problem of
existing supervised graph meta-learning methods.

1. Introduction

Most recently, TLP (Tan et al., 2022) empirically demonstrated that a simple linear probing with node embeddings
pre-trained by Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) methods
outperforms existing supervised graph meta-learning methods in FSNC. This is because GCL methods tend to generate
generic node embeddings, since all nodes in a graph are involved in the training.

Graph-structured data are useful and widely applicable in
the real-world, thanks to their capability of modeling complex relationships between objects such as user-user relationships in social networks and product networks, etc. To
handle tasks such as node classification on graph-structured
1

Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST
Graduate School of Data Science, KAIST. Correspondence to:
Chanyoung Park <cy.park@kaist.ac.kr>.
2

However, despite the effectiveness of generic node embeddings, we argue that they are vulnerable to class imbalance
in the graph, which might lead to a significant performance
drop due to the lack of model generalizability resulting from

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

