Nearest Neighbour Score Estimators for Diffusion Generative Models

Matthew Niedoba 1 2 Dylan Green 1 2 Saeid Naderiparizi 1 2 Vasileios Lioutas 1 2 Jonathan Wilder Lavington 1 2
Xiaoxuan Liang 1 2 Yunpeng Liu 1 2 Ke Zhang 1 2 Setareh Dabiri 2 Adam Ścibior 1 2 Berend Zwartsenberg 2
Frank Wood 1 2

Abstract

been proposed which learn few-step approximations of the
PF-ODE solution. Amongst these, some attempt to distill a
pre-trained diffusion network such as progressive distillation
(Salimans & Ho, 2022), consistency distillation (Song et al.,
2023) or adversarial diffusion distillation (Sauer et al., 2023).
Alternatively, consistency training (Song et al., 2023; Song
& Dhariwal, 2024) proposes a method to train consistency
models without a pre-trained diffusion model. We refer to
the general class of models including diffusion models and
related few-step methods as diffusion generative models.

Score function estimation is the cornerstone of
both training and sampling from diffusion generative models. Despite this fact, the most commonly
used estimators are either biased neural network
approximations or high variance Monte Carlo estimators based on the conditional score. We introduce a novel nearest neighbour score function
estimator which utilizes multiple samples from
the training set to dramatically decrease estimator variance. We leverage our low variance estimator in two compelling applications. Training
consistency models with our estimator, we report
a significant increase in both convergence speed
and sample quality. In diffusion models, we show
that our estimator can replace a learned network
for probability-flow ODE integration, opening
promising new avenues of future research.

As diffusion generative models are grounded in diffusion
processes, they utilize the score function. This critical quantity can be estimated by network approximation or Monte
Carlo methods. Diffusion and consistency training utilize a
one-sample Monte Carlo estimator of the score in their training procedure, (excepting (Xu et al., 2023)). Alternatively,
both diffusion sampling and diffusion distillation methods
rely upon neural network estimators. However, each estimator has drawbacks. The single-sample Monte Carlo
estimator has high variance (Xu et al., 2023) while learned
neural network approximators are imperfect, leading to bias
(Karras et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2021) have emerged as a powerful class
of generative models. They have seen broad adoption across
a variety of tasks such as image generation (Rombach et al.,
2022), video generation (Harvey et al., 2022), and 3D object synthesis (Poole et al., 2023). Although these models
achieve state of the art performance, their sampling procedure requires integration of the probability flow ODE (PFODE) or diffusion SDE (Song et al., 2021). This procedure
hampers sampling speed as each integration step requires
a neural network evaluation. Typically, many integration
steps are required per sample (Ho et al., 2020; Karras et al.,
2022).

Our work puts forward a new method for score function estimation with lower variance than the one-sample estimator
and less bias than neural network approximation. Utilizing
self-normalized importance sampling (Hesterberg, 1995),
we estimate the score through a weighted average over a
batch of training set examples. We draw these elements from
a proposal which prioritizes examples which are the most
likely to have generated the current noisy value (Figure 1).
We show that because diffusion processes are Gaussian,
these examples are equivalent to the ℓ2 nearest neighbours
to the noisy data. With this finding, we can rapidly identify
and sample important examples using a fast KNN search
(Johnson et al., 2019). We analyze our method and derive
bounds on the variance of our estimator.

Motivated by this shortcoming, an array of methods have
1

Empirically, we measure our performance in three settings.
First, we compare our score estimate against the analytic
score on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). We find that
our method has near-zero variance and bias – substantially
outperforming both STF (Xu et al., 2023) and EDM (Karras

Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 2 Inverted AI, Vancouver, Canada.
Correspondence to: Matthew Niedoba <mniedoba@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

