Generalization Bounds for Causal Regression:
Insights, Guarantees and Sensitivity Analysis

Daniel Csillag 1 Claudio José Struchiner 1 Guilherme Tegoni Goedert 1

Abstract

for all X and a, 0 < P[T = a|X] < 1). When these don’t
hold we are in the field of sensitivity analysis. In this context,
we may assume that there are certain unobserved covariates
U which must be included to satisfy ignorability.

Many algorithms have been recently proposed for
causal machine learning. Yet, there is little to
no theory on their quality, especially considering
finite samples. In this work, we propose a theory
based on generalization bounds that provides such
guarantees. By introducing a novel change-ofmeasure inequality, we are able to tightly bound
the model loss in terms of the deviation of the
treatment propensities over the population, which
we show can be empirically limited. Our theory
is fully rigorous and holds even in the face of
hidden confounding and violations of positivity.
We demonstrate our bounds on semi-synthetic and
real data, showcasing their remarkable tightness
and practical utility.

We consider two key tasks of causal ML: (i) outcome regression, in which we seek to predict the potential outcomes
Y a given the covariates, and (ii) individual treatment effect
estimation, in which we seek to predict the treatment effects
Y 1 − Y 0 given the covariates.
Many methods have been proposed for these tasks. There
are classical approaches based on linear models (Angrist
& Imbens, 1995; Hirano & Imbens, 2001) as well as more
recent approaches based on decision trees (Athey & Imbens,
2015; Wager & Athey, 2015; Athey et al., 2016), neural
networks (Shalit et al., 2017; Johansson et al., 2016; Yoon
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020) and even some modelagnostic approaches (Künzel et al., 2017; Nie & Wager,
2017; Oprescu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

However, all these methods still lack a rigorous supporting
theory, with there being fundamental questions that have not
been fully answered. For example, how well can we expect
these procedures to extract causal relations from the data?
How many samples are enough? How do these procedures
fare when causal assumptions are violated (e.g., because
there are unobserved confounders)?

Causal machine learning plays an increasingly important
role in many application domains including economics,
medicine, education research, and more. At the core of
causal ML is reasoning about potential outcomes. For instance, using covariates X to make predictions about the
potential outcomes Y 1 and Y 0 , which correspond to what
would happen if the treatment were to be administered
(T = 1) and if the treatment were not to be administered
(T = 0). This reasoning differs crucially from simply predicting the actual outcome Y given those covariates, which
is subject to biases in the training data.

In this paper, we seek to provide satisfying answers to these
questions through the lens of generalization bounds. By
leveraging a change-of-measure inequality based on an f divergence (namely, the Pearson χ2 divergence) we are
able to tightly bound the (unobservable) complete causal
loss in terms of the (observable) conditional loss plus some
additional highly interpretable terms:
Theorem 1.1 (Informal). For any (decomposable) loss function and any λ > 0,

The fundamental problem of causal ML is that the potential
outcomes cannot be both observed at the same time. For
instance, whenever T = 1 we can only observe Y = Y 1 ,
and Y 0 could vary unpredictably. To amend this, some
strong assumptions are introduced, with the most typical
being ignorability (that Y 1 , Y 0 ⊥
⊥ T |X) and positivity (that

E[Loss]
| {z }

1

School of Applied Mathematics, Fundação Getúlio Vargas,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Correspondence to: Daniel Csillag
<daniel.csillag@fgv.br>.

unobservable. . .

≤ E[Loss|T = a] +λ · ∆ + σ 2 /4λ
|
{z
}
observable!

where ∆ is a term that quantifies how far we deviate from a
randomized control trial.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, the result above suffers from the fact that ∆ fundamentally depends on unobservable quantities. But it can –
1

