Bayesian Adaptation of Network Depth and Width for Continual Learning

Jeevan Thapa 1 Rui Li 1

Abstract

Task 1

While existing dynamic architecture-based continual learning methods adapt network width by
growing new branches, they overlook the critical aspect of network depth. We propose a novel
non-parametric Bayesian approach to infer network depth and adapt network width while maintaining model performance across tasks. Specifically, we model the growth of network depth
with a beta process and apply drop-connect regularization to network width using a conjugate
Bernoulli process. Our results show that our proposed method achieves superior or comparable
performance with state-of-the-art methods across
various continual learning benchmarks. Moreover,
our approach can be readily extended to unsupervised continual learning, showcasing competitive
performance compared to existing techniques.

Task 2

Task 3

Fixed
Network
Structure

Width
Evolution

Width and
Depth
Evolution

Figure 1: Top Row: Both the number of hidden layers (i.e.,
depth) and the number of neurons (i.e., width) per layer
are kept constant for fixed network structure. Middle Row:
Width evolution methods expand width by adding or activating more neurons with a pre-determined depth. Bottom
Row: Our method enables both network depth and width
to evolve as stochastic processes based on the varying task
complexity.

1. Introduction
Continual learning, also known as incremental or lifelong
learning, entails observing a sequence of tasks and incrementally acquiring new knowledge while sustaining performance levels for previously learned tasks. It has become imperative in settings with evolving data distributions, limited
resources, and privacy concerns, necessitating the retention
of past knowledge without storing the past data (Parisi et al.,
2019). Despite advancements in addressing catastrophic
forgetting (French, 1999) in deep neural networks, existing
approaches to continual learning still face limitations.

able success in mitigating forgetting, these methods cannot adjust the network depth—a crucial factor for overall
model performance, whereas recent advances in deep learning highlight the significance of depth for optimal network
performance (He et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2020).
Another successful method for continual learning involves
utilizing the natural sequential Bayes approach. VCL
(Nguyen et al., 2018) employs the posterior of neural network weights for the current task t as the prior for the next
task t + 1 to overcome catastrophic forgetting while also
enabling knowledge transfer in both forward and backward
directions. This sequential Bayes method is a type of priorfocused or regularization-based method. Another Bayesian
continual learning method (Adel et al., 2020) introduces
task-specific weight adjustments. However, the fixed network structures limit the available model capacity for the
ever-evolving lifelong scenario.

An effective strategy for continual learning involves the utilization of dynamic architecture architecture, which grows
the model structure dynamically as new tasks arise. Approaches exemplified in (Rusu et al., 2016; Yoon et al.,
2018) augment the model’s width and incorporate distinct
sub-networks for individual tasks. Despite their consider1

College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester
Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Rui Li <rxlics@rit.edu>.

Recent works such as HIBNN (Kessler et al., 2021) and
IBPCL (Kumar et al., 2021) combine the powers of these
two worlds and extend the sequential Bayes on network parameters to incorporate model structure inference. However,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

