Adversarially Robust Hypothesis Transfer Learning

Yunjuan Wang 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the incredible success of machine learning on realworld problems and its widespread adoption, several studies
over the years have shown that models trained using machine learning can be highly susceptible to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2018). These
attacks involve intentionally designing imperceptible perturbations of the input data that cause the deployed (trained)
model to predict unreliably. A popular defense against such
inference-time attacks is adversarial training wherein the
learner is presented with simulated adversarial corruptions
of clean training data. Empirical studies have consistently
demonstrated that the use of adversarial training (Madry
et al., 2018) and its variants (Cai et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2020) result in models that exhibit greater
resilience to perturbations in the input space.

In this work, we explore Hypothesis Transfer
Learning (HTL) under adversarial attacks. In this
setting, a learner has access to a training dataset of
size n from an underlying distribution D and a set
of auxiliary hypotheses. These auxiliary hypotheses, which can be viewed as prior information
originating either from expert knowledge or as
pre-trained foundation models, are employed as
an initialization for the learning process. Our goal
is to develop an adversarially robust model for D.
We begin by examining an adversarial variant of
the regularized empirical risk minimization learning rule that we term A-RERM. Assuming a nonnegative smooth loss function with a strongly convex regularizer, we establish a bound on the robust
generalization error of the hypothesis returned by
A-RERM in terms of the robust empirical loss
and the quality of the initialization. If the initialization is good, i.e., there exists a weighted
combination of auxiliary hypotheses with a small
robust population loss, the bound exhibits a fast
rate of O(1/n).
√ Otherwise, we get the standard
rate of O(1/ n). Additionally, we provide a
bound on the robust excess risk which is similar
in nature, albeit with a slightly worse rate.

However, we rarely train models from scratch in real-world
scenarios, irrespective of whether we use adversarial training or standard training. One of the primary reasons is the
substantial increase in the size of available training data –
training from scratch demands not only the storage of copious amounts of data but also significant computational
expense (e.g., parameter tuning). It may also be the case that
the underlying data distribution is not aligned with the distribution of training data. Finally, in many scenarios, training
data might not be accessible due to privacy concerns.
A compelling solution in such large-scale, real-world settings is to consider transferring knowledge from a source
domain to a target domain using an auxiliary set of hypotheses; in prior work, this is referred to as hypothesis transfer
learning (HTL) (Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013; 2017; Du
et al., 2017; Aghbalou & Staerman, 2023). These auxiliary
hypotheses can be viewed as prior information, originating
either from expert knowledge or as pre-trained foundation
models (trained on various related source tasks), and are
employed as an initialization for the learning process. Given
a hypothesis class, H, we linearly combine any candidate
predictor hw ∈ H with a weighted combination of the auxiliary hypotheses, f1aux , . . . , fkaux , to construct the following
model for the target task:

We also consider solving the problem using a practical variant, namely proximal stochastic adversarial training, and present a bound that depends
on the initialization. This bound has the same
dependence on the sample size as the ARERM
bound, except for an additional term that depends
on the size of the adversarial perturbation.

1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Yunjuan Wang
<ywang509@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

hw,β (·) := hw (·) +

k
X
j=1

1

βj fjaux (·),

