Non-parametric Online Change Point Detection on Riemannian Manifolds

Xiuheng Wang 1 Ricardo Augusto Borsoi 2 Cédric Richard 1

Abstract

occurrence. In numerous real-world scenarios, the pursuit
of non-parametric CPD is also highly relevant since it can
be challenging to possess prior knowledge of the data distribution. However, even with the longstanding history and
continued interest in CPD techniques, it is noteworthy that
the overwhelming majority of existing algorithms assume
that the data resides in Euclidean spaces.

Non-parametric detection of change points in
streaming time series data that belong to Euclidean spaces has been extensively studied in the
literature. Nevertheless, when the data belongs to
a Riemannian manifold, existing approaches are
no longer applicable as they fail to account for the
structure and geometry of the manifold. In this
paper, we introduce a non-parametric algorithm
for online change point detection in manifoldvalued data streams. This algorithm monitors the
generalized Karcher mean of the data, computed
using stochastic Riemannian optimization. We
provide theoretical bounds on the detection and
false alarm rate performances of the algorithm,
using a new result on the non-asymptotic convergence of the stochastic Riemannian gradient
descent. We apply our algorithm to two different
Riemannian manifolds. Experimental results with
both synthetic and real data illustrate the performance of the proposed method.

Recent developments in statistical learning and signal processing have increasingly confronted the analysis of data
residing in non-Euclidean spaces. Among these spaces,
Riemannian manifolds have garnered attention due to their
wide-ranging applications, such as in diffusion tensor imaging (Pennec et al., 2006), pedestrian detection (Tuzel et al.,
2008), and human behavior understanding (Kacem et al.,
2018). Consequently, Riemannian optimization (Absil et al.,
2009; Boumal, 2023) has emerged as an area of significant
interest, offering essential and potent tools for handling
data on manifolds, especially with the recent advancements
in Riemannian stochastic gradient descent (R-SGD) algorithms (Bonnabel, 2013; Zhang & Sra, 2016). While the
detection of change points in Euclidean spaces has been notably successful, it is noteworthy that only a limited number
of CPD methods have been specifically crafted for Riemannian manifolds (Bouchard et al., 2020; Dubey & Müller,
2020; Wang et al., 2023a), and these still lack theoretical
analyses or online operation. The main hurdles stem from
the need to account for the intrinsic non-linear geometry
of these spaces and the absence of a vector space structure
in the data, making the adaptation of algorithms originally
conceived for Euclidean spaces a complex undertaking.

1. Introduction
Change point detection (CPD) is the problem of finding abrupt variations in a property of time series data,
which may be indicative of transitions between different
states (Aminikhanghahi & Cook, 2017). This question often
plays a central role in the modeling, analysis and prediction
of time series data, and it has been addressed in many applications ranging from remote sensing (Zeng et al., 2020)
and climatology (Reeves et al., 2007) to financial data analysis (Bai & Perron, 1998). Research on this topic can be
categorized into two primary branches: offline and online.
Offline CPD necessitates access to all received samples, as
extensively covered in the literature (Truong et al., 2020). In
contrast, online CPD methods process data in real-time and
aim to detect change points with minimal delay after their

In response to the aforementioned challenges, the objective
of this paper is to introduce a unified framework for nonparametric and online CPD on Riemannian manifolds. Our
contributions are as follows:
1. General non-parametric framework: We propose
a comprehensive non-parametric framework for CPD
by monitoring central values within Riemannian manifolds. Our framework places particular emphasis on the
generalized Karcher mean. We update two estimates
of the generalized Karcher mean using the R-SGD algorithm, each with distinct constant step sizes. These
two estimates, one with longer memory and the other
more adaptive, are compared to construct an online
CPD statistic.

1

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, OCA, France 2 Université de
Lorraine, CNRS, CRAN, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France. Correspondence to: Xiuheng Wang <xiuheng.wang@unice.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

