Exploiting Negative Samples: A Catalyst for Cohort Discovery
in Healthcare Analytics

Kaiping Zheng 1 Horng-Ruey Chua 2 1 Melanie Herschel 3 H. V. Jagadish 4 Beng Chin Ooi 1
James Wei Luen Yip 5 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Healthcare analytics leverages diverse healthcare data
sources to perform many analytic tasks including diagnoses (Lipton et al., 2016) and prognoses (Mould, 2012).
Electronic Medical Records (EMR) are perhaps the most
important of these data sources, since they play a crucial
role in recording patients’ essential information and providing a comprehensive view of their health conditions. The
recently increasing availability of EMR data has spawned
the development of healthcare analytic models for effective
patient management and medical resource allocation.

In healthcare analytics, addressing binary diagnosis or prognosis tasks presents unique challenges
due to the inherent asymmetry between positive
and negative samples. While positive samples, indicating patients with a disease, are defined based
on stringent medical criteria, negative samples
are defined in an open-ended manner and remain
underexplored in prior research. To bridge this
gap, we propose an innovative approach to facilitate cohort discovery within negative samples,
leveraging a Shapley-based exploration of interrelationships between these samples, which holds
promise for uncovering valuable insights concerning the studied disease, and related comorbidity
and complications. We quantify each sample’s
contribution using data Shapley values, subsequently constructing the Negative Sample Shapley
Field to model the distribution of all negative samples. Next, we transform this field through manifold learning, preserving the essential data structure information while imposing an isotropy constraint in data Shapley values. Within this transformed space, we pinpoint cohorts of medical
interest via density-based clustering. We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on
the real-world electronic medical records from National University Hospital in Singapore, yielding
clinically valuable insights aligned with existing
knowledge, and benefiting medical research and
clinical decision-making.

Without loss of generality, let us delve into a diagnosis or
prognosis problem of predicting whether a patient has developed/will develop a certain disease based on the EMR
data. This problem is a binary classification, where patients
who develop the disease are “positive samples,” while those
who do not are “negative samples.” Notably, we identify the
unique nature of such binary classifications in healthcare
analytics, as compared to traditional classification tasks. For
instance, when classifying cats vs. dogs, both positive and
negative samples are based on objective facts. However, in
healthcare analytics, positive samples are defined according to rigorous medical criteria, based on medical theories
and experience. Contrarily, negative samples are defined
in an unrestricted manner, as the complementary set of the
positive samples. Consequently, the negative samples may
include a wide range of healthy individuals or those outside
the studied disease. This leads to an inherent asymmetry:
positive samples are well-defined and bounded, while negative samples are diverse and open-ended.
Despite such fundamental asymmetry in healthcare analytics, previous research has not adequately addressed the role
of negative samples. One potential reason for this research
gap is the enormous challenge posed by investigating an
infinitely large negative sample space, which cannot be easily addressed using existing approaches, e.g., it could be
difficult to understand why general healthy individuals do
not develop a disease. Nonetheless, it is crucial to investigate negative samples to comprehensively study the disease.
While the disease may not have developed in these samples,
some may exhibit similar symptoms or develop related con-

1

National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 National
University Hospital, Singapore 3 Universität Stuttgart, Germany
4
University of Michigan, USA 5 National University Heart Centre, Singapore. Correspondence to: Kaiping Zheng <kaiping@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

