Learning from Memory: Non-Parametric Memory Augmented Self-Supervised
Learning of Visual Features

Thalles Silva 1 Helio Pedrini 1 Adı́n Ramı́rez Rivera 2
Despite their high ability to learn representations, clustering methods are notoriously difficult to train due to their
susceptibility to training collapse.

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach to improving the training stability of self-supervised
learning (SSL) methods by leveraging a nonparametric memory of seen concepts. The proposed method involves augmenting a neural network with a memory component to stochastically
compare current image views with previously encountered concepts. Additionally, we introduce
stochastic memory blocks to regularize training
and enforce consistency between image views.
We extensively benchmark our method on many
vision tasks, such as linear probing, transfer learning, low-shot classification, and image retrieval on
many datasets. The experimental results consolidate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
in achieving stable SSL training without additional regularizers while learning highly transferable representations and requiring less computing time and resources. Code at https:
//github.com/sthalles/MaSSL.

We argue that learning the prototypes via gradient descent
is the primary source of poor training instability in SSL
clustering methods. Due to the lack of human labels and excessive noise from the self-supervised signals, the network
attempts to cluster all the embeddings into a single prototype as the most efficient way to optimize the loss function.
Current methods avoid collapse by employing additional
regularizers that force representations to spread evenly in
the space over the prototypes. Examples include: (1) the
combination of centering and target sharpening (Caron et al.,
2021; Zhou et al., 2022), (2) the mean entropy maximization
(ME-MAX) (Assran et al., 2021; Silva & Ramı́rez Rivera,
2023), and (3) the Sinkhorn-Knopp (Asano et al., 2019;
Caron et al., 2020). In addition, state-of-the-art SSL methods based on Vision Transformers (ViTs) use the full output
of the Transformer ([CLS] + patch token) and optimize the
MIM (Masked Image Modeling) pretext task on the patch
embeddings (Zhou et al., 2022; Oquab et al., 2023). Despite performance gains, this architectural choice drastically
increases computational costs and training time.

1. Introduction

Motivated by the current landscape of SSL methods, we propose a new stable method that exceeds current approaches
on many retrieval and transfer tasks while reducing computing resources and training time. Based on the intuition
that learning relies on memory, we present a non-parametric
approach that poses the SSL problem in terms of learning
from past experiences. We augment a neural network with a
memory component that holds a snapshot of the most recent
image representations seen by the model. Unlike previous
approaches that use memory/queues to mine negatives (He
et al., 2020) or positives (Dwibedi et al., 2021) in a contrastive learning setup, our proposed memory allows the
network to learn visual representations by comparing current events (views of an image) with previously experienced
concepts (image representations from previous iterations)
in memory. We named this method Memory Augmented
Self-Supervised Learning (MaSSL).

Self-supervised learning (SSL) based on join-embedding
architectures currently holds state-of-the-art performance on
many representation learning benchmarks. Among different
methods, clustering-based approaches (Caron et al., 2021;
2018; 2019; Asano et al., 2019; Silva & Ramı́rez Rivera,
2023) appear to be the most successful recipe for learning
self-supervised features in the visual domain. SSL clustering methods learn image representations by discretizing the
embedding space. They set up optimization tasks that involve learning a finite set of prototypes or centroids based on
the self-supervised signal coming from views of an image.
1

Institute of Computing, University of Campinas, CampinasSP, Brazil 2 Department of Informatics, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
Correspondence to: Thalles Silva
<thalles.silva@students.ic.unicamp.br>, Helio Pedrini <helio@ic.unicamp.br>, Adı́n Ramı́rez Rivera <adinr@uio.no>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In addition to the working memory, we introduce the concept of stochastic memory blocks. Stochastic blocks allow
1

