Towards General Neural Surrogate Solvers with Specialized Neural Accelerators

Chenkai Mao 1 Robert Lupoiu 1 Tianxiang Dai 1 Mingkun Chen 1 Jonathan A. Fan 1

Abstract

Neural network-based approaches to solving PDE problems
have emerged and have garnered great interest due to their
tantalizing potential to exceed the capabilities of conventional algorithms. One of the earliest and most prominent
concepts is the Physics Informed Neural Network (PINN),
which produces an ansatz for a given PDE problem (Raissi
et al., 2019; Karniadakis et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2021).
PINNs have been shown to be able to solve wave propagation problems with fixed domain size and domain geometry, but their accuracy is sub-optimal (Moseley et al.,
2020; Rasht-Behesht et al., 2022) in systems featuring high
spatial frequency phenomena (Wang et al., 2022; Farhani
et al., 2022). In addition, they require retraining every time
the PDE problem is modified, making them unsuitable for
solving generalized parametric PDE problems.

Surrogate neural network-based partial differential equation (PDE) solvers have the potential to
solve PDEs in an accelerated manner, but they
are largely limited to systems featuring fixed
domain sizes, geometric layouts, and boundary conditions. We propose Specialized Neural Accelerator-Powered Domain Decomposition
Methods (SNAP-DDM), a DDM-based approach
to PDE solving in which subdomain problems
containing arbitrary boundary conditions and geometric parameters are accurately solved using
an ensemble of specialized neural operators. We
tailor SNAP-DDM to 2D electromagnetics and
fluidic flow problems and show how innovations
in network architecture and loss function engineering can produce specialized surrogate subdomain
solvers with near unity accuracy. We utilize these
solvers with standard DDM algorithms to accurately solve freeform electromagnetics and fluids
problems featuring a wide range of domain sizes.

Neural Operators, which are the focus of this study, have
also been recently proposed as deep network surrogate PDE
solvers. Unlike PINNs, Neural Operators learn a family of
PDEs by directly learning the mapping of an input, such
as PDE coefficients, to corresponding output solutions using simulated training data. PDE solutions are evaluated
through model inference, as opposed to model training,
which enables exceptionally high speed PDE problem solving. Initial work on Neural Operator models can be traced
to PDE-Net (Long et al., 2018; 2019), and additional improvements in network architecture have been proposed
with DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019) and Fourier Neural Operators (FNO) (Li et al., 2020). While much progress has been
made, Neural Operators cannot yet directly scale to large
arbitrary domain sizes, and they cannot accurately handle
arbitrary boundary conditions. These challenges arise due
to multiple reasons: 1) the dimensionality of PDE problems
grows exponentially with problem scale and can outpace
the expressiveness of deep neural networks; 2) it remains
difficult to scale neural networks to large numbers of parameters; and 3) the large scale generation of training data for
the training of large scale models is resource consuming.

1. Introduction
Large scale physics simulations are critical computational
tools in every modern science and engineering field, and
they involve the solving of parametric partial differential
equations (PDEs) with different physical parameters, boundary conditions, and sources. Their ability to accurately capture underlying physical processes makes them particularly
well suited in modeling and optimization tasks. Conventionally, PDE problems are set up using discretization methods
such as the finite element or finite difference formalisms,
which frame the PDE systems as large sparse matrices that
are solved by matrix inversion. Problems are set up from
scratch every time and computational scaling with domain
size is fundamentally tied to the scaling of matrix inversion
algorithms.

In this work, we propose Specialized Neural AcceleratorPowered Domain Decomposition Methods (SNAP-DDM),
which is a qualitatively new way to implement Neural Operators for solving large scale PDE problems with arbitrary
domain sizes and boundary conditions. Our method circumvents the issues posed above by subdividing global
boundary value problems into smaller boundary value sub-

1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford, Palo Alto,
USA. Correspondence to: Jonathan Fan <jonfan@Stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

