Weisfeiler–Leman at the margin: When more expressivity matters

Billy J. Franks * 1 Christopher Morris * 2 Ameya Velingker 3 Floris Geerts 4

Abstract

& Kleinberg, 2010), underlying the importance of machine
learning methods for graphs. Nowadays, there are numerous
approaches for machine learning on graphs, most notably
those based on graph kernels (Borgwardt et al., 2020; Kriege
et al., 2020) or message-passing graph neural networks
(MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017; Scarselli et al., 2009). Here,
graph kernels (Shervashidze et al., 2011) based on the 1dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (1-WL) (Weisfeiler
& Leman, 1968), a well-studied heuristic for the graph isomorphism problem, and corresponding MPNNs (Morris
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019), have recently advanced the
state-of-the-art in supervised vertex- and graph-level learning (Morris et al., 2021).

The Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (1-WL) is a wellstudied heuristic for the graph isomorphism problem. Recently, the algorithm has played a prominent role in understanding the expressive power of
message-passing graph neural networks (MPNNs)
and being effective as a graph kernel. Despite its
success, 1-WL faces challenges in distinguishing
non-isomorphic graphs, leading to the development of more expressive MPNN and kernel architectures. However, the relationship between
enhanced expressivity and improved generalization performance remains unclear. Here, we show
that an architecture’s expressivity offers limited
insights into its generalization performance when
viewed through graph isomorphism. Moreover,
we focus on augmenting 1-WL and MPNNs with
subgraph information and employ classical margin
theory to investigate the conditions under which
an architecture’s increased expressivity aligns with
improved generalization performance. In addition,
we show that gradient flow pushes the MPNN’s
weights toward the maximum margin solution.
Further, we introduce variations of expressive 1WL-based kernel and MPNN architectures with
provable generalization properties. Our empirical study confirms the validity of our theoretical
findings.

However, due to 1-WL’s limitations in distinguishing nonisomorphic graphs (Arvind et al., 2015; Cai et al., 1992),
numerous recent works proposed more expressive extensions
of the 1-WL and corresponding MPNNs (Morris et al., 2021).
For example, Bouritsas et al. (2020) introduced an approach
to enhance the 1-WL and MPNNs by incorporating subgraph
information, achieved by labeling vertices based on their
structural roles regarding a set of predefined (sub)graphs.
Through the careful selection of such graphs, Bouritsas et al.
(2020) demonstrated that these enhanced 1-WL and MPNNs
variants can effectively discriminate between pairs of nonisomorphic graphs, which the 1-WL and k-WL (Cai et al.,
1992), 1-WL’s more expressive generalization, cannot. Furthermore, empirical results (Bouritsas et al., 2020) indicate
that this added expressive power often results in improved
predictive performance. However, the exact mechanisms
underlying this performance improvement remain unclear.

1. Introduction

Although recent work (Morris et al., 2023) has used 1WL to establish upper and lower bounds on the Vapnik–

Graph-structured data are prevalent in application domains
ranging from chemo- and bioinformatics (Jumper et al.,
2021; Stokes et al., 2020; Wong et al., 2023), combinatorial
optimization (Cappart et al., 2021), to image (Simonovsky
& Komodakis, 2017) and social-network analysis (Easley

Chervonenkis (VC) dimension of MPNNs, these findings
do not explain the above empirical observations. Specifically, they do not explain the empirical trend that increased
expressive power corresponds to enhanced generalization
performance while keeping the size of the training set fixed.
Concretely, (Morris et al., 2023) demonstrated a strong correlation between the VC dimension of MPNNs and the number
of non-isomorphic graphs that 1-WL can differentiate. Consequently, increasing 1-WL’s expressive capabilities increases
the VC dimension, worsening generalization performance.
A parallel argument can be made regarding 1-WL-based
kernels.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Kaiserslautern-Landau 2 Department of Computer Science,
RWTH Aachen University 3 Google Research 4 Department of Computer Science, University of Antwerp. Correspondence to: Billy J.
Franks <billy.franks@rptu.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

