Sparse and Structured Hopfield Networks

Saul Santos 1 2 Vlad Niculae 3 Daniel McNamee 4 André F. T. Martins 1 2 5

Abstract

between Hopfield energies and Fenchel-Young losses (Blondel et al., 2020). We extend the energy functions of Ramsauer et al. (2021) and Hu et al. (2023) to a wider family
induced by generalized entropies. The minimization of
these energy functions leads to sparse update rules which
include as particular cases α-entmax (Peters et al., 2019),
α-normmax (Blondel et al., 2020), and SparseMAP (Niculae et al., 2018), where a structural constraint ensures the
retrieval of k patterns. Unlike Ramsauer et al. (2021)’s
Hopfield layers, our update rules pave the way for exact
retrieval, leading to the emergence of sparse association
among patterns while ensuring end-to-end differentiability.

Modern Hopfield networks have enjoyed recent
interest due to their connection to attention in
transformers. Our paper provides a unified framework for sparse Hopfield networks by establishing
a link with Fenchel-Young losses. The result is a
new family of Hopfield-Fenchel-Young energies
whose update rules are end-to-end differentiable
sparse transformations. We reveal a connection
between loss margins, sparsity, and exact memory
retrieval. We further extend this framework to
structured Hopfield networks via the SparseMAP
transformation, which can retrieve pattern associations instead of a single pattern. Experiments on
multiple instance learning and text rationalization
demonstrate the usefulness of our approach.

This endeavour aligns with the strong neurobiological motivation to seek new Hopfield energies capable of sparse and
structured retrieval. Indeed, sparse neural activity patterns
forming structured representations underpin core principles
of cortical computation (Simoncelli & Olshausen, 2001;
Tse et al., 2007; Palm, 2013). With respect to memory formation circuits, the sparse firing of neurons in the dentate
gyrus (DG), a distinguished region within the hippocampal
network, underpins its proposed role in pattern separation
during memory storage (Yassa & Stark, 2011; Severa et al.,
2017). Evidence suggests that such sparsified activity aids in
minimizing interference, however an integrative theoretical
account linking sparse coding and attractor network functionality to clarify these empirical observations is lacking
(Leutgeb et al., 2007; Neunuebel & Knierim, 2014). Our
main contributions are:

1. Introduction
Hopfield networks are a kind of biologically-plausible neural network with associative memory capabilities (Hopfield,
1982). Their attractor dynamics makes them suitable for
modeling the retrieval of episodic memories in humans and
animals (Tyulmankov et al., 2021; Whittington et al., 2021).
The limited storage capacity of classical Hopfield networks
was recently overcome through new energy functions and
continuous state patterns (Krotov & Hopfield, 2016; Demircigil et al., 2017; Ramsauer et al., 2021), leading to exponential storage capacities and sparking renewed interest in
“modern” Hopfield networks. In particular, Ramsauer et al.
(2021) revealed striking connections to transformer attention, but their model is incapable of exact retrieval and may
require a low temperature to avoid metastable states (states
which mix multiple input patterns).

• We introduce Hopfield-Fenchel-Young energy functions
as a generalization of modern Hopfield networks (§3.1).
• We leverage properties of Fenchel-Young losses which
relate sparsity and margins to obtain new theoretical
results for exact memory retrieval, proving exponential
storage capacity in a stricter sense than prior work (§3.2).

In this paper, we bridge this gap by making a connection

• We propose new structured Hopfield networks via the
SparseMAP transformation, which return pattern associations instead of single patterns. We show that SparseMAP
has a structured margin and provide sufficient conditions
for exact retrieval of pattern associations (§4).

*
Equal contribution 1 Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade
de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal 2 Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisbon, Portugal 3 Language Technology Lab, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 4 Champalimaud Research, Lisbon, Portugal
5
Unbabel, Lisbon, Portugal. Correspondence to: Saul Santos
<saul.r.santos@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>.

Experiments on synthetic and real-world tasks (multiple instance learning and text rationalization) showcase the usefulness of our proposed models using various kinds of sparse

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

