Plug-and-Play image restoration with Stochastic deNOising REgularization

Marien Renaud 1 Jean Prost 1 2 Arthur Leclaire 3 Nicolas Papadakis 1

Abstract

The regularization is crucial to complete the missing information of the observation by bringing prior knowledge
on the high-quality image. Choosing a relevant prior R in
Problem (1) is a long-standing (Rudin et al., 1992; Mallat,
1999; Zoran & Weiss, 2011) and challenging task and recent
approaches explore deep learning techniques that learn a
prior from a database of clean images (Zhang et al., 2017;
Lunz et al., 2018; Laumont et al., 2023).

Plug-and-Play (PnP) algorithms are a class of
iterative algorithms that address image inverse
problems by combining a physical model and
a deep neural network for regularization. Even
if they produce impressive image restoration results, these algorithms rely on a non-standard
use of a denoiser on images that are less and
less noisy along the iterations, which contrasts
with recent algorithms based on Diffusion Models (DM), where the denoiser is applied only on
re-noised images. We propose a new PnP framework, called Stochastic deNOising REgularization (SNORE), which applies the denoiser only
on images with noise of the adequate level. It
is based on an explicit stochastic regularization,
which leads to a stochastic gradient descent algorithm to solve ill-posed inverse problems. A
convergence analysis of this algorithm and its annealing extension is provided. Experimentally, we
prove that SNORE is competitive with respect to
state-of-the-art methods on deblurring and inpainting tasks, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Problem (1) can be addressed with proximal splitting algorithms (Boyd et al., 2011) which are first-order optimization
algorithms based on the recursive application of gradientdescent and/or proximal operators of functions F and R.
The Plug-and-Play (PnP) framework (Venkatakrishnan et al.,
2013) consists in replacing, within a proximal splitting algorithm, the proximal step on the regularization R by a
denoising operation; and it allows to use implicit regularization priors encoded by pre-trained image denoisers. Similarly, following the Regularization by Denoising (RED)
framework (Romano et al., 2017), a gradient-descent step
on the regularization can be substituted by a learned denoiser. It has been observed that plugging a pre-trained
state-of-the-art deep denoiser is essential for achieving the
best quality results in many imaging contexts (Metzler et al.,
2018; Ryu et al., 2019; Hurault et al., 2022b; Renaud et al.,
2024; Ulondu-Mendes et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

In another line of works, inverse problems solvers based
on denoising diffusion models (DDM) (Ho et al., 2020;
Song et al., 2020) have demonstrated their ability to provide
high-quality restoration even for severely ill-posed problems
where a large amount of information is missing (Chung et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2023). DDM and PnP both rely on deep
denoisers to implicitly model the prior distribution, and they
decouple prior and data-fidelity terms in order to provide
flexible solvers. However, while the theoretical properties of
PnP algorithms regarding convergence have been studied in
depth (Sreehari et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2019b; Gavaskar &
Chaudhury, 2019; Ryu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Cohen
et al., 2021; Hurault et al., 2022a), the theoretical properties
of restoration algorithms based on DDM remain poorly
understood. Indeed, DDM methods rely on heuristics to
approximate the score of the intractable likelihood. To the
best of our knowledge, the impact of the approximation
error on the generated samples remains to be quantified.

Many imaging problems can be formulated as inverse problems seeking to recover high-quality images x∗ from their
low-quality observations y by solving a problem of the form
x∗ ∈ arg min F(x, y) + αR(x),

(1)

x∈Rd

where F measures the fidelity to the degraded observation y
and R is a regularization term weighted by a parameter
α > 0.
1
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, INRIA, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR
5251, F-33400 Talence, France 2 Université Paris-Cité, CNRS,
MAP5, France 3 LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris. Correspondence
to: Marien Renaud <marien.renaud@math.u-bordeaux.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

