MagicPose: Realistic Human Poses and Facial Expressions Retargeting with
Identity-aware Diffusion

Di Chang 1 2 Yichun Shi 2 Quankai Gao 1 Hongyi Xu 2 Jessica Fu 1
Guoxian Song 2 Qing Yan 2 Yizhe Zhu 2 Xiao Yang 2 Mohammad Soleymani 1
Reference

Pose 1

Pose 2

Pose 3

Abstract
In this work, we propose MagicPose, a diffusionbased model for 2D human pose and facial
expression retargeting. Specifically, given a
reference image, we aim to generate a person’s
new images by controlling the poses and facial
expressions while keeping the identity unchanged.
To this end, we propose a two-stage training
strategy to disentangle human motions and
appearance (e.g., facial expressions, skin tone
and dressing), consisting of (1) the pre-training
of an appearance-control block and (2) learning
appearance-disentangled pose control. Our novel
design enables robust appearance control over
generated human images, including body, facial
attributes, and even background. By leveraging
the prior knowledge of image diffusion models,
MagicPose generalizes well to unseen human
identities and complex poses without the need for
additional fine-tuning. Moreover, the proposed
model is easy to use and can be considered as
a plug-in module/extension to Stable Diffusion.
The project website is https://boese0601.
github.io/magicdance/.
The code
is available at https://github.com/
Boese0601/MagicDance.

Figure 1. MagicPose can provide zero-shot and realistic human
poses and facial expressions retargeting for human images of different styles and poses. A shared model is used here for in-the-wild
generalization without any fine-tuning on target domains. Our proposed modules can be treated as an extension/plug-in to the original
text-to-image model without modifying its pre-trained weight.

1
University of Southern California 2 ByteDance Inc. Correspondence to: Di Chang <dichang@usc.edu>.

Traditionally, human motion transfer is achieved by training
a task-specific generative model, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) on specific datasets, e.g., (Siarohin
et al., 2018; 2019b; Liu et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2020; Sun
et al., 2022) for body pose and (Wu et al., 2020; Qiao et al.,
2018; Hong et al., 2022) for facial expressions. Such methods commonly suffer from two issues: (1) they are typically
dependent on an image warping module (Siarohin et al.,
2018; 2019b) and hence struggle to interpolate the body
parts that are invisible in the reference image due to perspective change or self-occlusion, and (2) they can hardly
generalize to images that are different from the training data,
greatly limiting their application scope.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Recently, diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020; Rombach et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023) have exhibited impressive ability on image generation (Bertalmio et al.,

1. Introduction
Human motion transfer is a challenging task in computer
vision. This problem involves retargeting body and facial
motions, from one source image to a target image. Such
methods can be used for image stylization, editing, digital
human synthesis, and possibly data generation for training
perception models.

1

