Differentially Private Synthetic Data via Foundation Model APIs 2: Text

Chulin Xie 1 Zinan Lin 2 Arturs Backurs 2 Sivakanth Gopi 2 Da Yu 3 Huseyin Inan 2 Harsha Nori 2
Haotian Jiang 2 Huishuai Zhang 2 Yin Tat Lee 2 Bo Li 1 4 Sergey Yekhanin 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
With recent advances in natural language processing
(NLP), text-based applications have greatly facilitated our
lives. These include AI-assisted medical record summaries
(Rumshisky et al., 2016), email and document autocomplete tools (Voytovich & Greenberg, 2022; CNN, 2023),
and personalized chatbots (Chew, 2022). However, all these
applications (among others) rely on collecting private text
data from users to train LLMs, which raises serious privacy concerns as LLMs may memorize and leak sensitive
information about users (Carlini et al., 2021; Lukas et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023). Differentially private synthetic
text is a promising and actively studied solution (Putta et al.,
2022; Bommasani et al., 2019). It aims to create a new text
dataset with similar characteristics to the original private
data while ensuring privacy by protecting sensitive information in each sample (known as Differential Privacy (DP)
(Dwork et al., 2014)). The DP synthetic text can then be
used in developing any downstream NLP system without
adding extra privacy risks. It also allows the safe sharing of
private data more broadly. For example, hospitals can share
their private medical data for research purposes by creating
a DP synthetic version of their data.

Text data has become extremely valuable due to
the emergence of machine learning algorithms
that learn from it. A lot of high-quality text data
generated in the real world is private and therefore cannot be shared or used freely due to privacy concerns. Generating synthetic replicas of
private text data with a formal privacy guarantee,
i.e., differential privacy (DP), offers a promising
and scalable solution. However, existing methods necessitate DP finetuning of large language
models (LLMs) on private data to generate DP
synthetic data. This approach is not viable for
proprietary LLMs (e.g., GPT-3.5) and also demands considerable computational resources for
open-source LLMs. Lin et al. (2024) recently
introduced the Private Evolution (PE) algorithm
to generate DP synthetic images with only API
access to diffusion models. In this work, we propose an augmented PE algorithm, named AUG PE, that applies to the complex setting of text.
We use API access to an LLM and generate DP
synthetic text without any model training. We conduct comprehensive experiments on three benchmark datasets. Our results demonstrate that AUG PE produces DP synthetic text that yields competitive utility with the SOTA DP finetuning baselines. This underscores the feasibility of relying solely on API access of LLMs to produce
high-quality DP synthetic texts, thereby facilitating more accessible routes to privacy-preserving
LLM applications. Our code and data are available at https://github.com/AI-secure/aug-pe.

The state-of-the-art DP synthetic text approach is to finetune
pretrained generative language models (LMs) on private
data with DP-SGD (a DP variant of SGD (Abadi et al.,
2016)) (Yue et al., 2023; Kurakin et al., 2023; Mattern
et al., 2022a) (short-handed as DP finetune generator; see
Fig. 1). Unlike non-DP ML applications, which have been
greatly advanced by powerful LLMs such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023b) and LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a;b) in a
short time after they are released, the state-of-the-art DP
synthetic text approaches are unfortunately still based on
GPT-2.1 The reasons are: (1) Many powerful LLMs such as
GPT-4, Claude, and Bard are only accessible through APIs.
DP finetuning them is not feasible.2 (2) Even though some
LLMs (e.g., LLaMA) are open-source, finetuning them with

1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Microsoft Research
Sun Yat-sen University 4 University of Chicago. Correspondence to: Chulin Xie <chulinx2@illinois.edu>, Zinan Lin <zinanlin@microsoft.com>.
3

1
The 175 billion-parameter GPT-3 has also been used for DP
synthetic text (He et al., 2022). However, the solution is not
publicly accessible as GPT-3 is proprietary.
2
Although standard finetuning APIs are provided for some of
the models (OpenAI, 2023a), DP finetuning requires a special
implementation and no model provides this custom API to date.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

