Overestimation, Overfitting, and Plasticity in Actor-Critic:
the Bitter Lesson of Reinforcement Learning
Michal Nauman * 1 2 Michał Bortkiewicz * 3 Piotr Miłoś 1 2 4 Tomasz Trzciński 1 3 5 Mateusz Ostaszewski † 3
Marek Cygan † 2 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, substantial improvements have been made
in the domain of deep reinforcement learning, as evidenced
by breakthroughs such as mastering complex games like
Dota 2 (OpenAI et al., 2019), Go (Silver et al., 2017) and
achieving control over nuclear fusion plasma (Degrave et al.,
2022). In particular, off-policy RL has witnessed a surge
of approaches reporting state-of-the-art results (Li et al.,
2022; Hafner et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023), including application to real robots (Smith et al., 2022). In general, those
approaches build upon Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm
with increased number of gradient steps per environment
steps (Replay Ratio (RR)) used in conjunction with some
form of regularization that stabilizes the learning in high
RR setting (Janner et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Hiraoka
et al., 2021; Nikishin et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; D’Oro
et al., 2022; Cetin & Celiktutan, 2023). These approaches
for regularization encompass considerations of reducing
overfitting (Li et al., 2022) (network regularization), reducing critic overestimation (Cetin & Celiktutan, 2023) (critic
regularization) or reducing the rate of plasticity loss (Lee
et al., 2023) (plasticity regularization).

Recent advancements in off-policy Reinforcement
Learning (RL) have significantly improved sample efficiency, primarily due to the incorporation of various forms of regularization that enable more gradient update steps than traditional
agents. However, many of these techniques have
been tested in limited settings, often on tasks
from single simulation benchmarks and against
well-known algorithms rather than a range of
regularization approaches. This limits our understanding of the specific mechanisms driving
RL improvements. To address this, we implemented over 60 different off-policy agents, each
integrating established regularization techniques
from recent state-of-the-art algorithms. We tested
these agents across 14 diverse tasks from 2 simulation benchmarks, measuring training metrics
related to overestimation, overfitting, and plasticity loss — issues that motivate the examined
regularization techniques. Our findings reveal that
while the effectiveness of a specific regularization
setup varies with the task, certain combinations
consistently demonstrate robust and superior performance. Notably, a simple Soft Actor-Critic
agent, appropriately regularized, reliably finds
a better-performing policy within the training
regime, which previously was achieved mainly
through model-based approaches.

Despite significant advancements, the understanding of how
different regularization techniques synergistically improve
off-policy agent performance is still limited (Hiraoka et al.,
2021; Lee et al., 2023). Moreover, most methods are tested
in narrow contexts, mainly in locomotion or manipulation
tasks, often restricted to a single simulation benchmark (Fujimoto et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020;
Moskovitz et al., 2021; D’Oro et al., 2022), leading to questions about their broad applicability and robustness. In this
study, our goal is to consolidate these lessons and address
the following research questions: Which regularization techniques lead to robust performance improvements across
diverse tasks and agent designs? Can generic regularization techniques outperform domain-specific RL techniques
that directly use the MDP structure?. We extend the scope
of prior research by examining over 60 design choices implemented within the Soft Actor-Critic framework. We test a
diverse array of tasks, including both locomotion and manipulation, within two simulation benchmarks and two replay

* Main authors contributed equally to this work; † Senior authors contributed equally to this work. 1 Ideas NCBR 2 University
of Warsaw 3 Warsaw University of Technology 4 Polish Academy of
Sciences 5 Tooploox 6 Nomagic. Correspondence to: Michal Nauman <nauman.mic@gmail.com>, Michal Bortkiewicz <michalbortkiewicz8@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

