Fair Off-Policy Learning from Observational Data

Dennis Frauen 1 2 Valentyn Melnychuk 1 2 Stefan Feuerriegel 1 2

Abstract

that decisions must not be subject to systematic discrimination by gender, race, or other attributes deemed as sensitive.

Algorithmic decision-making in practice must be
fair for legal, ethical, and societal reasons. To
achieve this, prior research has contributed various approaches that ensure fairness in machine
learning predictions, while comparatively little
effort has focused on fairness in decision-making,
specifically off-policy learning. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework for fair off-policy
learning: we learn decision rules from observational data under different notions of fairness,
where we explicitly assume that observational
data were collected under a different – potentially
discriminatory – behavioral policy. Importantly,
our framework is applicable to different fairness
notions for off-policy learning, where fairness
is formalized based on actions or policy values.
As our main contribution, we propose a neural
network-based framework to learn optimal policies under the different fairness notions. We further provide theoretical guarantees in the form of
generalization bounds for the finite-sample version of our framework. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework through extensive
numerical experiments using both simulated and
real-world data. Altogether, our work enables
algorithmic decision-making in a wide array of
practical applications where fairness must be ensured.

However, research from different areas has provided repeated evidence that algorithmic decision-making is often
not fair. A prominent example is Amazon’s tool for automatically screening job applicants that was used between 2014
and 2017 (Dastin, 2018). It was later discovered that the underlying algorithm generated decisions that were subject to
systematic discrimination against women and thus resulted
in a ceteris paribus lower probability of women being hired.
Ensuring fairness in off-policy learning is subject to inherent challenges. The reason is that off-policy learning is
based on observational data that may ingrain existing bias
from historical decision-making.1 Hence, one challenge is
that the resulting policy must be fair despite the observational data being collected under a different – potentially
discriminatory – behavioral policy. Furthermore, one may
erroneously think that a naı̈ve approach to achieving fairness in algorithmic decision-making is to simply omit the
sensitive attribute from the observational data. For instance,
to avoid bias against women, one would prevent off-policy
learning from having access to a variable that stores the
gender of an individual. However, in observational data,
other variables may act as proxies for gender, and, hence,
the learned policy may still lead to discrimination due to the
underlying data-generating process (Kilbertus et al., 2017).
Hence, a custom approach for handling sensitive attributes
in off-policy learning is needed.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for fair offpolicy learning from observational data. Specifically, we
learn fair decision rules from observational data where the
observational may be collected under a different – potentially discriminatory – behavioral policy. Specifically, we
propose a neural framework, called FairPol, to learn optimal
policies under these fairness notions. Therein, we leverage
fair representation learning in combination with custom
training objectives so that the resulting policies satisfy our
fairness notions. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the
first neural approach to fair off-policy learning. We further

1. Introduction
Algorithmic decision-making in practice must avoid discrimination and thus be fair to meet legal, ethical, and societal
demands (Nkonde, 2019; De-Arteaga et al., 2022; CorbettDavies et al., 2023). For example, in the U.S., the Fair
Housing Act and Equal Credit Opportunity Act stipulate
*

Equal contribution 1 LMU Munich 2 Munich Center for
Machine Learning.
Correspondence to: Dennis Frauen
<frauen@lmu.de>.

1
The term “bias” can have different meanings. Here, we use
bias to refer to algorithmic bias, where algorithms discriminate
against individuals from certain sensitive groups. This is in contrast
to the statistical bias of estimators, e.g., due to confounded data.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

