MD tree: a model-diagnostic tree grown on loss landscape

Yefan Zhou * 1 Jianlong Chen * 2 Qinxue Cao 3 Konstantin Schürholt 4 Yaoqing Yang 1

Abstract

One trained model Loss landscape analysis

Model Diagnosis
Q1: What’s wrong with optimizer hyperparameter?

This paper considers “model diagnosis”, which
we formulate as a classification problem. Given
a pre-trained neural network (NN), the goal is
to predict the source of failure from a set of
failure modes (such as a wrong hyperparameter,
inadequate model size, and insufficient data)
without knowing the training configuration of
the pre-trained NN. The conventional diagnosis
approach uses training and validation errors to
determine whether the model is underfitting
or overfitting. However, we show that rich
information about NN performance is encoded in
the optimization loss landscape, which provides
more actionable insights than validation-based
measurements. Therefore, we propose a diagnosis
method called MD tree based on loss landscape metrics and experimentally demonstrate
its advantage over classical validation-based
approaches. We verify the effectiveness of MD
tree in multiple practical scenarios: (1) use
several models trained on one dataset to diagnose
a model trained on another dataset, essentially a
few-shot dataset transfer problem; (2) use small
models (or models trained with small data) to
diagnose big models (or models trained with big
data), essentially a scale transfer problem. In a
dataset transfer task, MD tree achieves an accuracy of 87.7%, outperforming validation-based
approaches by 14.88%. Our code is available at
https://github.com/YefanZhou/ModelDiagnosis.

Large

✓Small

Q2: What’s wrong with model config?
configuration
is unknown

✓Model size

Optimizer hyperparameter

Figure 1. (Overview of our model-diagnostic framework using
MD tree). This framework is designed to analyze and diagnose
NNs where the training configuration is unknown. By examining
the loss landscape structure of a given trained model, MD tree
can identify potential failure sources of suboptimal performance.

access proprietary datasets, detailed configuration parameters, and complete training methodologies to develop these
models. When a trained model underperforms, the conventional approach to troubleshooting through retraining with
alternative settings thus becomes impractical. Therefore,
we should develop diagnostic methods that do not involve
complete datasets, retraining processes, and explicit configuration details. Can we say anything about why the model
is underperforming in this setting? Answering this question
requires a comprehensive analysis of the individual-trained
model to uncover the root causes of failure and identify
targeted strategies for improvement. The critical question in
this context is the following:
How can we methodically diagnose the root causes of the
underperformance of a model without the need for detailed
configuration specifics, retraining processes, and extensive
reliance on the dataset?
Canonical Problems in Model Diagnosis. In this paper,
we define the problem of “model diagnosis” and present
a systematic framework for evaluating and approaching it.
The goal is to identify the causes of underperformance in
trained models without relying on configuration specifics,
retraining processes, or extensive use of validation datasets.
See Figure 1 for an overview of the framework. We categorize the sources that lead to model failure into four: (1)
small optimizer hyperparameter (e.g., small batch size); (2)
large optimizer hyperparameter; (3) inadequate model size;
and (4) insufficient data amount. The four sources of failure
are inspired by the statistical physics viewpoint of learning (Seung et al., 1992; Watkin et al., 1993; Haussler et al.,
1994; Engel & den Broeck, 2001; Martin & Mahoney, 2017;
Yang et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2023). According to prior
works in this area (Martin & Mahoney, 2017; Yang et al.,

1. Introduction
There is a notable gap in the literature in systematically diagnosing the reason for the underperformance of a pre-trained
neural network (NN). For example, it is often difficult to
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Dartmouth College, NH, USA 2 Zhejiang University, Zhejiang,
China 3 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
4
University of St. Gallen, SUI. Correspondence to: Yefan Zhou
<yefan.zhou.gr@dartmouth.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

