Convergence and Complexity Guarantee for
Inexact First-order Riemannian Optimization Algorithms

Yuchen Li 1 Laura Balzano 2 Deanna Needell 3 Hanbaek Lyu 1

Abstract

f : M → R is an objective function consisting of a smooth
part φ and convex (and possibly nonsmooth) part ψ. Riemannian optimization problems of the form (1) have a wide
array of applications ranging from the computation of linear
algebraic quantities and factorizations and problems with
nonlinear differentiable constraints to the analysis of shape
space and automated learning (Ring & Wirth, 2012; Jaquier
et al., 2020). These applications arise either because of implicit constraints on the problem to be optimized or because
the domain is naturally defined as a manifold.

We analyze inexact Riemannian gradient descent
(RGD) where Riemannian gradients and retractions are inexactly (and cheaply) computed. Our
focus is on understanding when inexact RGD
converges and what is the complexity in the
general nonconvex and constrained setting. We
answer these questions in a general framework
of tangential Block Majorization-Minimization
(tBMM). We establish that tBMM converges to an
ϵ-stationary point within O(ϵ−2 ) iterations. Under a mild assumption, the results still hold when
the subproblem is solved inexactly in each iteration provided the total optimality gap is bounded.
Our general analysis applies to a wide range of
classical algorithms with Riemannian constraints
including inexact RGD and proximal gradient
method on Stiefel manifolds. We numerically
validate that tBMM shows improved performance
over existing methods when applied to various
problems, including nonnegative tensor decomposition with Riemannian constraints, regularized
nonnegative matrix factorization, and low-rank
matrix recovery problems.

Motivation: Inexact RGD. In many Riemannian optimization problem instances, the dimension of the parameter
space is much less than that of the ambient dimension. Such
‘latent’ low-dimensional structure in the parameter space
can be utilized by using the Riemannian gradient of the
objective that lives in the (low-dimensional) tangent space,
instead of the full gradient in the (high-dimensional) ambient space. Thus many Riemannian optimization methods
take the following form (Baker et al., 2008; Yang, 2007;
Boumal et al., 2019; Edelman et al., 1998): Iteratively,
(i) Compute descent direction in the tangent space;
(ii) Take a step in that direction along a geodesic.
However, step (ii) is often challenging in practice so other
approaches alleviate this burden by utilizing approximations or imposing additional assumptions (Absil et al., 2009;
Boumal, 2023). A popular way to implement a similar idea
with less computational burden for computing the geodesic
is to make the parameter update first in the tangent spaces
and then map the resulting point back onto the manifold using a retraction (which is like a projection from the tangent
space onto the manifold).

1. Introduction
A typical formulation of constrained Riemannian optimization takes the following form:
min (f (θ) := φ(θ) + ψ(θ)) ,

θ∈Θ⊆M

(1)

where M is a smooth Riemannian manifold embedded
in a Euclidean space, Θ is a closed subset of M, and

Perhaps the simplest and most widely used Riemannian optimization algorithms for smooth objectives f of the above
form is Riemannian gradient descent (RGD):
(
Vn ← − grad f (θ n−1 )
(RGD)
θ n ← Rtrθn−1 (αn Vn ) .

1
Department of Mathematics, University of WisconsinMadison, WI 53706, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90025, USA. Correspondence to: Hanbaek
Lyu <hlyu@math.wisc.edu>.

Here grad f (θ n−1 ) denotes the Riemannian gradient of f at
θ n−1 , Rtrθn−1 denotes the retraction map from the tangent
space Tθn−1 M at base point θ n−1 onto the manifold M

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

