Disguised Copyright Infringement of Latent Diffusion Models

Yiwei Lu * 1 2 Matthew Y.R. Yang * 1 Zuoqiu Liu * 1 Gautam Kamath 1 2 Yaoliang Yu 1 2

Abstract

2023; Somepalli et al. 2023a; Somepalli et al. 2023b), which
may also be copyrighted.

Copyright infringement may occur when a generative model produces samples substantially similar to some copyrighted data that it had access
to during the training phase. The notion of access usually refers to including copyrighted samples directly in the training dataset, which one
may inspect to identify an infringement. We argue that such visual auditing largely overlooks
a concealed copyright infringement, where one
constructs a disguise that looks drastically different from the copyrighted sample yet still induces
the effect of training Latent Diffusion Models on
it. Such disguises only require indirect access to
the copyrighted material and cannot be visually
distinguished, thus easily circumventing the current auditing tools. In this paper, we provide a
better understanding of such disguised copyright
infringement by uncovering the disguises generation algorithm, the revelation of the disguises,
and importantly, how to detect them to augment
the existing toolbox. Additionally, we introduce
a broader notion of acknowledgment for comprehending such indirect access. Our code is available at https://github.com/watml/d
isguised_copyright_infringement.

In this paper, we will focus on copyright law within the
jurisdiction of the United States. To establish a copyright
violation, two factors must be present. First, the accused
must have had access to the copyrighted material. Second,
the accused must produce content that bears “substantial
similarity” to the copyrighted material (reproducing). Note
that the definition of substantial similarity can be ambiguous.
Within the context of images, its definition appears to be
relatively broad (Steinberg v. Columbia Pictures Industries,
Inc. 1987), and in particular encompasses near-exact copies.
Turning our attention to the former “access” criterion: the
natural way to establish that a model had access to a particular piece of copyrighted material is to inspect its training
data. For example, in the case of Andersen v. Stability AI
Ltd. (Dist. Court 2023), the case was allowed to proceed
based on the fact that copyrighted images were found in
LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al. 2022) (the training data used
for Stable Diffusion) using haveibeentrained.com.
We challenge the perspective that such visual auditing is
sufficient to establish access to copyrighted material. Our results show that it is possible to conceal copyrighted images
within the training dataset for LDMs. Specifically, LDMs
are equipped with a fixed encoder for dimension reduction
such that the diffusion learning process occurs in the latent
space. This structure can be maliciously exploited to generate disguised copyrighted samples: given a copyrighted
image, we show how to generate a disguise such that it is
visually different from the copyrighted sample but shares
similar latent information. The closeness of the two samples in the latent space can be quantitatively measured by
a distance function, or qualitatively revealed by a concept
extraction tool called textual inversion (Gal et al. 2022),
both of which we will demonstrate in our empirical study.

1. Introduction
Generative models, especially the recent advanced Latent
Diffusion Models (LDM) (Rombach et al. 2022), have
shown tremendous ability to generate new images, even
of creative or artistic form according to text prompts. Such
models are trained on a large corpus of data, which may
consist of copyrighted material. Additionally, prior works
have established that such generative models are prone to
regurgitating content from their training data (Ippolito et
al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021; Carlini et al. 2022; Vyas et al.

Our study reveals the possibility of creating a new training
dataset that does not appear to directly or blatantly contain
any copyrighted data. Nonetheless, if a model is trained on
this derivative training dataset, it would behave similarly as
if the copyrighted data were present. Such disguises may
still exhibit copyright infringement, although only accessing proprietary data indirectly. In Figure 1, we display a
comparison between the previous copyright infringement

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 2 Vector Institute. Correspondence
to: Yiwei Lu <yiwei.lu@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

