Graph-Triggered Rising Bandits

Nicola Gatti

1

Gianmarco Genalti 1 Marco Mussi 1
Marcello Restelli 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

Abstract

cal guarantees on the convergence to the optimal solution
and the lower and upper bounds to the convergence rate
(usually referred to as regret bounds). However, the standard MAB model is too naı̈ve for many real-world applications, and understanding which kind of additional problem structure allows recovering good theoretical properties
is a central scientific challenge. Examples include nonstationary (Gur et al., 2014), delayed (Pike-Burke et al.,
2018), linear (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), contextual (Chu
et al., 2011) and continuous-action spaces (Kleinberg et al.,
2008) bandits.

In this paper, we propose a novel generalization
of rested and restless bandits where the evolution
of the arms’ expected rewards is governed by a
graph defined over the arms. An edge connecting a pair of arms (i, j) represents the fact that a
pull of arm i triggers the evolution of arm j, and
vice versa. Interestingly, rested and restless bandits are both special cases of our model for some
suitable (degenerate) graphs. Still, the model can
represent way more general and interesting scenarios. We first tackle the problem of computing
the optimal policy when no specific structure is
assumed on the graph, showing that it is NP-hard.
Then, we focus on a specific structure, forcing
the graph to be composed of a set of fully connected sub-graphs (i.e., cliques), and we prove
that the optimal policy can be easily computed
in closed form. Subsequently, we move to the
learning problem presenting regret minimization
algorithms for deterministic and stochastic cases.
Our regret bounds highlight the complexity of
the learning problem by incorporating instancedependent terms that encode specific properties
of the underlying graph structure. Moreover, we
illustrate how the knowledge of the underlying
graph is not necessary for achieving the no-regret
property.

We focus on rather recent MAB structures, called restless
and rested bandits (Tekin & Liu, 2012). In the former, the
expected rewards evolve following the time (i.e., as an effect of nature); in the latter, the expected reward of an arm
evolves as a function of the pulls we perform on that specific arm. In particular, we study a specific shape of the
expected reward evolution, namely rising (Heidari et al.,
2016). In a rising bandit, expected rewards increase according to monotonic and concave functions. Restless and rested
rising bandits can capture many settings of practical interest.
Consider, for instance, the scenario in which we have to
choose which product to advertise (i.e., our arms), and the
reward is the number of sales for such a product. The product we advertise will increase its sales and favor the sales
of complementary products. This scenario corresponds to a
rested problem in which some elements present a restless
behavior.
In this paper, we propose a generalization of restless and
rested bandits. We define a novel space of MABs called
Graph-Triggered Rising Bandits (GTRBs). A GTRB is represented by a bandit with a graph describing the interactions
between arms. Specifically, an arm triggers the evolution
of its own expected reward (as for rested bandit) and the
evolution of the “connected” arms. Figure 1b shows an
example of this scenario. Interestingly, rested and restless
bandits are two vertices in the space of GTRB. In particular,
restless bandits correspond to the case of a fully-connected
graph (Figure 1a), while rested ones correspond to the graph
with the self-loops only (Figure 1c).

1. Introduction
In the basic stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB, Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) problem, at each round, the
agent is asked to choose an action (a.k.a. arm) among a
finite action set observing a reward drawn from an unknown
probability distribution. MABs are particularly appealing
machine learning models as they provide important theoreti1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
Correspondence to: G. Genalti <gianmarco.genalti@polimi.it>.

Contributions. In this paper, we present Graph-Triggered
Rising Bandits (GTRBs), a setting aiming at generalizing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

