Stacking Deep Set Networks and Pooling by Quantiles

Zhuojun Chen 1 Xinghua Zhu 1 Dongzhe Su 1 Justin C. I. Chuang 1

Abstract

well studied in the literature (Wagstaff et al., 2019; Bueno
& Hylton, 2021; Wagstaff et al., 2022).

We propose Stacked Deep Sets and Quantile Pooling for learning tasks on set data. We introduce
Quantile Pooling, a novel permutation-invariant
pooling operation that synergizes max and average pooling. Just like max pooling, quantile
pooling emphasizes the most salient features of
the data. Like average pooling, it captures the
overall distribution and subtle features of the data.
Like both, it is lightweight and fast. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in a variety
of tasks, showing that quantile pooling can outperform both max and average pooling in each
of their respective strengths. We also introduce
a variant of deep set networks that is more expressive and universal. While Quantile Pooling
balances robustness and sensitivity, Stacked Deep
Sets enhances learning with depth.

The search for a more suitable pooling function for set data
has prompted the evaluation of alternatives. Learned pooling
methods, which adaptively weight set elements based on
their importance, show promise (Lee et al., 2019; Zhao et al.,
2021; Naderializadeh et al., 2021; Bartunov et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2019). However, their high computational
expense limits practicality for many applications (refer to
Appendix A.4 for a comparison).
In our observation on efficient pooling operations, we find
that while max pooling is effective in highlighting dominant features, it can neglect subtle yet informative aspects
of the data, leading to potential information loss. On the
other hand, average pooling, despite its inclusive approach,
risks diminishing unique features by uniformly averaging
all points. This balance poses a significant challenge in
handling complex data distributions where a complete representation demands acknowledgement of both subtle nuances
and prominent characteristics.

1. Introduction

This paper introduces a new paradigm of pooling for neural
networks in the form of Quantile Pooling, a method that
synergizes the extremes of max and average pooling. Quantile pooling has the potential to offer a dynamic balance,
selectively emphasizing the most relevant aspects of the
data depending on the context, a flexibility that is lacking in
traditional pooling methods. Building on the Stacked Deep
Sets architecture, initially introduced by Zaheer et al. (2017)
but not fully investigated before, our approach showcases
that it surpasses the performance of other pooling strategies
and network architectures while maintaining computational
efficiency.

Deep learning has made remarkable strides in various domains by leveraging the representational power of neural
networks. A fundamental challenge in this field is the effective processing and learning from set-structured data (Szabó
et al., 2016). The seminal works of ”Deep Sets” (Zaheer
et al., 2017), ”Pointnet” (Qi et al., 2017a) and ”Set Transformer” (Lee et al., 2019) have propelled advancements in
this area by demonstrating that permutation-invariant functions can model set-based data effectively.
Pooling operations are essential in neural network architectures for summarizing variable-sized, unordered set data.
Max pooling, highlighted in Pointnet, excels in robustness
by capturing the most significant features, while average
pooling computes a mean that better represents the overall
data distribution, leading to a more generalized feature aggregation. However, such pooling techniques come with
their limitations and trade-offs, many of which have been

2. The Quantile Pooling Family
Consider a probability space (Ω, F, P ) and a random variable X : Ω → R with cumulative distribution function
FX : R → [0, 1]. X has bounded support [a, b], where
a = inf{x ∈ R : P (X ≤ x) > 0} and b = sup{x ∈ R :
P (X ≥ x) > 0}. A symmetric pooling function P over the
distribution of X can be represented by an operator that aggregates the values of X, taking into account the symmetry
of the underlying distribution.

1
ASTRI, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Zhuojun
Chen <georgechen@astri.org>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

