Efficient World Models with Context-Aware Tokenization
Vincent Micheli * 1 Eloi Alonso * 1 François Fleuret 1

Abstract

Model-based RL (MBRL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is hypothesized to be the key for scaling up deep RL agents
(LeCun, 2022). Indeed, world models (Ha & Schmidhuber,
2018) offer a diverse range of capabilities: lookahead search
(Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2021), learning in imagination (Sutton, 1991; Hafner et al., 2023), representation
learning (Schwarzer et al., 2021; D’Oro et al., 2023), and uncertainty estimation (Pathak et al., 2017; Sekar et al., 2020).
In essence, MBRL shifts the focus from the RL problem to
a generative modelling problem, where the development of
an accurate world model significantly simplifies policy training. In particular, policies learnt in the imagination of world
models are freed from sample efficiency constraints, a common limitation of RL agents that is magnified in complex
environments with slow rollouts.

Scaling up deep Reinforcement Learning (RL)
methods presents a significant challenge. Following developments in generative modelling, modelbased RL positions itself as a strong contender.
Recent advances in sequence modelling have led
to effective transformer-based world models, albeit at the price of heavy computations due to
the long sequences of tokens required to accurately simulate environments. In this work, we
propose ∆-IRIS, a new agent with a world model
architecture composed of a discrete autoencoder
that encodes stochastic deltas between time steps
and an autoregressive transformer that predicts
future deltas by summarizing the current state
of the world with continuous tokens. In the
Crafter benchmark, ∆-IRIS sets a new state of
the art at multiple frame budgets, while being
an order of magnitude faster to train than previous attention-based approaches. We release
our code and models at https://github.com/
vmicheli/delta-iris.

Recently, the IRIS agent (Micheli et al., 2023) achieved
strong results in the Atari 100k benchmark (Bellemare et al.,
2013; Kaiser et al., 2020). IRIS introduced a world model
composed of a discrete autoencoder and an autoregressive
transformer, casting dynamics learning as a sequence modelling problem where the transformer composes over time a
vocabulary of image tokens built by the autoencoder. This
approach opened up avenues for future model-based methods to capitalize on advances in generative modelling (Villegas et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2023), and has already been
adopted beyond its original domain (comma.ai, 2023; Hu
et al., 2023). However, in its current form, scaling IRIS to
more complex environments is computationally prohibitive.
Indeed, such an endeavor requires a large number of tokens
to encode visually challenging frames. Besides, sophisticated dynamics may require to store numerous time steps
in memory to reason about the past, ultimately making the
imagination procedure excessively slow. Hence, under these
constraints, maintaining a favorable imagined-to-collected
data ratio is practically infeasible.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods have recently
delivered impressive results (Ye et al., 2021; Hafner et al.,
2023; Schwarzer et al., 2023) in traditional benchmarks
(Bellemare et al., 2013; Tassa et al., 2018). In light of the
evermore complex domains tackled by the latest generations
of generative models (Rombach et al., 2022; Achiam et al.,
2023), the prospect of training agents in more ambitious
environments (Kanervisto et al., 2022) may hold significant appeal. However, that leap forward poses a serious
challenge: deep RL architectures have been comparatively
smaller and less sample-efficient than their (self-)supervised
counterparts. In contrast, more intricate environments necessitate models with greater representational power and
have higher data requirements.

In the present work, we introduce ∆-IRIS, a new agent
capable of scaling to visually complex environments with
lengthier time horizons. ∆-IRIS encodes frames by attending to the ongoing trajectory of observations and actions,
effectively describing stochastic deltas between time steps.
This enriched conditioning scheme drastically reduces the
number of tokens to encode frames, offloads the deterministic aspects of world modelling to the autoencoder, and lets
the autoregressive transformer focus on stochastic dynamics.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Geneva, Switzerland. Correspondence to: <first.last@unige.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

