Stationarity Without Mean Reversion in Improper Gaussian Processes

Luca Ambrogioni 1

Abstract

(Neal and Neal, 1996) and provide robust non-parametric
models for low-dimensional regression and classification
problems (Williams and Rasmussen, 2006). In statistical
signal processing, GPs are used to specify structured prior
distributions on the underlying signals, which can be used
to specify dynamic properties such as temporal smoothness
and oscillatory frequency (Tobar et al., 2015). The properties of a GP depend on its covariance function, also known
as a kernel. Depending on its covariance function, samples
from a GP can exhibit a wide range of behaviors, such as
polynomial growth, quasi-periodic oscillations, fractality
or smoothness. In machine learning, the most commonly
used covariance functions are stationary and isotropic. As
we shall see in the paper, stationary covariance functions
usually induce mean-reversion, meaning that perturbations
tend to ’relax’ towards a fixed average value. In this paper,
we show that it is possible to use kernels that are both stationary and not mean-reverting as long as we use improper
GP priors. Roughly speaking, an improper GP has infinite
variance everywhere and its distribution of values at any
point is given by an (improper) flat distribution. We introduce the use of a large family of non-positive kernels that
do not correspond to proper covariance functions.

The behavior of a GP regression depends on the
choice of covariance function. Stationary covariance functions are preferred in machine learning
applications. However, (non-periodic) stationary
covariance functions are always mean reverting
and can therefore exhibit pathological behavior
when applied to data that does not relax to a fixed
global mean value. In this paper we show that it
is possible to use improper GP priors with infinite
variance to define processes that are stationary
but not mean reverting. To this aim, we use of
non-positive kernels that can only be defined in
this limit regime. The resulting posterior distributions can be computed analytically and it involves
a simple correction of the usual formulas. The
main contribution of the paper is the introduction
of a large family of smooth non-reverting covariance functions that closely resemble the kernels
commonly used in the GP literature (e.g. squared
exponential and Matérn class). By analyzing both
synthetic and real data, we demonstrate that these
non-positive kernels solve some known pathologies of mean reverting GP regression while retaining most of the favorable properties of ordinary
smooth stationary kernels.

2. Preliminaries
The use of improper priors is well-established in Bayesian
statistics and machine learning. Loosely speaking, an improper prior is a non-normalizable density that nevertheless
provides a proper normalizable posterior. Improper priors
are often used as uninformative prior models. For example, consider a univariate Gaussian inference with prior
N (x; 0, ν 2 ) and likelihood N (y; x, σ 2 ). Given a data-point
y, the resulting posterior distribution over x is


σ −2
−2
−2 −1
pν (x | y) = N x; −2
y,
(ν
+
σ
)
. (1)
ν + σ −2

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are infinite-dimensional generalizations of Gaussian distributions that have gained
widespread adoption in machine learning (Williams and
Rasmussen, 2006), spatial statistics (Stein, 1999; Gelfand
and Schliep, 2016) and statistical signal processing (Tobar et al., 2015; Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010; Ambrogioni
and Maris, 2019; 2018; Tobar et al., 2023). In machine
learning, GPs offer a mathematically tractable way to study
neural networks at the limit of infinitely many hidden units

In this case, the posterior provides a biased estimator of the
mean since the data y is "shrunk" towards the origin (i.e.
the prior mean). In order to remove the bias, we can take
the limit ν 2 → ∞, which corresponds to an uninformative
improper prior with infinite variance. However, while the
prior does not exist as a proper probability distribution, the
posterior has a well-defined (normalized) limit

p∞ (x | y) = N x; y, σ 2 ,
(2)

1

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University. Correspondence to: Luca Ambrogioni
<luca.ambrogioni@donders.ru.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

