ViP: A Differentially Private Foundation Model for Computer Vision

Yaodong Yu 1 2 Maziar Sanjabi 2 Yi Ma 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 2 Chuan Guo 2

Abstract

or training a simpler model on top of the learned representations to perform more specialized tasks, and have performed
tremendously well on challenging benchmarks in both language and vision domains (Brown et al., 2020; Radford
et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2023).

Artificial intelligence (AI) has seen a tremendous
surge in capabilities thanks to the use of foundation models trained on internet-scale data. On
the flip side, the uncurated nature of internetscale data also poses significant privacy and legal risks, as they often contain personal information or copyrighted material that should not
be trained on without permission. In this work,
we propose as a mitigation measure a recipe to
train foundation vision models via self-supervised
learning with differential privacy (DP) guarantee.
We identify masked autoencoders as a suitable
learning algorithm that aligns well with DP-SGD,
and train ViP—a Vision transformer with differential Privacy—under a strict privacy budget of
ϵ = 8 on the LAION400M dataset. We evaluate the quality of representation learned by ViP
using standard downstream vision tasks; in particular, ViP achieves a (non-private) linear probing
accuracy of 55.7% on ImageNet, comparable to
that of end-to-end trained AlexNet (trained and
evaluated on ImageNet). Our result suggests that
scaling to internet-scale data can be practical for
private learning. Code and DP pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/ViP-MAE.

Despite the widespread deployment of foundation models,
there are significant privacy and legal risks of training these
models on uncurated data that often contain personal information or copyrighted material. Although the training
data for these models are considered public in most cases,
some of the data may be sensitive (Tramèr et al., 2022);
additionally, there are certain privacy and copyright laws
that apply to model training even on such public data (Henderson et al., 2023). In addition, studies have shown that
generative foundation models such as GPT-3 can sometimes
regurgitate memorized information about individuals and
licensed content from its training data when prompted to do
so (Carlini et al., 2021). More recently, Meehan et al. (2023)
showed that non-generative vision SSL models can also
be probed to reveal sensitive information about individual
samples in its training data when given partial information.
Given these risks, there is an urgent need to train foundation
models that can adhere to relevant privacy and copyright
laws. To this end, differential privacy (DP; Dwork et al.
(2006)) seeks to limit the influence of individual training
data points on the trained model, and hence has the potential
to mitigate both privacy and copyright risks for sensitive
information that is confined to a single or a few training examples (Henderson et al., 2023). For any model that can be
trained using gradient-based optimization, DP-SGD (Song
et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016) can be applied to ensure
that the trained model satisfies the rigorous definition of DP.
However, there are still significant technical challenges in
DP-SGD training of large-scale foundation vision models:

1. Introduction
Foundation models (e.g., GPT-3, SimCLR, CLIP,
etc. (Brown et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a; Radford et al.,
2021)) pre-trained on vast amounts of diverse unlabeled data
through self-supervised learning (SSL) have emerged as an
important building block for artificial intelligence (AI) systems (Bommasani et al., 2021). These foundation models
enable downstream applications via fine-tuning, prompting,
1

UC Berkeley 2 Meta.
Correspondence to:
Yu <yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu>,
Chuan Guo
guo@meta.com>.

1. Differentially private representation learning in general
is a difficult problem. Tramer & Boneh (2020) showed
that even handcrafted features can outperform feature
learned by state-of-the-art DP-trained models, and attaining high-utility learned representations requires significantly more training data—much more than what is
provided in typical supervised/curated datasets.

Yaodong
<chuan-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2. Combining self-supervised learning (SSL) with internetscale uncurated datasets may seem like a natural ap1

