Adaptive Hierarchical Certification for Segmentation
using Randomized Smoothing

Alaa Anani 1 2 Tobias Lorenz 1 Bernt Schiele 2 Mario Fritz 1

Abstract

imaging (Kayalibay et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2019), video
surveillance (Cao et al., 2020), and object detection (Gidaris
& Komodakis, 2015). However, ever since deep neural
networks were shown to be inherently non-robust in the face
of small adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2014), the
risk of using them in such applications has become evident.
Moreover, an arms race between new adversarial attacks
and defenses has developed, which calls for the need for
provably and certifiably robust defenses. Many certification
techniques have been explored in the case of classification
(Li et al., 2023), with the first recent effort in semantic
segmentation by Fischer et al. (2021).

Certification for machine learning is proving that
no adversarial sample can evade a model within
a range under certain conditions, a necessity for
safety-critical domains. Common certification
methods for segmentation use a flat set of finegrained classes, leading to high abstain rates due
to model uncertainty across many classes. We
propose a novel, more practical setting, which
certifies pixels within a multi-level hierarchy, and
adaptively relaxes the certification to a coarser
level for unstable components classic methods
would abstain from, effectively lowering the abstain rate whilst providing more certified semantically meaningful information. We mathematically formulate the problem setup, introduce an
adaptive hierarchical certification algorithm and
prove the correctness of its guarantees. Since
certified accuracy does not take the loss of information into account for coarser classes, we
introduce the Certified Information Gain (CIG)
metric, which is proportional to the class granularity level. Our extensive experiments on the
datasets Cityscapes, PASCAL-Context, ACDC
and COCO-Stuff demonstrate that our adaptive
algorithm achieves a higher CIG and lower abstain rate compared to the current state-of-the-art
certification method. Our code can be found here:
https://github.com/AlaaAnani/adaptive-certify.

Certification for segmentation is a hard task since it requires
certifying many components (i.e., pixels) simultaneously.
The naive approach would be to certify each component to
its top class within a radius and then take the minimum as
the overall certified radius of the image. This is problematic
since a single unstable component could lead to a very small
radius, or even abstain due to a single abstention. The stateof-the-art certification method for segmentation, S EG C ER TIFY (Fischer et al., 2021), relies on randomized smoothing
(Cohen et al., 2019). It mitigates the many components
issue by abstaining from unstable components and conservatively certifies the rest. While an unstable component
implies that the model is not confident about a single top
class, it often means that it fluctuates between classes that
are semantically related (a result of our analysis in Section
5 and extended in App. C.1). For example, if an unstable
component fluctuates between car and truck, certifying it
within a semantic hierarchy as vehicle would provide a more
meaningful guarantee compared to abstaining.

1. Introduction

We propose a novel hierarchical certification method for
semantic segmentation, which adaptively certifies pixels
within a multi-level hierarchy while preserving similar theoretical guarantees to Fischer et al. (2021). The hierarchy
levels start from fine-grained labels to coarser ones that
group them. Our algorithm relies on finding unstable components within an image and relaxing their label granularity
to be certified within a coarser level in a semantic hierarchy.
Meanwhile, stable components can still be certified within
a fine-grained level. As depicted in Figure 1, our approach
lowers the abstain rate while providing more certified in-

Image semantic segmentation is of paramount importance
to many safety-critical applications such as autonomous
driving (Kaymak & Uçar, 2019; Zhang et al., 2016), medical
1

CISPA Helmhotz Center for Information Security,
Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Correspondence to: Alaa Anani <aanani@mpi-inf.mpg.de>,
Tobias Lorenz <tobias.lorenz@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

