Multiply Robust Estimation for Local Distribution Shifts with Multiple Domains

Steven Wilkins-Reeves 1 Xu Chen 2 Qi Ma 2 Christine Agarwal 2 Aude Hofleitner 2

Abstract

is crucial to evaluate model performance across different
countries, end devices and age groups, as user behaviors can
significantly vary across these segments (McMahan et al.,
2013). In addition to the heterogeneity of data distributions
across segments, it is also a common issue where the distribution of the data available for model training differs from
that of the target population for model deployment (Storkey,
2009), primarily due to sampling bias (Bethlehem, 2010;
González-Bailón et al., 2014).

Distribution shifts are ubiquitous in real-world
machine learning applications, posing a challenge
to the generalization of models trained on one
data distribution to another. We focus on scenarios where data distributions vary across multiple
segments of the entire population and only make
local assumptions about the differences between
training and test (deployment) distributions within
each segment. We propose a two-stage multiply
robust estimation method to improve model performance on each individual segment for tabular
data analysis. The method involves fitting a linear
combination of the based models, learned using
clusters of training data from multiple segments,
followed by a refinement step for each segment.
Our method is designed to be implemented with
commonly used off-the-shelf machine learning
models. We establish theoretical guarantees on
the generalization bound of the method on the test
risk. With extensive experiments on synthetic and
real datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed
method substantially improves over existing alternatives in prediction accuracy and robustness on
both regression and classification tasks. We also
assess its effectiveness on a user city prediction
dataset from Meta.

While building domain1 -specific models for all segments
and then adjusting for sampling bias may be a straightforward solution, it presents at least three challenges: (1)
unreliable model training on segments with an insufficient
number of labels, (2) excessive computation when training
individual models with a large number of segments, and,
(3) a potential loss of information shared across different
segments. To address these challenges, we aim to propose a
flexible modeling framework for general supervised learning scenarios on tabular data, with the goal of improving
model performance on each individual domain; however,
we also discuss how our methods could be adopted to image
and text data.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are often trained, evaluated and
monitored across multiple segments in both scientific research and industrial applications (Perone et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2019; McMahan et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2023). Due
to the heterogeneous nature of data distributions, the optimal
model and its performance may differ among these segments.
For example, in the context of the technology industry, it

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the problem setup with two
segments {S1 , S2 }. We observe both features and responses for
the training data and only features for the test domain. We don’t
make any global assumptions of distribution shifts but only shifts
within a segment.

1

Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle,
USA 2 Central Applied Science, Meta, Menlo Park, USA. Correspondence to: Steven Wilkins-Reeves <stevewr@uw.edu>, Xu
Chen <xuchen2@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Towards that end, we operate under the setting that the
1

1

We use ‘domain’ and ‘segment’ interchangeably hereafter.

