Beyond Regular Grids: Fourier-Based Neural Operators on Arbitrary Domains

Levi Lingsch 1 Mike Y. Michelis 2 3 Emmanuel de Bézenac 1 Sirani M. Perera 4 Robert K. Katzschmann 2 3
Siddhartha Mishra 1 2

Abstract

traditional numerical methods such as finite difference, finite element, and spectral methods (Quarteroni & Valli,
1994) are used to solve PDEs. Despite their tremendous
success, the prohibitively high computational cost of these
methods makes them infeasible for a variety of contexts
in PDEs ranging from high-dimensional problems to the
so-called many query scenarios (Karniadakis et al., 2021).
This high computational cost also provides the rationale for
the development of alternative data driven methods for the
fast and accurate simulation of PDEs. Hence, a wide variety of machine learning algorithms have been proposed
recently in this context. These include physics-informed
neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019), MLPs, and
CNNs for simulating parametric PDEs (Zhu & Zabaras,
2018; Lye et al., 2020; 2021; Wandel et al., 2020) as well
as graph-based algorithms (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020;
Pfaff et al., 2020; Brandstetter et al., 2022; Equer et al.,
2023), to name a few.

The computational efficiency of many neural operators, widely used for learning solutions of
PDEs, relies on the fast Fourier transform (FFT)
for performing spectral computations. As the
FFT is limited to equispaced (rectangular) grids,
this limits the efficiency of such neural operators
when applied to problems where the input and
output functions need to be processed on general non-equispaced point distributions. Leveraging the observation that a limited set of Fourier
(Spectral) modes suffice to provide the required
expressivity of a neural operator, we propose a
simple method, based on the efficient direct evaluation of the underlying spectral transformation,
to extend neural operators to arbitrary domains.
An efficient implementation* of such direct spectral evaluations is coupled with existing neural operator models to allow the processing of
data on arbitrary non-equispaced distributions of
points. With extensive empirical evaluation, we
demonstrate that the proposed method allows us
to extend neural operators to arbitrary point distributions with significant gains in training speed
over baselines while retaining or improving the
accuracy of Fourier neural operators (FNOs) and
related neural operators.

However, as solutions of PDEs are expressed in terms of
the so-called solution operators, which map input functions (initial and boundary data, coefficients, source terms)
to the PDE solution, operator learning, i.e., learning the
underlying operators from data, has emerged as a dominant framework for applying machine learning to PDEs.
Existing operator learning algorithms include, but are not
limited to, operator networks (Chen & Chen, 1995), DeepONets (Lu et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2021),
attention-based methods such as (Kissas et al., 2022; Cao,
2021; Prasthofer et al., 2022), and neural operators (Kovachki et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2020b;c; Raonić et al., 2023).
More recently, transformer-based approach for learning operators have been explored (Wu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023),
yet operator learning in the spectral domain retains an advantage (Hao et al., 2024).

1. Introduction
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are extensively used
to mathematically model interesting phenomena in science
and engineering (Evans, 2010). As closed-form or analytical solutions to solve PDEs are not available or practical,

Within this large class of operator learning algorithms,
Neural Operators based on non-local spectral transformations, such as the Fourier Neural operator (FNO) (Li et al.,
2020a) and its variants (Li et al., 2021; Pathak et al., 2022)
have gained much traction and are widely applied. Apart
from favorable theoretical approximation properties (Kovachki et al., 2021a; Lanthaler et al., 2023b), FNOs are attractive due to their expressivity, simplicity, and computational efficiency. A key element in the computational effi-

1

Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH AI Center, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 3 Soft Robotics Lab,
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 4 Department of Mathematics, EmbryRiddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, FL, USA. Correspondence to: Levi Lingsch <llingsch@student.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).
* Source code available on GitHub: https://github.
com/camlab-ethz/DSE-for-NeuralOperators

1

