Learning from Students: Applying t-Distributions
to Explore Accurate and Efficient Formats for LLMs

Jordan Dotzel 1 2 Yuzong Chen 1 Bahaa Kotb 1 Sushma Prasad 2 Gang Wu 2 Sheng Li 2
Mohamed S. Abdelfattah 1 Zhiru Zhang 1

Abstract
The increasing size of large language models
(LLMs) traditionally requires low-precision integer formats to meet strict latency and power
demands. Yet recently, alternative formats such
as Normal Float (NF4) have increased model accuracy at the cost of increased chip area. In this
work, we first conduct a large-scale analysis of
LLM weights and activations across 30 networks
and conclude that most distributions follow a Student’s t-distribution. We then derive a new theoretically optimal format, Student Float (SF4),
that improves over NF4 across modern LLMs,
for example increasing the average accuracy on
LLaMA2-7B by 0.76% across tasks. Using this
format as a high-accuracy reference, we then propose augmenting E2M1 with two variants of supernormal support for higher model accuracy. Finally, we explore the quality and efficiency frontier across 11 datatypes by evaluating their model
accuracy and hardware complexity. We discover
a Pareto curve composed of INT4, E2M1, and
E2M1 with supernormal support, which offers
a continuous tradeoff between model accuracy
and chip area. For example, E2M1 with supernormal support increases the accuracy of Phi-2
by up to 2.19% with 1.22% area overhead, enabling more LLM-based applications to be run
at four bits. The supporting code is hosted at
https://github.com/cornell-zhang/llm-datatypes.

Figure 1. Quantization Datatypes – Datatypes should reflect
LLM weight and activation distributions to achieve the highest
quality. In this work, we compare model accuracy, chip area, and
power consumption across datatypes to map the quality-efficiency
Pareto frontier. We also propose alternative datatypes including
Student Float (SF4), super-range E2M1 (SR), and super-precision
E2M1 (SP). These complement existing datatypes, e.g., Normal
Float (NF4), Intel E2M1 (E2M1-I), bitsandbytes E2M1 (E2M1-B)
and Additive Powers of Two (APoT4).

quality at higher compression ratios (Kuzmin et al., 2023),
and importantly it can be applied post-training, often without any fine-tuning. This makes it suitable for large language
models (LLMs), which require significant resources during
fine-tuning for gradient and optimizer state buffers. Recent
LLM quantization works have successfully lowered weight
and activation precision to eight bits (Frantar et al., 2023;
Xiao et al., 2023) and four bits (Zhao et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023; Shao et al., 2023) with minimal accuracy loss.

1. Introduction

At four bits, prior LLM quantization has focused on integer
datatypes since they are supported in current DNN accelerators (Jouppi et al., 2023). However, recent work has
shown eight-bit floating-point (FP8), e.g. E4M3, achieves
higher accuracy compared to INT8, where E represents the
exponent bits and M the mantissa bits (Kuzmin et al., 2022;
Micikevicius et al., 2022). These improvements motivate
the further study of four-bit non-integer formats, such as
FP4, that can be included in next-generation accelerators.

Quantization has become the mainstream method for deep
neural network (DNN) compression (Hao et al., 2021). Compared to alternatives like pruning, it retains original model
1
School of ECE, Cornell University 2 Google. Correspondence
to: Jordan Dotzel <dotzel@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

