Generating In-Distribution Proxy Graphs for Explaining Graph Neural
Networks
Zhuomin Chen 1 Jiaxing Zhang 2 Jingchao Ni 3 Xiaoting Li 4 Yuchen Bian 5 Md Mezbahul Islam 1
Ananda Mohan Mondal 1 Hua Wei 6 Dongsheng Luo 1

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become
a building block in graph data processing, with
wide applications in critical domains. The growing needs to deploy GNNs in high-stakes applications necessitate explainability for users in the
decision-making processes. A popular paradigm
for the explainability of GNNs is to identify explainable subgraphs by comparing their labels
with the ones of original graphs. This task is
challenging due to the substantial distributional
shift from the original graphs in the training set
to the set of explainable subgraphs, which prevents accurate prediction of labels with the subgraphs. To address it, in this paper, we propose a
novel method that generates proxy graphs for explainable subgraphs that are in the distribution of
training data. We introduce a parametric method
that employs graph generators to produce proxy
graphs. A new training objective based on information theory is designed to ensure that proxy
graphs not only adhere to the distribution of training data but also preserve explanatory factors.
Such generated proxy graphs can be reliably used
to approximate the predictions of the labels of explainable subgraphs. Empirical evaluations across
various datasets demonstrate our method achieves
more accurate explanations for GNNs.

(a) Explanation process

(b) OOD problem

Figure 1. Examples of the explanation process and out-ofdistribution problem. (a) is the explanation process for a graph
learning model. The original graph G undergoes an explanation
process, resulting in an explanation graph G′ that highlights the
most significant features and relationships; (b) shows the explanation graph G′ is out of distribution where the GNN is trained.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a pivotal
technology for handling graph-structured data, demonstrating remarkable performance in various applications including node classification and link prediction (Kipf & Welling,
2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Scarselli
et al., 2008). Their growing use in critical sectors such as
healthcare and fraud detection has escalated the need for
explainability in their decision-making processes (Wu et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). To meet this
demand, a variety of explanation methods have been recently developed to interpret the behavior of GNN models.
These methods primarily concentrate on identifying a subgraph that significantly impacts the model’s prediction for a
particular instance (Ying et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2020).
A prominent approach to explain GNNs involves the Graph
Information Bottleneck (GIB) principle (Wu et al., 2020).
This principle focuses on extracting a compact yet informative subgraph from the input graph, ensuring that this
subgraph retains sufficient information for the model to
maintain its original prediction. A key aspect of the GIB
approach is evaluating the predictive capability of such a
subgraph. Typically, this is accomplished by feeding the
subgraph into the GNN model and comparing its prediction
against that of the complete input graph.

1
Knight Foundation School of Computing and Information
Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, USA 2 New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, USA 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of Houston, Houston, USA 4 Visa
Research, USA 5 Amazon Search A9, USA 6 School of Computing
and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, Tempe,
USA. Correspondence to: Zhuomin Chen <zchen051@fiu.edu>,
Dongsheng Luo <dluo@fiu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Although it is intuitively correct, the underlying assumption of the aforementioned approach – GNN model can
1

