Causal Representation Learning Made Identifiable
by Grouping of Observational Variables

Hiroshi Morioka 1 Aapo Hyvärinen 2

Abstract

nisms latent in the data; importantly, this is possible without
conducting expensive and time-consuming interventional
experiments. However, the problem is ill-posed in general,
and thus the main focus of causal discovery research is to
find conditions where the causal graph can be uniquely determined (Andersson et al., 1997; Spirtes et al., 2001). A large
number of studies have been conducted so far; they have
basically found that imposing some asymmetricity into the
model, such as nonlinearity or non-Gaussianity, enables its
unique identification (Hoyer et al., 2008a; Peters et al., 2014;
Shimizu et al., 2006; 2011; Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009).

A topic of great current interest is Causal Representation Learning (CRL), whose goal is to learn
a causal model for hidden features in a data-driven
manner. Unfortunately, CRL is severely ill-posed
since it is a combination of the two notoriously
ill-posed problems of representation learning and
causal discovery. Yet, finding practical identifiability conditions that guarantee a unique solution
is crucial for its practical applicability. Most approaches so far have been based on assumptions
on the latent causal mechanisms, such as temporal
causality, or existence of supervision or interventions; these can be too restrictive in actual applications. Here, we show identifiability based on
novel, weak constraints, which requires no temporal structure, intervention, nor weak supervision.
The approach is based on assuming the observational mixing exhibits a suitable grouping of the
observational variables. We also propose a novel
self-supervised estimation framework consistent
with the model, prove its statistical consistency,
and experimentally show its superior CRL performances compared to the state-of-the-art baselines.
We further demonstrate its robustness against latent confounders and causal cycles.

A crucial and implicit assumption of most causal discovery
research is that we know exactly what constitutes the causal
variables; in most cases, we implicitly assume that each observational variable corresponds to a single causal variable,
i.e. a node in the causal graph. However, this is not necessarily true, for example when what is actually observed is raw,
high-dimensional sensory data. Consider natural images:
we do not really know in advance what kinds of objects are
present, while the causal interactions should probably be
modeled on the level of the objects. Therefore, in order to
understand what kind of causal mechanism is generating
such low-level sensory data, we also need to extract the
“high-level” causal variables constructing the causal graph
by performing representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013)
simultaneously.
Nonlinear representation learning has its own problems of
identifiability. Recent work has solved the identifiability
problem in the context of Nonlinear Independent Component Analysis (NICA) by assuming temporal structure or an
additional (conditioning, possibly unobservable) auxiliary
variable (Hyvärinen & Morioka, 2016; Hälvä et al., 2021;
Sprekeler et al., 2014). However, if the components are
mutually independent, it seems impossible to model causal
connections between them, and thus such theory is not directly applicable to this case. Thus, we need to go beyond
independent components (Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2010; Khemakhem et al., 2020b) and build an explicit model of the
dependencies resulting from their causal interactions.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery aims to learn causal interactions among
observed variables in a data-driven manner (Pearl, 2000).
The goal is to estimate a causal graph, also called an adjacency matrix, from passively observed data, with minimal
assumptions. It plays an important role in a wide variety
of fields, enabling fundamental insight into causal mecha1
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Kyoto,
Japan 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. Correspondence to: Hiroshi Morioka <hiroshi.morioka@riken.jp>.

Such simultaneous learning of the causal variables (representation learning) and their causal graph (causal discovery)
has been a focus of intense attention recently, resulting is

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

