Robust Sparse Estimation for Gaussians with Optimal Error
under Huber Contamination
Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Daniel Kane 2 Sushrut Karmalkar 1 Ankit Pensia 3 Thanasis Pittas 1

Abstract

say that G is the distribution of inliers, B the distribution
of outliers, and P is the ϵ-corrupted version of G. A set of
samples generated in this fashion is called an ϵ-corrupted
set of samples from P .

We study Gaussian sparse estimation tasks in Huber’s contamination model with a focus on mean
estimation, PCA, and linear regression. For each
of these tasks, we give the first sample and computationally efficient robust estimators with optimal error guarantees, within constant factors.
All prior efficient algorithms for these tasks incur quantitatively suboptimal error. Concretely,
for Gaussian robust k-sparse mean estimation on
Rd with corruption rate ϵ > 0, our algorithm has
sample complexity (k 2 /ϵ2 )polylog(d/ϵ), runs in
sample polynomial time, and approximates the target mean within ℓ2 -error O(ϵ). Previous
p efficient
algorithms inherently incur error Ω(ϵ log(1/ϵ)).
At the technical level, we develop a novel multidimensional filtering method in the sparse regime
that may find other applications.

Estimating the parameters of a Gaussian distribution —
the prototypical family of distributions in statistics — in
the Huber contamination model is a foundational problem
in robust statistics (Huber & Ronchetti, 2009). Huber
in his foundational work (Huber, 1964) settled the question of robust univariate Gaussian mean estimation, i.e.,
D = {N (µ, 1) : µ ∈ R}. Since then, a large body of work
has developed sample-efficient robust estimators for various
tasks (Huber & Ronchetti, 2009), that were unfortunately
computationally inefficient for high-dimensional tasks.
Only in the past decade have the first computationally efficient robust estimators been introduced; see Diakonikolas
& Kane (2023) for a book on the topic.

1. Introduction

Despite this remarkable progress, perhaps surprisingly, our
understanding of this fundamental problem of Gaussian
estimation under Huber contamination remains incomplete
for structured settings.

Robust statistics focuses on developing estimators resilient
to a constant fraction of outliers in the sample data (Huber
& Ronchetti, 2009; Diakonikolas & Kane, 2023). A data set
may have been contaminated by outliers originating from
a variety of sources: measurement error, equipment malfunction, data mismanagement, etc. The pivotal question
of developing robust estimators in statistics was first posed
in the 1960s by Tukey and Huber (Huber, 1964; Tukey,
1960). The standard model for handling outliers, originally
formalized in Huber (1964), is defined below.
Definition 1.1 (Huber Contamination Model). Given 0 <
ϵ < 1/2 and a distribution family D, the algorithm specifies
n ∈ N and observes n i.i.d. samples from a distribution
P = (1 − ϵ)G + ϵB, where G ∈ D and B is arbitrary. We

In many high-dimensional settings, additional structural
information about the data can dramatically decrease the
sample complexity of estimation. Our focus here is on the
structure of sparsity. In the context of mean estimation,
this corresponds to the regime that at most k out of the d
coordinates of the target mean µ are non-zero; our focus
is on the practically relevant regime of k ≪ d. Sparsity
has been crucial in improving statistical performance in a
myriad of applications (Hastie et al., 2015). We begin with
the problem of robust sparse mean estimation.
Definition 1.2 (Robust Sparse Mean Estimation). Given ϵ ∈
(0, 1/2) , k ∈ Z+ and ϵ-corrupted samples from N (µ, I) on
Rd under Huber contamination for an unknown k-sparse1
mean µ, compute an estimate µ
b such that ∥b
µ − µ∥2 is small.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of California, San Diego 3 IBM Research. Correspondence to: Sushrut Karmalkar <skarmalkar@wisc.edu>, Ankit Pensia <ankitp@ibm.com >, Thanasis Pittas <pittas@wisc.edu>.

For the above problem, it is known that the informationtheoretically optimal error is Θ(ϵ). Moreover, the sample
complexity of this task is known to be poly(k log d, 1/ϵ)
(upper and lower bound); this should be contrasted with the
unstructured setting (i.e., dense) whose sample complexity

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

We say x is k-sparse if it has at most k non-zero coordinates.

