Position: Social Environment Design Should be Further Developed for AI-based
Policy-Making

Edwin Zhang 1 2 Sadie Zhao 1 Tonghan Wang 1 Safwan Hossain 1 Henry Gasztowtt 3 Stephan Zheng 4
David C. Parkes 1 Milind Tambe 1 5 Yiling Chen 1

Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) holds promise as a technology that can be used to improve government
and economic policy-making. This paper proposes a new research agenda towards this end by
introducing Social Environment Design, a general framework for the use of AI in automated
policy-making that connects with the Reinforcement Learning, EconCS, and Computational Social Choice communities. The framework seeks to
capture general economic environments, includes
voting on policy objectives, and gives a direction
for the systematic analysis of government and economic policy through AI simulation. We highlight
key open problems for future research in AI-based
policymaking. By solving these challenges, we
hope to achieve various social welfare objectives,
thereby promoting more ethical and responsible
decision making.

Figure 1. The proposed framework. The process begins with voting, where human or AI players report preferences on social welfare objectives to a voting mechanism (1). This an objective for
a Principal policy-maker, who designs a parameterized N -player
Partially Observable Markov Game (POMG) (2). The players are
the same as the voters. This POMG unfolds over several timesteps
H (3). Following the POMG, game state information is extracted
to initiate n last POMG state used as the first game state of the new
round. This whole process is repeated again in the next round.

1. Introduction
Wra where AI is gaining increasing attention in governments
(House, 2023; Engstrom et al., 2020), it is timely to understand its potential influence on future policy-making. Ideally, such a framework should satisfy the following desiderata:

Economic policy formulation is a domain fraught with complexity, with traditional economic models providing limited
foresight into the outcomes of policy decisions. Policymakers must not only understand the immediate implications of individual policies but also their aggregate and
long-term effects. In addition, human policy-maker incentives are oftentimes not aligned with the interests of the
general public, and may instead prioritize special interests
or reelection (de Figueiredo & Richter, 2014). In light of
this, AI-based approaches to policy design that can simulate
economies and target different objectives, hold the potential
for improved policy understanding and formulation (Zheng
et al., 2022; Koster et al., 2022).

1. Alignment of policy-makers to the values of constituents, whilst ensuring fair and equitable representation (Barocas et al., 2023).
2. Sufficient model expressivity (Patig, 2004) to accurately represent the intricate governance structures
found in the real world, capturing the subtleties and
variances of socio-economic interactions.

1

Harvard University 2 Founding 3 Oxford University 4 Asari
AI Google Research. Correspondence to: Edwin Zhang
<ezhang@g.harvard.edu>.
5

3. Balance expressiveness with computational tractability, making it feasible to scale to systems with a large
number of agents.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

4. Build theoretical understanding, enabling systematic
1

