xT: Nested Tokenization for Larger Context in Large Images

Ritwik Gupta * 1 Shufan Li * 2 Tyler Zhu * 1 3 Jitendra Malik 1 Trevor Darrell † 1 Karttikeya Mangalam † 1
Existing Vision Methods

Abstract
Modern computer vision pipelines handle large
images in one of two sub-optimal ways: downsampling or cropping. These two methods incur
significant losses in the amount of information
and context present in an image. There are many
downstream applications in which global context
matters as much as high frequency details, such
as in real-world satellite imagery; in such cases researchers have to make the uncomfortable choice
of which information to discard. We introduce xT,
a simple framework for vision transformers which
effectively aggregates global context with local
details and can model large images end-to-end on
contemporary GPUs. We select a set of benchmark datasets across classic vision tasks which
accurately reflect a vision model’s ability to understand truly large images and incorporate fine details over large scales and assess our method’s improvement on them. xT is a streaming, two-stage
architecture that adapts existing vision backbones
and long sequence language models to effectively
model large images without quadratic memory
growth. We are able to increase accuracy by up to
8.6% on challenging classification tasks and F1
score by 11.6 on context-dependent segmentation
on images as large as 29,000 x 29,000 pixels.

1. Downsampling

Lost objects of interest
Vision
Encoder

2. Windowing

Small regions lacking context

Nested
Tokenization

xT (ours)

Region
Encoding

Context
Encoding

Vision
Vision
Encoder
Encoder

Context
Encoder

1
1

2

3

4

2
3

Global context
with high res
feaures

4

Figure 1: xT allows large images to be modeled end-to-end
on contemporary GPUs without compromising on high
frequency features or global context.
sensors on satellites and microscopes capture images with
over a billion pixels.
Modern computer vision pipelines are limited by the memory in the systems they are trained upon, resulting in the
creation of models that only operate on small images. Computer vision practitioners limit the size of images in two
less-than-ideal ways: down-sampling or cropping. While
these simple operations produce powerful models when measured against typical computer vision benchmarks, the loss
of high frequency information or global context is limited
for many real-world tasks.
Consider a video feed of a football game. Captured natively
in 8K resolution, a model attempting to answer the question
of where a player on the left side of the screen will pass
the ball to on the right side of screen will not be able to
reason over the entire image in one pass. The image, the
downstream model, and all intermediate tensors cannot fit
in the memory of modern, large VRAM GPUs. A common
approach is to process the image by treating it as individual
“windows”, each fed through the model without sharing
context, resulting in sub-optimal performance.

Code and pre-trained weights are available at
https://github.com/bair-climate-initiative/xT.

1. Introduction
As camera technology has advanced, images have been
getting increasingly larger over the past decade. Images
captured by sensors on smartphones now capture images
at 4K resolution (roughly 8.3M pixels) while professional
DSLR cameras capture images at 8K resolution. Elsewhere,

We introduce xT, a streaming, two-stage framework by
which myopic vision backbones can effectively integrate
local and global context over large images without incurring
quadratic memory growth. In particular, we tackle both
issues of increasing GPU memory utilization and the integration of context across very large images. We achieve this
by introducing token hierarchies to state-of-the-art vision
backbones (Liu et al., 2021; Ryali et al., 2023) and imbuing

*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley
University of California, Los Angeles 3 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Ritwik Gupta <ritwikgupta@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

