Joint Composite Latent Space Bayesian Optimization

Natalie Maus 1 Zhiyuan Jerry Lin 2 Maximilian Balandat 2 Eytan Bakshy 2

Abstract

predictions to guide the exploration-exploitation tradeoff.
While the standard black-box approach is effective across
many domains (Frazier & Wang, 2016; Packwood, 2017;
Zhang et al., 2020; Calandra et al., 2016; Letham et al.,
2019; Mao et al., 2019), it does not make use of rich data
that may be available when objectives may be stated in
terms of a composite function f = g ◦ h. In this setting,
not only the final objective f (x) = g(h(x)), but also the
outputs of the intermediate function, h(x), can be observed
upon evaluation, providing additional information that can
be exploited for optimization.

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a technique for
sample-efficient black-box optimization that employs probabilistic models to identify promising inputs for evaluation. When dealing with
composite-structured functions such as f = g ◦ h,
evaluating a specific location x yields observations of both the final outcome f (x) = g(h(x))
as well as the intermediate output(s) h(x). Previous research has shown that integrating information from these intermediate outputs can enhance BO performance substantially. However,
existing methods struggle if the outputs h(x) are
high-dimensional. Many relevant problems fall
into this setting, including in the context of generative AI, molecular design, or robotics. To effectively tackle these challenges, we introduce
Joint Composite Latent Space Bayesian Optimization (JoCo), a novel framework that jointly trains
neural network encoders and probabilistic models
to adaptively compress high-dimensional input
and output spaces into manageable latent representations. This enables effective BO on these
compressed representations, allowing JoCo to outperform other state-of-the-art methods in highdimensional BO on a wide variety of simulated
and real-world problems.

While recent scientific advances (Astudillo & Frazier, 2019;
Lin et al., 2022) attempt to take advantage of this structure,
they falter when h maps to a high-dimensional intermediate
outcome space, a common occurrence in a variety of applications. For example, when optimizing foundational ML
models with text prompts as inputs, intermediate outputs
may be complex data types such as images or text and the
objective may be to generate images of texts of a specific
style. In aerodynamic design problems, a high-dimensional
input space of geometry and flow conditions are optimized
to achieve specific objectives, e.g., minimizing drag while
maintaining lift, defined over a high-dimensional output
space of pressure and velocity fields (Zawawi et al., 2018;
Lomax et al., 2002).
Intuitively, the wealth of information contained in such
high-dimensional intermediate data should pave the way for
more efficient resolution of the task at hand. However, to
our knowledge, little literature exists on leveraging this potential efficiency gain when optimizing functions with highdimensional intermediate outputs over high-dimensional
input spaces. To close this gap, we introduce JoCo, a new
algorithm for Joint Composite Latent Space Bayesian Optimization. Unlike standard BO, which constructs a surrogate model only for the full mapping f , JoCo simultaneously trains probabilistic models both for capturing the
behavior of the black-box function and for compressing the
high-dimensional intermediate output space. In doing so,
it effectively leverages this additional information, yielding a method that substantially outperforms existing highdimensional BO algorithms on problems with composite
structure.

1. Introduction
Many problems in engineering and science involve optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions. Bayesian
Optimization (BO) has emerged as a sample-efficient approach to tackling this challenge. At a high level, BO builds
a probabilistic surrogate model, often a Gaussian Process,
of the unknown function based on observed evaluations and
then recommends the next query point(s) by optimizing
an acquisition function that leverages probabilistic model
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania 2 Meta. Correspondence to: Natalie Maus
<nmaus@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

