Privacy Profiles for Private Selection

Antti Koskela 1 Rachel Redberg 2 Yu-Xiang Wang 3

Abstract

algorithms are notoriously finicky and require extensive hyperparameter tuning in order to achieve good performance.
In the context of data privacy, this means that the evaluation
of every additional hyperparameter candidate could have a
privacy cost.

Private selection mechanisms (e.g., Report Noisy
Max, Sparse Vector) are fundamental primitives
of differentially private (DP) data analysis with
wide applications to private query release, voting,
and hyperparameter tuning. Recent work (Liu
& Talwar, 2019; Papernot & Steinke, 2022) has
made significant progress in both generalizing private selection mechanisms and tightening their
privacy analysis using modern numerical privacy
accounting tools, e.g., Renyi DP. But Renyi DP
is known to be lossy when (ϵ, δ)-DP is ultimately
needed, and there is a trend to close the gap by
directly handling privacy profiles, i.e., δ as a function of ϵ or its equivalent dual form known as
f -DPs. In this paper, we work out an easy-to-use
recipe that bounds the privacy profiles of ReportNoisyMax and PrivateTuning using the privacy
profiles of the base algorithms they corral. Numerically, our approach improves over the RDP-based
accounting in all regimes of interest and leads to
substantial benefits in end-to-end private learning experiments. Our general result also allows
analysing the case of binomially-distributed number of rounds, which leads to more concentrated
distributions compared to the previously considered Poisson distribution.

Imagine that you have an (ϵ, δ)-DP training algorithm and
wish to evaluate it across k candidates. Naı̈vely it’s possible
to analyze the privacy of this procedure via composition,
a property of differential privacy which in its most basic
form implies that the privacy parameters ϵ and δ “add up”
(Dwork et al., 2006). This naı̈ve analysis would allow an
ML practitioner to privately release all k trained models at
a cost of (kϵ, kδ)-DP — i.e., the privacy cost scales linearly
in the number of model evaluations. But for hyperparameter
tuning, practitioners are typically most interested in the
“best” model (with the highest quality score) and hence
might want to output only one out of the k trained models.
Thus, a tighter analysis may often be available for this class
of private selection mechanisms which choose from a set
of candidates the item which approximately maximizes a
given quality score.
The aim of our work is to improve the privacy analysis
of private hyperparameter tuning algorithms for machine
learning algorithms. This line of inquiry originates with
Chaudhuri & Vinterbo (2013), who highlighted the need for
differentially private parameter tuning in order to achieve
end-to-end privacy in machine learning applications. Chaudhuri & Vinterbo (2013) proposed a procedure for training
and validation which provides differential privacy under the
somewhat stringent condition that the learning algorithm
must uphold a notion of Lipschitz-like stability on the score
function.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) bounds the privacy loss incurred
when an algorithm is run on a dataset. While the analysis
of this bound is often quite nuanced, the rough tally is that
whenever the algorithm accesses the data, it incurs a privacy
cost.

The subsequent work of Liu & Talwar (2019) ushered in
the age of black-box frameworks for differentially private
hyperparameter tuning. Liu & Talwar (2019) relaxed the
stability assumption on the score function to the weaker
requirement that each individual candidate be differentially
private. They proposed black-box tuning methods that use
a random stopping strategy; in particular, the number of
candidates evaluated by the learning algorithm follows a
geometric distribution. Liu & Talwar (2019) showed that if
each candidate (or “base mechanism”, as we will call it in
our work) satisfies ϵ-DP, then their end-to-end algorithm for

By this rule of thumb, data privacy for modern machine
learning (ML) applications is in trouble. Most modern ML
1

Nokia Bell Labs 2 Northeastern University 3 UC San Diego.
Correspondence to: Antti Koskela <antti.h.koskela@nokia-belllabs.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

