Position: Near to Mid-term Risks and Opportunities of
Open-Source Generative AI

Francisco Eiras 1 Aleksandar Petrov 1 Bertie Vidgen 2 Christian Schroeder de Witt 1 Fabio Pizzati 1
Katherine Elkins 3 Supratik Mukhopadhyay 4 Adel Bibi 1 Botos Csaba 1 Fabro Steibel 5 Fazl Barez 1
Genevieve Smith 6 Gianluca Guadagni 7 Jon Chun 3 Jordi Cabot 8 9 Joseph Marvin Imperial 10 11
Juan A. Nolazco-Flores 12 Lori Landay 13 Matthew Jackson 1 Paul Röttger 14 Philip H.S. Torr 1
Trevor Darrell 6 Yong Suk Lee 15 Jakob Foerster 1
Long-term

Abstract

Mid-term
ado
pti
on

capability jump

current
pace

wid
er

Realized Capabilities

In the next few years, applications of Generative
AI are expected to revolutionize a number of different areas, ranging from science & medicine
to education. The potential for these seismic
changes has triggered a lively debate about potential risks and resulted in calls for tighter regulation, in particular from some of the major tech
companies who are leading in AI development.
While regulation is important, it is key that it does
not put at risk the budding field of open-source
Generative AI. We argue for the responsible open
sourcing of generative AI models in the near and
medium term. To set the stage, we first introduce
an AI openness taxonomy system and apply it to
40 current large language models. We then outline differential benefits and risks of open versus
closed source AI and present potential risk mitigation, ranging from best practices to calls for
technical and scientific contributions. We hope
that this report will add a much needed missing
voice to the current public discourse on near to
mid-term AI safety and other societal impact.

Near-term

future
pace

Horizon

Figure 1: Three Development Stages for Generative AI
Models: near-term is defined by early use and exploration
of the technology in much of its current stage; mid-term is
a result of the widespread adoption of the technology and
further scaling at current pace; long-term is the result of
technological advances that enable greater AI capabilities.
2023) (e.g., large language or foundation models), is anticipated to profoundly impact a diverse array of domains
including science (AI4Science and Quantum, 2023), the
economy (Brynjolfsson et al., 2023), education (Alahdab,
2023), the environment (Rillig et al., 2023), among many
others. As a result, there has been significant socio-technical
work undertaken to evaluate the broader risks and opportunities associated with these models, in a step towards a
more nuanced and comprehensive understanding of their impacts (Bommasani et al., 2021), including recent regulatory
developments (see Appendix B.1).

1. Introduction
Generative AI (Gen AI), defined as “artificial intelligence
that can generate novel content” by conditioning its response on an input (Gozalo-Brizuela and Garrido-Merchan,
1

University of Oxford 2 MLCommons 3 Kenyon College 4 Center
for Computation & Technology, Louisiana State University
5
Institute for Technology & Society (ITS), Rio 6 University of California, Berkeley 7 University of Virginia 8 Luxembourg Institute of
Science and Technology 9 University of Luxembourg 10 University
of Bath 11 National University Philippines 12 ITESM 13 Berklee College of Music 14 Bocconi University 15 University of Notre Dame.
Correspondence to: FE <eiras@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Parallel to these efforts is a debate on the openness of Gen AI
models. The digital economy heavily relies on open-source
software, exemplified by over 60% of global websites using
open-source servers like Apache and Nginx (Lifshitz-Assaf
and Nagle, 2021). This prevalence is underscored by a 2021
European Union report, which concluded that “overall, the
[economic] benefits of open source greatly outweigh the
costs associated with it” (Blind et al., 2021). Some developers of Gen AI models have chosen to openly release

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

