Recovering Labels from Local Updates in Federated Learning

Huancheng Chen 1 Haris Vikalo 1

Abstract

demonstrated vulnerability of FL systems to privacy attacks
such as membership inference (Shokri et al., 2017), property
inference (Melis et al., 2019) and gradient inversion (Zhu
et al., 2019). In particular, gradient inversion methods have
been shown capable of reconstructing private training data
given the gradients computed during local training. The
milestone work, Deep Leakage from Gradient (DLG) (Zhu
et al., 2019), minimizes the difference between simulated
and true gradients to extract data and the corresponding
labels belonging to FL clients training a model for a classification task. However, DLG does not perform well in settings
where the training batch size is large and the data resolution
is high, since in such scenarios the joint optimization of
data and the corresponding labels becomes challenging. A
subsequent study, iDLG (Zhao et al., 2020), presents an
analytical method for the recovery of ground-truth labels
from the gradients by exploiting a relationship between the
labels and the signs of the gradients. GradInversion (Yin
et al., 2021) takes a step further by exploiting a relationship
between labels and the magnitudes of gradient in the output
layer to perfectly restore labels of the samples used in the
considered training round, and facilitates high-resolution
reconstruction of data in a batch with as many as 48 samples.
Unfortunately, this method assumes no repeated labels in the
batch, which is unrealistic in real-world settings. Recently,
iRLG (Ma et al., 2023) attempted to address the limitations
of GradInversion, enabling recovery of potentially repeated
labels in a batch by utilizing gradients computed using a
randomly initialized untrained model. However, the performance of iRLG drastically deteriorates as the model’s
accuracy improves.

Gradient inversion (GI) attacks present a threat to
the privacy of clients in federated learning (FL)
by aiming to enable reconstruction of the clients’
data from communicated model updates. A number of such techniques attempts to accelerate data
recovery by first reconstructing labels of the samples used in local training. However, existing
label extraction methods make strong assumptions that typically do not hold in realistic FL
settings. In this paper we present a novel label
recovery scheme, Recovering Labels from Local
Updates (RLU), which provides near-perfect accuracy when attacking untrained (most vulnerable) models. More significantly, RLU achieves
high performance even in realistic real-world settings where the clients in an FL system run multiple local epochs, train on heterogeneous data,
and deploy various optimizers to minimize different objective functions. Specifically, RLU estimates labels by solving a least-square problem
that emerges from the analysis of the correlation between labels of the data points used in
a training round and the resulting update of the
output layer. The experimental results on several datasets, architectures, and data heterogeneity
scenarios demonstrate that the proposed method
consistently outperforms existing baselines, and
helps improve quality of the reconstructed images
in GI attacks in terms of both PSNR and LPIPS.

The above label recovery methods either: (1) assume no
repeated labels in a batch; (2) use non-negative network
activation functions; or (3) perform well only on untrained
models. They further assume that each client in an FL system runs only a single epoch when updating its local model,
while the more practical settings with multiple epochs of
local training are not considered. Moreover, these studies
are limited to the scenarios where a server collects gradients
and do not apply to the standard FL setting where the server
collects model updates rather than the gradients.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017), which aims
to enable collaborative training of ML models while protecting privacy of the participating clients, has attracted considerable interest in privacy-sensitive fields such as healthcare
and finance (Yang et al., 2019). However, recent works have
1

University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence
to: Huancheng Chen <huanchengch@utexas.edu>, Haris Vikalo
<hvikalo@ece.utexas.edu>.

Aiming to address the aforementioned limitations of the
prior work, in this paper we propose a novel method for label recovery, Recovering Labels from Local Updates (RLU).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

