UniAudio: Towards Universal Audio Generation with Large Language Models

Dongchao Yang * 1 Jinchuan Tian * 2 Xu Tan 3 Rongjie Huang 4 Songxiang Liu 5 Haohan Guo 1
Xuankai Chang 2 Jiatong Shi 2 Sheng Zhao 3 Jiang Bian 3 Zhou Zhao 4 Xixin Wu 1 Helen Meng 1

Abstract

i.e., generating human speech, music, and other audio. Prior
works on audio generation tasks are commonly task-specific:
their designs heavily leverage domain knowledge and their
usage is restricted to fixed setups (Tan et al., 2021b; Luo
& Mesgarani, 2019; Zmolikova et al., 2023; Huang et al.,
2021b; Cho et al., 2021). Instead of taking care of each task
independently, this work advocates achieving universal audio generation, which intends to accomplish multiple audio
generation tasks with only one unified model. Specifically,
building a universal model in audio generation can not only
leverage the massive data collected from various sources and
tasks but also explore the shared prior knowledge among various data modalities and domains. Additionally, compared
with building task-specific models, the proposed routine can
save human effort considerably. Thus, building a universal
audio generation model is a solution of both high performance and cost-effectiveness towards the increasing needs
of generating diverse types of audio.

Audio generation is a major branch of generative
AI research. Compared with prior works in this
area that are commonly task-specific with heavy
domain knowledge, this paper advocates building universal audio generation models that can
handle various tasks in a unified manner. As recent research on large language models (LLMs)
has demonstrated their strong ability to handle
multiple tasks, this work presents UniAudio, an
LLM-based audio generation model that supports
a wide range of audio generation tasks. Based on
various input conditions, such as phoneme, text
description, or audio itself, UniAudio can generate speech, sound, music, and singing voice.
The proposed UniAudio is built with 100k hours
of multi-source open-available audio data and is
scaled to 1B parameters. The audio tokenization
method and language model architecture are also
specifically designed for both performance and
efficiency. Experimentally, UniAuido supports 11
audio generation tasks and achieves competitive
results on all tasks consistently. We also show
that UniAudio can support new tasks seamlessly
via simple fine-tuning 1 .

The superiority of Large Language Models (LLMs) in textgenerative tasks inspires a series of LLM-based models in
audio generation (Wang et al., 2023a; Kharitonov et al.,
2023; Huang et al., 2023d; Agostinelli et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2023). Among these works, LLM’s capability
in independent tasks has been extensively studied in tasks
like speech generation (Wang et al., 2023a; Kharitonov
et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023d) and music generation
(Agostinelli et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023), and achieves
competitive performance. However, LLM’s ability to process multiple tasks with a unified model is less exploited
in audio generation research: most existing LLM-based
works are still designed for a single or a few tasks (Wang
et al., 2023a; Kharitonov et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c),
such as text-to-speech, speech enhancement. We argue that
achieving universality in audio generation through the LLM
paradigm is promising but has not yet been comprehensively
studied before this work.

1. Introduction
Recently, the popularity of generative AI has induced increasingly emergent and varying needs in audio generation,
*
Equal contribution 1 The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 2 Language Technologies
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA 3 Microsoft
Research Asia , China 4 Zhejiang University, China
5
Independent Researcher, China.
Correspondence to:
Dongchao Yang <dcyang@se.cuhk.edu.hk>, Helen Meng
<hhmeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk>, Xu Tan <xutan@microsoft.com>.

Toward universal audio generation, this work presents UniAudio, which adopts LLM techniques and can generate
multiple types of audio (speech, sounds, music, and singing)
conditioned on various input modalities, such as phoneme
sequences, text descriptions, and audio itself. By various
tokenization methods, UniAudio first transforms audio and
conditions from other modalities as discrete tokens. The

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Part of the work was done by Dongchao Yang as an intern
at Microsoft Research Asia. Demo and code are released http:
//dongchaoyang.top/UniAudio_demo/

1

