Improving Adversarial Energy-Based Model via Diffusion Process

Cong Geng 1 Tian Han 2 Peng-Tao Jiang 1 Hao Zhang 1 Jinwei Chen 1 Søren Hauberg 3 Bo Li 1

Abstract

expression for the normalization constant. MCMC-based
EBMs (Du & Mordatch, 2019; Nijkamp et al., 2019) evaluate the gradient of the objective through Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling on the defined energy function, which can be computationally expensive for both training and sampling. Adversarial EBMs (Grathwohl et al.,
2021; Geng et al., 2021) introduce a generator to form a
minimax game between alternative optimization of this generator and energy function, allowing for MCMC-free EBM
training and fast sampling.

Generative models have shown strong generation
ability while efficient likelihood estimation is less
explored. Energy-based models (EBMs) define
a flexible energy function to parameterize unnormalized densities efficiently but are notorious for
being difficult to train. Adversarial EBMs introduce a generator to form a minimax training game
to avoid expensive MCMC sampling used in traditional EBMs, but a noticeable gap between adversarial EBMs and other strong generative models
still exists. Inspired by diffusion-based models,
we embedded EBMs into each denoising step to
split a long-generated process into several smaller
steps. Besides, we employ a symmetric Jeffrey divergence and introduce a variational posterior distribution for the generator’s training to address the
main challenges that exist in adversarial EBMs.
Our experiments show significant improvement
in generation compared to existing adversarial
EBMs, while also providing a useful energy function for efficient density estimation.

Although adversarial EBMs have great potential in distribution modeling, they still have some limitations that can
be mainly attributed to three reasons. First, as is pointed
out in Mescheder et al. (2018) and Geng et al. (2021), minimax training can be unstable if two alternative optimization
steps are not well balanced. This instability poses a significant challenge in fitting the marginal energy distribution
through adversarial training, particularly when dealing with
large-scale, complex, and multi-modal data distributions.
Secondly, most adversarial EBMs adopt KL divergence to
optimize the generator. Since KL divergence is an asymmetric measure of divergence, relying solely on KL divergence
may not be sufficient (Arjovsky et al., 2017). Thirdly, optimizing the generator requires computing an intractable
entropy term, leading to a trade-off between generation and
density estimation (Grathwohl et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Energy-based models (EBMs) are known as one type of
generative models that draw inspiration from physics and
have been widely studied in machine learning (Hopfield,
1982; Hinton & Sejnowski, 1983; Smolensky, 1986). EBMs
define an unnormalized probability distribution over data
space from a Gibbs density, which can be useful for several visual tasks, such as image classification (Grathwohl
et al., 2020), out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Liu et al.,
2020) or semi-supervised learning (Gao et al., 2020). However, training an EBM using maximum likelihood estimation can be challenging due to the lack of a closed-form

To address these issues, we get inspiration from diffusionbased models (Ho et al., 2020) which specify a diffusion
process to transform a data distribution by adding Gaussian noise with multiple steps until obtaining an approximate Gaussian distribution. A denoising diffusion process
is learned by minimizing the KL divergence between true
conditional denoising distribution q (xt−1 | xt ) and a parameterized conditional distribution pθ (xt−1 | xt ) at each
noise step. Diffusion Recovery Likelihood (DRL) (Gao
et al., 2021) and Denoising diffusion GAN (DDGAN) (Xiao
et al., 2022) combined EBM or GAN with diffusion process
respectively. They trained a sequence of EBMs or GANs by
matching true and modeled denoising distributions at each
time step. The efficacy of these methods demonstrates that
matching two denoising distributions is more tractable, as
sampling from these conditional distributions is much easier
than sampling from their marginal distributions. However,
DDGAN lacks a useful density estimate for its discriminator

1

vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd, China 2 Department
of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
3
Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark. Correspondence to: Søren Hauberg <sohau@dtu.dk>, Bo Li <libra@vivo.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

