CaRiNG: Learning Temporal Causal Representation under
Non-Invertible Generation Process
Guangyi Chen * 1 2 Yifan Shen * 1 Zhenhao Chen * 1 Xiangchen Song 2
Yuewen Sun 1 Weiran Yao 3 Xiao Liu 1 Kun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sequential data, including video, stock, and climate observations, are integral to our daily lives. Gaining an understanding of the causal dynamics in such time series data
has always been a crucial challenge (Berzuini et al., 2012;
Ghysels et al., 2016; Friston, 2009) and has attracted considerable attention. The core of this task is to identify the
underlying causal dynamics in the data we observe.

Identifying the underlying time-delayed latent
causal processes in sequential data is vital for
grasping temporal dynamics and making downstream reasoning. While some recent methods can
robustly identify these latent causal variables, they
rely on strict assumptions about the invertible generation process from latent variables to observed
data. However, these assumptions are often hard
to satisfy in real-world applications containing information loss. For instance, the visual perception
process translates a 3D space into 2D images, or
the phenomenon of persistence of vision incorporates historical data into current perceptions. To
address this challenge, we establish an identifiability theory that allows for the recovery of independent latent components even when they come
from a nonlinear and non-invertible mix. Using
this theory as a foundation, we propose a principled approach, CaRiNG, to learn the Causal
Representation of Non-invertible Generative temporal data with identifiability guarantees. Specifically, we utilize temporal context to recover lost
latent information and apply the conditions in our
theory to guide the training process. Through experiments conducted on synthetic datasets, we validate that our CaRiNG method reliably identifies
the causal process, even when the generation process is non-invertible. Moreover, we demonstrate
that our approach considerably improves temporal
understanding and reasoning in practical applications. Code can be accessed through https:
//github.com/sanshuiii/CaRiNG.

Towards this goal, we focus on Independent Component
Analysis (ICA) (Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000), which is a classical method for decomposing the latent signals from mixed
observation. Recent advancements in nonlinear ICA (Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2016; 2017; Hyvarinen et al., 2019;
Khemakhem et al., 2020; Sorrenson et al., 2020; Hälvä &
Hyvarinen, 2020) have yielded robust theoretical evidence
for the identifiability of latent variables, and enabled the use
of deep neural networks to address complex scenarios. For
example, by assuming the latent variables in the data generation process are mutually independent, and leveraging the
auxiliary side information such as time index, domain index, or class label, (Hyvarinen & Morioka, 2017; Hyvarinen
et al., 2019; Hälvä & Hyvarinen, 2020) have demonstrated
the strong identifiability results. (Hälvä et al., 2021; Klindt
et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022b;a; Lachapelle et al., 2022)
further extend this nonlinear ICA framework into scenarios
of the time-delayed dynamical systems, which allows the
temporal transitions among the latent variables.
However, these nonlinear ICA-based methods usually assume that the mixing function (the generation process from
sources to observations) is invertible, which may be difficult
to satisfy in real-world scenarios, such as the 3D to 2D projection in the visual process. As shown in Figure 1 (a) and
(b), we provide two intuitive instances of the real videos to
illustrate how the non-invertibility happens. In (a), when
object occlusions occur, information from the obstructed
object is lost in the generation process of the current time
step, which causes non-invertibility. In (b), the persistence
of vision introduces non-invertibility, since the mixing process of the current time step utilizes the history information.
We further found that the violation of this invertibility assumption may cause the nonlinear ICA method to yield

*
Equal contribution 1 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 2 Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburg, US 3 Salesforce, San Francisco, US. Correspondence to:
Kun Zhang <kunz1@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

