Stability Evaluation through Distributional Perturbation Analysis

Jose Blanchet 1 * Peng Cui 2 * Jiajin Li 1 * Jiashuo Liu 1 2 *

Abstract

phenomenon can be attributed to discrepancies between
the training and test datasets, influenced by various factors. Some of these factors include measurement errors
during data collection (Jacobucci & Grimm, 2020; Elmes
et al., 2020), deployment in dynamic, non-stationary environments (Camacho & Conover, 2011; Conger et al., 2023),
and the under-representativeness of marginalized groups in
the training data (Corbett-Davies et al., 2023), among others. The divergence between training and test data presents
substantial challenges to the reliability, robustness, and fairness of machine learning models in practical settings. Recent empirical studies have shown that algorithms intentionally developed for addressing distribution shifts—such as
distributionally robust optimization (Blanchet et al., 2019;
Sagawa et al., 2019; Kuhn et al., 2019; Duchi & Namkoong,
2021; Rahimian & Mehrotra, 2022; Blanchet et al., 2024),
domain generalization (Zhou et al., 2022), and causally invariant learning (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Krueger et al., 2021)
— experience a notable performance degradation when faced
with real-world scenarios (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020;
Frogner et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023).

The performance of learning models often deteriorates when deployed in out-of-sample environments. To ensure reliable deployment, we propose
a stability evaluation criterion based on distributional perturbations. Conceptually, our stability
evaluation criterion is defined as the minimal perturbation required on our observed dataset to induce a prescribed deterioration in risk evaluation.
In this paper, we utilize the optimal transport (OT)
discrepancy with moment constraints on the (sample, density) space to quantify this perturbation.
Therefore, our stability evaluation criterion can
address both data corruptions and sub-population
shifts—the two most common types of distribution shifts in real-world scenarios. To further
realize practical benefits, we present a series of
tractable convex formulations and computational
methods tailored to different classes of loss functions. The key technical tool to achieve this is
the strong duality theorem provided in this paper.
Empirically, we validate the practical utility of
our stability evaluation criterion across a host of
real-world applications. These empirical studies
showcase the criterion’s ability not only to compare the stability of different learning models and
features but also to provide valuable guidelines
and strategies to further improve models.

Instead of providing a robust training algorithm, we shift
focus towards a more fundamental (in some sense even
simpler) question:
Q: How do we evaluate the stability of a learning
model when subjected to data perturbations?
To answer this question, our initial step is to gain a comprehensive understanding of various types of data perturbations.
In this paper, we categorize data perturbations into two
classes: (i) Data corruptions, which encompass changes
in the distribution support (i.e., observed data samples).
These changes can be attributed to measurement errors in
data collection or malicious adversaries. Typical examples
include factors like street noises in speech recognition (Kinoshita et al., 2020), rounding errors in finance (Li & Mykland, 2015), adversarial examples in vision (Goodfellow
et al., 2020) and, the Goodhart’s law empirically observed
in government assistance allocation (Camacho & Conover,
2011). (ii) Sub-population shifts, refer to perturbation on
the probability density or mass function while keeping the
same support. For example, model performances substantially degrade under demographic shifts in recommender

1. Introduction
The issue of poor out-of-sample performance frequently
arises, particularly in high-stakes applications such as healthcare (Bandi et al., 2018; Wynants et al., 2020; Roberts
et al., 2021), economics (Hand, 2006; Ding et al., 2021),
self-driving (Malinin et al., 2021; Hell et al., 2021). This
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Management Science
and Engineering, Stanford University 2 Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. Correspondence
to: Jiajin Li <jiajinli@stanford.edu>, Jiashuo Liu <liujiashuo77@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

