PID: Prompt-Independent Data Protection Against Latent Diffusion Models

Ang Li 1 Yichuan Mo 2 Mingjie Li 3 Yisen Wang 2 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
The advent of Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) has ushered
in an era where images of unprecedented quality are synthesized, blurring the lines between artificial creations and
authentic human-generated content, including portraits, photographic arts, and drawings (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song
et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Holz, 2022; Podell et al., 2024). A particularly intriguing aspect of LDMs is the capability of few-shot fine-tuning, a.k.a.
personalization of the generative model, which teaches the
models a brand new concept, such as human faces or painting styles, with as few as 4∼5 images in a matter of minutes
(Hu et al., 2021; Ruiz et al., 2023; Gal et al., 2023; Clark
et al., 2024). However, the ease with which targeted sets
of images can be curated with either manual downloading
or web crawling on social media renders this capability a
double-edged sword. Several selfies casually posted online
could mean an array of counterfeit images produced by the
LDM fine-tuned by malicious users with the photos, showing exactly the same person clothless or in places he/she has
never been to. Civilians are concerned by lawsuits and news
related to the unregulated exploitation of such techniques
(Juefei-Xu et al., 2022). Thus, developing reliable data
protection algorithms that prevent the malicious misuse of
LDMs on unauthorized images is vital for both the research
community and society.

The few-shot fine-tuning of Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) has enabled them to grasp new concepts from a limited number of images. However,
given the vast amount of personal images accessible online, this capability raises critical concerns
about civil privacy. While several previous defense methods have been developed to prevent
such misuse of LDMs, they typically assume that
the textual prompts used by data protectors exactly match those employed by data exploiters. In
this paper, we first empirically demonstrate that
breaking this assumption, i.e., in cases where discrepancies exist between the textual conditions
used by protectors and exploiters, could substantially reduces the effectiveness of these defenses.
Furthermore, considering the visual encoder’s
independence from textual prompts, we delve
into the visual encoder and thoroughly investigate
how manipulating the visual encoder affects the
few-shot fine-tuning process of LDMs. Drawing
on these insights, we propose a simple yet effective method called Prompt-Independent Defense (PID) to safeguard privacy against LDMs.
We show that PID can act as a strong privacy
shield on its own while requiring significantly
less computational power. We believe our studies,
along with the comprehensive understanding and
new defense method, provide a notable advance
toward reliable data protection against LDMs.
Our code is available at https://github.com/PKUML/Diffusion-PID-Protection

Fortunately, notable efforts have been made to protect images containing sensitive information like human faces or
unique art styles against such exploitations by generative
models (Yeh et al., 2020; Ruiz et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2021a;b; Wang et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2023b). Salman et al. (2023) protect images from malicious
image editing. Liang et al. (2023) adopt the adversarial
attack (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2019; 2022b;
Mo et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023a) against LDMs to hinder
the models from learning features from the protected data.
Van Le et al. (2023) propose to generate protective perturbations by attacking a fully trained surrogate model or by synchronizedly disrupting the training process. More recently,
Xue et al. (2023) propose Score Distillation Sampling (SDS)
to lighten the computational overhead required by optimizing the protective perturbations. These works have made
significant steps toward the ultimate goal. However, when
it comes to few-shot fine-tuning, previous works assume

1
School of EECS, Peking University, China 2 National Key Lab
of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science
and Technology, Peking University, China 3 CISPA Helmholtz
Center for Information Security, Germany 4 Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University, China. Correspondence to: Yisen
Wang <yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

