Reducing sequential change detection to sequential estimation

Shubhanshu Shekhar 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1 2

Abstract

• For n ≤ T , the observations are the first T elements of
a trajectory of P0 ∈ P, with θ(P0 ) = θ0 .

We consider the problem of sequential change
detection under minimal assumptions on the distribution generating the stream of observations.
Formally, our goal is to design a scheme for detecting any changes in a parameter or functional
θ of the data stream distribution that has small
detection delay, but guarantees control on the frequency of false alarms in the absence of changes.
We describe a simple reduction from sequential
change detection to sequential estimation using
confidence sequences (CSs): begin a new level(1 − α) CS at each time step, and proclaim a
change as soon as the intersection of all active CSs
becomes empty. We prove that the average run
length of our scheme is at least 1/α, resulting in a
change detection scheme with minimal structural
assumptions (thus allowing for possibly dependent observations, and nonparametric distribution
classes), but strong guarantees. We also describe
an interesting parallel with Lorden’s reduction
from change detection to sequential testing and
connections to the recent “e-detector” framework.

• For n > T , the observations are drawn from another
distribution P1 ∈ P, such that θ(P1 ) = θ1 ̸= θ0 .
In particular, P0 , P1 are distributions over an infinite sequence of observations, and the data is not assumed to be
i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed), meaning that
we do not assume that P0 , P1 take the form p∞ for some
distribution p over X . Further, P1 (and hence θ1 ) is allowed
to depend on X1 , . . . , XT . We refer to the term T as the
changepoint, and to P0 and P1 as the pre- and post-change
distributions respectively.
Under the above model, our goal is to design a data-driven
method for detecting any change in the value of θ, without any knowledge of T, P0 , P1 . In technical terms, our
objective is to define a stopping time τ , at which we stop
collecting more data, and declare a changepoint has previously occurred.
There are two problem settings to consider: non-partitioned
and partitioned. By default, define the filtration F ≡
(Fn )n≥0 , where Fn is by default the sigma algebra
σ(X1 , . . . , Xn ) and F0 = {∅, Ω}.

1. Introduction

Problem 1.1 (Non-partitioned SCD). For some unknown
triple (T, P0 , P1 ), suppose X1 , X2 , . . . denote a data
stream, such that (Xn )n≤T are drawn from P0 , and
(Xn )n>T are drawn from P1 , such that θ(P1 ) = θ1 ̸= θ0 =
θ(P0 ). The goal is to define a stopping time τ , adapted to
the filtration F satisfying:

We consider the following problem of sequential change
detection (SCD): for a general space X , given a stream of
X -valued observations X1 , X2 , . . ., our goal is to design a
method to detect any changes in a prespecified parameter or
functional θ (possibly infinite dimensional) associated with
the source generating this stream. Let P denote a class
of probability distributions on the infinite product space
Ω = X ∞ , and let θ : P → Θ, denote a mapping from
probability distributions to some (possibly infinite dimensional) parameter space Θ. The data distribution satisfies
the following for some T ∈ N ∪ {∞}:

• If T = ∞, and there is no changepoint, we require
that E∞ [τ ] ≥ 1/α, for a prespecified α ∈ (0, 1). The
term E∞ [τ ] is called the average run length (ARL),
and represents the frequency of false alarms.
• If T < ∞, and there is a changepoint at which the
distribution changes from P0 to P1 , we desire the detection delay, ET [(τ − T )+ ], to be as small as possible.

1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Shubhanshu Shekhar <shubhan2@andrew.cmu.edu>.

The non-partitioned SCD problem stated above, does not
require any pre-specified partitioning of P into pre- and
post change distribution classes. That is, it assumes that
the data generating distribution changes from one unknown

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

