Towards Efficient Exact Optimization of Language Model Alignment

Haozhe Ji 1 Cheng Lu 2 Yilin Niu 3 Pei Ke 1 Hongning Wang 1 Jun Zhu 2 Jie Tang 4 Minlie Huang 1

Abstract

supervision, they are still prone to produce harmful (Bai
et al., 2022), biased (Bender et al., 2021), and unfaithful (Ji
et al., 2023c) responses due to the heterogeneous sources
of their pre-training corpora. Ensuring the large language
models to generate desired responses that are in line with
humans’ ethical standards and quality preferences is crucial
for the development of reliable AI systems.

The alignment of language models with human
preferences is vital for their application in realworld tasks. The problem is formulated as optimizing the model’s policy to maximize the expected reward that reflects human preferences
with minimal deviation from the initial policy.
While considered as a straightforward solution,
reinforcement learning (RL) suffers from high
variance in policy updates, which impedes efficient policy improvement. Recently, direct preference optimization (DPO) was proposed to directly optimize the policy from preference data.
However, we show that DPO derived based on the
optimal solution of the problem leads to a compromised mean-seeking approximation of the optimal solution in practice. In this paper, we propose
efficient exact optimization (EXO) of the alignment objective. EXO is guaranteed to optimize
in the same direction as RL algorithms asymptotically for arbitrary policy parametrization. This
leads to the same mode-seeking solution, while
enables efficient optimization by circumventing
the complexities of RL. We also compare our
method to DPO with both theoretical and empirical analyses, and further demonstrate the advantages of our method over existing approaches
on realistic human preference data. Code is
available at https://github.com/haozheji/
exact-optimization.

The problem, well known as language model (LM) alignment with human preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022), is
generally formulated as optimizing the LM policy πθ to
maximize the expected reward, which reflects human preferences regarding the completion y for a given prompt x. The
practical recipe is to train a reward model rϕ to predict the
human-chosen response from a set of responses generated
by an initial LM policy πinit . Yet, the challenge of acquiring
substantial high-quality preference data often impedes accurate estimation of the ideal reward model. Consequently,
this empirically learned reward model may lead to misspecified behaviors, particularly under the distributional shift
between its training data and the data generated by πθ (Gao
et al., 2023). Therefore, the final objective of alignment additionally involves minimizing the reverse Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence of πθ from its initial distribution πinit with
an intensity β, besides maximizing the expected reward:
max Ex∼D,y∼πθ (y|x) [rϕ (x, y)] − βDKL (πθ ∥πinit ). (1)
πθ

Due to the discrete nature of content generation from an LM
(i.e., sampling y from πθ (·|x)), the most widely adopted
approach to optimize Eq. (1) is reinforcement learning
(RL) (Ziegler et al., 2019; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang
et al., 2022). Albeit well studied even before the era of large
language models, RL solutions are notorious for their poor
stability due to the high variance in estimating the policy
gradients or value functions, which potentially worsens sample complexity and thus compromises efficient convergence
(Papini et al., 2018; Anschel et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
Despite the proficiency of large language models, e.g., GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) in complex tasks under minimal
1
The Conversational AI (CoAI) Group, Tsinghua University 2 The Tsinghua Statistical Artificial Intelligence & Learning
(TSAIL) Group, Tsinghua University 3 Zhipu AI 4 The Knowledge Engineering Group (KEG), Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Haozhe Ji <jihaozhe@gmail.com>, Minlie Huang <aihuang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

As a remedy, direct preference optimization (DPO) was recently proposed to replace the RL solutions (Rafailov et al.,
2023). Specifically, DPO defines a pair-wise preference
loss on the estimated policy πθ by leveraging the following
policy-reward mapping in the optimal solution to Eq. (1):

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

πβ∗ (y|x) ∝ πinit (y|x)e β rϕ (x,y)
1

(2)

