What Can Transformer Learn with Varying Depth?
Case Studies on Sequence Learning Tasks

Xingwu Chen 1 Difan Zou 2

Abstract

for building universal foundation models (Bommasani et al.,
2021; Brown et al., 2020a; Kaplan et al., 2020). A central
module in the transformer is the attention layer, which performs nonlinear sequence-to-sequence mapping that allows
each token to attend to several other tokens based on the
semantic relationship. By stacking multiple attention layers,
the transformer models have been observed to be surprisingly strong at performing memorization, understanding,
and reasoning from the input sequences.

We study the capabilities of the transformer architecture with varying depth. Specifically, we
designed a novel set of sequence learning tasks to
systematically evaluate and comprehend how the
depth of transformer affects its ability to perform
memorization, reasoning, generalization, and contextual generalization. We show a transformer
with only one attention layer can excel in memorization but falls short in other tasks. Then, we
show that exhibiting reasoning and generalization
ability requires the transformer to have at least
two attention layers, while context generalization
ability may necessitate three attention layers. Additionally, we identify a class of simple operations
that a single attention layer can execute, and show
that the complex tasks can be approached as the
combinations of these simple operations and thus
can be resolved by stacking multiple attention layers. This sheds light on studying more practical
and complex tasks beyond our design. Numerical
experiments corroborate our theoretical findings.

The remarkable empirical performance of transformer has
triggered a series of theoretical studies, which aim to understand the working mechanism of transformer. For instance,
some early attempts, including RASP (Weiss et al., 2021)
and Tracr (Lindner et al., 2023), propose to interpret the
transformer model by translating its mechanism into programming languages. However, their explanations are still
hard to parse and difficult to help obtain quantitative characterizations on the transformer’s capability. More recently,
people has particularly focused on the capability of transformer in certain aspects, including its universal approximation power (Kajitsuka & Sato, 2023; Yun et al., 2020), data
memorization capacity (Kajitsuka & Sato, 2023; Mahdavi
et al., 2023), reasoning ability (Boix-Adsera et al., 2023; Fu
et al., 2023), and in-context learning (ICL) (Xie et al., 2021;
Garg et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2023; von Oswald et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been recognized
as the most powerful model to achieve state-of-the-art performances in various deep learning tasks such as vision,
natural language process, and decision making (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2021). Its superior performance makes it the most prevalent architecture
for building universal foundation models (Touvron et al.,
2023; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Devlin et al., 2018; Ying
et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022), its superiority in capability makes it one of the most widely used architectures

However, these research primarily focuses on specific, simplified tasks that only utilize a subset of the transformer’s
capabilities. In practice, tasks often involve complex combinations of these simpler tasks, rendering them more challenging. Moreover, these studies often assume that the data
is well-structured, aligning perfectly with the desired inputoutput token pairs. In practical scenarios, transformer inputs
typically consist of general sequences, with tokens generated through human learning processes. Consequently, it
remains unclear whether a given transformer model can effectively handle practical sequence-based tasks that require
leveraging multiple aspects of the transformer’s capabilities.
Specifically, the capacity and limitations of the transformer
architecture for addressing diverse sequence learning tasks
remain uncertain.

1
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong. 2 Department of Computer Science and Insititute of Data
Science, The University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Difan
Zou <dzou@cs.hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we aim to comprehensively understand the per1

