Harnessing Hierarchical Label Distribution Variations
in Test Agnostic Long-tail Recognition

Zhiyong Yang 1 Qianqian Xu 2 Zitai Wang 3 4 Sicong Li 3 4 Boyu Han 2 1
Shilong Bao 3 4 Xiaochun Cao 5 Qingming Huang 1 2 6

Abstract
This paper explores test-agnostic long-tail recognition, a challenging long-tail task where the test
label distributions are unknown and arbitrarily imbalanced. We argue that the variation in these distributions can be broken down hierarchically into
global and local levels. The global ones reflect a
broad range of diversity, while the local ones typically arise from milder changes, often focused
on a particular neighbor. Traditional methods
predominantly use a Mixture-of-Expert (MoE)
approach, targeting a few fixed test label distributions that exhibit substantial global variations.
However, the local variations are left unconsidered. To address this issue, we propose a new
MoE strategy, DirMixE, which assigns experts to
different Dirichlet meta-distributions of the label
distribution, each targeting a specific aspect of local variations. Additionally, the diversity among
these Dirichlet meta-distributions inherently captures global variations. This dual-level approach
also leads to a more stable objective function, allowing us to sample different test distributions
better to quantify the mean and variance of performance outcomes. Theoretically, we show that
our proposed objective benefits from enhanced
generalization by virtue of the variance-based regularization. Comprehensive experiments across
multiple benchmarks confirm the effectiveness
of DirMixE. The code is available at https:
//github.com/scongl/DirMixE.

Figure 1. Traditional methods can only capture global variations
of label distribution. By contrast, our DirMixE learns from both
global and local variations, covering more test distributions.

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning (ML) methods are usually
designed for data with a balanced distribution (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009; Deng et al., 2009). In contrast, most real-world
data exhibits a long-tailed nature. Specifically, a few classes
have a large number of samples (i.e., head classes), while
many others have far fewer (i.e., tail classes) (Zhang et al.,
2023b). This pattern produces profound studies in many
tasks, including species classification (Horn et al., 2018;
Miao et al., 2021), face recognition (Zhang et al., 2017;
Zhong et al., 2019), medical image diagnosis (Galdran et al.,
2021), social image understanding (Tang et al., 2016; Li
et al., 2018), semantic segmentation (Zhong et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2020), and object detection (Lin et al., 2017).

School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Key Lab. of Intelligent Information
Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS 3 Institute of Information Engineering, CAS 4 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 School of Cyber Science
and Tech., Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 6 BDKM,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence
to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming Huang
<qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

Hitherto, considerable methods have been developed to address this issue seeing its widespread nature. To evaluate
model performance with long-tail distributions, most existing studies train their models on long-tailed data and test
them on a balanced dataset (Cui et al., 2019; Cao et al.,
2019; Kang et al., 2020; Menon et al., 2021; Kini et al.,
2021b; Cui et al., 2021; Rangwani et al., 2022; Alshammari
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). This protocol poses an
implicit assumption: the test distribution is balanced and
fixed. However, this assumption is often invalid, as the test
distribution is typically unknown and can change over time.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To reduce the bias in test distribution, Zhang et al. (2022) recently proposed a more practical setting called test-agnostic
long-tailed recognition. This setting aims at ensuring model

1

1

