Provable Privacy with Non-Private Pre-Processing

Yaxi Hu 1 Amartya Sanyal 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Abstract

for handling missing values (Anil Jadhav & Ramanathan,
2019), deduplication for reducing memorization and eliminating bias (Kandpal et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022), standard
scaling for reducing the impact of outliers, and dimensionality reduction for denoising or visualization (Abadi et al.,
2016; Zhou et al., 2021; Pinto et al., 2024) are commonly
used. These pre-processings are also prevalent prior to applying DP algorithms, a pipeline that we term pre-processed
DP pipeline. Among other uses, this has been shown to improve privacy-accuracy trade-off (Tramer & Boneh, 2021;
Ganesh et al., 2023).

When analyzing Differentially Private (DP) machine learning pipelines, the potential privacy cost
of data-dependent pre-processing is frequently
overlooked in privacy accounting. In this work,
we propose a general framework to evaluate the
additional privacy cost incurred by non-private
data-dependent pre-processing algorithms. Our
framework establishes upper bounds on the overall privacy guarantees by utilising two new technical notions: a variant of DP termed Smooth DP
and the bounded sensitivity of the pre-processing
algorithms. In addition to the generic framework,
we provide explicit overall privacy guarantees
for multiple data-dependent pre-processing algorithms, such as data imputation, quantization,
deduplication, standard scaling and PCA, when
used in combination with several DP algorithms.
Notably, this framework is also simple to implement, allowing direct integration into existing DP
pipelines.

A fundamental assumption, required by DP, is that individual data points are independent. However, if training
data is used in pre-processing, this assumption is compromised. For example, when deduplicating a dataset, whether
a point remains after the pre-processing is dependent on
the presence of other points in its vicinity. Similarly, for
mean imputation, the imputed value depends on the values
of other data points. These dependencies, also evident in
PCA and pre-training, can undermine the privacy guarantee
of the pre-processed DP pipeline.
There are multiple strategies to address this. A straightforward method to derive privacy guarantees for this pipeline
is to use group privacy where the size of the group can be
as large as the size of the dataset, thereby resulting in weak
privacy guarantees. This idea, albeit not in the context of
pre-processing, was previous explored under the name Dependent Differential Privacy (DDP) (Zhao et al., 2017; Liu
et al., 2016). Another approach is to use public data for the
pre-processing. Broadly referred to as semi-private learning
algorithms, examples of these methods include pre-training
on public data and learning projection functions using the
public data e.g. (Pinto et al., 2024; Li et al., 2022b;a; Yu
et al., 2021). Despite their success, these methods crucially
rely on the availability of high-quality public data.

1. Introduction
With the growing emphasis on user data privacy, Differential
Privacy (DP), has become the preferred solution for safeguarding training data in Machine Learning (ML) and data
analysis (Dwork et al., 2006). DP algorithms are designed
to ensure that individual inputs minimally affect the algorithm’s output, thus preserving privacy. This approach is
now widely adopted by various organizations for conducting
analyses while maintaining user privacy (AppleDP, 2017;
U.S. Census Bureau, 2020).
Pre-processing data is a standard practice in data analysis
and machine learning. Techniques such as data imputation

In the absence of public data, an alternative approach is
to privatise the pre-processing algorithm. However, designing new private pre-processing algorithms complicate
the process, increasing the risk of privacy breaches due to
errors in implementation or analysis. Moreover, private
pre-processing can be statistically or computationally more
demanding than private learning itself. For example, the
sample complexity of DP-PCA(Chaudhuri et al., 2012) is
dependent on the dimension of the training data (Liu et al.,
2022), implying that the costs associated with DP-PCA

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen,
Germany.
Correspondence to:
Yaxi
Hu
<yaxi.hu@tuebingen.mpg.de>,
Amartya
Sanyal
<amsa@di.ku.dk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
An
implementation
for
our
framework
is
available
at
https://github.com/yaxihu/
privacy-non-private-preprocessing.

1

