Does Label Smoothing Help Deep Partial Label Learning?

Xiuwen Gong 1 Nitin Bisht 1 Guandong Xu 1 2

Abstract

label. PLL has attracted increasing attention in real-world
applications due to its lower labeling cost, such as, automatic
face recognition, automatic object detection, etc.

Although deep partial label learning (deep PLL)
classifiers have shown their competitive performance, they are heavily influenced by the noisy
false-positive labels leading to poorer performance as the training progresses. Meanwhile,
existing deep PLL research lacks theoretical guarantee on the analysis of correlation between label
noise (or ambiguity degree) and classification performance. This paper addresses the above limitations with label smoothing (LS) from both theoretical and empirical aspects. In theory, we prove
lower and upper bounds of the expected risk to
show that label smoothing can help deep PLL.
We further derive the optimal smoothing rate to
investigate the conditions, i.e., when label smoothing benefits deep PLL. In practice, we design a
benchmark solution and a novel optimization algorithm called Label Smoothing-based Partial Label Learning (LS-PLL). Extensive experimental
results on benchmark PLL datasets and various
deep architectures validate that label smoothing
does help deep PLL in improving classification
performance and learning distinguishable representations, and the best results can be achieved
when the empirical smoothing rate approximately
approaches the optimal smoothing rate in theoretical findings. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/kalpiree/LS-PLL.

In recent years, PLL has evolved from conventional PLL
to deep PLL (i.e., from linear/kernel-based models to deep
neural networks (DNNs)-based models) as a result of DNNs’
remarkable training ability on large-scale datasets. The main
challenge for deep PLL is that the ground-truth label in PLL
is unkown while DNNs largely depend on the precisely labeled data to guarantee the effectiveness of training. More
specifically, DNNs are over-confident on any fed example.
If the DNNs are not fed data with true labels, the learned
deep PLL classifiers perform worse than the desired ones as
with the training process continues. Moreover, what changes
with the PLL evolvement is the label noise, from uniform to
non-uniform, and from naive to competitive/realistic. Most
deep PLL methods assume that the noisy labels are randomly generated from a uniform distribution (Lv et al.,
2020; Feng et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022).
However, the noisy labels are usually high-correlated with
the true label and instances in real-world scenarios, which
makes the deep PLL problem more challenging than the
uniformally generated label noise. As is also pointed out
by Xu et al. (2021) that the candidate labels are always
instance-dependent. Yan & Guo (2023) also point out that
it is more realistic to consider the competitive noise, which
can demonstrate stronger association relationships with a
true label than a random label noise.
Here comes a question: What will happen when competitive noise meets the over-confidence of deep PLL? Larger
performance degradation, definitely! In addition, existing
research on deep PLL lacks theoretical guarantee on the
analysis of correlation between label noise (or ambiguity
degree) and classification performance. These problems motivate us to figure out a solution. Label smoothing (Szegedy
et al., 2016) has shown to be effective in denoising and improving predictive performance of deep learning models by
preventing DNN from becoming over-confident. Does label
smoothing help deep PLL? If so, when can label smoothing
benefit PLL? Little research has been done to explore this.

1. Introduction
Partial label learning (PLL) (Cour et al., 2011; Chen et al.,
2014; Yu & Zhang, 2017) is an important weakly-supervised
learning problem that allows each instance to be annotated
with a set of candidate labels, with only one being the true
1

Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia 2 Department of
Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU),
Kowloon, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Guandong Xu
<Gdxu@eduhk.hk>.

In this paper, we provide a novel insight into deep PLL by
investigating the effectiveness of label smoothing from both
theoretical and empirical aspects. We first propose a novel

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

