Provably Better Explanations with Optimized Aggregation of
Feature Attributions
Thomas Decker 1 2 Ananta R. Bhattarai 2 3 Jindong Gu 4 Volker Tresp 1 5 Florian Buettner 2 6 7

Abstract

instance, empirical evidence has revealed that single methods often exhibit unreasonable sensitivity to input perturbations (Kindermans et al., 2019; Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola,
2018; Dombrowski et al., 2019; Ghorbani et al., 2019; Lin
et al., 2023) and critically depend on the concrete hyperparameter choice (Bansal et al., 2020; Sturmfels et al., 2020;
Pahde et al., 2023). This lack of explanation robustness
not only causes unstable attribution results but can even be
exploited for malicious manipulations (Baniecki & Biecek,
2023). On top of that, some methods may fail to identify
relevant features (Hooker et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022) and
different techniques frequently disagree substantially when
explaining the same prediction (Krishna et al., 2022; Neely
et al., 2021). These findings contest the actual fidelity of a
single attribution result for the purpose model explainability.
In addition to these observations, there is a growing body of
theoretical work that highlights the limitations of individual
attribution methods (Nie et al., 2018; Sixt et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2021; Bilodeau et al., 2024; Fokkema et al., 2023).
More specifically, in (Han et al., 2022), the authors establish
a ”no-free lunch” theorem for model explanations, which
implies that a single attribution method cannot universally
approximate the behavior of any model faithfully.
Nevertheless, each feature attribution method derives importance based on different mechanisms and each can be
associated with individual benefits and shortcomings. As
a consequence, the question arises of how to best combine
them to attain better explainability of opaque predictions.
In this work, we explore the capabilities of convex combinations across different attribution results to improve the
overall reliability of explanations. Guided by established
quality criteria for feature attributions (Nauta et al., 2023),
we propose an effective strategy to derive convex weightings such that the corresponding aggregation of different
outcomes yields significant improvements in robustness and
faithfulness. This is underpinned by a theoretical analysis
showing that the improvements in relevant quality metrics
are provable and even close to optimal with high probability.
Our specific contributions are the following:

Using feature attributions for post-hoc explanations is a common practice to understand and verify the predictions of opaque machine learning
models. Despite the numerous techniques available, individual methods often produce inconsistent and unstable results, putting their overall reliability into question. In this work, we aim to systematically improve the quality of feature attributions by combining multiple explanations across
distinct methods or their variations. For this purpose, we propose a novel approach to derive optimal convex combinations of feature attributions
that yield provable improvements of desired quality criteria such as robustness or faithfulness to the
model behavior. Through extensive experiments
involving various model architectures and popular feature attribution techniques, we demonstrate
that our combination strategy consistently outperforms individual methods and existing baselines.

1. Introduction
The practice of quantifying the influence of individual features through attribution methods has been established as a
popular paradigm to enhance the transparency of complex
machine learning models. These approaches typically produce heatmaps highlighting individual input features, such
as pixels or image regions, relevant to a specific model prediction (see Figure 1, left). However, while a multitude of
techniques has been developed for this purpose, concerns
and doubts regarding the reliability of individual methods
persist (Adebayo et al., 2018; 2020; Zhou et al., 2022). For
1
LMU Munich 2 Siemens AG 3 Technical University of
Munich 4 University of Oxford 5 Munich Center for Machine
Learning (MCML) 6 Goethe University Frankfurt 7 German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ). Correspondence to: Thomas
Decker <thomas.decker@siemens.com>, Florian Buettner <florian.buettner@dkfz.de>.

• We introduce an innovative approach for combining the
results generated by various feature attribution methods
or different variants of the same method.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

