CrossGET: Cross-Guided Ensemble of Tokens for
Accelerating Vision-Language Transformers

Dachuan Shi 1 2 Chaofan Tao 3 Anyi Rao 4 Zhendong Yang 1 Chun Yuan 1 † Jiaqi Wang 2 †

1. Introduction

Abstract

The AI community is currently witnessing the bloom of
vision-language models (Kiros et al., 2014; Karpathy et al.,
2014; Antol et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2015; Yang et al.,
2016; Huang et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2022a; Li et al., 2022; 2023b), with Transformer-based models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), BLIP/BLIP2 (Li
et al., 2022; 2023c), and GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023) emerging
as prominent in recent research. These models are capable
of tackling a broad range of vision-language tasks, such as
Image-Text Retrieval (Jia et al., 2015), Vision Reasoning
(Suhr et al., 2018), Image Captioning (Lin et al., 2014),
and Visual Question Answering (Antol et al., 2015). Nevertheless, the notable improvement is at the expense of
significantly increased computational cost, making it less
accessible for consumers with limited resources.

Recent vision-language models have achieved
tremendous advances. However, their computational costs are also escalating dramatically,
making model acceleration exceedingly critical.
To pursue more efficient vision-language Transformers, this paper introduces Cross-Guided
Ensemble of Tokens (CrossGET), a general acceleration framework for vision-language Transformers. This framework adaptively combines tokens
in real-time during inference, significantly reducing computational costs while maintaining high
performance. CrossGET features two primary
innovations: 1) Cross-Guided Matching and Ensemble. CrossGET leverages cross-modal guided
token matching and ensemble to effectively utilize cross-modal information, achieving wider
applicability across both modality-independent
models, e.g., CLIP, and modality-dependent ones,
e.g., BLIP2. 2) Complete-Graph Soft Matching. CrossGET introduces an algorithm for the
token-matching mechanism, ensuring reliable
matching results while facilitating parallelizability and high efficiency. Extensive experiments
have been conducted on various vision-language
tasks, such as image-text retrieval, visual reasoning, image captioning, and visual question answering. The performance on both classic multimodal architectures and emerging multimodal
LLMs demonstrates the framework’s effectiveness and versatility. The code is available at
https://github.com/sdc17/CrossGET.

The computational cost of Transformers increases monotonically with the input tokens. Token reduction, which reduces
the number of tokens processed during forward, is an effective strategy to mitigate high computational costs for both
vision Transformers (Rao et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022b;
Bolya et al., 2023) and language Transformers (Goyal et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022). Although studied
on the acceleration of unimodal models, a non-negligible
research gap persists in multimodal contexts.
In vision-language transformers, a straightforward idea involves leveraging cross-modal information to guide token
reduction. This concept can be intuitively applicable in
modality-independent frameworks, such as CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021). However, recent popular vision-language
Transformers like BLIP/BLIP2 (Li et al., 2022; 2023c) and
LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023b;a) are modality-dependent, with
the vision encoder processing first. While vision features
can guide token reduction in the following networks, incorporating language priors to guide token reduction in the
vision encoder poses a challenge. The issue of facilitating bidirectional guidance, which would allow the preceding modality to benefit from information in the succeeding
modality for token reduction, remains an open question.

1

Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 Stanford University. Work was done
when Dachuan Shi was an intern at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
†
Correspondence to: Chun Yuan <yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Jiaqi Wang <wjqdev@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This paper introduces CrossGET, a general acceleration
framework designed to efficiently reduce the number of to1

