Privately Learning Smooth Distributions on the Hypercube
by Projections

Clément Lalanne 1 Sébastien Gadat 1

Abstract

2006) in order to guarantee that a quantity built on users’
data does not leak more information than a given threshold.
It is now considered as the gold standard in terms of privacy protection, and it is notably used by Apple (Thakurta
et al., 2017), Google (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Bittau et al.,
2017), Microsoft (Ding et al., 2017) and the US Census
Bureau (Machanavajjhala et al., 2008; Haney et al., 2017;
Abowd, 2018) among many others.

Fueled by the ever-increasing need for statistics
that guarantee the privacy of their training sets,
this article studies the centrally-private estimation
of Sobolev-smooth densities of probability over
the hypercube in dimension d. The contributions
of this article are two-fold : Firstly, it generalizes the one-dimensional results of (Lalanne et al.,
2023b) to non-integer levels of smoothness and to
a high-dimensional setting, which is important for
two reasons : it is more suited for modern learning tasks, and it allows understanding the relations
between privacy, dimensionality and smoothness,
which is a central question with differential privacy. Secondly, this article presents a private
strategy of estimation that is data-driven (usually
referred to as adaptive in Statistics) in order to
privately choose an estimator that achieves a good
bias-variance trade-off among a finite family of
private projection estimators without prior knowledge of the ground-truth smoothness β. This is
achieved by adapting the Lepskii method for private selection, by adding a new penalization term
that makes the estimation privacy-aware.

Let f be a density of probability on [0, 1]d w.r.t. Lebesgue’s
measure, and let X1 , . . . , Xn be n i.i.d. random variables
with a distribution of probability that admits f as density
on [0, 1]d . In this article, we will study the estimation of f
with a quantity fˆ that privately builds on X1 , . . . , Xn . The
notion of privacy that is adopted in this article is the notion
of central zero-concentrated differential privacy (Dwork &
Rothblum, 2016; Bun & Steinke, 2016) (see Section 2).
This problem is statistically difficult (in the sense that it
requires a lot of data) and suffers from the curse of dimensionality, which means that even without privacy considerations, one must expect an exponential number (in the
dimensionality) of data points in order to solve it. Yet, its
interest lies in its generality, and in its expressivity. Exploring the effects of privacy on this statistical problem is
interesting on a theoretical standpoint, in order to better
understand differential privacy, and for the practitioner in
order to better decide between this general approach and a
different one that incorporates more prior information about
the distribution to estimate.

1. Introduction
Multiple experimental pieces of work have demonstrated
that the unrestricted use of data for various learning tasks
may cause privacy concerns (Narayanan & Shmatikov,
2006; Backstrom et al., 2007; Fredrikson et al., 2015; Dinur
& Nissim, 2003; Homer et al., 2008; Loukides et al., 2010;
Narayanan & Shmatikov, 2008; Sweeney, 2000; Gonon
et al., 2023; Wagner & Eckhoff, 2018; Sweeney, 2002;
Carlini et al., 2022). As a result, formal guarantees have
been developed through differential privacy (Dwork et al.,

The motivations for this problem are multiple. For instance,
learning a density allows learning distributions that are very
general, and distributions for which we do not have simple
parametric representations. On top of that, learning densities
allows learning in a tractable way multimodal distributions
and mixture distributions whereas the tractability of alternative methods (e.g. EM) is not always obtainable, even
without considering privacy. With a private density estimate,
a data analyst may estimate various other interesting statistics without having to see the data again (and hence without
having to spend more privacy budget) such as the mean, the
median, the different modes, . . . A final application that we
can mention is private data generation : If one has access to
a private estimate of the density, then one may sample new

1

Toulouse School of Ecolomics, Université Toulouse 1 Capitole, Toulouse, France. Correspondence to: Clément Lalanne
<clement.lalanne@tse-fr.eu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

