Multi-View Clustering by Inter-cluster Connectivity Guided Reward

Hao Dai 1 2 Yang Liu 1 2 Peng Su 1 2 Hecheng Cai 1 2 Shudong Huang 1 2 Jiancheng Lv 1 2

Abstract

=4

Multi-view clustering has been widely explored
for its effectiveness in harmonizing heterogeneity
along with consistency in different views of data.
Despite the significant progress made by recent
works, the performance of most existing methods
is heavily reliant on strong priori information regarding the true number of clusters k, which is
rarely feasible in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel graph-based multi-view
clustering algorithm to infer unknown k through
a graph consistency reward mechanism. To be
specific, we evaluate the cluster indicator matrix
during each iteration with respect to diverse k. We
formulate the inference process of unknown k as
a parsimonious reinforcement learning paradigm,
where the reward is measured by inter-cluster connectivity. As a result, our approach is capable
of independently producing the final clustering
result, free from the input of a predefined cluster
number. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed approach in comparison to existing
state-of-the-art methods.

=3

Figure 1. The motivation for designing the reward function for
finding unknown k. It is obvious that an erroneous k (k = 3 in this
case) would dramatically increase the inter-cluster connectivity (as
shown by the red dashed line). Hence it is intuitive and reasonable
to measure the reward by minimizing the inter-cluster connectivity.

et al., 2021).
In recent years, significant advancements have been witnessed in multi-view clustering algorithms, concomitant
with the burgeoning development of the machine learning
domain. Despite considerable advancements in multi-view
clustering, a majority of these methods are parametric, necessitating a predefined number of clusters as input. This
requirement often proves impractical in real-world scenarios.
A natural thought is to adopt non-parametric solutions from
single-view clustering. Early approaches primarily relied on
conducting k experiments repeatedly and empirically and
then determining optimal k by observing unsupervised criteria (Kodinariya et al., 2013; Yuan & Yang, 2019). However,
employing these methods in a multi-view setting can be
time-consuming. Furthermore, they are primarily developed
for convex data. Inspired by (Liu et al., 2023), a feasible
approach is to form the decision-making problem of k as a
paradigm of reinforcement learning, which is fundamentally
a trial-and-error process. Compared to early approaches,
clustering under a reinforcement learning paradigm can infer
optimal k during the iterative process, significantly reducing
time costs. Besides, its capability to automatically infer k
provides an advantage over empirical decision, especially
in scenarios where certain criteria (i,e, ELBOW) are ambiguous (Umargono et al., 2020; Onumanyi et al., 2022).
Nevertheless, transferring the method of (Liu et al., 2023)
to a multi-view setting also proves problematic. For one,
it demands an additional adjacency matrix as input. More-

1. Introduction
In real-world settings, data are likely derived from varied
domains and represented in a multitude of forms, or views
(Bickel & Scheffer, 2004). For instance, a document may be
represented through audio, images, videos, and text themselves can be available in multiple languages (Wang et al.,
2015). With a predominant portion of such data being unlabeled, the role of multi-view clustering becomes pivotal.
This approach incorporates information from various views
to effectively segregate data into separate categories (Liu
*

Equal contribution 1 College of Computer Science, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610065, China 2 Engineering Research Center
of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Chengdu 610065, China. Correspondence to: Shudong
Huang <huangsd@scu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

