Transolver: A Fast Transformer Solver for PDEs on General Geometries
Haixu Wu 1 Huakun Luo 1 Haowen Wang 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

even days for complex structures (Umetani & Bickel, 2018).
Recently, deep models have emerged as promising tools for
solving PDEs (Lu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021). Benefiting
from their impressive non-linear modeling capacity, they
can learn to approximate the input and output mappings of
PDE-governed tasks from data during training and then infer
the solution significantly faster than numerical methods at
the inference phase (Goswami et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023).

Transformers have empowered many milestones
across various fields and have recently been applied to solve partial differential equations (PDEs).
However, since PDEs are typically discretized
into large-scale meshes with complex geometries,
it is challenging for Transformers to capture intricate physical correlations directly from massive
individual points. Going beyond superficial and
unwieldy meshes, we present Transolver based on
a more foundational idea, which is learning intrinsic physical states hidden behind discretized geometries. Specifically, we propose a new PhysicsAttention to adaptively split the discretized domain into a series of learnable slices of flexible
shapes, where mesh points under similar physical
states will be ascribed to the same slice. By calculating attention to physics-aware tokens encoded
from slices, Transovler can effectively capture
intricate physical correlations under complex geometrics, which also empowers the solver with
endogenetic geometry-general modeling capacity
and can be efficiently computed in linear complexity. Transolver achieves consistent state-of-the-art
with 22% relative gain across six standard benchmarks and also excels in large-scale industrial simulations, including car and airfoil designs. Code is
available at https://github.com/thuml/Transolver.

As the major backbone of foundation models, Transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved remarkable processes
in extensive areas (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021), which have also
been introduced in PDE solving (Li et al., 2023c). However,
as PDEs are usually discretized into large-scale meshes with
complex geometrics for precise simulation, directly applying Transformers to massive mesh points faces difficulties
in both computational efficiency and relation learning (Liu
et al., 2021; Katharopoulos et al., 2020b), impeding them
from being ideal PDE solvers. For instance, to calculate the
drag force of a driving car (Figure 1), the model needs to
approximate the solution of Navier-Stokes equations, including estimating the pressure for surface meshes and velocity
for surrounding volumes, which poses the following two
challenges. First, this problem involves collaborative modeling of tens of thousands of irregularly placed mesh points,
which is computationally prohibited for canonical attention due to its quadratic complexity. Second, PDEs involve
extremely complex spatiotemporal interactions among multiple physics quantities. It is hard to capture these high-order
and intricate correlations directly from massive individual
points. Thus, how to efficiently capture physical correlations
underlying the discretized domain is the key to “transform”
Transformers into practical PDE solvers.

1. Introduction
Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) is of immense
importance in extensive real-world applications, such as
weather forecasting, industrial design, and material analysis
(Roubı́ček, 2013). As a basic scientific problem, it is usually
hard to obtain analytic solutions for PDEs. Thus, PDEs are
typically discretized into meshes and then solved by numerical methods in practice, which usually takes a few hours or

Previous methods attempt to tackle the complexity problem
by introducing linear attention (Hao et al., 2023; Tran et al.,
2023), but directly applying the attention to massive mesh
points may overwhelm the model from learning informative
relations (Wu et al., 2022). In addition, solely relying on
features of individual points is also insufficient in capturing intricate physical correlations of PDEs (Trockman &
Kolter, 2022), especially for industrial design, which usually involves extremely complex multiphysics interactions.
Besides, although the patchify operation is widely adopted
to augment the feature of a single pixel with local informa-

1

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University.
Haixu Wu <wuhx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence
to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

