From Generalization Analysis to Optimization Designs for State Space Models

Fusheng Liu 1 2 Qianxiao Li 1

Abstract

output sequence and A, B, C, D are trainable parameters.
To simplify the analysis, we omit the skip connection by
letting D = 0. In fact, our analysis can also applied to
the case when D is included (see the discussions in Section 4.2). Recent studies have demonstrated the power of
SSMs in deep learning. For example, it was shown in Gu
et al. (2022a) that by a new parameterization and a carefully
chosen initialization, the structured state space sequence
(S4) model achieved strong empirical results on image and
language tasks. Following the S4 model, more variants of
SSMs are proposed, e.g., diagonal SSMs (Gu et al., 2022b;
Gupta et al., 2022) S5 (Smith et al., 2023), H3 (Fu et al.,
2023), GSS (Mehta et al., 2023), Hyena Hierarchy (Poli
et al., 2023), and Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023).

A State Space Model (SSM) is a foundation model
in time series analysis, which has recently been
shown as an alternative to transformers in sequence modeling. In this paper, we theoretically
study the generalization of SSMs and propose
improvements to training algorithms based on
the generalization results. Specifically, we give a
data-dependent generalization bound for SSMs,
showing an interplay between the SSM parameters and the temporal dependencies of the training
sequences. Leveraging the generalization bound,
we (1) set up a scaling rule for model initialization
based on the proposed generalization measure,
which significantly improves the robustness of the
output value scales on SSMs to different temporal
patterns in the sequence data; (2) introduce a new
regularization method for training SSMs to enhance the generalization performance. Numerical
results are conducted to validate our results.

Theoretical analysis and understanding of the approximation
and optimization of SSMs are well studied in the literature
such as (Li et al., 2021; 2022; Gu et al., 2022a; 2023). Since
the SSM can be regarded as a continuous linear RNN model
(Li et al., 2022), most generalization analysis of SSMs is
based on the generalization theory of RNNs (Zhang et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2019; Tu et al., 2019). However, these
previous works did not study the effects of the temporal dependencies in the sequence data on the SSM generalization
(see more details on the comparison in Section 4.1). As an
attempt to understand the relationship between the temporal
dependencies and the generalization performance, this paper
aims to provide a generalization bound that connects the
memory structure of the model with the temporal structure
of the data. We can, in turn, use the proposed bound to guide
us in designing new algorithms to improve optimization and
generalization. Specifically, we discover two roles for the
proposed generalization measure: (1) generalization bound
as an initialization scheme; (2) generalization bound as a
regularization method. The common initialization method
for the S4 model and its variants follows from the HiPPO
framework (Gu et al., 2022a; 2023), which is based on the
prerequisite that the training sequence data is stable. To
improve the robustness of the output value scales on SSMs
to different temporal patterns in the sequence data, we consider to rescale the initialization of SSMs with respect to
the generalization measure. This new initialization scheme
makes the SSMs more resilient on their initial output value
scales to variations in the temporal patterns of the training
data. Except for the initialization setup, our generalization

1. Introduction
Sequence modeling has been a long-standing research topic
in many machine learning areas, such as speech recognition
(Hinton et al., 2012), time series prediction (Li et al., 2019),
and natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019). Various machine learning models have been successfully applied
in sequence modeling to handle different types of sequence
data, ranging from the (probabilistic) Hidden Markov model
(Baum & Petrie, 1966) to deep learning models, e.g., Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Long Short-Term Memory units (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), Gated Recurrent Unit (Chung et al., 2014), and transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017). In this paper, we focus on the state space
model (SSM), which has a simple mathematical expression:
h′ (t) = Ah(t) + Bx(t), y(t) = Ch(t) + Dx(t) where h(t)
is the hidden state, x(t) is the input sequence, y(t) is the
1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore 2 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Qianxiao Li <qianxiao@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

