Learning Shadow Variable Representation for Treatment Effect Estimation
under Collider Bias
Baohong Li 1 Haoxuan Li 2 Ruoxuan Xiong 3 Anpeng Wu 1 Fei Wu 1 Kun Kuang 1

Abstract

2024), and a central problem in causal inference is treatment effects estimation. The gold standard approach for
treatment effect estimation is to conduct Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs), but RCTs can be expensive (Kohavi
& Longbotham, 2011) and sometimes infeasible (Bottou
et al., 2013). Therefore, developing practical approaches to
estimate treatment effects from observational data is crucial
for causal inference.

One of the significant challenges in treatment effect estimation is collider bias, a specific form
of sample selection bias induced by the common
causes of both the treatment and outcome. Identifying treatment effects under collider bias requires well-defined shadow variables in observational data, which are assumed to be related to
the outcome and independent of the sample selection mechanism, conditional on the other observed variables. However, finding a valid shadow
variable is not an easy task in real-world scenarios and requires domain-specific knowledge from
experts. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a
novel method that can automatically learn shadowvariable representations from observational data
without prior knowledge. To ensure the learned
representations satisfy the assumptions of the
shadow variable, we introduce a tester to perform
hypothesis testing in the representation learning
process. We iteratively generate representations
and test whether they satisfy the shadow-variable
assumptions until they pass the test. With the help
of the learned shadow-variable representations,
we propose a novel treatment effect estimator to
address collider bias. Experiments show that the
proposed methods outperform existing treatment
effect estimation methods under collider bias and
prove their potential application value.

In observational studies, association does not imply causation, mainly due to the presence of spurious associations in
the data. There are two primary sources of spurious associations: confounding bias and collider bias (Hernán & Robins,
2020). Most of the previous works focused on confounding
bias that results from common causes of treatments and outcomes (Bang & Robins, 2005; Louizos et al., 2017; Shalit
et al., 2017; Wager & Athey, 2018) while ignored collider
bias which comes from non-random sample selection caused
by both treatments and outcomes.
We use causal diagrams in Figure 1 to further illustrate
the two biases, where X denotes the observed covariates,
T denotes the treatment variable, Y denotes the outcome
variable, and S denotes the sample selection indicator. Confounding bias results from common causes of treatment and
outcome (Greenland, 2003; Guo et al., 2020). As shown in
Figure 1(a), there are two sources of association between T
and Y : the path T → Y that represents the treatment effect
of T on Y , and the path T ← X → Y between T and Y
that includes the common cause X, which introduces spurious associations into the observational data. Collider bias is
a particular case of sample selection bias1 that results from
conditioning on a common effect of T and Y (Hernán &
Robins, 2020). As shown in Figure 1(b), except for the path
T → Y , the other source of association between T and Y is
from the open path T → S ← Y . It links T and Y through
their conditioned on common effect S, which introduces
spurious associations. As shown in Figure 1(d), an analysis
conditioned on S will cause collider bias, i.e., we can only
observe the outcome of those selected units (S = 1), and the
values of Y are missing for those unselected units (S = 0),

1. Introduction
Causal inference is a powerful statistical modeling tool for
explanatory analysis (Wang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023;
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Department of Quantitative Theory &
Methods, Emory University, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence to:
Kun Kuang <kunkuang@zju.edu.cn>.

1
Sample selection bias arises from non-random sample selection conditioned on S caused by certain variables in data, while
collider bias is the particular case that T and Y both cause S.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

