A Differentiable Partially Observable Generalized Linear Model with
Forward-Backward Message Passing

Chengrui Li 1 Weihan Li 1 Yule Wang 1 Anqi Wu 1

Abstract

However, a nonnegligible problem in neural recording is
that the recorded neurons are only a small part of the entire population in a certain target region of our interests.
A GLM for such an incomplete problem is referred to as
a partially observable GLM (POGLM) (Pillow & Latham,
2007; Jimenez Rezende & Gerstner, 2014; Linderman et al.,
2017), which considers both visible and hidden neurons.

The partially observable generalized linear model
(POGLM) is a powerful tool for understanding
neural connectivity under the assumption of existing hidden neurons. With spike trains only
recorded from visible neurons, existing works use
variational inference to learn POGLM meanwhile
presenting the difficulty of learning this latent variable model. There are two main issues: (1) the
sampled Poisson hidden spike count hinders the
use of the pathwise gradient estimator in VI; and
(2) the existing design of the variational model is
neither expressive nor time-efficient, which further affects the performance. For (1), we propose a new differentiable POGLM, which enables
the pathwise gradient estimator, better than the
score function gradient estimator used in existing
works. For (2), we propose the forward-backward
message passing sampling scheme for the variational model. Comprehensive experiments show
that our differentiable POGLMs with our forwardbackward message passing produce a better performance on one synthetic and two real-world
datasets. Furthermore, our new method yields
more interpretable parameters, underscoring its
significance in neuroscience. Code: https:
//github.com/JerrySoybean/poglm.

The general goal of POGLM is to learn the model parameter
set θ given only the spike trains X from visible neurons,
especially the connectivity between neurons (including both
visible and hidden neurons). The spike trains from hidden
neurons Z is the latent variable in POGLM. Variational
inference (VI) (Blei et al., 2017) is the most commonly used
method for solving such a latent variable model. In VI, the
target is to maximize the observable data’s evidence lower
bound
ELBO(X; θ, ϕ)
=Eq(Z|X;ϕ) [ln p(X, Z; θ) − ln q(Z|X; ϕ)]
= ln p(X; θ) − KL(q(Z|X; ϕ)∥p(Z|X; θ))

(1)

⩽ ln p(X; θ)
w.r.t. θ and ϕ, where p(X, Z; θ) is the generative model
and q(Z|X; ϕ) is the variational model parameterized by ϕ
approximating the posterior p(Z|X; θ). Maximizing Eq. 1
requires sampling hidden spike train Z from q(Z|X; ϕ)
and computing the gradient estimator of ELBO(X; θ, ϕ)
w.r.t. θ and ϕ.
However, results from existing works demonstrated the difficulties of solving such a complicated model. Particularly,
two issues have caught our attention:
(1) A good way of deriving ∂ ELBO(X;θ,ϕ)
is via the path∂ϕ
wise gradient estimator (Kingma & Welling, 2013), which
will be hindered with a discrete Z. The only alternative
is the score function gradient estimator which usually has
higher variance than the pathwise gradient estimator (Paisley et al., 2012; Bengio et al., 2013; Schulman et al., 2015).
(2) The sampling scheme of the variational model Z ∼
q(Z|X; ϕ) in most of the existing works is a GLM on hidden neurons (Jimenez Rezende & Gerstner, 2014; Kajino,
2021; Li et al., 2024b), which is only conditioned on history visible and sampled history hidden spikes. This design
makes the sampling and inference procedure slow and omits

1. Introduction
Understanding neural connectivity is a critical research question in neuroscience. The generalized linear model (GLM)
(Pillow et al., 2008) with its variants (Linderman et al., 2016;
Roudi et al., 2015; Li et al., 2024a) form a mainstream set
of tools for inferring connectivity from neural populations.
1
School of Computational Science & Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA. Correspondence
to: Chengrui Li <cnlichengrui@gatech.edu>, Anqi Wu <anqiwu@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

