Optimal Hessian/Jacobian-Free Nonconvex-PL Bilevel Optimization

Feihu Huang 1 2

Abstract

hyper-parameter learning (Franceschi et al., 2018), meta
learning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2021) and reinforcement learning (Hong et al., 2020; Chakraborty et al.,
2023). In the paper, we consider a class of nonconvex bilevel
optimization problems:

Bilevel optimization is widely applied in many
machine learning tasks such as hyper-parameter
learning, meta learning and reinforcement learning. Although many algorithms recently have
been developed to solve the bilevel optimization
problems, they generally rely on the (strongly)
convex lower-level problems. More recently,
some methods have been proposed to solve
the nonconvex-PL bilevel optimization problems,
where their upper-level problems are possibly
nonconvex, and their lower-level problems are
also possibly nonconvex while satisfying PolyakŁojasiewicz (PL) condition. However, these methods still have a high convergence complexity or
a high computation complexity such as requiring compute expensive Hessian/Jacobian matrices
and its inverses. In the paper, thus, we propose an
efficient Hessian/Jacobian-free method (i.e., HJFBiO) with the optimal convergence complexity to
solve the nonconvex-PL bilevel problems. Theoretically, under some mild conditions, we prove
that our HJFBiO method obtains an optimal convergence rate of O( T1 ), where T denotes the number of iterations, and has an optimal gradient complexity of O(ϵ−1 ) in finding an ϵ-stationary solution. We conduct some numerical experiments
on the bilevel PL game and hyper-representation
learning task to demonstrate efficiency of our proposed method.

min

f (x, y) + ϕ(x),

(Upper-Level)

s.t. y ∗ (x) ≡ arg minp g(x, y),

(Lower-Level)

x∈Rd ,y∈y ∗ (x)

y∈R

(1)

where the upper-level function f (x, y) with y ∈ y ∗ (x)
is possibly nonconvex, and ϕ(x) is a convex but possibly nonsmooth regularization such as ϕ(x) = 0 when
x ∈ X ⊆ Rd with convex set X otherwise ϕ(x) = +∞,
or ϕ(x) = ∥x∥1 . The lower-level function g(x, y) is possibly nonconvex on any y and satisfies Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(PL) condition (Polyak, 1963), which relaxes the strong convexity. The PL condition is widely used to some machine
learning models such as the over-parameterized deep neural networks (Frei & Gu, 2021; Song et al., 2021). In fact,
Problem (1) widely appears in many machine learning tasks
such as meta learning (Huang, 2023b) and reinforcement
learning (Chakraborty et al., 2023).
The inherent nested nature of bilevel optimization gives
rise to several difficulties in effectively solving these bilevel
problems. For example, compared
 with the standard singlelevel optimization (i.e., g x, y = 0 in Problem (1)), the
main difficulty of bilevel optimization is that the minimization of the upper and lower-level objectives are intertwined
via the minimizer y ∗ (x) ∈ arg miny g(x, y) of the lowerlevel problem. To deal with this difficulty, recently many
bilevel optimization methods (Ghadimi & Wang, 2018;
Hong et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023b) have been proposed by imposing the strong
convexity assumption on the Lower-Level (LL) problems.
The LL strong convexity assumption ensures the uniqueness of LL minimizer (i.e., LL Singleton), which simplifies both the optimization process and theoretical analysis, e.g., hyper-gradient ∇F (x) of the upper-level objective
F (x) = f (x, y ∗ (x)) has a simple closed-form:

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization (Colson et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2021a),
as an effective two-level hierarchical optimization paradigm,
is widely applied in many machine learning tasks such as
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Feihu Huang
<huangfeihu2018@gmail.com>.

∇F (x) = ∇x f (x, y ∗ (x))

(2)

− ∇2xy g(x, y ∗ (x))∇2yy g(x, y ∗ (x))−1 ∇y f (x, y ∗ (x)).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Based on the above form of hyper-gradient ∇F (x), some
gradient-based methods (Chen et al., 2022; Dagréou et al.,
1

