Consistent Submodular Maximization
Paul Dütting * 1 Federico Fusco * 2 Silvio Lattanzi * 1 Ashkan Norouzi-Fard * 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam * 1

Abstract

One aspect of efficient approximation algorithms for submodular maximization that has received little attention so
far, is the stability of the solution. In fact, for some of
the known algorithms, even adding a single element to the
universe of elements V may completely change the final
output (see Appendix A for some examples). Unfortunately,
this is problematic in many real-world applications where
consistency is a fundamental system requirement. Indeed, a
flurry of recent work has started to explore various optimization problems under stability and consistency constraints
such as clustering (Lattanzi & Vassilvitskii, 2017; CohenAddad et al., 2022; Fichtenberger et al., 2021; Guo et al.,
2021; Łacki et al., 2024), facility location (Cohen-Addad
et al., 2019; Bhattacharya et al., 2022), and online learning
(Jaghargh et al., 2019).

Maximizing monotone submodular functions under cardinality constraints is a classic optimization task with several applications in data mining
and machine learning. In this paper we study this
problem in a dynamic environment with consistency constraints: elements arrive in a streaming
fashion and the goal is maintaining a constant approximation to the optimal solution while having
a stable solution (i.e., the number of changes between two consecutive solutions is bounded). We
provide algorithms in this setting with different
trade-offs between consistency and approximation quality. We also complement our theoretical
results with an experimental analysis showing the
effectiveness of our algorithms in real-world instances.

Having solutions that evolve smoothly is central in many
practical application of submodular optimization. Consider,
for example, the data summarization task in an evolving
setting where elements are added to the universe V . In this
setting, having a stable summary that changes as little as
possible from step to step is very important both for serving
the summary to a user or for using it in a machine learning
model. In fact, in both settings a drastic change of the solution may have negative impact on system usability, it could
harm user attention, and adversely effect the performance
of the machine learning model.

1. Introduction
Submodular optimization is a powerful framework for modeling and solving problems that exhibit the widespread diminishing returns property. Thanks to its effectiveness, it
has been applied across diverse domains, including video
analysis (Zheng et al., 2014), data summarization (Lin
& Bilmes, 2011; Bairi et al., 2015), sparse reconstruction (Bach, 2010; Das & Kempe, 2011), and active learning (Golovin & Krause, 2011; Amanatidis et al., 2022).

For these reasons, in this paper we initiate the study of
submodular maximization under consistency constraints,
where we allow the solutions to change only slightly after
each element insertion. More formally, consider a stream V
of exactly n elements, chosen by an adversary. Denote by
Vt = {e1 , . . . , et } ⊆ V the set of all elements inserted up
to the t-th stream operation, and let OPTt be an optimum
feasible solution for Vt . Our goal is to design an algorithm
with two key properties. On the one hand, we want the
algorithm to maintain, at the end of each operation t, a
solution St ⊆ Vt , with |St | ≤ k, of high value f (St ). In
particular, we say that an algorithm is an α-approximation
of the best solution if αf (St ) ≥ f (OPTt ), for all t =
1, . . . , n. On the other hand, we want the dynamic solution
to not change much after consecutive insertions: we say
that an algorithm is C-consistent if |St \ St−1 | ≤ C for
all t = 2, . . . , n. In general, we say that an algorithm is
consistent, without specifying C, when C is constant.

In this paper, we focus on submodular maximization under cardinality constraints: given a submodular function f ,
a universe of elements V , and a cardinality constraint k,
the goal is to find a set S of at most k elements that maximizes f (S). Submodular maximization under cardinality
constraints is NP-hard, nevertheless efficient approximation
algorithms exist for this task in both the centralized and the
streaming setting (Nemhauser et al., 1978; Badanidiyuru
et al., 2014; Kazemi et al., 2019).
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research 2 Sapienza University
of Rome, Rome, Italy. Correspondence to: Federico Fusco <federico.fusco@uniroma1.it>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

