Envisioning Outlier Exposure by Large Language Models for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Chentao Cao 1 Zhun Zhong 2 3 Zhanke Zhou 1 Yang Liu 4 Tongliang Liu 5 Bo Han 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning models excel in closed-set scenarios,
where training and testing datasets share identical distribution. However, in open-world settings, especially in highstakes scenarios like autonomous driving where the consequence of making an error can be fatal, these models
often encounter out-of-distribution (OOD) samples that fall
outside the label space of the training dataset, leading to
unpredictable and frequently erroneous model behaviors.
Consequently, there is a growing interest in OOD detection (Yang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Salehi et al.,
2021), aiming to distinguish OOD samples from test-time
data while maintaining classification accuracy.

Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is
essential when deploying machine learning models in open-world scenarios. Zero-shot OOD detection, requiring no training on in-distribution
(ID) data, has been possible with the advent of
vision-language models like CLIP. Existing methods build a text-based classifier with only closedset labels. However, this largely restricts the inherent capability of CLIP to recognize samples
from large and open label space. In this paper,
we propose to tackle this constraint by leveraging
the expert knowledge and reasoning capability
of large language models (LLM) to Envision potential Outlier Exposure, termed EOE, without
access to any actual OOD data. Owing to better adaptation to open-world scenarios, EOE can
be generalized to different tasks, including far,
near, and fine-grained OOD detection. Technically, we design (1) LLM prompts based on visual similarity to generate potential outlier class
labels specialized for OOD detection, as well as
(2) a new score function based on potential outlier
penalty to distinguish hard OOD samples effectively. Empirically, EOE achieves state-of-the-art
performance across different OOD tasks and can
be effectively scaled to the ImageNet-1K dataset.
The code is publicly available at: https://
github.com/tmlr-group/EOE.

Most existing OOD detection methods (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Lee et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2019b; Liu
et al., 2020; Sehwag et al., 2021) can effectively detect OOD
samples based on a well-trained in-distribution (ID) classifier. However, they are constrained to ID datasets with
different label spaces. Besides, these methods solely depend on vision patterns, ignoring the connection between
visual images and textual labels. Recently, MCM (Ming
et al., 2022) introduced the setting of zero-shot OOD detection, which aims to leverage the capabilities of large-scale
vision-language models (VLMs), e.g., CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021), to detect OOD samples across diverse ID datasets
without training samples. By constructing a textual classifier with only ID class labels, MCM achieves impressive
performance compared to previous OOD detection methods.
However, such an approach often fails when encountering
hard OOD samples, as shown in Figure 1 (a). One might
wonder 1) if this issue arises because the pre-trained models
(e.g., CLIP) are not strong enough or require further finetuning; or 2) if it is attributable to the usages of these pretrained models, e.g., an exclusive reliance on closed-set ID
classes. Surprisingly, our findings suggest that CLIP can
achieve superior OOD detection results by incorporating
actual OOD class labels, as depicted in Figure 1 (b). This
reinforces that relying solely on ID class labels is inadequate
for distinguishing hard OOD samples. Unfortunately, we
are unable to access the actual OOD label space in practical
open-world scenarios. Therefore, we raise an open question:

1
TMLR Group, Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong
Baptist University 2 School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology 3 School of
Computer Science, University of Nottingham 4 Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz
5
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney. Correspondence
to: Bo Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>, Zhun Zhong <zhunzhong007@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

