A Circuit Domain Generalization Framework
for Efficient Logic Synthesis in Chip Design

Zhihai Wang * 1 Lei Chen * 2 Jie Wang 1 Yinqi Bai 1 Xing Li 2 Xijun Li 2 Mingxuan Yuan 2 Jianye Hao 2 3
Yongdong Zhang 1 Feng Wu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Chip design is a cornerstone of the worldwide semiconductor industry, promoting the development of an extensive
market of electronic devices, such as cellular phones, personal computers, smart automobiles, etc. Logic Synthesis
(LS) is one of the most important modules in chip design,
which aims to transform a behavioral-level description of
a design into an optimized gate-level circuit (Berndt et al.,
2022; Pasandi et al., 2023). In brief, LS is the “compiler” in
chip design. A key task in LS is Circuit Optimization (CO),
which aims to transform an input circuit into a simplified
circuit with equivalent functionality and reduced size and/or
depth. Thus, it is crucial to well tackle the CO task, as it can
significantly improve the Quality of Results, i.e., various
metrics that evaluate the quality of designed chips, such as
the area, delay, and performance of the chips (De Abreu
et al., 2021; Bertacco & Damiani, 1997; Berndt et al., 2022).

Logic Synthesis (LS) plays a vital role in chip
design. A key task in LS is to simplify circuits—
modeled by directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)—
with functionality-equivalent transformations. To
tackle this task, many LS heuristics apply transformations to subgraphs—rooted at each node
on an input DAG—sequentially. However, we
found that a large number of transformations are
ineffective, which makes applying these heuristics highly time-consuming. In particular, we
notice that the runtime of the Resub and Mfs2
heuristics often dominates the overall runtime of
LS optimization processes. To address this challenge, we propose a novel data-driven LS heuristic
paradigm, namely PruneX, to reduce ineffective
transformations. The major challenge of developing PruneX is to learn models that well generalize to unseen circuits, i.e., the out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization problem. Thus, the major technical contribution of PruneX is the novel
circuit domain generalization framework, which
learns domain-invariant representations based on
the transformation-invariant domain-knowledge.
To the best of our knowledge, PruneX is the first
approach to tackle the OOD problem in LS heuristics. We integrate PruneX with the aforementioned Resub and Mfs2 heuristics. Experiments
demonstrate that PruneX significantly improves
their efficiency while keeping comparable optimization performance on industrial and very largescale circuits, achieving up to 3.1× faster runtime.

However, the CO task can be extremely hard to tackle as it is
a N P-hard problem (Micheli, 1994; Farrahi & Sarrafzadeh,
1994; Pasandi et al., 2023). To approximately tackle the CO
task, many existing LS frameworks (Brayton & Mishchenko,
2010; Jiang et al.), including the open-source state-of-theart LS framework known as ABC (Brayton & Mishchenko,
2010), have developed a rich set of LS heuristics, such as
Mfs2 (Mishchenko et al., 2011), Resub (Brayton, 2006),
Rewrite (Bertacco & Damiani, 1997; Mishchenko et al.,
2006), Refactor (Brayton, 1982; Mishchenko et al., 2006),
etc. Specifically, given an input circuit modeled by a directed acyclic graph (DAG), many commonly used LS
heuristics apply transformations to subgraphs rooted at each
node—that is, the node-level transformation—sequentially
for all nodes on the DAG. We illustrate a unified paradigm
of these LS heuristics as shown in Figure 1.

*

Equal contribution This work was done when Zhihai Wang
was an intern at Huawei. 1 CAS Key Laboratory of Technology
in GIPAS & MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent
Perception and Cognition, University of Science and Technology
of China 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 3 College of
Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University. Correspondence
to: Jie Wang <jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn>.

However, we found an important problem leading to inefficient LS, that is, a large number of node-level transformations are ineffective, making applying these heuristics
highly time-consuming. In particular, we notice that applying the Resub (Brayton, 2006) and Mfs2 (Mishchenko et al.,
2011) heuristics take much longer runtime, roughly ranging from 30× to 70×, than the other heuristics (see Figure
2). Moreover, we found that the runtime of the two heuris-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

