Online Learning in CMDPs: Handling Stochastic and Adversarial Constraints

Francesco Emanuele Stradi 1 Jacopo Germano 1 Gianmarco Genalti 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1
Nicola Gatti 1

Abstract

modeled as an MDP. A different line of work (Even-Dar
et al., 2009; Neu et al., 2010) is concerned with problems
in which an agent interacts with an unknown MDP with the
goal of guaranteeing that the overall reward achieved during
the learning process is as much as possible. This approach
is more akin to online learning (Orabona, 2019), and it is
far less investigated than classical RL approaches.

We study online learning in episodic constrained
Markov decision processes (CMDPs), where the
learner aims at collecting as much reward as possible over the episodes, while satisfying some
long-term constraints during the learning process.
Rewards and constraints can be selected either
stochastically or adversarially, and the transition
function is not known to the learner. While online
learning in classical (unconstrained) MDPs has
received considerable attention over the last years,
the setting of CMDPs is still largely unexplored.
This is surprising, since in real-world applications,
such as, e.g., autonomous driving, automated bidding, and recommender systems, there are usually
additional constraints and specifications that an
agent has to obey during the learning process.
In this paper, we provide the first best-of-bothworlds algorithm for CMDPs with long-term constraints, in the flavor of Balseiro et al. (2023).
Our algorithm is capable of handling settings in
which rewards and constraints are selected either
stochastically or adversarially, without requiring
any knowledge of the underling process. Moreover, our algorithm matches state-of-the-art regret and constraint violation bounds for settings
in which constraints are selected stochastically,
while it is the first to provide guarantees in the
case in which they are chosen adversarially.

In real-world applications, there are usually additional constraints and specifications that an agent has to obey during
the learning process, and these cannot be captured by the
classical definition of MDP. For instance, autonomous vehicles must avoid crashing while navigating (Wen et al., 2020;
Isele et al., 2018), bidding agents in ad auctions are constrained to a given budget (Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2021),
while recommender systems should not present offending
items to users (Singh et al., 2020). In order to model such
features of real-world problems, Altman (1999) introduced
constrained MDPs (CMDPs) by extending classical MDPs
with cost constraints that the agent has to satisfy.
We study online learning in episodic CMDPs in which the
agent is subject to long-term constraints. In such a setting,
the goal of the agent is twofold. On the one hand, the agent
wants to minimize their (cumulative) regret, which is how
much reward they lose compared to what they would have
obtained by always playing a best-in-hindsight, constraintsatisfying policy. On the other hand, while the agent is
allowed to violate the constraints in a given episode, they
want that the (cumulative) constraint violation stays under
control, by growing sublinearly in the number of episodes.
Long-term constraints naturally model many features of realworld problems, such as, e.g., budget depletion in automated
bidding (Balseiro & Gur, 2019; Gummadi et al., 2012).

1. Introduction
The framework of Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) has been extensively employed to model sequential decision-making problems. In reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018), the goal is to learn an
optimal policy for an agent interacting with an environment
1

Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
dence to:
Francesco Emanuele Stradi
manuele.stradi@polimi.it>.

All the existing works studying online learning problems in
CMDPs with long-term constraints address settings in which
the constraints are selected stochastically according to an
unknown (stationary) probability distribution. While these
works address both the case where the rewards are stochastic
(see, e.g., (Zheng & Ratliff, 2020; Efroni et al., 2020)) and
the one in which they are adversarial (see, e.g., (Wei et al.,
2018; Qiu et al., 2020)), to the best of our knowledge there
is no work addressing settings with adversarially-selected
constraints. Some works (see, e.g., (Ding & Lavaei, 2023;

Correspon<francescoe-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

