LayerMerge: Neural Network Depth Compression
through Layer Pruning and Merging

Jinuk Kim 1 2 Marwa El Halabi 3 Mingi Ji 4 Hyun Oh Song 1 2

Abstract

X (0)

θ1

X (1)

θ2

Recent works show that reducing the number of
layers in a convolutional neural network can enhance efficiency while maintaining the performance of the network. Existing depth compression methods remove redundant non-linear activation functions and merge the consecutive convolution layers into a single layer. However, these
methods suffer from a critical drawback; the kernel size of the merged layers becomes larger,
significantly undermining the latency reduction
gained from reducing the depth of the network.
We show that this problem can be addressed by
jointly pruning convolution layers and activation
functions. To this end, we propose LayerMerge,
a novel depth compression method that selects
which activation layers and convolution layers
to remove, to achieve a desired inference speedup while minimizing performance loss. Since
the corresponding selection problem involves an
exponential search space, we formulate a novel
surrogate optimization problem and efficiently
solve it via dynamic programming. Empirical
results demonstrate that our method consistently
outperforms existing depth compression and layer
pruning methods on various network architectures, both on image classification and generation tasks. We release the code at https://
github.com/snu-mllab/LayerMerge.

X (2)
σ2

id

ReLU
X (0)

X (2)

θmerged = θ2 ∗ θ1

Ker(θ1 ) = Ker(θ2 ) = 3

σ2

Ker(θmerged ) = 5
ReLU

X (0)

θ1

X (1)

Latency speed-up : 1.45×
θ2

id

X (2)

θ3

X (3)
σ3

id

ReLU
X (0)

θmerged = θ3 ∗ θ2 ∗ θ1
σ3

X (2)
Ker(θ1 ) = Ker(θ2 ) = Ker(θ3 ) = 3
Ker(θmerged ) = 7

ReLU

Latency speed-up : 1.02×

Figure 1: An illustration of the increase in kernel size significantly undermining the latency reduction in the depth
compression framework. Here, θl denotes the l-th convolution parameter, X (l) denotes the l-th feature map, and
Ker(·) denotes the kernel size of the parameter. As the layers are merged, the kernel size of the merged layer continues
to grow, impeding the latency reduction. The latency is measured for the depicted model, on RTX2080 Ti, with channel
size 256, input resolution 56 × 56, and batch size 128.

et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2018a; Girshick, 2015). More
recently, diffusion probabilistic models employing U-Net
based architecture are demonstrating great performance in
various high-quality image generation tasks (Ho et al., 2020;
Ronneberger et al., 2015). However, the impressive capabilities of these models on complex vision tasks come at
the cost of increasingly higher computational resources and
inference latency as they are scaled up (Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021; Liu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown remarkable performance in various vision-based tasks such as classification, segmentation, and object detection (Krizhevsky

An effective approach to address this is structured pruning,
which consists of removing redundant regular regions of
weights, such as channels, filters, and entire layers, to make
the model more efficient without requiring specialized hardware while preserving its performance. In particular, channel pruning methods remove redundant channels in CNNs
(Molchanov et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2022).

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University 2 Neural Processing Research Center 3 Samsung
- SAIT AI Lab, Montreal 4 Google. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh
Song <hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

