Learning to Infer Generative Template Programs for Visual Concepts

R. Kenny Jones 1 Siddhartha Chaudhuri 2 Daniel Ritchie 1

Abstract

approach this problem ‘symbolically’, a common strategy
is to induce a structured grammar that explains the input
concept set under some criteria (often Bayesian in flavor, e.g.
Stuhlmuller et al. (2010)). These methods are challenged
by the fact that grammar induction is a difficult inverse
problem: these methods often rely on domain specialization or structured inputs, limiting their generality. Other
attempts have investigated ‘neural’ approaches that learn
to perform concept-related tasks (Finn et al., 2017). While
these approaches impress in their areas of specialization,
such methods can usually only perform a subset of the tasks
we are interested in. They also typically do not generalize well beyond training concepts, unless they have been
pretrained on internet scale data.

People grasp flexible visual concepts from a few
examples. We explore a neurosymbolic system
that learns how to infer programs that capture visual concepts in a domain-general fashion. We
introduce Template Programs: programmatic expressions from a domain-specific language that
specify structural and parametric patterns common to an input concept. Our framework supports
multiple concept-related tasks, including few-shot
generation and co-segmentation through parsing.
We develop a learning paradigm that allows us
to train networks that infer Template Programs
directly from visual datasets that contain concept
groupings. We run experiments across multiple
visual domains: 2D layouts, Omniglot characters,
and 3D shapes. We find that our method outperforms task-specific alternatives, and performs
competitively against domain-specific approaches
for the limited domains where they exist.

Working towards domain and task general concept learning, we introduce the Template Program framework. Our
neurosymbolic system learns how to infer programs that
capture visual concepts. Beyond simply parsing concepts,
our Template Programs can also be sampled to synthesize
new generations conditioned on a group of visual inputs.
Template Programs are structured symbolic objects from a
domain-specific language that capture structural and parametric attributes common to a particular concept. They
admit instantiated programs that accord with these constraints, and convert these programs into visual outputs with
a domain-specific executor. We train networks that learn
how to infer Template Programs with a training regime
that works across visual domains. This paradigm requires
only a domain-specific language (DSL) and a visual dataset
(e.g. images) with concept groupings (e.g. class annotations). Our two-step learning approach first pretrains a
series of inference networks on synthetic data sampled from
the DSL, and then specializes these networks towards the
target dataset with a bootstrapped fine-tuning procedure.

1. Introduction
Humans understand the visual world through concepts (Murphy, 2004). Concept-level reasoning allows us to perform
a multitude of tasks over a range of situations, even after
seeing a new concept only a few times (Tenenbaum, 2018).
In this paper, we endeavor to endow machines with similar
abilities to learn flexible, general purpose visual concepts.
For instance, to support creative applications, we would like
to be able to feed it a small set of visual exemplars and have
it synthesize novel generations that match the input concept.
Or to support analysis tasks, our system should be able to
parse the input exemplars into corresponding parts in a consistent fashion. We desire a system capable of achieving
these goals across different visual domains.

We experimentally validate that our method is capable of inferring Template Programs across multiple visual domains:
2D layouts, Omniglot characters, and 3D shapes. We demonstrate that Template Programs natively support a number of
downstream applications, including few-shot generation and
co-segmentation. We are unaware of any other method that
is able to perform these tasks in a domain-general fashion, so
we compare against either task-specific or domain-specific
alternatives. With respect to task-specific approaches, we

Past work has explored systems capable of meeting some of
these desiderata (Lake et al., 2019a). Within methods that
1
Brown University 2 Adobe Research. Correspondence to: R.
Kenny Jones <russell jones@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

