How to Trace Latent Generative Model Generated Images without Artificial
Watermark?
Zhenting Wang 1 Vikash Sehwag 2 Chen Chen 2 Lingjuan Lyu 2 Dimitris N. Metaxas 1 Shiqing Ma 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, latent generative models (Rombach et al., 2022)
have attracted significant attention and showcased outstanding capabilities in generating a wide range of high-resolution
images with surprising quality. Many state-of-the-art image
generation models belong to latent generative models, such
as DALL-E 3 (Betker et al., 2023) from OpenAI, Parti (Yu
et al., 2022a) from Google, and Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) from Stability AI. These models allow for
achieving a near-optimal point between reducing computing
complexity and preserving visual details, greatly boosting
the efficiency in both training and generation phase. Among
them, Stable Diffusion is the most widely-used, which has
already gained more than 10 million users 1 .

Latent generative models (e.g., Stable Diffusion)
have become more and more popular, but concerns have arisen regarding potential misuse related to images generated by these models. It
is, therefore, necessary to analyze the origin of
images by inferring if a particular image was generated by a specific latent generative model. Most
existing methods (e.g., image watermark and
model fingerprinting) require extra steps during
training or generation. These requirements restrict
their usage on the generated images without such
extra operations, and the extra required operations
might compromise the quality of the generated
images. In this work, we ask whether it is possible
to effectively and efficiently trace the images generated by a specific latent generative model without the aforementioned requirements. To study
this problem, we design a latent inversion based
method called L ATENT T RACER to trace the generated images of the inspected model by checking
if the examined images can be well-reconstructed
with an inverted latent input. We leverage gradient based latent inversion and identify a encoderbased initialization critical to the success of our
approach. Our experiments on the state-of-the-art
latent generative models, such as Stable Diffusion,
show that our method can distinguish the images
generated by the inspected model and other images with a high accuracy and efficiency. Our
findings suggest the intriguing possibility that
today’s latent generative generated images are
naturally watermarked by the decoder used in
the source models. Code: https://github.
com/ZhentingWang/LatentTracer.

As latent generative models become more prevalent, the
issues surrounding their potential for misuse are becoming
increasingly important (Schramowski et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023c; Pan et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Wen et al.,
2023b; Chen et al., 2023). For example, malicious users may
use the latent generative models to generate and distribute
images containing inappropriate concepts such as “sexual”,
“drug use”, “weapons”, and “child abuse” (Schramowski
et al., 2023). AI-powered plagiarism (Francke & Bennett,
2019) and IP (intellectual property) infringement problem
surrounding the latent generative models are also important issues. For instance, users may synthesize high-quality
images using one company’s or open-sourced latent generative models and then dishonestly present them as their
own original artwork (e.g., photographs and paintings) to
gain recognition and reputation, which is harmful to society
and may cause a series of IP problems. Consequently, it’s
crucial to be able to trace the source of images generated by
latent generative models, i.e., determining if a certain image
was produced by a specific model.
There are several existing methods for tracing the source
of the images. Watermarking-based methods (Luo et al.,
2009; Pereira & Pun, 2000; Tancik et al., 2020) typically
add watermark into the images and the images from specific
origins can be identified via analyzing if the particular watermark is inserted in the images or not. Classification-based

Work partially done during Zhenting Wang’s internship at
Sony AI. 1 Rutgers University 2 Sony AI 3 University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Correspondence to: Lingjuan Lyu
<Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

https://journal.everypixel.com/ai-image-statistics

