Less is More: on the Over-Globalizing Problem in Graph Transformers

Yujie Xing 1 Xiao Wang 2 Yibo Li 1 Hai Huang 1 Chuan Shi 1

Abstract

tion networks. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Yu et al., 2023), as representative graph machine learning
methods, effectively utilize their message-passing mechanism to extract useful information and learn high-quality
representations from graph data. However, GNNs face challenges with layer stacking due to over-smoothing (Li et al.,
2018; Nt & Maehara, 2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2020) and oversquashing (Topping et al., 2021; Deac et al., 2022) problems,
which limit their receptive fields to near neighbors. In contrast, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), with their global
attention mechanism, have shown exceptional expressive
capability, which makes significant strides in various fields,
including natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018)
and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Incorporating Transformers into graph data presents an excellent
solution to these challenges since they naturally construct
a fully connected graph and adaptively learn interaction
relationships with the powerful global attention mechanism.

Graph Transformer, due to its global attention
mechanism, has emerged as a new tool in dealing
with graph-structured data. It is well recognized
that the global attention mechanism considers a
wider receptive field in a fully connected graph,
leading many to believe that useful information
can be extracted from all the nodes. In this paper, we challenge this belief: does the globalizing property always benefit Graph Transformers? We reveal the over-globalizing problem in
Graph Transformer by presenting both empirical
evidence and theoretical analysis, i.e., the current attention mechanism overly focuses on those
distant nodes, while the near nodes, which actually contain most of the useful information, are
relatively weakened. Then we propose a novel
Bi-Level Global Graph Transformer with Collaborative Training (CoBFormer), including the intercluster and intra-cluster Transformers, to prevent
the over-globalizing problem while keeping the
ability to extract valuable information from distant nodes. Moreover, the collaborative training is
proposed to improve the model’s generalization
ability with a theoretical guarantee. Extensive
experiments on various graphs well validate the
effectiveness of our proposed CoBFormer. The
source code is available for reproducibility at:
https://github.com/null-xyj/CoBFormer.

In graph-level tasks like molecular property prediction,
numerous Graph Transformers leveraging global attention have achieved remarkable success (Ying et al., 2021;
Kreuzer et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Rampášek et al., 2022).
This success is largely attributed to their global perception
capability. Inspired by the successful applications in graphlevel tasks, researchers have attempted to solve the scalability challenge posed by the O(N 2 ) complexity of the global
attention mechanism and make efforts to adapt this mechanism for node-level task, aiming at expanding the receptive
field and enhancing the model’s expressive ability (Kuang
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023a; Wu et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

Although the global attention module has been recognized
as the fundamental unit of Graph Transformer, the following
question remains largely unknown:

Graph-structured data, an essential and prevalent form in the
real world, plays a vital role in modeling object interactions,
such as social networks (Yang et al., 2017), transportation
networks (Chen et al., 2023), and protein-protein interac-

Does the globalizing property always benefit
Graph Transformers?

1

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 2 School of
Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xiao Wang <xiao wang@buaa.edu.cn>, Chuan Shi
<shichuan@bupt.edu.cn>.

Understanding the attention mechanism in Graph Transformers, particularly its globalizing property, can provide
valuable guidelines and insights for the development of advanced Graph Transformers. In this study, we reveal the
over-globalizing problem in Graph Transformers by presenting both empirical evidence and theoretical analysis.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

