Sequential Neural Score Estimation: Likelihood-Free Inference with Conditional
Score Based Diffusion Models
Louis Sharrock * 1 2 Jack Simons * 2 Song Liu 2 Mark Beaumont 2

Abstract

2010; Wood, 2010), epidemiology (Corander et al., 2017),
climate science (Holden et al., 2018), cosmology (Alsing
et al., 2018), high-energy physics (Brehmer, 2021), and
econometrics (Gourieroux et al., 1993).

We introduce Sequential Neural Posterior Score
Estimation (SNPSE), a score-based method for
Bayesian inference in simulator-based models.
Our method, inspired by the remarkable success
of score-based methods in generative modelling,
leverages conditional score-based diffusion models to generate samples from the posterior distribution of interest. The model is trained using an
objective function which directly estimates the
score of the posterior. We embed the model into a
sequential training procedure, which guides simulations using the current approximation of the
posterior at the observation of interest, thereby
reducing the simulation cost. We also introduce
several alternative sequential approaches, and discuss their relative merits. We then validate our
method, as well as its amortised, non-sequential,
variant on several numerical examples, demonstrating comparable or superior performance to
existing state-of-the-art methods such as Sequential Neural Posterior Estimation (SNPE).

In many cases, simulator-based models depend on parameters θ which cannot be identified experimentally, and must
be inferred from data x. Bayesian inference provides a principled approach for this task. In particular, given a prior p(θ)
and a likelihood p(x|θ), Bayes’ Theorem gives the posterior
distribution over the parameters as
p(θ|x) =

p(x|θ)p(θ)
p(x)

(1)

R
where p(x) = p(x|θ)p(θ)dθ is known as the evidence
or marginal likelihood. The major difficulty associated
with simulator-based models is the absence of a tractable
likelihood function p(x|θ). This precludes, in particular,
the use of conventional likelihood-based Bayesian inference methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
(Brooks et al., 2011) or variational inference (VI) (Blei et al.,
2017). The resulting inference problem is often referred to
as likelihood-free inference or simulation-based inference
(SBI) (Cranmer et al., 2020; Sisson et al., 2018).
Traditional methods for performing SBI include approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) (Beaumont et al., 2002;
Sisson et al., 2018), whose variants include rejection ABC
(Tavaré et al., 1997; Pritchard et al., 1999), MCMC ABC
(Marjoram et al., 2003), and sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
ABC (Beaumont et al., 2009; Bonassi & West, 2015). In
such methods, one repeatedly samples parameters, and only
accepts parameters for which the corresponding samples
from the simulator are similar to the observed data xobs .

1. Introduction
Many applications in science, engineering, and economics
make use of stochastic numerical simulations to model complex phenomena of interest. Such simulator-based models
are often designed by domain experts, using knowledge of
the underlying principles of the process of interest. They are
thus well suited to domains in which observations are best
understood as the result of mechanistic physical processes.
These include, amongst others, neuroscience (Sterratt et al.,
2011; Gonçalves et al., 2020), evolutionary biology (Beaumont et al., 2002; Ratmann et al., 2007), ecology (Beaumont,

More recently, a range of new SBI methods have been introduced, which leverage advances in machine learning such
as normalising flows (Papamakarios et al., 2017; 2021) and
generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
These methods often include a sequential training procedure, which adaptively guides simulations to yield more
informative data. Such methods include Sequential Neural Posterior Estimation (SNPE) (Papamakarios & Murray,
2016; Lueckmann et al., 2017; Greenberg et al., 2019), Sequential Neural Likelihood Estimation (SNLE) (Lueckmann

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, UK 2 School of Mathematics, University of Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Louis Sharrock
<l.sharrock@lancaster.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

