LoRA+: Efficient Low Rank Adaptation of Large Models

Soufiane Hayou * 1 Nikhil Ghosh * 2 Bin Yu 2

Abstract

is computationally infeasible as it requires modifying the
weights of the pretrained models using gradient methods
which is a costly process. Besides, a model that has already
learned generally useful representations during pretraining
would not require in-principle significant adaptation of all
parameters. With this intuition, researchers have proposed
a variety of resource-efficient finetuning methods which
typically freeze the pretrained weights and tune only a
small set of newly inserted parameters. Such methods
include prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021) where a “soft
prompt" is learned and appended to the input, the adapters
method (Houlsby et al., 2019) where lightweight “adapter"
layers are inserted and trained, and (IA)3 (Liu et al.,
2022) where activation vectors are modified with learned
scalings. Another resource-efficient method is known as
Low Rank Adaptation (Hu et al., 2021), or simply LoRA.
In LoRA finetuning, only a low rank matrix, called an
adapter, that is added to the pretrained weights is trainable.
The training can be done with any optimizer and in practice
a common choice is Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014). Since
the trained adapter is low-rank, this effectively reduces the
number of trainable parameters in the fine-tuning process,
significantly decreasing the training cost. On many tasks
such as instruction finetuning, LoRA has been shown
to achieve comparable or better performance compared
with full-finetuning (Wang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023),
although on complicated, long form generation tasks, it is
not always as performant. The impressive performance and
the computational savings of LoRA have contributed to it
becoming an industry standard finetuning method.

In this paper, we show that Low Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) as originally introduced in (Hu et al.,
2021) leads to suboptimal finetuning of models
with large width (embedding dimension). This
is due to the fact that adapter matrices A and
B in LoRA are updated with the same learning
rate. Using scaling arguments for large width
networks, we demonstrate that using the same
learning rate for A and B does not allow
efficient feature learning. We then show that this
suboptimality of LoRA can be corrected simply
by setting different learning rates for the LoRA
adapter matrices A and B with a well-chosen
fixed ratio. We call this proposed algorithm
LoRA+. In our extensive experiments, LoRA+
improves performance (1% − 2% improvements)
and finetuning speed (up to ∼ 2X SpeedUp), at
the same computational cost as LoRA.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art (SOTA) deep learning models all share
a common characteristic: they all have an extremely
large number of parameters (10’s if not 100’s of billions
parameters). Currently, only a few industry labs can
pretrain large language models due to their high training
cost. However, many pretrained models are accessible
either through an API (GPT4, (OpenAI, 2023)) or through
open-source platforms (Llama, (Touvron et al., 2023)).
Most practitioners are interested in using such models
for specific tasks and want to adapt these models to a
new, generally smaller task. This procedure is known as
finetuning, where one adjusts the weights of the pretrained
model to improve performance on the new task. However,
due to the size of SOTA models, adapting to down-stream
tasks with full finetuning (finetuning all model parameters)
*

Efficient use of LoRA requires a careful choice of
hyperparameters: the rank and the learning rate. While
some theoretical guidelines on the choice of the rank in
LoRA exist in the literature (see e.g. Zeng and Lee (2023)),
there are no principled guidelines on how to set the learning
rate, apart from common choices of order 1e-4.
Related Work. Dettmers et al. (2023) introduced a
quantized version of LoRA (or QLoRA), which further
reduces computation costs by quantizing pretrained
weights down to as few as four bits. Using QLoRA enables
fine-tuning Llama-65b (Touvron et al., 2023), on a single
consumer GPU while achieving competitive performance
with full-finetuning. To further improve LoRA training
with quantization, Li et al. (2023) introduced a new

1

Equal contribution
Simons Institute, UC Berkeley
Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley.
Correspondence
to: Soufiane Hayou <hayou@berkeley.edu>, Nikhil Ghosh
<nikhil_ghosh@berkeley.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

