Analyzing Dα seeding for k-means

Etienne Bamas 1 Sai Ganesh Nagarajan 2 Ola Svensson 3

Abstract

approximation. We complement these results by
some lower bounds showing that the dependency
on gα and σmax /σmin is tight. Finally, we provide an experimental validation of the effects of
the aforementioned parameters when using Dα
seeding.

One of the most popular clustering algorithms is
the celebrated Dα seeding algorithm (also know
as k-means++ when α = 2) by Arthur and
Vassilvitskii (2007), who showed that it guarantees in expectation an O(22α · log k)-approximate
solution to the (k,α)-clustering cost (where distances are raised to the power α) for any α ≥ 1.
More recently, Balcan, Dick, and White (2018)
observed experimentally that using Dα seeding
with α > 2 can lead to a better solution with respect to the standard k-means objective (i.e. the
(k, 2)-clustering cost). In this paper, we provide a
rigorous understanding of this phenomenon. For
any α > 2, we show that Dα seeding guarantees
in expectation an approximation factor of
!

2−4/α
σmax
2/α
Oα
· (gα · min{ℓ, log k})
σmin

1. Introduction
Clustering is a quintessential machine learning problem
with numerous practical applications in medicine (Alashwal et al., 2019), image segmentation (Shi & Malik, 2000;
Burney & Tariq, 2014), market analysis (Chiu et al., 2009)
and anomaly detection (Münz et al., 2007), to name a few.
One of the most popular formulations is the k-means problem that requires us to pick k centers such that the sum
of the squared distance from each data point to its closest
center is minimized. The k-means problem is NP-hard even
in 2 dimensions (Mahajan et al., 2009) and most research
is therefore focused on heuristics and approximation algorithms. For a long time, a heavily used heuristic for this
problem has been the Lloyd’s algorithm, with Expectation
Maximization (EM) style updates for the centers after an
initial set of k centers are chosen uniformly at random from
the data. While this method finds a local optimum, it is
known not to have any approximation guarantees and it
could have an exponential run time in the worst case (Arthur
& Vassilvitskii, 2006).

with respect to the standard k-means cost of any
underlying clustering; where gα is a parameter
capturing the concentration of the points in each
cluster, σmax and σmin are the maximum and minimum standard deviation of the clusters around
their center, and ℓ is the number of distinct mixing weights in the underlying clustering (after
rounding them to the nearest power of 2). For
instance, if the underlying clustering is defined by
a mixture of k Gaussian distributions with equal
cluster variance (up to a constant-factor), then
our result implies that: (1) if there are a constant number of mixing weights, any constant
α > 2 yields a constant-factor approximation; (2)
if the mixing weightsare arbitrary,
 any constant
2/α
α > 2 yields an O log
k -approximation,

The k-means++ method. (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007)
came up with the elegant k-means++ method that carefully selects the initial centers (also called D2 seeding) such
that the next center is a data point that is chosen with probability that is proportional to its squared distance to its closest
center, selected thus far (see (Ostrovsky et al., 2013) for a
concurrent work on a similar algorithm as well). This intuitively makes sense as this initialization is more likely to
discover new clusters (that are far away) than simply selecting centers uniformly at random. Indeed, they proved that
the initial choice of centers already forms a O(log k) approximation (in expectation) for this problem. They complemented this upper bound with a family of instances where
the expected cost of the D2 seeding is a factor Ω(log k)
times the optimum cost, showing that their analysis is tight.

and α = Θ(log log k) yields an O(log log k)3 1
2
ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland.
Zuse Institute Berlin 3 EPFL. Correspondence to: Etienne Bamas <etienne.bamas@inf.ethz.ch>, Sai Ganesh Nagarajan <nagarajan@zib.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

