Not Just Pretty Pictures:
Toward Interventional Data Augmentation Using Text-to-Image Generators

Jianhao Yuan * 1 Francesco Pinto * 1 Adam Davies * 2 Philip Torr 1

Abstract

Wang et al., 2022a; Sakaridis et al., 2020). Since these
changes only affect the inputs (i.e., the covariates) in some
features without altering the labels, this form of distribution
shift is also known as covariate shift (Quionero-Candela
et al., 2009). In the absence of more sophisticated techniques to simulate the possibility of sampling data coming
from different environmental conditions, the employment
of complex augmentation pipelines integrating image transformation primitives has been one of the most effective
techniques for this purpose.

Neural image classifiers are known to undergo
severe performance degradation when exposed to
inputs that are sampled from environmental conditions that differ from their training data. Given the
recent progress in Text-to-Image (T2I) generation,
a natural question is how modern T2I generators
can be used to simulate arbitrary interventions
over such environmental factors in order to augment training data and improve the robustness
of downstream classifiers. We experiment across
a diverse collection of benchmarks in single domain generalization (SDG) and reducing reliance
on spurious features (RRSF), ablating across key
dimensions of T2I generation including interventional prompting strategies, conditioning mechanisms, and post-hoc filtering. Our extensive empirical findings demonstrate that modern T2I generators like Stable Diffusion can indeed be used
as a powerful interventional data augmentation
mechanism, outperforming previously state-ofthe-art data augmentation techniques regardless
of how each dimension is configured.1

Many types of augmentation primitives can be thought as
reproducing (often approximately) a controlled and targeted
manipulation of the domain-specific environmental conditions in which the image was captured (e.g., illumination
or weather conditions) without affecting the label-related
features. As such, augmentations may be understood as an
automated, low-cost way of simulating interventions over
the environmental factors that are likely to change across
domains, turning observational data (i.e., with no intentional manipulation of the environment) into approximated
interventional data (Ilse et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022b).
Motivated by this principle, several works have theoretically conjectured the utility of an augmentation mechanism
capable of simulating arbitrary interventions (Ilse et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2022c; Wang & Veitch, 2022; Gowda
et al., 2021). However, since it is not possible to target arbitrary interventions in the context of traditional augmentation
pipelines (e.g., it is not possible to hard-code a pixel-space
intervention to transform images of paintings into realistic
photos), prior work has instead focused on leveraging prior
knowledge about specific invariances expected to hold in
the target domains (Hong et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Ilse
et al., 2021) or targeting specific downstream applications
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Gowda et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The success of deep image classifiers is largely built on
the assumption that the train and test data come from the
same domain – i.e., that they are independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) – but in real-world applications, small
changes in the environmental conditions under which the
image is captured can break this assumption, significantly
degrading their performance (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020;

Recently, powerful Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models
like Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021) have emerged
that can be used to synthesize new images (or edit existing
ones) using text prompts describing the desired output image (see Figure 1). In this work, our goal is to study how
well such models can serve as general-purpose interventional data augmentation (IDA) mechanisms by simulating
arbitrary interventions, either by editing existing images

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Oxford 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Jianhao Yuan,
Francesco Pinto, Adam Davies <yuanjianhao2019@gmail.com;
francesco1.pinto@gmail.com; adavies4@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
code
available
at:
https://github.com/
YuanJianhao508/NotJustPrettyPictures

1

