MaxMin-RLHF: Alignment with Diverse Human Preferences

Souradip Chakraborty * 1 Jiahao Qiu * 2 Hui Yuan 2 Alec Koppel 3 Dinesh Manocha 1 Furong Huang 1
Amrit Singh Bedi 4 Mengdi Wang 2

Abstract

emerged as a pivotal approach to alignment problems, specifically aligning LLM (Wang et al., 2023; Ouyang et al.,
2022b; Stiennon et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022a). RLHF
operates in three steps (a) supervised fine-tuning, (2) reward
learning, and (3) RL fine-tuning. Step 2 learns a reward
function that is expected to represent the preference feedback of the human population. However, there has been
minimal emphasis on accurately representing the diversity
of human preferences and the broad spectrum of user populations. As highlighted by Aroyo & Welty (2015); Aroyo
et al. (2023a;b), “the notion of ‘one truth’ in crowdsourcing responses is a myth” and we need to account for the
diversity in opinions and preferences.

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) aligns language models to human preferences by employing a singular reward model
derived from preference data. However, the single reward model overlooks the rich diversity of
human preferences inherent in data collected from
multiple users. In this work, we first derive an
impossibility result of alignment with single reward RLHF, thereby highlighting its insufficiency
in representing diverse human preferences. Next,
we propose to learn a mixture of reward models via an expectation-maximization algorithm
and solve a MaxMin alignment objective inspired
by the Egalitarian principle in social choice theory to better honor diverse human preferences.
We present comprehensive experimental results
on small-scale (GPT-2) and large-scale language
(with Tulu2-7B)) and show the efficacy of the
proposed approach in the presence of diversity
among human preferences. We remark that our
findings in this work are not only limited to language models but also extend to reinforcement
learning in general.

Despite the criticality, most of the latest RLHF approaches
ignore the consideration of the diversity in human preference feedback by aligning the language model with a single
reward (Wang et al., 2023; Christian, 2020; Stiennon et al.,
2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022a). The assumption of a single
ground truth reward is restrictive and can potentially subdue
the preferences or opinions of minority groups, leading to
societal biases (Figure 1). To mitigate this issue, some of the
recent research proposes to learn multiple reward functions,
which can then be aggregated in arbitrary manners (Bakker
et al., 2022). On the other hand, (Ovadya, 2023) adopts
a consensus-based method for aggregating human representations by emphasizing specific principles (Bai et al.,
2022b; Kovač et al., 2023), which might result in the underrepresentation of marginalized groups (Ramé et al., 2023).
Another line of research focuses on the aspect of designing
multi-policy strategies by fine-tuning personalized language
models towards individual rewards (Jang et al., 2023; Ramé
et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023a).

1. Introduction
The alignment problem, central to developing and finetuning current large language models (LLMs), represents
a crucial challenge in artificial intelligence, especially in
ensuring these models operate in harmony with human values and preferences (Wang et al., 2023; Christian, 2020).
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has

As mentioned above, the recent literature has brought attention to the challenge of aligning single utility RLHF with
diverse preferences. However, a thorough understanding of
how the diversity within human sub-populations influences
the overall alignment objective remains elusive. Consequently, this prompts us to pose the following question: Is a
single reward RLHF pipeline sufficient to align with diverse
human preferences?

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, NJ, USA.
3
JP Morgan Chase AI Research, New York, USA. 4 Department of
Computer Science,, University of Central Florida, FL, USA.. Correspondence to: Souradip Chakraborty <schakra3@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we present negative results for the above ques-

1

