EVEREST: Efficient Masked Video Autoencoder by
Removing Redundant Spatiotemporal Tokens

Sunil Hwang * 1 Jaehong Yoon * 2 Youngwan Lee * 3 4 Sung Ju Hwang 3 5

Abstract

However, direct utilization of user-generated video data
to solve target task problems is nontrivial, as annotating
them is time-consuming and expensive. One potential approach to tackle this problem is to learn generic representations from unlabeled video streams that can transfer to diverse downstream visual tasks. Video Representation Learning (VRL) (Fernando et al., 2017; Piergiovanni et al., 2020;
Qian et al., 2021; Pan et al., 2021) methods allow learning
spatial and temporal features from input video frames in
a self-supervised manner without any human annotations.
A caveat to such pre-training for video tasks is that, unlike image-based tasks with static information of objects
in instances, video-based tasks involve temporal causality;
that is, successive frames are strongly correlated in their
semantics.

Masked Video Autoencoder (MVA) approaches
have demonstrated their potential by significantly outperforming previous video representation learning methods. However, they waste an
excessive amount of computations and memory
in predicting uninformative tokens/frames due to
random masking strategies. (e.g., over 16 nodes
with 128 NVIDIA A100 GPUs (Feichtenhofer
et al., 2022)). To resolve this issue, we exploit the
unequal information density among the patches
in videos and propose EVEREST, a surprisingly
efficient MVA approach for video representation
learning that finds tokens containing rich motion
features and discards uninformative ones during
both pre-training and fine-tuning. We further
present an information-intensive frame selection
strategy that allows the model to focus on informative and causal frames with minimal redundancy.
Our method significantly reduces the computation and memory requirements of MVA, enabling
the pre-training and fine-tuning on a single machine with 8 GPUs while achieving comparable
performance to computation- and memory-heavy
baselines on multiple benchmarks and the uncurated Ego4D dataset. We hope that our work contributes to reducing the barrier to further research
on video understanding.

Recently, Masked Video Autoencoder (MVA) (Tong et al.,
2022; Feichtenhofer et al., 2022), which learns to reconstruct randomly masked spatiotemporal regions in video
clips, has shown impressive performance on various videobased problems. Yet, critical challenges remain in efficiently exploiting the spatiotemporal information in realworld videos: (1) Tokens (a pair of two temporally successive patches in the same space) in videos are not equally
valuable to reconstruct, as the amount of their information
depends not only on spatial importance but also on temporal redundancy. (2) Learning representations from videos
is infeasible without a huge computing budget. MVA approaches (Feichtenhofer et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b;c)
that reconstruct the whole video require excessively large
amounts of computations, making it impractical without
access to a substantial GPU cluster. For example, VideoMAE (Tong et al., 2022) takes about 27 hours to pre-train
for 800 epochs with ViT-B using 64 NVIDIA V100 (32GB)
GPUs, and ST-MAE (Feichtenhofer et al., 2022) takes about
35.8 hours to pre-train for 800 epochs with ViT-L using 128
NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs.

1. Introduction
Massive video data floods the web and media daily with
the rapid growth of portable devices equipped with cameras, such as AR glasses, smartphones, UAVs, and robots.
*
Equal contribution 1 Korea Military Academy 2 UNC Chapel
Hill 3 KAIST 4 ETRI 5 DeepAuto. Correspondence to: Sunil
Hwang <sunil.hwang93@kma.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

To overcome such limited feasibility of video representation learning, we propose an Efficient Masked Video
AutoEncoder which removes REdundant Spatiotemporal
Tokens (EVEREST), that is a highly efficient training algorithm with token selection to alleviate the extremely
high resource requirements for VRL. Unlike previous meth-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

