AlphaZero-Like Tree-Search can Guide
Large Language Model Decoding and Training

Muning Wen

1

Ziyu Wan * 1 Xidong Feng * 2
Stephen Marcus McAleer 3 Ying Wen 1 Weinan Zhang 1 Jun Wang 2

Abstract

range of natural language tasks. A plethora of recent studies
have concentrated on improving LLMs task-solving capability, including curation of larger and higher-quality general
or domain-specific data (Touvron et al., 2023a; Zhou et al.,
2023; Gunasekar et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023; Taylor et al.,
2022), more sophisticated prompt design (Wei et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2022), or better training algorithms with Supervised Learning or Reinforcement
Learning (RL) (Dong et al., 2023; Gulcehre et al., 2023;
Rafailov et al., 2023). When training LLMs with RL, LLMs’
generation can be naturally formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and optimized with specific objectives.
Following this formulation, ChatGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022)
emerges as a notable success, optimizing LLMs to align
human preference by leveraging Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017).

Recent works like Tree-of-Thought (ToT) and
Reasoning via Planning (RAP) aim to augment
the multi-step reasoning capabilities of LLMs by
using tree-search algorithms. These methods rely
on prompting a pre-trained model to serve as a
value function and focus on problems with low
search depth. As a result, these methods cannot
benefit from in-domain training and only rely on
pretraining process — they will not work in domains where the pre-trained LLM does not have
enough knowledge to serve as an effective value
function or in domains that require long-horizon
planning. To address these limitations, we present
an AlphaZero-like tree-search learning framework
for LLMs (termed TS-LLM), systematically illustrating how tree-search with a learned value
function can guide LLM decoding. TS-LLM distinguishes itself in two key ways. (1) Leveraging
a learned value function and AlphaZero-like algorithms, our approach can be generally adaptable to a wide range of tasks, language models
of any size, and tasks of varying search depths.
(2) Our approach can guide LLMs during both
inference and training, iteratively improving the
LLMs. Empirical results across reasoning, planning, alignment, and decision-making tasks show
that TS-LLM outperforms existing approaches
and can handle trees with a depth of 64.

LLMs can be further guided with planning algorithms such
as tree search. Preliminary work in this field includes
Tree-of-Thought (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023; Long, 2023) with
depth/breadth-first search and Reasoning-via-Planing (RAP)
(Hao et al., 2023) with MCTS. They successfully demonstrated a performance boost of searching on trees expanded
by LLM through self-evaluation. Despite these advances,
current methods come with distinct limitations. First, the
value functions in the tree-search algorithms are obtained
by prompting LLMs. As a result, such algorithms lack general applicability and heavily rely on both well-designed
prompts and the robust capabilities of advanced LLMs. Beyond the model requirements, we will also show in Sec.
4.2.1 that such prompt-based self-evaluation is not always
reliable. Second, ToT and RAP use BFS/DFS and MCTS
for tree search, restricting their capabilities to relatively simple and shallow tasks. They are capped at a maximum depth
of only 10 or 7, which is significantly less than the depth
achieved by AlphaZero in chess or Go (Silver et al., 2017).
As a result, ToT and RAP might struggle with complex problems that demand large analytical depths and longer-term
planning horizons, decreasing their scalability.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023a) have demonstrated their potential in a wide
*
Equal contribution, order determined by flipping a coin.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University College London
3
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Ying Wen
<ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn>, Jun Wang <jun.wang@ucl.ac.uk>.

1

To address these problems, we introduce tree-search enhanced LLM (TS-LLM), an AlphaZero-like framework that
utilizes tree-search to improve LLMs’ performance on gen-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

