Realistic Unsupervised CLIP Fine-tuning with Universal Entropy Optimization

Jian Liang 1 2 Lijun Sheng 1 3 Zhengbo Wang 1 3 Ran He 1 2 Tieniu Tan 1 2 4

Abstract

increasing attention from the research community. As an
example, Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)
(Radford et al., 2021) leverages a contrastive objective to
obtain a modality-agnostic embedding space in which the
paired images and texts are pulled closer and unpaired images and texts are pushed apart. Then zero-shot classification is performed by matching the embeddings of test images
and prompt-based textual descriptions (e.g., “a photo of a
[CLASS]” and “a picture of a [CLASS]”), merely requiring
the names of all the semantic classes in downstream tasks.

The emergence of vision-language models, such
as CLIP, has spurred a significant research effort towards their application for downstream supervised learning tasks. Although some previous studies have explored the unsupervised finetuning of CLIP, they often rely on prior knowledge in the form of class names associated with
ground truth labels. This paper explores a realistic unsupervised fine-tuning scenario, considering
the presence of out-of-distribution samples from
unknown classes within the unlabeled data. In
particular, we focus on simultaneously enhancing
out-of-distribution detection and the recognition
of instances associated with known classes.

Apart from the extensive research dedicated to the pretraining stage, numerous studies (Zhou et al., 2022b; Zhang
et al., 2022b; Bahng et al., 2022) have concentrated on
adapting VLMs to specific downstream tasks by using taskspecific labeled data. This fine-tuning paradigm empowers
VLMs to bridge both data and task gaps, leading to improved
performance in recognition tasks. In addition to multi-class
classification, these pioneering strategies have also been
harnessed in a spectrum of computer vision tasks, including
ordinal regression (Li et al., 2022b), point cloud understanding (Zhang et al., 2022a), and dense prediction (Rao
et al., 2022). When considering fine-tuning setups, most
efforts have primarily revolved around fully supervised and
few-shot supervised learning scenarios. To pursue annotation efficiency and scalability, several recent studies (Huang
et al., 2022; Shu et al., 2022; Tanwisuth et al., 2023) have
delved into the realm of unsupervised fine-tuning, remarkably achieving performance on par with few-shot supervised
approaches. However, they still demand a priori knowledge
of class names associated with ground truth labels, limiting
their applicability in diverse real-world scenarios.

To tackle this problem, we present a simple, efficient, and effective approach called Universal
Entropy Optimization (UEO). UEO leverages
sample-level confidence to approximately minimize the conditional entropy of confident instances and maximize the marginal entropy of
less confident instances. Apart from optimizing
the textual prompt, UEO incorporates optimization of channel-wise affine transformations within
the visual branch of CLIP. Extensive experiments
across 15 domains and 4 different types of prior
knowledge validate the effectiveness of UEO compared to baseline methods. The code is at https:
//github.com/tim-learn/UEO.

1. Introduction

To circumvent the limitation, this paper explores a novel finetuning setup, termed Unsupervised Universal Fine-Tuning
(U2 -FT) with CLIP, wherein the predefined list of class
names may partially overlap with the ground truth label
space of unlabeled training data. To illustrate, as depicted
in Fig. 1, consider an unlabeled data set [C2] comprising
samples from three classes (i.e., ‘dog’, ‘cat’, and ‘panda’).
However, the provided predefined list of class names might
be imprecise, containing four classes (i.e., ‘fox’, ‘dog’,
‘cat’, ‘pig’). Generally, U2 -FT requires the fine-tuned model
to demonstrate superior performance to the original CLIP
in two aspects, namely, recognizing samples from classes
within the predefined list (‘dog’ and ‘cat’), as well as identi-

Vision-language models (VLMs) (Radford et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022a; Jia et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022c) pre-trained
on web-scale image-text pairs have exhibited robust zeroshot prediction capabilities, which have recently attracted
1

NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 University of Science and Technology of China 4 Nanjing University. Correspondence to: Jian Liang
<liangjian92@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

