Understanding the Impact of Introducing Constraints at Inference Time
on Generalization Error
Masaaki Nishino 1 Kengo Nakamura 1 Norihito Yasuda 1

Abstract

tant tasks. As a result, machine learning is being used in
a wide range of practical systems. However, models with
merely low prediction errors might not be adequate for some
situations since the errors that occur with a low probability
potentially yield severe results. For example, we must avoid
hazardous actions in safety-critical situations (Zhu et al.,
2019; Leino et al., 2022). It is also important to avoid harmful generations of generative models (Gehman et al., 2020;
Sheng et al., 2021). Since modern ML models are complex black-box systems with huge numbers of parameters,
it is unrealistic to expect that we can extensively examine a
model to guarantee the removal of such severe mistakes.

Since machine learning technologies are being
used in various practical situations, models with
merely low prediction errors might not be satisfactory; prediction errors occurring with a low probability might yield dangerous results in some applications. Therefore, there are attempts to achieve
an ML model whose input-output pairs are guaranteed to satisfy given constraints. Among such attempts, many previous works chose the approach
of modifying the outputs of an ML model at the
inference time to satisfy the constraints. Such
a strategy is handy because we can control its
output without expensive training or fine-tuning.
However, it is unclear whether using constraints
only in the inference time degrades a model’s predictive performance. This paper analyses how
the generalization error bounds change when we
only put constraints in the inference time. Our
main finding is that a class of loss functions preserves the relative generalization error, i.e., the
difference in generalization error compared with
the best model will not increase by imposing constraints at the inference time on multi-class classification. Some popular loss functions preserve the
relative error, including the softmax cross-entropy
loss. On the other hand, we also show that some
loss functions do not preserve relative error when
we use constraints. Our results suggest the importance of choosing a suitable loss function when
we only use constraints in the inference time.

A simple but effective approach to avoid such errors is to
make ML models that satisfy the given constraints. If we
can guarantee that the outputs of ML models satisfy the
given hard constraints, we can use them without excessive
anxiety about the severe errors caused by violating them.
Research is attempting to control a model’s outputs by additional constraints (Mustafa et al., 2021; Ahmed et al.,
2022; Leino et al., 2022; Hoernle et al., 2022; Qin et al.,
2022). Many of these attempts use constraints only in the
inference time, i.e., training models without constraints and
using them for predictions with the trained models. Using constraints only in the inference time is more practical
than using them in training and inference since users can
flexibly change the constraints to control a model’s output
without re-training or fine-tuning. However, such ad-hoc
use constraints might degrade performance.
Nishino et al. (2022) analyzed how the generalization error
changes by adding constraints on the possible outputs of
an ML model. They categorized the situations where constraints are used into two cases depending on whether they
are accessed in the training time and named the situation
where we can just access constraints only in the inference
time as the inference time verification (ITV) setting. Nishino
et al. (2022) showed that the model’s generalization error,
whose outputs are modified to satisfy constraints, can be
bounded in ITV if the learning problem is PAC-learnable.
However, how the generalization error is changed by adding
constraints remains unknown for general cases.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in machine learning (ML) enables models
to achieve low prediction errors in many practically impor1

NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence to: Masaaki Nishino
<masaaki.nishino@ntt.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This paper describes how generalization error changes in
ITV settings, including non-PAC-learnable cases. Our key
1

