In-Context Reinforcement Learning for Variable Action Spaces

Viacheslav Sinii 1 2 Alexander Nikulin 3 4 * Vladislav Kurenkov 3 * Ilya Zisman 3 * Sergey Kolesnikov 1

Abstract
Recently, it has been shown that transformers pretrained on diverse datasets with multi-episode contexts can generalize to new reinforcement learning
tasks in-context. A key limitation of previously
proposed models is their reliance on a predefined
action space size and structure. The introduction of a new action space often requires data
re-collection and model re-training, which can
be costly for some applications. In our work,
we show that it is possible to mitigate this issue by proposing the Headless-AD model that,
despite being trained only once, is capable of
generalizing to discrete action spaces of variable size, semantic content and order. By experimenting with Bernoulli and contextual bandits, as well as a gridworld environment, we show
that Headless-AD exhibits significant capability
to generalize to action spaces it has never encountered, even outperforming specialized models trained for a specific set of actions on several environment configurations. Implementation is available at: https://github.com/
corl-team/headless-ad.

Figure 1. Variable Action Spaces: We consider four types of
novel action spaces different from the one used during training.
Permuted Train Actions maintains the action set contents but reorders its elements. Test Actions introduces a completely new
action set with an increased size. It is important to consider that
some models may be architecturally limited to a fixed action set
size. To evaluate the performance of such models on unseen actions, we adjust the size of a new set to be compatible with the
model output. Therefore, we slice the first actions from the Test
Actions set. Lastly, a new action space might include both the seen
Train and unseen Test actions, depicted as the All Actions set.

have successfully employed transformer ICL abilities in
sequential decision-making. These models are capable of
predicting the next action based on a query state and history of environment interactions, which inform them about
task objectives and environment dynamics. While effective
at generalizing across various reward distributions (Laskin
et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023) and transition functions (Raparthy et al., 2023), their adaptability to new action spaces
remains unexplored and limited by architectural constraints.

1. Introduction
The transformer architecture, first introduced by Vaswani
et al. (2017), has been widely adopted in key areas of
machine learning, including natural language processing
(Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018), computer vision
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and sequential decision-making
(Chen et al., 2021). One major feature of transformers is
in-context learning (ICL), which makes it possible for them
to adapt to new tasks after extensive pre-training (Brown
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023). Recent developments, such
as Algorithm Distillation (AD) by Laskin et al. (2022) and
Decision Pretrained Transformer (DPT) by Lee et al. (2023),

Creating models that can adapt to new action spaces is essential for building the foundation of decision-making systems
in order to enable large-scale pretraining across various environments and address real-world problems (Jain et al.,
2020; Chandak et al., 2020; London & Joachims, 2020; Jain
et al., 2021). With this in mind, our research focuses on
variable discrete action spaces, with the notion of variability illustrated in the Figure 1. In our study, we reveal the
limitations of the Algorithm Distillation model from prior
work, such as its diminished performance upon changes in
action semantics as well as architectural constraints when
handling varying action space sizes (see Figure 3).

*

Work done while at Tinkoff 1 Tinkoff, Moscow, Russia
Innopolis University 3 AIRI, Moscow, Russia 4 MIPT. Correspondence to: Viacheslav Sinii <v.siniy@tinkoff.ai>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

