How Universal Polynomial Bases Enhance Spectral Graph Neural Networks:
Heterophily, Over-smoothing, and Over-squashing

Keke Huang 1 Yu Guang Wang 2 3 4 Ming Li 5 6 Pietro Liò 7

1. Introduction

Abstract
Spectral Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), alternatively known as graph filters, have gained increasing prevalence for heterophily graphs. Optimal
graph filters rely on Laplacian eigendecomposition for Fourier transform. In an attempt to avert
prohibitive computations, numerous polynomial
filters have been proposed. However, polynomials in the majority of these filters are predefined
and remain fixed across different graphs, failing to
accommodate the varying degrees of heterophily.
Addressing this gap, we demystify the intrinsic
correlation between the spectral property of desired polynomial bases and the heterophily degrees via thorough theoretical analyses. Subsequently, we develop a novel adaptive heterophily
basis wherein the basis vectors mutually form angles reflecting the heterophily degree of the graph.
We integrate this heterophily basis with the homophily basis to construct a universal polynomial
basis UniBasis, which devises a polynomial filterbased graph neural network – UniFilter. It optimizes the convolution and propagation in GNN,
thus effectively limiting over-smoothing and alleviating over-squashing. Our extensive experiments, conducted on datasets with a diverse range
of heterophily, support the superiority of UniBasis in the universality but also its proficiency in
graph explanation.

Spectral Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2017), also referred to as graph filters, have been extensively investigated in recent years due to their superior performance in handling heterophily graphs (Bo et al., 2023b).
Optimal graph filters conduct Laplacian eigendecomposition for Fourier transform. To bypass computation complexity, existing graph filters leverage various polynomials to
approximate the desired filters for graphs with varying heterophily degrees. For example, ChebNet (Defferrard et al.,
2016) employs truncated Chebyshev polynomials (Mason
& Handscomb, 2002; Hammond et al., 2011) and accomplishes localized spectral filtering. BernNet (He et al., 2021)
utilizes Bernstein polynomials (Farouki, 2012) to acquire
better controllability and interpretability. Later, Wang &
Zhang (2022) propose JacobiConv by exploiting Jacobi
polynomial bases (Askey, 1974) with improved generality.
However, existing polynomial filters overlook the diverse
heterophily degrees of underlying graphs when implementing polynomial bases. This oversight of the graph homophily characteristic in the development of polynomial
bases leads to suboptimal performance on real-world graphs,
as demonstrated in our experiments (Sections 6.1 and 6.3).
Meanwhile, Theorem 3.1 proves that frequencies of signals
filtered by optimal graph filters are proportional to the heterophily degrees. Therefore, ideal polynomial bases are
obligated to provide adaptability to the wide range of heterophily degrees. Consequently, a natural question arises:
how can we devise a universal polynomial basis that
encapsulates the diverse graph heterophily degrees?

1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Institute of Natural Sciences, School of Mathematical
Sciences, Zhangjiang Institute for Advanced Study, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
Shanghai, China 4 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia 5 Zhejiang Institute
of Optoelectronics, Jinhua, China 6 Zhejiang Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Education Technology and Application, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China 7 Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Keke Huang <kkhuang@nus.edu.sg>, Ming Li
<mingli@zjnu.edu.cn>.

To address the issue, we initially determine the relationship
between the degree of heterophily and the frequency of optimally filtered signals (Theorem 3.1). Following this, we
investigate how the distribution of polynomial bases within
the Euclidean space affects the basis spectrum on regular
graphs, as outlined in Theorem 4.2. These pivotal insights
pave the way for creating an innovative adaptive heterophily
basis, specifically designed to match the heterophily degrees
in graphs. Ultimately, we combine the heterophily and homophily bases to establish a comprehensive universal basis,
termed UniBasis. Utilizing UniBasis, we develop a graph
neural network using a general polynomial filter, named

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

