Conformalized Adaptive Forecasting of Heterogeneous Trajectories

Yanfei Zhou 1 Lars Lindemann 2 Matteo Sesia 1

Abstract

convert any model’s point predictions into intervals (or sets)
with guaranteed coverage properties for future observations.

This paper presents a new conformal method for
generating simultaneous forecasting bands guaranteed to cover the entire path of a new random trajectory with sufficiently high probability.
Prompted by the need for dependable uncertainty
estimates in motion planning applications where
the behavior of diverse objects may be more or
less unpredictable, we blend different techniques
from online conformal prediction of single and
multiple time series, as well as ideas for addressing heteroscedasticity in regression. This solution
is both principled, providing precise finite-sample
guarantees, and effective, often leading to more
informative predictions than prior methods.

Conformal prediction typically hinges on exchangeability—
an assumption less stringent than the requirement for calibration and test data to be independent and identically distributed. Under data exchangeability, conformal prediction
can provide reliable statistical safeguards for any predictive model. Its flexibility enables applications across many
tasks, including regression (Lei & Wasserman, 2014; Romano et al., 2019; Sesia & Romano, 2021), classification
(Lei et al., 2013; Sadinle et al., 2019; Podkopaev & Ramdas,
2021), outlier detection (Bates et al., 2023; Marandon et al.,
2024; Liang et al., 2024), and time series forecasting (Xu
& Xie, 2021; Stankeviciute et al., 2021; Xu & Xie, 2023b;
Ajroldi et al., 2023). This paper focuses on the last topic.
Conformal methods for time series tend to fall into one of
two categories: multi-series and single-series. Methods in
the former category aim to predict a new trajectory by leveraging other jointly exchangeable trajectories from the same
population (Stankeviciute et al., 2021; Lindemann et al.,
2023; Lekeufack et al., 2023). In the single-series setting,
the aim shifts to forecasting future values based on historical
observations from a fixed series, typically avoiding strict
exchangeability assumptions (Gibbs & Candès, 2021; 2022;
Angelopoulos et al., 2024). This paper draws inspiration
from both areas and addresses a remaining limitation of
current methods for multi-series forecasting.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is a crucial problem with numerous
applications in science and engineering. Many machine
learning algorithms, including deep neural networks, have
been developed to address this task, but they are typically
designed to produce point predictions and struggle to quantify uncertainty. This limitation is especially problematic
in domains involving intrinsic unpredictability, such as human behavior, and in high-stakes situations like autonomous
driving (Lindemann et al., 2023; Lekeufack et al., 2023) or
wildfire forecasting (Xu et al., 2022; 2023a).

The challenge addressed in this paper is that of data
heterogeneity—distinct time series with different levels of
unpredictability. For instance, in motion planning, forecasting the paths of pedestrians may be complicated by
the relatively erratic behavior of some individuals, such as
small children or intoxicated adults. This variability aligns
with the classical issue of heteroscedasticity. The latter has
recently gained some recognition within the conformal prediction literature, particularly for regression (Romano et al.,
2019) and classification (Romano et al., 2020b; Einbinder
et al., 2022). In this paper, we address heteroscedasticity
within the more complex setting of trajectory forecasting.

A popular framework for endowing any model with reliable
uncertainty estimates is that of conformal prediction (Vovk
et al., 2005; Lei et al., 2018a). The idea is to observe and
quantify the model’s predictive performance on a calibration data set, independent of the training sample. If those
data are sampled from the test population, the calibration
performance is representative of the performance at test
time. Thus, it becomes possible, with suitable algorithms, to
1

Department of Data Sciences and Operations, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Matteo Sesia
<sesia@marshall.usc.edu>.

Related Work

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The challenge of conformal inference for non-exchangeable
data is receiving significant attention, both from more gen1

