The Balanced-Pairwise-Affinities Feature Transform
Daniel Shalam 1 Simon Korman 1

Abstract

In set-input problems, such as few-shot classification, an
instance of the task is in the form of a set of n items (e.g.
images) {xi }ni=1 . A generic neural-network pipeline (Fig. 1
Left) typically uses a feature embedding (extractor) F , that
is applied independently to each input item, to obtain a set
of features V ={vi }ni=1 ={F (xi )}ni=1 , prior to downstream
task-specific processing G (e.g. a clustering head or classifier). The features V can be of high quality (concise, unique,
descriptive), but are limited in representation since they are
extracted based on knowledge acquired for similar examples
at train time, with no context of the test time instance they
are part of, which is critical in set-input tasks.

The Balanced-Pairwise-Affinities (BPA) feature
transform is designed to upgrade the features of a
set of input items to facilitate downstream matching or grouping related tasks. The transformed
set encodes a rich representation of high order
relations between the input features. A particular min-cost-max-flow fractional matching problem, whose entropy regularized version can be
approximated by an optimal transport (OT) optimization, leads to a transform which is efficient, differentiable, equivariant, parameterless
and probabilistically interpretable. While the
Sinkhorn OT solver has been adapted extensively
in many contexts, we use it differently by minimizing the cost between a set of features to itself and using the transport plan’s rows as the
new representation. Empirically, the transform is
highly effective and flexible in its use and consistently improves networks it is inserted into,
in a variety of tasks and training schemes. We
demonstrate state-of-the-art results in few-shot
classification, unsupervised image clustering and
person re-identification. Code is available at
github.com/DanielShalam/BPA .

We rather consider the more general framework (Fig. 1
Right), in which the per-item independently extracted feature collection V is passed to an attention-mechanism type
computation, in which some transform jointly processes the
entire set of instance features, re-embedding each feature in
light of the joint statistics of the entire instance.
The main idea of BPA is very intuitive and is demonstrated
on a toy example in Fig. 2. The embedding of each feature
will encode the distribution of its affinities to the rest of the
set items. Specifically, items in the embedded space will be
close if and only if they share a similar such distribution, i.e.
’agree’ on the way they ’see’ the entire set. In fact, the transform largely discards the item-specific feature information,
resulting in a purely relative normalized representation that
results in a highly efficient embedding with many attractive
properties.

1. Introduction
In this work, we reassess the functionality of features in setinput problems, in which a task is defined over a set of items.
Prominent examples of this setting are few-shot classification (Ravi & Larochelle, 2017), clustering (Van Gansbeke
et al., 2020), feature matching (Korman & Avidan, 2015)
and person re-identification (Ye et al., 2021), to name but a
few. In such tasks, features computed at test time are mainly
compared relative to one another, and less so to the features
seen at training time. For such tasks, the practice of learning
a generic feature extractor during training and applying it at
test time is sub-optimal.

The proposed transformation can be computed very efficiently, with negligible runtime within the hosting network,
and can be easily used in different contexts, as can be seen
in the pseudo-code snippets we provide in Sections A and
C of the Appendix. The embedding itself is given by rows
of an optimal-transport (OT) plan matrix, which is the solution to a regularized min-cost-max-flow fractional matching
problem that is defined over the pairwise (self)-affinities
matrix of the features in the set.
Technically, it involves the computation of pairwise distances and several normalization iterations of a Sinkhorn
(Cuturi, 2013) algorithm, baring apparent similarities to
many related methods based on either Spectral Clustering
(Ng et al., 2001) that normalize the same affinity matrix),
attention-mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017) that learn fea-

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to: Daniel Shalam <dani360@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

