ALERT-Transformer: Bridging Asynchronous and Synchronous Machine
Learning for Real-Time Event-based Spatio-Temporal Data

Carmen Martin-Turrero * 1 2 Maxence Bouvier * 1 Manuel Breitenstein 1 Pietro Zanuttigh 2 Vincent Parret 1

Abstract

(Gehrig et al., 2019). The latter relies on SNNs, which
are hard to train and usually exhibit lower accuracy than
an equivalent dense neural network. Furthermore, while
the neuromorphic community has argued in favor of their
higher energy efficiency for decades, recent research and
breakthroughs in edge AI accelerators indicate this is still
an open question (Dampfhoffer et al., 2023; Garrett et al.,
2023; Moosmann et al., 2023; Caccavella et al., 2023).

We seek to enable classic processing of continuous ultra-sparse spatiotemporal data generated by
event-based sensors with dense machine learning
models. We propose a novel hybrid pipeline composed of asynchronous sensing and synchronous
processing that combines several ideas: (1) an embedding based on PointNet models – the ALERT
module – that can continuously integrate new and
dismiss old events thanks to a leakage mechanism, (2) a flexible readout of the embedded data
that allows to feed any downstream model with
always up-to-date features at any sampling rate,
(3) exploiting the input sparsity in a patch-based
approach inspired by Vision Transformer to optimize the efficiency of the method. These embeddings are then processed by a transformer model
trained for object and gesture recognition. Using
this approach, we achieve performances at the
state-of-the-art with a lower latency than competitors. We also demonstrate that our asynchronous
model can operate at any desired sampling rate.

Nevertheless, considering the inherent advantages of eventbased vision sensors, namely high dynamic range (HDR)
and high temporal resolution – simultaneously, without any
tradeoffs between the two –, we aim to find a way to leverage
this sparse and low-latency data for real-world situations.
Standard ML relies on tensor-based processing. Converting
the stream of events – represented as tuples of values (x and
y pixel coordinates, polarities and timestamp) – to a multidimensional tensor is thus a crucial step. The challenge
involves (1) representing time in a reliable and continuous
manner, allowing it to be processed similarly to the finite
spatial and polarity dimensions, (2) continuously incorporating new events in the feature tensors which also requires
forgetting previous events, (3) using limited computational
resources to allow real-time processing. Our main contributions towards Event-Based ML are the following:

1. Introduction

• The ALERT module, an embedding based on PointNet
which continuously integrates new events dismissing
old ones via a leakage mechanism. This module introduces novel asynchronous embedding updates.
• A flexible readout of the embedded data that can feed
any downstream model with up-to-date features at different sampling rates, down to a per-event operation,
allowing ultra-low latency decision making.
• A patch-based approach inspired by Vision Transformer to exploit input sparsity and optimize efficiency.
• A time encoding solution to represent continuous time
as a bi-dimensional vector of bounded values, at the
cost of negligible decrease of relative accuracy.
• The ALERT-Transformer, a framework incorporating all of the above, which is trained on event-based
data end-to-end. The model can then operate in synchronous regime for high accuracy on gesture recognition, or asynchronously for ultra-low latency.

Event-based sensors capture visual information in an eventdriven, asynchronous manner (Finateu et al., 2020; Gallego
et al., 2020). Efficiently exploiting their data has proven
challenging as the vast majority of approaches published
in the literature consist of either converting event-based
data to dense representations, or deploying spiking neural
networks (SNNs) on streams of events. The former allows
to exploit standard machine learning (ML) frameworks such
as PyTorch and Tensorflow, but does not leverage the
inherent sparsity and other properties of event-based data
*
Equal contribution 1 Sony Semiconductor Solutions Europe,
Sony Europe B.V, Stuttgart Laboratory 1, Zurich, Switzerland
2
University of Padova, MEDIA Lab, Veneto, Italy. Correspondence to: Vincent Parret <vincent.parret@sony.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

