Compressible Dynamics in Deep Overparameterized
Low-Rank Learning & Adaptation

Can Yaras 1 Peng Wang 1 Laura Balzano 1 Qing Qu 1

Abstract
While overparameterization in machine learning
models offers great benefits in terms of optimization and generalization, it also leads to increased
computational requirements as model sizes grow.
In this work, we show that by leveraging the
inherent low-dimensional structures of data and
compressible dynamics within the model parameters, we can reap the benefits of overparameterization without the computational burdens. In
practice, we demonstrate the effectiveness of this
approach for deep low-rank matrix completion
as well as fine-tuning language models. Our
approach is grounded in theoretical findings for
deep overparameterized low-rank matrix recovery,
where we show that the learning dynamics of each
weight matrix are confined to an invariant lowdimensional subspace. Consequently, we can construct and train compact, highly compressed factorizations possessing the same benefits as their
overparameterized counterparts. In the context
of deep matrix completion, our technique substantially improves training efficiency while retaining the advantages of overparameterization.
For language model fine-tuning, we propose a
method called “Deep LoRA”, which improves the
existing low-rank adaptation (LoRA) technique,
leading to reduced overfitting and a simplified
hyperparameter setup, while maintaining comparable efficiency. We validate the effectiveness of
Deep LoRA on natural language tasks, particularly when fine-tuning with limited data.

Figure 1. Benefits of depth & width in overparameterized matrix completion with d = 100, r∗ = 5, ϵl = 10−3 and 30% of
entries observed. Left: Recovery error vs. width for shallow and
deep factorizations. Right: Number of GD iterations to converge to
10−10 error vs. width. We observe that depth prevents overfitting,
while width improves convergence.

refers to employing a greater number of model parameters
than necessary to interpolate the training data. While this
may appear counterintuitive initially due to the risk of overfitting, it has been demonstrated to be an effective modeling
approach (Zhang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2017; Allen-Zhu
et al., 2019a; Buhai et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2018), primarily
attributed to improved optimization landscape and implicit
algorithmic regularization. In the context of large language
models (LLMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020),
empirical scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020) suggest that
larger models are more sample efficient, often requiring
fewer samples to reach the same test loss.
Taking the problem of low-rank matrix recovery as an illustrative example, the seminal work of Arora et al. (2019)
showed that deeper factorizations better promote low-rank
solutions as a function of depth, consequently mitigating
overfitting in the overparameterized regime compared to
a classical two-layer factorization approach; see Figure 1
(left). On the other hand, increasing the width of each layer
substantially reduces the number of iterations to reach the
same training error; see Figure 1 (right).

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest within
the realm of deep learning in overparameterization, which
1
EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
Correspondence to: Can Yaras <cjyaras@umich.edu>.

While overparameterization offers remarkable benefits, it
also comes with its computational challenges. The significantly increased number of parameters inevitably results
in dramatically higher computational costs. This naturally
raises a fundamental question: can we attain the benefits of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

