Generative Active Learning for Long-tailed Instance Segmentation

Muzhi Zhu 1 * Chengxiang Fan 1 * Hao Chen 1 Yang Liu 1 Weian Mao 2 1 Xiaogang Xu 3 1 Chunhua Shen 1 4

Abstract

generated data to improve perception tasks, including classification (Azizi et al., 2023), detection (Chen et al., 2023),
and segmentation (Wu et al., 2023b). However, they often
directly use generated samples as mixed training data (Yang
et al., 2023) or as data augmentation (Zhao et al., 2023)
without exploring how to better filter and utilize the data for
downstream models.

Recently, large-scale language-image generative
models have gained widespread attention and
many works have utilized generated data from
these models to further enhance the performance
of perception tasks. However, not all generated
data can positively impact downstream models,
and these methods do not thoroughly explore how
to better select and utilize generated data. On the
other hand, there is still a lack of research oriented towards active learning on generated data.
In this paper, we explore how to perform active
learning specifically for generated data in the longtailed instance segmentation task. Subsequently,
we propose BSGAL, a new algorithm that online
estimates the contribution of the generated data
based on gradient cache. BSGAL can handle unlimited generated data and complex downstream
segmentation tasks effectively. Experiments show
that BSGAL outperforms the baseline approach
and effectually improves the performance of longtailed segmentation.

On the other hand, existing data mining and filtering methods, such as active learning, have only been validated on
real data and are not suitable for generated data, as there
are differences between generated data and real data regarding characteristics and usage scenarios. The differences are
mainly as follows: 1) Existing data analysis methods are
aimed at a limited data pool, while the scale of generated
data is almost infinite. 2) Active learning is often carried
out under a specified annotation budget. Thanks to the development of conditional generative models, the annotation
cost of generated data can be almost negligible. However,
this results in an unclear and uncertain quality of annotation
in generated data compared to expert annotations. 3) There
are differences in the distribution between real data and generated data, while the target data of previous methods do
not have obvious distribution differences.
In response to the aforementioned challenges, we propose
a novel problem called “Generative Active Learning for
Long-tailed Instance Segmentation” (see Figure 1), which
investigates how to utilize generated data effectively for
downstream tasks. We focus on long-tailed instance segmentation for three main reasons. First, data collection for
long-tailed categories is exceedingly arduous, and how to
do classification well is currently a focus in the segmentation field (Kirillov et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a; Yuan et al.,
2024; ?; Zou et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Given that
generated data has demonstrated the potential to alleviate
this difficulty (Zhao et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023; Fan et al.,
2024), it is necessary to introduce generated data for longtail segmentation tasks. Second, the quality requirements for
generated data in long-tailed instance segmentation tasks
are very high, and not all generated data can have a promoting effect. Therefore, it is necessary to further explore
how to screen generated data. Third, this task itself is very
comprehensive and challenging, which has more guiding
significance for migration to real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Data is one of the driving forces behind the development
of artificial intelligence. In the past, securing high-quality
data was a time-consuming and laborious task. Yet, a large
amount of high-quality data is crucial for a model to achieve
breakthrough performance. Therefore, many active learning
methods have emerged to explore the most informative samples from massive unlabeled data to achieve better model
performance with minimal annotation costs. Currently, the
rapid development of generative models has made it possible
to obtain massive amounts of high-quality data, including
long-tailed data, at a relatively low cost. In the field of
visual perception, there have been many works utilizing
*
Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, China 2 The University of Adelaide, Australia 3 The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, China 4 Ant Group. Correspondence to: Hao Chen
<haochen.cad@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

