Reducing Balancing Error for Causal Inference via Optimal Transport

Yuguang Yan 1 Hao Zhou 1 Zeqin Yang 1 Weilin Chen 1 Ruichu Cai 1 2 Zhifeng Hao 3

Abstract

distributions (Shalit et al., 2017). For example, to treat heart
disease, a doctor typically prescribes surgery to younger
patients and medication to older ones, resulting in different
age distributions for these two groups. In other words, age
is the confounder here that brings confounding bias.

Most studies on causal inference tackle the issue of confounding bias by reducing the distribution shift between the control and treated groups.
However, it remains an open question to adopt an
appropriate metric for distribution shift in practice. In this paper, we define a generic balancing
error on reweighted samples to characterize the
confounding bias, and study the connection between the balancing error and the Wasserstein
discrepancy derived from the theory of optimal
transport. We not only regard the Wasserstein discrepancy as the metric of distribution shift, but
also explore the association between the balancing
error and the underlying cost function involved in
the Wasserstein discrepancy. Motivated by this,
we propose to reduce the balancing error under
the framework of optimal transport with learnable marginal distributions and the cost function,
which is implemented by jointly learning weights
and representations associated with factual outcomes. The experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

Most studies for ATE estimation address the confounding
bias by balancing the confounder distributions of the treated
and control groups, so that ATE can be estimated by comparing the difference of the average outcomes between the balanced groups (Yao et al., 2021). However, the performance
of distribution balancing highly relies on the metric of distribution discrepancy, e.g., moment difference (Hainmueller,
2012) or integral probability metric (IPM) (Kong et al.,
2023; Wei et al., 2023), and how to adopt an appropriate
metric remains a challenging problem. For example, regarding the moment-based method, the first and second moments
frequently used in existing works are insufficient to model
complex distributions, while the higher-order moments are
difficult to estimate in practice. For the IPM-based method,
different function spaces derive different distance metrics,
e.g., maximum mean discrepancy or Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion, while how to select the optimal function
space is still under-explored.
In this paper, we seek to address the confounding bias from
a generic balancing error, which is not necessarily a metric
of distribution discrepancy on confounders and could be
built based on factual and counterfactual outcomes, propensity scores, or other factors. To this end, we first define a
balancing error on reweighted samples to describe the confounding bias, and then construct a theoretical connection
between the balancing error and the Wasserstein discrepancy through the theory of optimal transport, which studies
how to move masses from one distribution to another with
a minimal transport cost (Villani, 2008; Peyré et al., 2019).
We not only regard the Wasserstein discrepancy as a metric
of distribution shift, but also deeply explore the association
between our defined balancing error and the underlying cost
function involved in optimal transport. Based on this, we
propose an optimal transport model with learnable sample
weights and the cost function associated with the balancing
error to reduce the confounding bias.

1. Introduction
Causal inference from observational data aims to estimate
the effect of the treatment from data, which are collected
from a real-world scenario rather than well-designed randomized control trials (RCTs) (Concato et al., 2000). For
data from RCTs, the average treatment effect (ATE) can
be easily estimated by comparing the outcomes of treated
and control groups (Hernán & Robins, 2010). Nevertheless,
it is non-trivial to estimate ATE from observational data
since treated and control groups follow different covariate
1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China 2 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
Guangzhou, China 3 College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China.
Correspondence to: Ruichu Cai
<cairuichu@gmail.com>.

In particular, we model the balancing error by incorporating
factual outcomes, and design an optimal transport problem

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

