Deep Stochastic Mechanics

Elena Orlova 1 Aleksei Ustimenko 2 Ruoxi Jiang 1 Peter Y. Lu 3 Rebecca Willett 1 4

Abstract

computing due to the well-known curse of dimensionality:
the computational complexity grows exponentially as a function of the dimensionality of the problem (Bellman, 2010).
Traditional numerical solvers have been limited to dealing
with problems in rather low dimensions since they rely on a
grid.

This paper introduces a novel deep-learningbased approach for numerical simulation of a
time-evolving Schrödinger equation inspired by
stochastic mechanics and generative diffusion
models. Unlike existing approaches, which exhibit computational complexity that scales exponentially in the problem dimension, our method
allows us to adapt to the latent low-dimensional
structure of the wave function by sampling from
the Markovian diffusion. Depending on the
latent dimension, our method may have far
lower computational complexity in higher dimensions. Moreover, we propose novel equations
for stochastic quantum mechanics, resulting in
quadratic computational complexity with respect
to the number of dimensions. Numerical simulations verify our theoretical findings and show
a significant advantage of our method compared
to other deep-learning-based approaches used for
quantum mechanics.

Deep learning is a promising way to avoid the curse of
dimensionality (Poggio et al., 2017; Madala et al., 2023).
However, no known deep learning approach avoids it in the
context of the TDSE (Manzhos, 2020). Although generic
deep learning approaches have been applied to solving the
TDSE (E & Yu, 2017; Han et al., 2018; Raissi et al., 2019;
Weinan et al., 2021), this paper shows that it is possible to
get performance improvements by developing an approach
specific to the TDSE by incorporating quantum physical
structure into the deep learning algorithm itself.
We propose a method that relies on a stochastic interpretation of quantum mechanics (Nelson, 1966; Guerra, 1995;
Nelson, 2005) and is inspired by the success of deep diffusion models that can model complex multi-dimensional
distributions effectively (Yang et al., 2022); we call it Deep
Stochastic Mechanics (DSM). Our approach is not limited
to only the linear Schrödinger equation but can be adapted
to Klein-Gordon, Dirac equations (Serva, 1988; Lindgren &
Liukkonen, 2019), and to the non-linear Schrödinger equations of condensed matter physics, e.g., by using mean-field
stochastic differential equations (SDEs) (Eriksen, 2020), or
McKean-Vlasov SDEs (dos Reis et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Mathematical models for many problems in nature appear
in the form of partial differential equations (PDEs) in high
dimensions. Given access to precise solutions of the manyelectron time-dependent Schrödinger equation (TDSE), a
vast body of scientific problems could be addressed, including in quantum chemistry (Cances et al., 2003; Nakatsuji, 2012), drug discovery (Ganesan et al., 2017; Heifetz,
2020), condensed matter physics (Boghosian & Taylor IV,
1998; Liu et al., 2013), and quantum computing (Grover,
2001; Papageorgiou & Traub, 2013). However, solving
high-dimensional PDEs and the Schrödinger equation, in
particular, are notoriously difficult problems in scientific

1.1. Problem formulation
The Schrödinger equation, a governing equation in quantum
mechanics, predicts the future behavior of a dynamic system
for 0 ≤ t ≤ T and ∀x ∈ M:

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, USA 2 ShareChat, London, UK 3 Department of Physics,
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA 4 Department of Statistics,
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Aleksei
Ustimenko <research@aleksei.uk>.

iℏ∂t ψ(x, t) = Hψ(x, t),

(1)

ψ(x, 0) = ψ0 (x),

(2)

where ψ : M × [0, T ] → C is a wave function defined over
a manifold M, and H is a self-adjoint operator acting on
a Hilbert space of wave functions. For simplicity of future
derivations, we consider a case of a spinless particle1 in

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
A multi-particle case is covered by considering d = 3n, where
n – the number of particles.

1

