GeoMFormer: A General Architecture for
Geometric Molecular Representation Learning

Tianlang Chen * 1 Shengjie Luo * 2 Di He 2 Shuxin Zheng 3 Tie-Yan Liu 3 Liwei Wang 2 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Deep learning approaches have emerged as a powerful tool
for a wide range of tasks (He et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020). Recently, researchers have started investigating whether the power of neural networks could help
solve problems in physics and chemistry, such as predicting
the property of molecules with 3D coordinates and simulating how each atom moves in Euclidean space (Schütt
et al., 2018; Gasteiger et al., 2020b; Satorras et al., 2021).
These molecular modeling tasks require the learned model
to satisfy general physical laws, such as the invariance and
equivariance conditions: The model’s prediction should
react physically when the input coordinates change according to the transformation of the coordinate system, such as
rotation and translation.

Molecular modeling, a central topic in quantum
mechanics, aims to accurately calculate the properties and simulate the behaviors of molecular systems. The molecular model is governed by physical laws, which impose geometric constraints
such as invariance and equivariance to coordinate
rotation and translation. While numerous deep
learning approaches have been developed to learn
molecular representations under these constraints,
most of them are built upon heuristic and costly
modules. We argue that there is a strong need
for a general and flexible framework for learning
both invariant and equivariant features. In this
work, we introduce a novel Transformer-based
molecular model called GeoMFormer to achieve
this goal. Using the standard Transformer modules, two separate streams are developed to maintain and learn invariant and equivariant representations. Carefully designed cross-attention modules
bridge the two streams, allowing information fusion and enhancing geometric modeling in each
stream. As a general and flexible architecture,
we show that many previous architectures can be
viewed as special instantiations of GeoMFormer.
Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the power of GeoMFormer. All empirical
results show that GeoMFormer achieves strong
performance on both invariant and equivariant
tasks of different types and scales. Code and models will be made publicly available at https:
//github.com/c-tl/GeoMFormer.

A variety of methods have been proposed to design neural
architectures that intrinsically satisfy the invariance or
equivariance conditions (Thomas et al., 2018; Schütt et al.,
2021; Batzner et al., 2022). To satisfy the invariant condition, several approaches incorporate invariant features, such
as the relative distance between each atom pair, into classic
neural networks (Schütt et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2022). However, this may hinder the model from effectively extracting
the molecular structural information (Pozdnyakov et al.,
2020; Joshi et al., 2023). For example, computing dihedral
angles from coordinates is straightforward but requires
much more operations using relative distances (Schütt
et al., 2021). To satisfy the equivariant condition, several
works design neural networks with equivariant operation
only, such as tensor product between irreducible representations (Thomas et al., 2018; Fuchs et al., 2020; Batzner et al.,
2022) and vector operations (Satorras et al., 2021; Schütt
et al., 2021; Thölke & De Fabritiis, 2022). However, the
number of such operations are limited due to the equivariant
constraints, which are either costly to scale or lead to
fairly complex network architecture designs to guarantee
sufficient expressive power. More importantly, many
real-world applications require a model that can effectively
perform both invariant and equivariant prediction with
strong performance at the same time. While some recent
works study this direction (Schütt et al., 2021; Thölke &
De Fabritiis, 2022), most proposed networks are designed
heuristically and lack general design principles.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of EECS, Peking University
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Microsoft Research AI4Science 4 Center for Machine Learning
Research, Peking University. Correspondence to: Shengjie Luo
<luosj@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang
<wanglw@pku.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

