Double Momentum Method for Lower-Level Constrained Bilevel Optimization

Wanli Shi 1 2 Yi Chang 1 Bin Gu 1 2

Abstract

speaking, the BO can be formulated as follows,
min F (x) = f (x, y ∗ (x))

x∈X

Bilevel optimization (BO) has recently gained
prominence in many machine learning applications due to its ability to capture the nested structure inherent in these problems. Recently, many
hypergradient methods have been proposed as
effective solutions for solving large-scale problems. However, current hypergradient methods
for the lower-level constrained bilevel optimization (LCBO) problems need very restrictive assumptions, namely, where optimality conditions
satisfy the differentiability and invertibility conditions and lack a solid analysis of the convergence
rate. What’s worse, existing methods require either double-loop updates, which are sometimes
less efficient. To solve this problem, in this paper, we propose a new hypergradient of LCBO
leveraging the theory of nonsmooth implicit function theorem instead of using the restrive assumptions. In addition, we propose a single-loop
single-timescale algorithm based on the doublemomentum method and adaptive step size method
and prove it can return a (δ, ϵ)-stationary point
with Õ(d22 ϵ−4 ) iterations. Experiments on two
applications demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method.

(1)

s.t. y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y),
y∈Y

where X and Y are convex subsets in Rd1 and Rd2 , respectively. It involves a competition between two parties or two
objectives, and if one party makes its choice first, it will
affect the optimal choice of the other party.
Recently, hypergradient methods have shown great effectiveness in solving various large-scale bilevel optimization
problems, where there is no constraint in the lower-level
objective, i.e., Y = Rd2 . Specifically, (Franceschi et al.,
2017; Pedregosa, 2016; Ji et al., 2021) proposed several
double-loop algorithms to solve the BO problems. They
first apply the gradient methods to approximate the solution
to the lower-level problem and then implicit differentiable
methods (Pedregosa, 2016; Ji et al., 2021) or explicit differentiable methods (Franceschi et al., 2017) can be used to
approximate the gradient of the upper-level objective w.r.t
x, namely hypergradient, to update x. However, in some
real-world applications, such as in a sequential game, the
problems must be updated at the same time (Hong et al.,
2020), which makes these methods unsuitable. To solve
this problem, (Hong et al., 2020) propose a single-loop twotimescale method, which updates y and x alternately with
stepsize ηy and ηx , respectively, designed with different
timescales as limk→∞ ηx /ηy = 0. However, due to the
nature of two-timescale updates, it incurs the sub-optimal
complexity O(ϵ−5 ) (Chen et al., 2021). To further improve
the efficiency, (Huang & Huang, 2021; Khanduri et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2021) proposed single-loop
single-timescale methods, where ηx /ηy is a constant. These
methods have the complexity of Õ(ϵ−4 ) (Õ means omitting
logarithmic factors) or better (Õ(ϵ−3 )) to achieve the stationary point. However, all these methods are limited to the
bilevel optimization problem with unconstrained lower-level
problems and require the upper-level objective function to
be differentiable. They cannot be directly applied when
constraints are present in the lower-level optimization, i.e.,
Y ̸= Rd2 , as the upper-level objective function is naturally
non-differentiable (Xu & Zhu, 2023).

1. Introduction
Bilevel optimization (BO) (Bard, 2013; Colson et al., 2007)
plays a central role in various significant machine learning
applications, including hyper-parameter optimization (Pedregosa, 2016; Bergstra et al., 2011; Bertsekas, 1976; Shi
& Gu, 2021), meta-learning (Feurer et al., 2015; Franceschi
et al., 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), reinforcement learning
(Hong et al., 2020; Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000). Generally
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE. Correspondence to: Bin Gu <jsgubin@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To solve the lower-level constrained bilevel optimization
problem, recently, several methods have been proposed to
1

