Speech Self-Supervised Learning Using Diffusion Model Synthetic Data

Heting Gao 1 Kaizhi Qian 2 Junrui Ni 1 Chuang Gan 2 Mark Hasegawa-Johnson 1 Shiyu Chang 3
Yang Zhang 2

Abstract

scale annotated corpora. By pretraining a speech representation network on a large-scale unannotated dataset, SSL
models only require a relatively small annotated dataset
for finetuning, which has significantly improved the efficiency and feasibility of speech processing, particularly for
low-resource languages. However, the success of such methods still hinges on the availability of a large-scale unannotated corpus. For example, the training of HuBERT
(Hsu et al., 2021), one of the most widely-used speech
pretraining models, typically requires that the unannotated
corpus contains at least 1,000 hours of speech. If the dataset
size drops to 100 hours, it tends to perform significantly
worse. Yet, in many scenarios, obtaining such a large-scale
dataset is impractical due to various constraints, e.g., lowresource languages, privacy concerns, etc. There have been
many research attempts that perform data augmentation on
training/pre-training data, but most of them perform perturbations to the real speech data, such as adding noise, and do
not introduce many new speech variations, such as prosody,
speaker, and content, which are important for SSL.

While self-supervised learning (SSL) in speech
has greatly reduced the reliance of speech processing systems on annotated corpora, the success of
SSL still hinges on the availability of a large-scale
unannotated corpus, which is still often impractical for many low-resource languages or under privacy concerns. Some existing work seeks to alleviate the problem by data augmentation, but most
works are confined to introducing perturbations to
real speech and do not introduce new variations
in speech prosody, speakers, and speech content,
which are important for SSL. Motivated by the
recent finding that diffusion models have superior
capabilities for modeling data distributions, we
propose D IFF S4L, a pretraining scheme that augments the limited unannotated data with synthetic
data with different levels of variations, generated
by a diffusion model trained on the limited unannotated data. Finally, an SSL model is pre-trained
on the real and the synthetic speech. Our experiments show that D IFF S4L can significantly improve the performance of SSL models, such as reducing the WER of the HuBERT pretrained model
by 6.26 percentage points in the English ASR task.
Notably, we find that the synthetic speech with all
levels of variations, i.e. new prosody, new speakers, and even new content (despite the new content
being mostly babble), accounts for significant performance improvement. The code is available at
github.com/Hertin/DiffS4L.

In situations where the pretraining dataset is limited, it becomes crucial to maximize the amount of information captured from the dataset to achieve the best performance in
downstream tasks. Data augmentation can be regarded as introducing new variations/combinations in speech, which can
supply new information to SSL. This raises the question –
do existing SSL techniques have a high enough information
efficiency? Could there be additional information that SSL
models fail to capture, which would otherwise contribute to
a better performance in downstream tasks? If so, could we
design a data augmentation technique that can supply the
overlooked information?
On the other hand, generative models are also often considered models that capture distributional information about
data. Recently, diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2021), with their superior performance in computer vision,
have quickly attracted wide research attention. Researchers
have found that compared to other generative models, diffusion models can generate samples with much better global
coherence (Li et al., 2022b) and local details (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021), an indication that diffusion models may be
able to capture more complete information from a limited
dataset that could complement those learnable by existing

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) in speech has greatly reduced the reliance of speech processing systems on large1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA 2 MITIBM Watson AI Lab, MA, USA 3 University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Heting Gao
<hgao17@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

