Dissecting Multimodality in VideoQA Transformer Models
by Impairing Modality Fusion

Ishaan Singh Rawal 1 2 Alexander Matyasko 1 2 Shantanu Jaiswal 1 2 Basura Fernando 1 2 Cheston Tan 1 2 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

Multimodal learning with videos and language presents
a challenge, given their shared sequential nature but distinct underlying structures. That is, videos exhibit spatiotemporal dynamics in the pixel space, whereas language
representation is composed of the syntax and semantics of
word sequences. Hence, tasks like Video Question Answering (VideoQA) (Zhong et al., 2022) are difficult as they
necessitate the model to acquire accurate representations of
both modalities and establish meaningful connections between them. Transformers have demonstrated exceptional
performance on VideoQA benchmarks (Zhong et al., 2022).
But does the good performance of Transformers on current
VideoQA benchmarks necessarily mean that they learn to
faithfully represent, leverage, understand, and reason about
the modalities? Or do the current benchmarks and metrics
fail to robustly evaluate the models for their multimodal
understanding?

While VideoQA Transformer models demonstrate
competitive performance on standard benchmarks,
the reasons behind their success are not fully understood. Do these models capture the rich multimodal structures and dynamics from video and
text jointly? Or are they achieving high scores by
exploiting biases and spurious features? Hence, to
provide insights, we design QUAG (QUadrant AveraGe), a lightweight and non-parametric probe,
to conduct dataset-model combined representation analysis by impairing modality fusion. We
find that the models achieve high performance
on many datasets without leveraging multimodal
representations. To validate QUAG further, we
design QUAG-attention, a less-expressive replacement of self-attention with restricted token interactions. Models with QUAG-attention achieve
similar performance with significantly fewer multiplication operations without any finetuning. Our
findings raise doubts about the current models’
abilities to learn highly-coupled multimodal representations. Hence, we design the CLAVI (Complements in LAnguage and VIdeo) dataset, a stresstest dataset curated by augmenting real-world
videos to have high modality coupling. Consistent with the findings of QUAG, we find that
most of the models achieve near-trivial performance on CLAVI. This reasserts the limitations
of current models for learning highly-coupled
multimodal representations, that is not evaluated
by the current datasets (project page: https:
//dissect-videoqa.github.io).

This is a valid concern because deep learning models can
learn shortcuts to achieve good performance without leveraging and aligning the modalities (Geirhos et al., 2020). For
example, seemingly spatio-temporal tasks, like some action classification problems, are shown to be solved without
focusing much on temporal representations (Sevilla-Lara
et al., 2021; Kowal et al., 2022). Similarly, in VideoQA,
recent works report that the datasets contain specific biases
(Buch et al., 2022; Lei et al., 2023). However, most studies
on biases are restricted to isolated analyses of either the
models or the datasets. This raises question: Do VideoQA
models learn to jointly leverage the modalities to achieve
competitive performance on current benchmarks?
To answer these questions, we propose QUAG (QUadrant
AveraGe), a lightweight and non-parametric probe to systematically gauge the reliance of a finetuned model’s performance on joint multimodal representations. QUAG impairs
modality fusion by block-averaging attention weights. We
apply QUAG on multiple dataset-model combinations, and
consistently find that the models manage to achieve high
performance on the benchmarks without leveraging multimodal representations. This finding is concerning because
high performance on established benchmarks should be ideally indicative of coupled multimodal understanding. We

1
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology & Research, Singapore 2 Institute of High Performance
Computing, Agency for Science, Technology & Research, Singapore 3 Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science,
Technology & Research, Singapore. Correspondence to: Ishaan
Singh Rawal <rawal ishaan singh@cfar.a-star.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

