R2E: Turning any GitHub Repository into a
Programming Agent Environment

Naman Jain * 1 Manish Shetty * 1 Tianjun Zhang 1 King Han 1 Koushik Sen 1 Ion Stoica 1

Abstract

such real-world coding setups have not kept pace. Prior
benchmarks (Chen et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022b), used
for evaluating coding capabilities of LLM S, only consist
of short and isolated functional code completion problems.
On the other hand, real-world software engineering requires
more complex workflows involving integrating code with
existing (large) codebases, using libraries, interacting with
the interpreter, debugging errors, etc. In this work, to capture this interactive aspect (in contrast with single-shot code
generation), we consider programming agents as AI systems that can similarly use interpreters and error feedback
to improve their own outputs given a specification. As such
programming agents become more powerful, it urges the
need to build real-world test environments to evaluate them.

While Large Language Models’ (LLM S) coding
capabilities have advanced rapidly, corresponding evaluation benchmarks on real-world programming setups are yet to catch up. Building a scalable and interactive testbed for evaluating general-purpose AI programming agents
for real-world code has been challenging, particularly due to a lack of high-quality test suites
available. In this paper, we present Repository to
Environment (R2E), a framework that can turn
any G IT H UB repository into a test environment to
evaluate the performance of code-generating systems, both static and interactive. R2E is powered
by a synergistic combination of program analysis and LLM S to construct equivalence test harnesses for any G IT H UB function. We instantiate our framework to build the first large-scale
benchmark, R2E-Eval1, for building realistic environments for AI coding assistants. Our results
demonstrate that even when SOTA models cannot
generate correct solutions with advanced prompting techniques, they can effectively use environment feedback highlighting the need to move from
static functional coding to interactive programming paradigm. We hope that our framework
(and the instantiated benchmark) can motivate
research directions by providing web-scale openended coding environments. R2E code is available at https://r2e.dev/

In this work, we propose Repository to Environment
(R2E), a scalable framework for turning any GitHub repository into a test environment to evaluate the performance of
code generation systems on real-world scenarios (Section 3).
We build on a key insight that test suites if synthesized for
real-world code, can act as checks as well as orchestrators for execution-guided programming environments. R2E
takes a function (from G IT H UB), constructs an equivalence
test harness – a scaffold consisting of test cases and a setup
that establishes dependencies for executing the function.
R2E further refines the docstring and uses the refined specification along with repository code and test harness as a
problem instance for studying code generation. Figure 1
provides an end-to-end diagram of our approach.
These environments serve two evaluation purposes: First,
a code generation system can be evaluated via the environment in these real-world scenarios. Secondly, even for an
interactive programming agent, our environment can provide feedback to the agent using the interpreter (Figure 1
right). Notably, R2E framework is scalable and can be used
to build web-scale open-domain coding datasets. Furthermore, R2E requires minimal human supervision and can be
updated in a live manner for contamination-free evaluation.

1. Introduction
The rapid improvement of LLM S’ performance on coderelated tasks has enabled the development of coding assistants deployed in the real world. However, evaluations on
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Naman Jain <naman_jain@berkeley.edu>, Manish
Shetty <manishs@berkeley.edu>.

Using this framework, we construct R2E-Eval1 (Section 4),
the first large-scale benchmark of real-world coding problems consisting of natural-language docstrings, repository
contexts, and equivalence test harnesses. Figure 2 shows
an example of a function and corresponding synthesized

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

