Beyond the ROC Curve: Classification Trees Using Cost-Optimal Curves,
with Application to Imbalanced Datasets

Magzhan Gabidolla 1 Arman Zharmagambetov 2 Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán 1

Abstract

cus on classification trees, which are widely recognized as
among the most interpretable models. We consider the traditional axis-aligned trees (where each decision node uses
a single feature) and also sparse oblique trees (where each
decision node uses a linear combination of a small subset of
features). The latter are far more powerful and subsume as
particular cases axis-aligned trees (such as CART or C5.0)
and linear classifiers (such as logistic regression or linear
SVMs). In both cases each leaf node outputs a constant
label.

Important applications such as fraud or spam detection or churn prediction involve binary classification problems where the datasets are imbalanced and the cost of false positives greatly differs from the cost of false negatives. We focus
on classification trees, in particular oblique trees,
which subsume both the traditional axis-aligned
trees and logistic regression, but are more accurate than both while providing interpretable models. Rather than using ROC curves, we advocate a loss based on minimizing the false negatives subject to a maximum false positive rate,
which we prove to be equivalent to minimizing a
weighted 0/1 loss. This yields a curve of classifiers that provably dominates the ROC curve,
but is hard to optimize due to the 0/1 loss. We
give the first algorithm that can iteratively update
the tree parameters globally so that the weighted
0/1 loss decreases monotonically. Experiments
on various datasets with class imbalance or class
costs show this indeed dominates ROC-based
classifiers and significantly improves over previous approaches to learn trees based on weighted
purity criteria or over- or undersampling.

In these types of problems, optimizing the raw accuracy
does not work well because it can largely ignore the lowcost or infrequent class. It is desirable to have control on
the number of false positives or true positives. A popular
way to achieve this is through the ROC curve, but this results in suboptimal classifiers because it does not explicitly
optimize for accuracy or true positives while controlling the
false positive rate.
Our paper has two contributions. Firstly, in section 3, we
formally propose the concept of cost-optimal curve (COC).
This defines a set of optimal-accuracy classifiers as a function of the false positive level. We prove this is equivalent to a penalized formulation which has the form of a
weighted 0/1 loss and (with our new algorithm) is more
amenable to optimization, although still NP-hard in general.
Although the COC idea is straightforward, its properties
and optimization appear not to have been explored before.
Note this is different from using a weighted surrogate loss
such as the cross-entropy; while this (being differentiable)
can be easily optimized, its optimum can be quite far from
the true (0/1 loss) one. Second, in section 4, we propose the
first algorithm that directly tries to optimize this problem
for classification trees, with the guarantee that the weighted
0/1 loss decreases monotonically at each iteration. In section 5, our experiments confirm that the algorithm provides
a good approximation to the ideal COC curve and is generally much better than using the ROC curve or approaches
based on over- or undersampling, cost-sensitive surrogates
or weighted purity criteria for constructing the tree.

1. Introduction
Many important practical applications involve a binary classification problem with imbalanced classes (e.g. few positives and many negatives) or asymmetric costs (e.g. a false
positive is much more costly than a false negative), where
the positives and negatives are suitably defined in each case.
Examples are fraud or spam detection or churn prediction.
Although many types of classifiers may be used, we fo1
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Merced, USA. 2 Meta AI (FAIR). Correspondence to: Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán <mcarreiraperpinan@ucmerced.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

