What Improves the Generalization of Graph Transformers? A Theoretical Dive
into the Self-attention and Positional Encoding

Hongkang Li 1 Meng Wang 1 Tengfei Ma 2 Sijia Liu 3 4 Zaixi Zhang 5 Pin-Yu Chen 6

Abstract

explains the superior feature representation of
Graph Transformers. Our theoretical results are
supported by empirical experiments on synthetic
and real-world benchmarks.

Graph Transformers, which incorporate selfattention and positional encoding, have recently
emerged as a powerful architecture for various
graph learning tasks. Despite their impressive performance, the complex non-convex interactions
across layers and the recursive graph structure
have made it challenging to establish a theoretical foundation for learning and generalization.
This study introduces the first theoretical investigation of a shallow Graph Transformer for semisupervised node classification, comprising a selfattention layer with relative positional encoding
and a two-layer perceptron. Focusing on a graph
data model with discriminative nodes that determine node labels and non-discriminative nodes
that are class-irrelevant, we characterize the sample complexity required to achieve a desirable
generalization error by training with stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). This paper provides the
quantitative characterization of the sample complexity and number of iterations for convergence
dependent on the fraction of discriminative nodes,
the dominant patterns, and the initial model errors.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that self-attention
and positional encoding enhance generalization
by making the attention map sparse and promoting the core neighborhood during training, which

1. Introduction
Graph Transformers (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021; Kreuzer
et al., 2021; Ying et al., 2021) were developed for graph machine learning as a response to the impressive performance
of Transformers demonstrated in various domains (Vaswani
et al., 2017; Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019). It is designed
specifically to handle graph data by constructing positional
embeddings that capture important graph information and
using nodes as input tokens for the Transformer model. Empirical results have shown that Graph Transformers (GT)
outperform classical graph neural networks (GNN), such as
graph convolutional networks (GCN), in graph-level learning tasks such as molecular property prediction (Rong et al.,
2020; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021), image classification (Gabrielsson et al., 2022; Rampášek et al., 2022), as
well as node-level tasks like document analysis (Zhang &
Zhang, 2020; Hu et al., 2020c;b; ZHANG et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023), semantic segmentation (Rampášek et al., 2022;
Hussain et al., 2022), and social network analysis (Zhao
et al., 2021; Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021; Chen et al., 2022).
Despite the notable empirical advancements, some critical
theoretical aspects of Graph Transformers remain much less
explored. These include fundamental inquiries such as:

1

Department of Electrical, Computer, and System Engineering,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA 2 Department of
Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY,
USA 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 4 MIT-IBM Watson
AI Lab, IBM Research, MA, USA 5 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, Anhui, China 6 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Hongkang
Li <lih35@rpi.edu>, Meng Wang <wangm7@rpi.edu>,
Tengfei Ma <Tengfei.Ma@stonybrook.edu>, Sijia Liu
<liusiji5@msu.edu>, Zaixi Zhang <zaixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn>,
Pin-Yu Chen <pin-yu.chen@ibm.com>.

• Under what conditions can a Graph Transformer achieve
adequate generalization?
• What is the advantage of self-attention and positional
encoding in graph learning?
Some recent works (Ying et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023) theoretically study GTs by comparing their expressive power
with other graph neural networks without self-attention.
Meanwhile, other studies (Kreuzer et al., 2021; Rampášek
et al., 2022; Gabrielsson et al., 2022) explain the design of
positional encoding (PE) in terms of graph topology and
spectral theory. However, these analyses only establish the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

