Pi-DUAL: Using privileged information to distinguish clean from noisy labels

Ke Wang 1 Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez 2 3 Rodolphe Jenatton 4 5 Mark Collier 6 Efi Kokiopoulou 6
Pascal Frossard 1

Abstract

training set tends to damage generalization performance as
it forces the model to learn spurious associations between
the input features and the noisy labels (Zhang et al., 2017;
Arpit et al., 2017). To mitigate the negative effects of label
noise, recent methods have primarily tried to prevent overfitting to the noisy labels, often utilising the observation that
neural networks tend to first learn the clean labels before
memorizing the wrong ones (Maennel et al., 2020; Baldock
et al., 2021). For instance, these methods include filtering
out incorrect labels, correcting them, or enforcing regularization on the training dynamics (Han et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020a). Other works, instead, try to capture
the noise structure in an input-dependent fashion (Patrini
et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2022; Collier et al., 2022; 2023).

Label noise is a pervasive problem in deep learning that often compromises the generalization
performance of trained models. Recently, leveraging privileged information (PI) – information
available only during training but not at test time
– has emerged as an effective approach to mitigate
this issue. Yet, existing PI-based methods have
failed to consistently outperform their no-PI counterparts in terms of preventing overfitting to label
noise. To address this deficiency, we introduce
Pi-DUAL, an architecture designed to harness PI
to distinguish clean from wrong labels. Pi-DUAL
decomposes the output logits into a prediction
term, based on conventional input features, and
a noise-fitting term influenced solely by PI. A
gating mechanism steered by PI adaptively shifts
focus between these terms, allowing the model to
implicitly separate the learning paths of clean and
wrong labels. Empirically, Pi-DUAL achieves
significant performance improvements on key
PI benchmarks (e.g., +6.8% on ImageNet-PI),
establishing a new state-of-the-art test set accuracy. Additionally, Pi-DUAL is a potent method
for identifying noisy samples post-training,
outperforming other strong methods at this task.
Overall, Pi-DUAL is a simple, scalable and practical approach for mitigating the effects of label
noise in a variety of real-world scenarios with PI.

The above methods are however designed for a standard supervised learning setting, where models are tasked to learn
an association between input features x ∈ Rd and targets
y ∈ {1, . . . , K} (assuming K classes) from a training set of
pairs {(xi , ỹi )}i∈[n] of features and (possibly) noisy labels
ỹ ∈ {1, . . . K}. As a result, they need to model the noise in
the targets as a function of x. Yet, in many practical situations, the mistakes introduced during the annotation process
may not solely depend on the input x, but rather be mostly
explained by annotation-specific side information, such as
the experience of the annotator or the attention they paid
while annotating. For this reason, a recent line of work (Vapnik & Vashist, 2009; Collier et al., 2022; Ortiz-Jimenez et al.,
2023) has proposed to use privileged information (PI) to
mitigate the affects of label noise. PI is defined as additional
features available at training time but not at test time. It can
include annotation features such as the annotator ID, the
amount of time to provide the label, or their experience.

1. Introduction

Remarkably, having access to PI at training time, even
when it is not available at test time, has been shown to be
an effective tool for dealing with instance-dependent label
noise. Most notably, Ortiz-Jimenez et al. (2023) showed that
by exploiting PI it is possible to activate positive learning
shortcuts to memorize, and therefore explain away, noisy
training samples, thereby improving generalization. Nevertheless, and perhaps surprisingly, current PI-based methods
do not systematically outperform no-PI baselines in the
presence of label noise, making them a less competitive
alternative in certain cases (Ortiz-Jimenez et al., 2023).

Many deep learning models are trained on large noisy
datasets, as obtaining cleanly labeled datasets at scale can
be expensive and time consuming (Snow et al., 2008; Sheng
et al., 2008). However, the presence of label noise in the
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 2 Google
DeepMind 3 Work done while at EPFL 4 Bioptimus 5 Work done
while at Google DeepMind 6 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Ke Wang <k.wang@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

