An Efficient Self-Learning Framework For Interactive Spoken Dialog Systems

Garima Lalwani

1

Hitesh Tulsiani * 1 David M. Chan * 1 2 Shalini Ghosh * 1
Prabhat Pandey 1 Ankish Bansal 1 Sri Garimella 1 Ariya Rastrow 1 Björn Hoffmeister 1

Abstract

Supervised ASR
Transcription Loss

Dialog systems, such as voice assistants, are expected to engage with users in complex, evolving
conversations. Unfortunately, traditional automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems deployed
in such applications are usually trained to recognize each turn independently and lack the ability to
adapt to the conversational context or incorporate
user feedback. In this work, we introduce a general
framework for ASR in dialog systems that can
go beyond learning from single-turn utterances
and learn over time how to adapt to both explicit
supervision and implicit user feedback present in
multi-turn conversations. We accomplish that by
leveraging advances in student-teacher learning
and context-aware dialog processing, and designing contrastive self-supervision approaches with
Ohm, a new online hard-negative mining approach.
We show that leveraging our new framework compared to traditional training leads to relative WER
reductions of close to 10% in real-world dialog
systems, and up to 26% on public synthetic data.

Target Utterance
ASR
Model

Predicted Transcription

Text
Context Data
(e.g. past utterances)

Traditional Context Modeling
Contrastive Learning
from Context
(CLC) + Hard Negative
Mining (Ohm)

Supervised
ASR
Transcription
Loss

Past Utterances

Target Utterance

Teacher
ASR Model

Predicted transcription

Model
Distillation
Future Utterances

(with predicted transcription)

Student
ASR Model

Predicted transcription

Target Utterance
Proposed Approach

Figure 1: Traditional dialog systems learn to perform ASR using
only supervised feedback with large-scale unsupervised/semisupervised pre-training on single isolated utterances. This work
introduces a novel general framework leveraging student-teacher
distillation, contrastive learning, and online hard-negative mining,
allowing ASR systems to learn from contextual clues and implicit
feedback present in full conversational transcripts. Our two stage
system naturally allows us to distill contextual signals from a
context-aware teacher model to a context unaware student model.

1. Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) for dialog systems has
traditionally been a focused field, where the primary goal is
to produce a text transcript for an utterance given the acoustic
signal corresponding to that utterance (Radford et al., 2023;
Baevski et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2021; Mitra et al., 2023).
While such systems have been largely successful, particularly in the domain of dialog systems and voice assistants
(leading to word error rates below 2% on the Librispeech
benchmark (Radford et al., 2022)), in real-world applications
such single-utterance systems have been shown to struggle
with a long-tailed distribution of rare words, proper nouns,
etc., leading to decreased user satisfaction with such systems

(Schwarz et al., 2023; Kim & Metze, 2018; Chang et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2019; Sathyendra et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021).
Such a struggle with long-tailed distributions has led
to several promising directions of research aimed at
specializing large-scale general models to handle rare words.
These approaches generally center around fine-tuning where
models are tuned on rare words as they are discovered (Li
et al., 2022; Ku et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2022; Chang et al.,
2022; Yang et al., 2023; Hung et al., 2023), “ASR model
personalization” where model parameters are locally adapted
with user-specific context (Gourav et al., 2021; Biadsy et al.,
2022; Shor et al., 2019), or “Contextual biasing” where
model inputs include additional user-specific context as part
of the input to the model (Jayanthi et al., 2023; Kim & Metze,
2018; Tang et al., 2024; Sathyendra et al., 2022; Chang et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2021; Dingliwal et al.,
2023). While these approaches have shown promising results, they often require additional compute during training or

*

Equal contribution 1 Amazon AGI 2 UC Berkeley (work
done while at Amazon). Correspondence to: Shalini Ghosh
<ghoshsha@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

