All-in-one simulation-based inference
Manuel Gloeckler 1 Michael Deistler 1 Christian Weilbach 2 Frank Wood 2 Jakob H. Macke 1 3

Abstract
Amortized Bayesian inference trains neural networks to solve stochastic inference problems using model simulations, thereby making it possible to rapidly perform Bayesian inference for
any newly observed data. However, current
simulation-based amortized inference methods
are simulation-hungry and inflexible: They require the specification of a fixed parametric prior,
simulator, and inference tasks ahead of time. Here,
we present a new amortized inference method—
the Simformer—which overcomes these limitations. By training a probabilistic diffusion model
with transformer architectures, the Simformer
outperforms current state-of-the-art amortized inference approaches on benchmark tasks and is
substantially more flexible: It can be applied to
models with function-valued parameters, it can
handle inference scenarios with missing or unstructured data, and it can sample arbitrary conditionals of the joint distribution of parameters
and data, including both posterior and likelihood.
We showcase the performance and flexibility of
the Simformer on simulators from ecology, epidemiology, and neuroscience, and demonstrate
that it opens up new possibilities and application domains for amortized Bayesian inference
on simulation-based models.

Parameters

Simulator

Data

finite-dim

exploit dependency
structure of the
simulator

unstructured or
missing data

∞-dim

observation
intervals

All-in-1-inference

posterior:
likelihood:
all conditionals:

Figure 1. Capabilities of the Simformer: It can perform inference
for simulators with a finite number of parameters or functionvalued parameters (first column), it can exploit dependency structures of the simulator to improve accuracy (second column), it can
perform inference for unstructured or missing data, for observation
intervals (third column), and it provides an ‘all-in-one’ inference
method that can sample all conditionals of the joint distribution,
including posterior and likelihood (fourth column).

et al., 2020; Dax et al., 2021; Marlier et al., 2022). A fundamental challenge in these simulators is the identification
of unobservable parameters based on empirical data, a task
addressed by simulation-based inference (SBI) (Cranmer
et al., 2020), which aims to perform Bayesian inference
using samples from a (possibly blackbox) simulator, without requiring access to likelihood evaluations. A common
approach in SBI is to train a neural network on pairs of
parameters and corresponding simulation outputs: After an
initial investment in simulations and network training, inference for any observation can then be performed without
further simulations. These methods thereby amortize the
cost of Bayesian inference.

1. Introduction
Numerical simulators play an important role across various
scientific and engineering domains, offering mechanistic
insights into empirically observed phenomena (Gonçalves

Many methods for amortized SBI have been developed recently (Papamakarios & Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al.,
2017; Le et al., 2017; Greenberg et al., 2019; Papamakarios et al., 2019; Radev et al., 2020; Hermans et al., 2020;
Glöckler et al., 2022; Boelts et al., 2022; Deistler et al.,
2022a; Simons et al., 2023). While these methods have
different strengths and weaknesses, most of them also share
limitations. First, they often rely on structured, tabular data
(typically θ, x vectors). Yet, real-world datasets are often
more messy (Shukla & Marlin, 2021): Irregularly sampled
time series naturally arise in domains like ecology, climate

1

Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen and
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Department Empirical Inference, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to:
Manuel Gloeckler <manuel.gloeckler@uni-tuebingen.de>, Jakob
H. Macke <jakob.macke@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

