Multi-Fidelity Residual Neural Processes for Scalable Surrogate Modeling

Ruijia Niu 1 Dongxia Wu 1 Kai Kim 1 Yi-An Ma 2 Duncan Watson-Parris 2 3 Rose Yu 1

Abstract

sophistication. The high-fidelity simulators are more accurate but resource demanding, whereas lower-fidelity models
are less accurate but more computationally efficient. For
example, in climate science, people incorporate real-world
observations with computational models to calibrate simulations (Hersbach et al., 2020; Karami & Kashef, 2020).
While the calibrated data has refined details and accuracy,
the domain coverage is very limited and the simulation
process is computation heavy. Multi-fidelity surrogate modeling (Peherstorfer et al., 2018) aims to balance the computation efficiency-accuracy trade-off by utilizing data across
fidelities to learn an accurate surrogate at the highest fidelity.

Multi-fidelity surrogate modeling aims to learn
an accurate surrogate at the highest fidelity level
by combining data from multiple sources. Traditional methods relying on Gaussian processes
can hardly scale to high-dimensional data. Deep
learning approaches utilize neural network based
encoders and decoders to improve scalability.
These approaches share encoded representations
across fidelities without including corresponding
decoder parameters. This hinders inference performance, especially in out-of-distribution scenarios when the highest fidelity data has limited domain coverage. To address these limitations, we propose Multi-fidelity Residual Neural Processes (MFRNP), a novel multi-fidelity
surrogate modeling framework. MFRNP explicitly models the residual between the aggregated output from lower fidelities and ground
truth at the highest fidelity. The aggregation
introduces decoders into the information sharing step and optimizes lower fidelity decoders
to accurately capture both in-fidelity and crossfidelity information. We show that MFRNP significantly outperforms state-of-the-art in learning
partial differential equations and a real-world climate modeling task. Our code is published at:
github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/MFRNP.

Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Seeger, 2004) are a popular tool
for surrogate modeling. Recent works have attempted to
extend GP to multi-fidelity setting (Perdikaris et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2021). However, they inherit the limited scalability from GP due to the inversion of the kernel matrix
(Williams & Rasmussen, 1995; Rasmussen, 2003). To solve
this issue, many have proposed deep learning-based surrogate models (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013; Raissi & Karniadakis, 2016; Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017; Wilson et al.,
2016). Neural Processes (NPs) (Wang & Lin, 2020; Hebbal et al., 2021) stand out as one of the most appealing
approaches regarding inference performance and scalability.
NPs are capable of encoding fidelity-specific data into lowdimensional latent representations and use them to improve
inference performance at the highest fidelity, alleviating the
scalability issue from high-dimensional data.
For example, Deep Multi-fidelity Active Learning (DMFAL) (Li et al., 2022b;a) proposed to pass information from
lower fidelities to higher fidelities with encoded hidden
representations. This method requires a hierarchical structure in the latent space passing information from low to
high fidelity level, which can lead to the error propagation
issue. Disentangled Multi-fidelity Deep Bayesian Active
Learning (D-MFDAL) (Wu et al., 2023) alleviates this issue by redesigning the NP using local and global hidden
representations. Nevertheless, these methods rely on latent
representations from only the encoders for cross-fidelity information sharing. However, the decoder parameters varies
across fidelities and are not shared. At the highest fidelity,
shared representations are decoded with different parameters, making the decoded output inherently inaccurate. This
significantly limits the inference performance, especially

1. Introduction
From engineering to climate science, a computational model,
often realized by simulation, is frequently used to characterize the input-output relationship of a physical system. These
computational models can be simulated at multiple levels of
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA 2 Halıcıoğlu
Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA 3 Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University
of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. Correspondence to: Rose Yu <roseyu@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

