SaVeR: Optimal Data Collection Strategy for Safe Policy Evaluation in Tabular
MDP
Subhojyoti Mukherjee 1 Josiah P. Hanna 2 Robert Nowak 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning has emerged as a powerful tool
for decision-making in a wide range of applications, from
robotics (Ibarz et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2022) and gameplaying (Szita, 2012) to autonomous driving (Kiran et al.,
2021), web-marketing (Bottou et al., 2013), healthcare (Fischer, 2018; Yu et al., 2019) and finance (Hambly et al.,
2021). However, in these applications, it is often necessary
to first evaluate the decision-making policy before its longterm deployment in the real world. In fact, policy evaluation
is a critical step in reinforcement learning, as it allows us to
assess the quality of a learned policy and to check whether
it can truly achieve the desired goal for the target task. One
potential solution to this issue is off-policy evaluation (OPE)
(Dudı́k et al., 2014; Li et al., 2015; Swaminathan et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2017; Su et al., 2020; Kallus et al., 2021; Cai
et al., 2021). However, for OPE estimators there is no control over how the static dataset is generated, which could
result in low accuracy estimates.

In this paper, we study safe data collection for the
purpose of policy evaluation in tabular Markov
decision processes (MDPs). In policy evaluation,
we are given a target policy and asked to estimate
the expected cumulative reward it will obtain. Policy evaluation requires data and we are interested
in the question of what behavior policy should
collect the data for the most accurate evaluation
of the target policy. While prior work has considered behavior policy selection, in this paper,
we additionally consider a safety constraint on
the behavior policy. Namely, we assume there
exists a known default policy that incurs a particular expected cost when run and we enforce
that the cumulative cost of all behavior policies
ran is better than a constant factor of the cost that
would be incurred had we always run the default
policy. We first show that there exists a class of
intractable MDPs where no safe oracle algorithm
with knowledge about problem parameters can
efficiently collect data and satisfy the safety constraints. We then define the tractability condition
for an MDP such that a safe oracle algorithm can
efficiently collect data and using that we prove
the first lower bound for this setting. We then
introduce an algorithm SaVeR for this problem
that approximates the safe oracle algorithm and
bound the finite-sample mean squared error of
the algorithm while ensuring it satisfies the safety
constraint. Finally, we show in simulations that
SaVeR produces low MSE policy evaluation while
satisfying the safety constraint.

Hence, a natural idea is to actively gather the dataset using
an adaptive behavior policy and thus increase accuracy in
the evaluation of the target policy’s value. In many realworld settings, the behavior policy itself must satisfy some
side constraints (specific to the industry) (Wu et al., 2016)
or safety constraints (Wan et al., 2022) while collecting
the dataset. For instance, in web marketing, it is common
to run an A/B test with safety constraints over a subset of
all users before a potential new policy is deployed for all
users (Kohavi and Longbotham, 2017; Tucker and Joachims,
2022). While testing autonomous vehicles it is quite natural
to incorporate safety constraints in the behavior policy. So
it is of great practical importance to ensure that our data
collection rule is safe (Zhu and Kveton, 2022).
In this paper, we consider the question of optimal data collection for policy evaluation under safety constraints in the
tabular reinforcement learning (RL) setting. Consider the
following scenario that could arise in web marketing. Suppose we have a policy learned from offline data that has
never been run in a real application. Moreover, we want
this learned policy to be at least as good as a baseline policy
that is already deployed in the application (Wu et al., 2016;
Zhu and Kveton, 2021; 2022). Off-policy evaluation often

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA 2 Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
USA. Correspondence to: Subhojyoti Mukherjee <smukherjee27@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

