CLLMs: Consistency Large Language Models

Siqi Kou * 1 Lanxiang Hu * 2 Zhezhi He 3 Zhijie Deng 1 Hao Zhang 2

Abstract

number of tokens generated, resulting in high latency.

Parallel decoding methods such as Jacobi decoding show promise for more efficient LLM inference as it breaks the sequential nature of the LLM
decoding process and transforms it into parallelizable computation. However, in practice, it
achieves little speedup compared to traditional
autoregressive (AR) decoding, primarily because
Jacobi decoding seldom accurately predicts more
than one token in a single fixed-point iteration
step. To address this, we develop a new approach aimed at realizing fast convergence from
any state to the fixed point on a Jacobi trajectory. This is accomplished by refining the target
LLM to consistently predict the fixed point given
any state as input. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, showing
2.4× to 3.4× improvements in generation speed
while preserving generation quality across both
domain-specific and open-domain benchmarks.
Our code is available at https://github.com/hao-ailab/Consistency LLM.

Existing methods address this issue from various perspectives. For example, speculative decoding (Leviathan et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023) introduces a small draft LLM to
guess tokens and let the target LLM verify them in parallel. Although they can opportunistically generate multiple
tokens in a single evaluation of the target LLM, obtaining
a small yet effective draft model is non-trivial; managing
multiple models within a single system remains a challenging engineering task. Medusa (Cai et al., 2024) alternatively
augments the target LLM with extra guess heads to enable
self-speculation with as much as 3× speedup on various
tasks. Yet, the number of added parameters can be significant (e.g., Medusa2 with 5 extra heads adds 1.6B parameters
for a 6.7B target LLM). Increased memory consumption
could limit generation length and negatively affect inference latency due to the reduction in available memory for
key-value (KV) cache (Pope et al., 2023).
On the other hand, originating from the Jacobi and GaussSeidel fixed-point iteration for solving nonlinear equations (Ortega & Rheinboldt, 2000; Song et al., 2021a), the
Jacobi decoding method (Santilli et al., 2023) first randomly guesses the next n tokens in a sequence (referred to
as n-token sequence hereinafter) from an input prompt. The
n-token sequence, along with the prompt, is then fed to the
LLM to iteratively update itself. Eventually, the n-token
sequence converges to the same output generated by AR decoding under a greedy strategy (see Figure 1). The evolution
of the n-token sequence forms a Jacobi trajectory between
a randomly initialized sequence to the n-token sequence
generated by AR decoding (i.e., the fixed point).

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), including GPT-4 (Achiam
et al., 2023), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a;b), PaLM (Anil
et al., 2023), are pushing the limit of artificial intelligence.
As LLMs are integrated into more applications (Zheng et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2023), the inference latency of LLMs plays
a crucial role in ensuring a positive user experience and high
service quality. However, LLM serving operates in an AR
paradigm, generating one token at a time due to the attention
mechanism’s need for previous token states to generate the
next one. To produce a lengthy response, one must execute
forward passes through the LLMs as many times as the

However, vanilla Jacobi decoding for LLMs shows only
marginal speedup over AR decoding in practice, e.g., an
average of 1.05× speedup in Santilli et al. (2023). This is
because a LLM can rarely yield a correct token when there
are incorrection1 in its preceding tokens due to the attention
mechanism, resulting in a long trajectory as illustrated on the
left side of Figure 2. Lookahead decoding (Fu et al., 2024)
improves the efficiency by leveraging n-grams generated
from previous Jacobi iterations and verify them in parallel
during the decoding process. However, both work are unable

*

Equal contribution 1 Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of California, San
Diego 3 School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Zhijie
Deng <zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
By correctness, we mean alignment with the AR decoding
result under a greedy sampling strategy.

1

