Position: AI-Powered Autonomous Weapons Risk Geopolitical Instability and
Threaten AI Research
Riley Simmons-Edler * 1 2 Ryan P. Badman * 1 2 Shayne Longpre 3 Kanaka Rajan 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

The recent embrace of machine learning (ML)
in the development of autonomous weapons systems (AWS) creates serious risks to geopolitical
stability and the free exchange of ideas in AI research. This topic has received comparatively
little attention of late compared to risks stemming
from superintelligent artificial general intelligence
(AGI), but requires fewer assumptions about the
course of technological development and is thus
a nearer-future issue. ML is already enabling the
substitution of AWS for human soldiers in many
battlefield roles, reducing the upfront human cost,
and thus political cost, of waging offensive war.
In the case of peer adversaries, this increases the
likelihood of “low intensity” conflicts which risk
escalation to broader warfare. In the case of nonpeer adversaries, it reduces the domestic blowback to wars of aggression. This effect can occur
regardless of other ethical issues around the use of
military AI such as the risk of civilian casualties,
and does not require any superhuman AI capabilities. Further, the military value of AWS raises the
specter of an AI-powered arms race and the misguided imposition of national security restrictions
on AI research. Our goal in this paper is to raise
awareness among the public and ML researchers
on the near-future risks posed by full or near-full
autonomy in military technology, and we provide
regulatory suggestions to mitigate these risks. We
call upon AI policy experts and the defense AI
community in particular to embrace transparency
and caution in their development and deployment
of AWS to avoid the negative effects on global
stability and AI research that we highlight here.

With the rise of powerful generative AI models such as GPT4 and Stable Diffusion, and continued progress in fields
such as robotics and reinforcement learning, concerns have
grown among both experts and the public about giving AI
too much power. Academic concerns have thus far centered on threats in domains such as cybersecurity, biological
weapons, disinformation, fraud, and hypothetical rogue artificial general intelligence (AGI) (Future of Life Institute,
2023; Bengio, 2023). Despite these general concerns, there
has been relatively little attention given to specific recent
developments from military and defense-industry groups,
which have already begun to deploy next-generation AIguided Autonomous Weapon Systems (AWS). Weapons
falling under the AWS label have traditionally been either
remotely operated (but AI-assisted) or only autonomous
within a very narrow scope. However, new fully autonomous
(unmanned) AWS in development remove or reduce the human role in the control and decision making process, with
the goal of removing humans from the active battlefield
en mass. For example, the Pentagon’s Replicator program
for AI-based weapon “swarms” promises a drastic shift
in warfare towards highly autonomous and cooperative AI
units within the next few years (Greenwalt, 2023). AWS
can serve many battlefield roles, although human-targeting
lethal AWS (LAWS) have received most public attention
(Taddeo & Blanchard, 2022). Many of these new advanced
AI and machine learning (ML) weapons systems are already seeing real-world deployment for the first time in the
Ukraine War, and are being designed for every branch of
the military and by many nations (Sharma, 2022; Greenwalt,
2023; Pfaff et al., 2023).
Current discussion of ethical use of AWS centers on keeping
humans in-the-loop for remote autonomous warfare so that
only humans are making lethal decisions, while accepting
the idea that remote warfare saves lives (Riesen, 2022; Pfaff
et al., 2023). However, we argue that there are fundamental issues caused by removing humans from the battlefield.
Human “boots-on-the-ground” can signify a commitment
to following the rules of war, improve humanitarian aspects
of occupation, and most importantly maintain a human cost
to war for aggressor nations that prevents a state of endless

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Neurobiology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, USA 2 Kempner Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, USA. Correspondence to: Riley Simmons-Edler <riley simmons-edler@hms.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

