Closing the Gap: Achieving Global Convergence (Last Iterate) of Actor-Critic
under Markovian Sampling with Neural Network Parametrization

Mudit Gaur 1 Amrit Singh Bedi 2 Di Wang 3 Vaneet Aggarwal 4
expected returns, denoted by J(λ), where λ ∈ Rd is the
policy parameter and J(λ) is the expected reward for a policy parameterised by λ. The algorithms involves an interplay between the gradient ascent for the actor parameter
and the estimation of the action value function or critic.
Theoretical analysis of AC algorithms, however, often lags
behind their practical implementations. Due to the practical
use of multi-layer neural network parameterizations for the
actor as well as critic, an important observation in recent
research is the widening gap between theoretical models
and real-world applicability. True insights are gained when
theoretical analysis mirrors practical complexities, even if
it means accepting more conservative bounds for the sake
of realism. Our focus in this work is to close this gap between theoretical analysis and practical implementations of
AC algorithms.

Abstract
The current state-of-the-art theoretical analysis of Actor-Critic (AC) algorithms significantly
lags in addressing the practical aspects of AC
implementations. This crucial gap needs bridging to bring the analysis in line with practical implementations of AC. To address this, we
advocate for considering the MMCLG criteria:
Multi-layer neural network parametrization for
actor/critic, Markovian sampling, Continuous
state-action spaces, the performance of the Last
iterate, and Global optimality. These aspects
are practically significant and have been largely
overlooked in existing theoretical analyses of AC
algorithms. In this work, we address these gaps
by providing the first comprehensive theoretical
analysis of AC algorithms that encompasses all
five crucial practical aspects (covers MMCLG
criteria). We establish global convergence
sam
ple complexity bounds of Õ ϵ−3 . We achieve
this result through our novel use of the weak
gradient domination property of MDP’s and our
unique analysis of the error in critic estimation.

To align closely with practical settings, it is essential
that any theoretical analysis of Actor-Critic (AC) algorithms thoroughly considers five crucial aspects. These
are (a) Multi-layer neural network parametrization for actor/critic, (b) Markovian sampling, (c) Continuous stateaction spaces, (d) performance of the Last iterate, and (e)
Global optimality. The significance of the MMCLG criteria lies in its alignment with practical implementations:
Deep neural networks are commonly used for actor-critic
implementations (Lee et al., 2020), data in real-world scenarios is typically sampled in a Markovian fashion (Zhong
et al., 2019), and most applications, like robotics, operate
in continuous spaces (Dankwa & Zheng, 2019). Furthermore, in practice, the last iterate of the algorithms is used
to evaluate performance (Wang & Hu, 2023). Finally for
training neural networks, the global convergence truly matters, as local convergence can be misleading in evaluating
the effectiveness of the trained network (Swirszcz et al.,
2016).

1. Introduction
Actor-Critic (AC) algorithms (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999)
have emerged as a cornerstone in modern reinforcement
learning, showcasing remarkable versatility and effectiveness across a diverse range of applications such as games
(Zhou et al., 2022), network scheduling (Agarwal et al.,
2022), robotics (Chen et al., 2022), autonomous driving
(Tang et al., 2022), and video streaming (Zhang et al.,
2022). At their core, AC algorithms aim to maximize the
1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN, U.S.A 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida 3 Department of Computer Science, KAUST 4 School
of IE and School of ECE, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
U.S.A. Correspondence to: Mudit Gaur <mgaur@purdue.edu>,
Vaneet Aggarwal <vaneet@purdue.edu>.

The existing literature (cf. Table 1), while extensive,
does not have any works that simultaneously address the
above-mentioned five dimensions (MMCLG). There exist works which have achieved
PTlocal convergence (which
upper bound the quantity T1 i=1 ||∇J(λt )||2 ) for finite
state spaces for Multi-layer settings with Markovian sampling (Tian et al., 2023)]. Another set of results have

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

