Positive and Unlabeled Learning with Controlled Probability Boundary Fence

Changchun Li 1 2 Yuanchao Dai 1 2 Lei Feng 3 Ximing Li 1 2 Bing Wang 1 2 Jihong Ouyang 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The traditional binary classification, a.k.a., Positive and
Negative (PN) learning, is a common case of supervised
learning, whose goal, as its name suggests, is to induce a
binary classifier from a set of labeled positive and negative training instances (Bekker & Davis, 2020). However,
manually annotating sufficient numbers of positive training
instances is often costly and even impractical in many realworld scenarios, therefore the datasets consisting of a few
labeled positive training instances and loads of unlabeled
ones can be available only (Yang et al., 2012; Ren et al.,
2014; Hsieh et al., 2015). Take the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease for example. Due to the infrequency and long incubation of Alzheimer’s disease, one can only access a
few diagnosed patients (positive) and loads of undiagnosed
individuals (unlabeled), which can be either diseased or
healthy. Learning with such kind of datasets refers to the
paradigm of Positive and Unlabeled (PU) learning, which
has drawn increasing interest recently to meet the urgent
practical demands (Bekker & Davis, 2020).

Positive and Unlabeled (PU) learning refers to a
special case of binary classification, and technically, it aims to induce a binary classifier from a
few labeled positive training instances and loads
of unlabeled instances. In this paper, we derive a
theorem indicating that the probability boundary
of the asymmetric disambiguation-free expected
risk of PU learning is controlled by its asymmetric penalty, and we further empirically evaluated this theorem. Inspired by the theorem and
its empirical evaluations, we propose an easy-toimplement two-stage PU learning method, namely
Positive and Unlabeled Learning with Controlled
Probability Boundary Fence (PUL - CPBF). In the
first stage, we train a set of weak binary classifiers
concerning different probability boundaries by
minimizing the asymmetric disambiguation-free
empirical risks with specific asymmetric penalty
values. We can interpret these induced weak binary classifiers as a probability boundary fence.
For each unlabeled instance, we can use the predictions to locate its class posterior probability
and generate a stochastic label. In the second
stage, we train a strong binary classifier over labeled positive training instances and all unlabeled
instances with stochastic labels in a self-training
manner. Extensive empirical results demonstrate
that PUL - CPBF can achieve competitive performance compared with the existing PU learning
baselines.

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University,
China 2 Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge
Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China
3
Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore
University of Technology and Design, Singapore. Correspondence
to: Ximing Li <liximing86@gmail.com>.

Many PU learning methods have been developed during the
past decade (Chen et al., 2020a; Li et al., 2022; Zhao et al.,
2022; Zhu et al., 2023). Naturally, a straightforward methodology is to induce the binary classifier by minimizing the
disambiguation-free empirical risk, where all unlabeled instances are directly treated as pseudo-negative instances.
However, it empirically suffers from a disambiguationfree boundary deviation phenomenon, where the boundary
learned by the disambiguation-free empirical risk tends to
deviate from the supervised boundary towards the positive
side (Li et al., 2022), resulting in worse performance. To
promote the disambiguation-free setting, some PU learning
studies formulate a variety of unbiased risk estimators of PN
learning, and the representatives include uPU (du Plessis
et al., 2014; 2015), nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017), and DistPU (Zhao et al., 2022) etc. In parallel, another branch of
PU learning concentrates on estimating pseudo-labels for
unlabeled instances, and using them to induce the binary
classifier in a self-training manner (Liu et al., 2002; Zhang
& Zuo, 2009; Chaudhari & Shevade, 2012; Luo et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our motivation and contribution. Our motivation begins with an interest in the disambiguation-free boundary
1

