Private Gradient Descent for Linear Regression: Tighter Error Bounds and
Instance-Specific Uncertainty Estimation

Gavin Brown 1 Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham 2 Georgina Evans 2 Daogao Liu 1 Adam Smith 3 2
Abhradeep Thakurta 2

Abstract

training procedures remains an important open question,
with an extensive line of research dating back 15 years (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2008; Chaudhuri et al., 2011).

We provide an improved analysis of standard differentially private gradient descent for linear regression under the squared error loss. Under
modest assumptions on the input, we characterize the distribution of the iterate at each time step.

The distortion introduced for privacy is complex to characterize; recent work has thus also investigated how to provide confidence intervals and other inferential tools that allow the model’s user to correctly interpret its parameters.
Confidence intervals on parameters are critical for applications of regression in the social and natural sciences, where
they serve to evaluate effects’ significance.

Our analysis leads to new results on the algorithm’s accuracy: for a proper fixed choice of hyperparameters, the sample complexity depends
only linearly on the dimension of the data. This
matches the dimension-dependence of the (nonprivate) ordinary least squares estimator as well
as that of recent private algorithms that rely on
sophisticated adaptive gradient-clipping schemes
(Varshney et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023).

In this paper, we address these problems for a fundamental statistical learning problem: least-squares linear regression. Specifically, we give a new analysis of a widely studied differentially private algorithm, noisy gradient descent
(DP-GD). This algorithm repeatedly computes the (full)
gradient at a point, adds Gaussian noise, and updates the
iterate using the noisy gradient.

Our analysis of the iterates’ distribution also allows us to construct confidence intervals for the
empirical optimizer which adapt automatically to
the variance of the algorithm on a particular data
set. We validate our theorems through experiments on synthetic data.

Our central technical tool is a new characterization of the
distribution of the iterates of private gradient descent. Under the assumption that the algorithm does not clip any gradients, we show that the distribution at any time step can be
written as a Gaussian distribution about the empirical minimizer (plus a small bias term). All together, the iterates
are drawn from a Gaussian process. We apply this characterization in two ways: we derive tighter error bounds and
prove finite-sample coverage guarantees for natural confidence intervals constructions.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models trained on personal data are now
ubiquitous—keyboard prediction models (Xu et al., 2023),
sentence completion in email (Li et al., 2022), and photo
labeling (Kurakin et al., 2022), for example. Training with
differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) gives a strong
guarantee that the model parameters reveal little about any
single individual. However, differentially private algorithms necessarily introduce some distortion into the training process. Understanding the most accurate and efficient

Our main result shows that the algorithm converges to a
nontrivial solution—that is, an estimate whose distance
from the true parameters is a o(1) fraction of the parameter
space’s diameter—using only n = e
Θ(p) samples (omitting
dependency on the privacy parameters) when the features
and errors are distributed according to a Gaussian. Until recently, all private algorithms for linear regression required Ω(p3/2 ) samples to achieve nontrivial bounds. This
includes previous analyses of gradient descent (Cai et al.,
2021). Three recent papers have broken this barrier: the
exponential-time approach of Liu et al. (2022) and the efficient algorithms of Varshney et al. (2022) and subsequently

1

Paul G Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington. Part of this work was done while
G.B. was at Boston University 2 Google DeepMind 3 Department
of Computer Science, Boston University. Correspondence to:
Gavin Brown <grbrown@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

