Listwise Reward Estimation for
Offline Preference-based Reinforcement Learning

Heewoong Choi 1 Sangwon Jung 1 Hongjoon Ahn 1 Taesup Moon 1 2

Abstract

However, designing the reward function is time-consuming,
especially if we want to align it with human intent (Hejna &
Sadigh, 2024).

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), designing precise reward functions remains to be a challenge,
particularly when aligning with human intent.
Preference-based RL (PbRL) was introduced to
address this problem by learning reward models
from human feedback. However, existing PbRL
methods have limitations as they often overlook
the second-order preference that indicates the relative strength of preference. In this paper, we propose Listwise Reward Estimation (LiRE), a novel
approach for offline PbRL that leverages secondorder preference information by constructing a
Ranked List of Trajectories (RLT), which can be
efficiently built by using the same ternary feedback type as traditional methods. To validate the
effectiveness of LiRE, we propose a new offline
PbRL dataset that objectively reflects the effect
of the estimated rewards. Our extensive experiments on the dataset demonstrate the superiority of LiRE, i.e., outperforming state-of-the-art
baselines even with modest feedback budgets and
enjoying robustness with respect to the number
of feedbacks and feedback noise. Our code is
available at https://github.com/chwoong/LiRE

This shortcoming has led to research on learning the reward
model from human feedback without explicitly designing
the reward function. While expert demonstration is one
type of human feedback (Abbeel & Ng, 2004), recent papers use preference feedback on which of a pair of trajectory segments is preferred since it is a significantly easier
type of feedback to collect (Kaufmann et al., 2023; Casper
et al., 2023). More specifically, the common approach for
the Preference-based RL (PbRL) consists of two steps: (1)
learn a reward model using preference feedback from trajectory segment pairs, then (2) apply ordinary RL algorithms
with the learned reward model. After successfully training a robot agent with PbRL (Christiano et al., 2017), it
was shown that novel behaviors aligned with human intent,
e.g., backflips, can also be learned (Lee et al., 2021b), while
learning such behavior would be extremely hard from explicitly hand-coded rewards. The PbRL framework has gained
popularity in both online (Park et al., 2021; Liang et al.,
2021) and offline (Kim et al., 2022; Shin et al., 2022; An
et al., 2023; Hejna & Sadigh, 2024) settings, in which the
former allows the agents to interact with their environments,
while the latter does not.
In this paper, we focus on the offline PbRL setting, in which
the goal is to find an optimal policy solely from the previously collected preference feedbacks on the pairs of trajectories obtained from some past, fixed policy. This setting
is challenging since the preference feedback cannot be actively collected on the trajectories generated by the current,
updated policy. Hence, developing effective methods for
collecting maximally informative preference feedback data
from the past policy as well as devising efficient reward
learning schemes is indispensable.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated considerable success in various domains such as robotics (Haarnoja
et al., 2018; Kalashnikov et al., 2018), game (Silver et al.,
2017; Mnih et al., 2013; Vinyals et al., 2019), autonomous
driving (Kiran et al., 2021), and real-world tasks (Tan et al.,
2018; Chebotar et al., 2019). An essential component of RL
is to define suitable and precise reward functions so that an
RL agent can be trained successfully (Wirth et al., 2017).

The current norm is to collect ternary preference feedback
(i.e., more/less/equally preferred) for independently sampled
pairs of trajectories, and then employ the standard BradleyTerry (BT) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952) on the collected
data to learn the reward function. While the above approach
was shown to be effective to some extent, a critical limitation
also exists. Namely, due to the independent sampling of the

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University 2 ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Taesup Moon <tsmoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

