Enhancing Storage and Computational Efficiency in Federated Multimodal
Learning for Large-Scale Models

Zixin Zhang 1 Fan Qi 1 Changsheng Xu 2

Abstract

erated multimodal learning (MFL) has garnered widespread
attention (Liu et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2022; Che et al.,
2023). MFL is centered on facilitating collaborative training
of models relevant to multimodal tasks among distributed
clients equipped with diverse sensors, all while ensuring the
protection of data privacy.

The remarkable generalization of large-scale models has recently gained significant attention in multimodal research. However, deploying heterogeneous large-scale models with different modalities
under Federated Learning (FL) to protect data privacy imposes tremendous challenges on clients’
limited computation and storage. In this work,
we propose M2 F ED SA to address the above issue. We realize modularized decomposition of
large-scale models via Split Learning (SL) and
only retain privacy-sensitive modules on clients,
alleviating storage overhead. By freezing largescale models and introducing two specialized
lightweight adapters, the models can better focus
on task-specific knowledge and enhance modalityspecific knowledge, improving the model’s adaptability to different tasks while balancing efficiency. In addition, M2 F ED SA further improves
performance by transferring multimodal knowledge to unimodal clients at both the feature and decision levels, which leverages the complementarity of different modalities. Extensive experiments
on various multimodal classification tasks validate the effectiveness of our proposed M2 F ED SA.
The code is made available publicly at https:
//github.com/M2FedSA/M-2FedSA.

Previous work in MFL has primarily focused on addressing
the challenges of data heterogeneity and modality inconsistency (Chen & Li, 2022; Chen & Zhang, 2022; Yang
et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023a), achieving notable progress in
the process. As large-scale models (Houlsby et al., 2019;
Howard & Ruder, 2018; Jiang et al., 2019; Radford et al.,
2021; Yuan et al., 2021; Tong et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022) have increasingly demonstrated remarkable capabilities in fields such as Natural Language Processing (NLP), and Computer Vision (CV), an increasing
number of efforts in MFL are beginning to harness largescale models for extracting superior features or directly
deploying such models on local clients within the FL framework. However, these approaches are subject to at least two
significant shortcomings. Firstly, large-scale models usually
maintain a large number of parameters, and updating all
model parameters represents an impractical computational
and communication cost. To address this challenge, existing
work (Chen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2022a;
Zhao, 2023; Yu et al., 2023b; Cai et al., 2022; Jiang et al.,
2023) has introduced various efficient fine-tuning strategies
in FL. However, considering that the size of models is snowballing now, even efficient fine-tuning strategies will still
result in unavoidable storage costs. Moreover, the largescale model has significant intellectual property value and it
is questionable whether it is fully accessible to clients.

1. Introduction
With the swift advancement of sensing technologies, there
has been an explosive growth in multimodal data. These
multimodal data, such as medical diagnostic records and vehicular sensory data, are typically collected and stored in a
decentralized and privacy-sensitive manner. Therefore, fed-

To address the above issues, we propose a unified MFL
framework for large-scale models, M2 F ED SA. Specifically,
to alleviate the challenge of limited storage resources on
the client, we adopt a U-shaped split learning method
(Vepakomma et al., 2018) that splits the large-scale models and only keeps privacy-sensitive modules that interact directly with the raw data and labels on the client.
In addition, to balance efficiency and performance, we
carefully design a Dual Adaptive Fine-tuning Strategy
(DAFS). We introduce task and modality adapters to focus

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin, China 2 Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Fan Qi <fanqi@email.tjut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

