SLAB: Efficient Transformers with Simplified Linear Attention and
Progressive Re-parameterized Batch Normalization

Jialong Guo 1 *

Xinghao Chen 1 *

Abstract

Yehui Tang 1

Yunhe Wang 1

rapidly emerged as a preeminent model in the landscape of
language models. Its influence has significantly expanded
with the introduction of Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), illustrating the efficacy and versatility of transformer-based architectures. These architectures
have demonstrated their capability to achieve competitive
performance benchmarks in comparison to convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) across diverse vision tasks (Han
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023; Tang
et al., 2023a; Carion et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2023). Due
to its powerful performance, transformer has become the
mainstream architecture in deep learning. However, the
computational demands of transformer architecture pose a
significant challenge, which is predominantly due to the
quadratic computational complexity of its attention mechanism and the necessity for online statistic computation of
LayerNorm component.

Transformers have become foundational architectures for both natural language and computer vision tasks. However, the high computational cost
makes it quite challenging to deploy on resourceconstraint devices. This paper investigates the
computational bottleneck modules of efficient
transformer, i.e., normalization layers and attention modules. LayerNorm is commonly used in
transformer architectures but is not computational
friendly due to statistic calculation during inference. However, replacing LayerNorm with more
efficient BatchNorm in transformer often leads to
inferior performance and collapse in training. To
address this problem, we propose a novel method
named PRepBN to progressively replace LayerNorm with re-parameterized BatchNorm in training. Moreover, we propose a simplified linear
attention (SLA) module that is simple yet effective to achieve strong performance. Extensive
experiments on image classification as well as object detection demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method. For example, our SLAB-Swin
obtains 83.6% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K
with 16.2ms latency, which is 2.4ms less than
that of Flatten-Swin with 0.1% higher accuracy.
We also evaluated our method for language modeling task and obtain comparable performance
and lower latency. Codes are publicly available at https://github.com/xinghaochen/SLAB
and https://github.com/mindspore-lab/models/.

Numerous efforts have been directed towards enhancing
the efficiency of transformer architecture (Tang et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023b). Several approaches
have sought to mitigate computational complexity by limiting the scope of token interactions within self-attention
mechanisms, such as downsampling the key and value matrices (Wang et al., 2021), implementing sparse global attention patterns (Child et al., 2019), and computing selfattention within smaller windows (Tu et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2022). Meanwhile, linear attention emerges as an alternative strategy to enhance computational efficiency by breaking down the attention mechanism
into linear computational cost (Cai et al., 2022; Han et al.,
2023), yet it is still a challenging task to obtain a good balance between efficiency and accuracy. Moreover, there are
some explorations into substituting LayerNorm (LN) with
BatchNorm (BN) within transformers, motivated by the additional computational overhead LayerNorm incurs during
inference. Yang et al. (2022) propose to add a BatchNorm
layer in-between the two linear layers in the feed forward
network to stabilize the training. However, there still exists a performance gap between the LayerNorm-based and
BatchNorm-based transformers.

1. Introduction
Introduced initially for tasks in natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), transformer architecture has
*

Equal contribution 1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence
to: Xinghao Chen <xinghao.chen@huawei.com>, Yunhe Wang
<yunhe.wang@huawei.com>.

In this paper, we focus on obtaining efficient transformer
architectures by digging deep into the computational in-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

