Neural NeRF Compression

Tuan Pham 1 Stephan Mandt 1

Abstract

Keil et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Fridovich-Keil et al.,
2023; Chan et al., 2022). While significantly accelerating
training and rendering processes, this change also poses
a new challenge: the storage cost for saving the explicit
grid NeRF representation increases. This problem is crucial,
especially in real-world (e.g., large-scale VR and AR) applications where storage and transmission impose critical
constraints.

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have emerged as
powerful tools for capturing detailed 3D scenes
through continuous volumetric representations.
Recent NeRFs utilize feature grids to improve
rendering quality and speed; however, these representations introduce significant storage overhead. This paper presents a novel method for
efficiently compressing a grid-based NeRF model,
addressing the storage overhead concern. Our
approach is based on the non-linear transform
coding paradigm, employing neural compression
for compressing the model’s feature grids. Due
to the lack of training data involving many i.i.d
scenes, we design an encoder-free, end-to-end
optimized approach for individual scenes, using
lightweight decoders. To leverage the spatial inhomogeneity of the latent feature grids, we introduce
an importance-weighted rate-distortion objective
and a sparse entropy model employing a masking mechanism. Our experimental results validate that our proposed method surpasses existing
works in terms of grid-based NeRF compression
efficacy and reconstruction quality.

Our work seeks to significantly reduce the storage costs of
NeRFs. Inspired by neural image compression methodology (Yang et al., 2023b), we apply non-linear transform
coding techniques (Ballé et al., 2020) to compress the explicit grid NeRF representation efficiently. However, we
sidestep the conventional auto-encoder approach in favor
of an iterative inference framework, in which we jointly
optimize the latent code along with a lightweight decoder.
We further take account of the NeRF grid importance scores
while reconstructing the scene to boost the efficiency of our
compression model. Lastly, we propose a novel entropy
model that masks uninformative feature grid points. Utilizing a rate-distortion objective, we can choose from various
compression levels. Our proposed approach departs from
previous works on compressing explicit grid NeRF representations (Li et al., 2023a;b; Deng & Tartaglione, 2023) based
on voxel pruning and/or vector quantization (Gray, 1984)
while taking into account the varying importance levels of
different voxel grid locations.

1. Introduction

To show the effectiveness of our proposed method, we perform extensive experiments on four different datasets. Our
results show that our model is capable of compressing diverse NeRF scenes to a much smaller size and improves over
previous works in terms of rate-distortion performance.

Over the past few years, the field of 3D scene modeling
and reconstruction has been revolutionized by the advent of
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) methodologies (Mildenhall
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Barron et al., 2021). NeRFs
offer a sophisticated method for 3D reconstruction, with
the ability to synthesize novel viewpoints from limited 2D
data. Yet, the original NeRF model requires millions of
MLP queries, which causes slow training and rendering.

2. Background
2.1. Neural Radiance Fields

To address these efficiency concerns, recent NeRF advancements have transitioned to the integration of an explicit grid
representation (Yu et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Fridovich-

Neural radiance fields (Mildenhall et al., 2021) mark a
paradigm shift in 3D scene representation using deep neural
networks. Unlike traditional approaches that employ discrete structures such as point clouds or meshes, NeRFs
model a scene using a continuous volumetric function
F : (x, d) → (c, σ). Here, an input comprising of spatial coordinates x and a viewing direction d is mapped to

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California
Irvine. Correspondence to: Tuan Pham <tuan.pham@uci.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

