MOMENT: A Family of Open Time-series Foundation Models

Mononito Goswami 1 Konrad Szafer * 1 Arjun Choudhry * 1 Yifu Cai 1 Shuo Li 2 Artur Dubrawski 1

Long-horizon Forecasting

Abstract
We introduce MOMENT, a family of open-source
foundation models for general-purpose time series analysis. Pre-training large models on time
series data is challenging due to (1) the absence
of a large and cohesive public time series repository, and (2) diverse time series characteristics
which make multi-dataset training onerous. Additionally, (3) experimental benchmarks to evaluate these models, especially in scenarios with
limited resources, time, and supervision, are still
in their nascent stages. To address these challenges, we compile a large and diverse collection of public time series, called the Time series
Pile, and systematically tackle time series-specific
challenges to unlock large-scale multi-dataset pretraining. Finally, we build on recent work to design a benchmark to evaluate time series foundation models on diverse tasks and datasets in
limited supervision settings. Experiments on this
benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our
pre-trained models with minimal data and taskspecific fine-tuning. Finally, we present several
interesting empirical observations about large pretrained time series models. Pre-trained models
(AutonLab/MOMENT-1-large) and Time
Series Pile (AutonLab/Timeseries-PILE)
are available on https://huggingface.co/AutonLab.

Classification
Imputation
Short-horizon
Forecasting
MOMENT

Anomaly Detection
GPT4TS
TimesNet

Figure 1. MOMENT can solve multiple time series analysis tasks
well (App. E).

unique challenges that modeling time series data poses, time
series analysis continues to receive substantial interest from
academia and industry alike. However, modeling such data
typically requires substantial domain expertise, time, and
task-specific design.
Large pre-trained language (Touvron et al., 2023; Devlin
et al., 2019; Chung et al., 2022), vision (Li et al., 2023a), and
video (Day et al., 2023) models, typically perform well on a
variety of tasks on data from diverse domains, with little or
no supervision, and they can be specialized to perform well
on specific tasks. We unlock these key capabilities for time
series data and release the first family of open-source large
pre-trained time series models, which we call MOMENT.
The models in this family (1) serve as a building block
for diverse time series analysis tasks (e.g., forecasting,
classification, anomaly detection, and imputation, etc.), (2)
are effective out-of-the-box, i.e., with no (or few) particular
task-specific exemplars (enabling e.g., zero-shot forecasting,
few-shot classification, etc.), and (3) are tunable using indistribution and task-specific data to improve performance.

1. Introduction
Time series analysis is an important field encompassing a
wide range of applications ranging from forecasting weather
patterns (Schneider & Dickinson, 1974) or detecting irregular heartbeats using Electrocardiograms (Goswami et al.,
2021), to identifying anomalous software deployments (Xu
et al., 2018). Due to its significant practical value and the
*
Equal contribution 1 Auton Lab, Robotics Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Mononito Goswami
<mgoswami@andrew.cmu.edu>.

MOMENT is a family of high-capacity transformer models,
pre-trained using a masked time series prediction task on
large amounts of time series data drawn from diverse domains. Below we summarize our key contributions.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

C1: Pre-training data. A key limiting factor for pretraining large time series models from scratch was the lack
1

