A New Robust Partial p-Wasserstein-Based Metric for Comparing Distributions

Sharath Raghvendra 1 Pouyan Shirzadian 2 Kaiyi Zhang 2

Abstract

of moving a unit mass from a to b. A transport plan γ is a
coupling of µ and ν, i.e., a joint distribution over the support
A × B whose first and second marginals are µ and ν. For
p ≥ 1, consider the case where the support of µ and ν lie in
a metric space (X , c) with a unit diameter, i.e., c(a, b) ≤ 1
for any pair (a, b) ∈ X × X and the cost of moving unit
mass from a to b is given by d(a, b) = c(a, b)p . For any
transport plan γ between µ and ν, the cost of γ is defined as
Z
1/p
p
wp (γ) :=
c(x, y) dγ(x, y)
.

The 2-Wasserstein distance is sensitive to minor geometric differences between distributions,
making it a very powerful dissimilarity metric.
However, due to this sensitivity, a small outlier
mass can also cause a significant increase in the
2-Wasserstein distance between two similar distributions. Similarly, sampling discrepancy can
cause the empirical 2-Wasserstein distance on n
samples in R2 to converge to the true distance at
a rate of n−1/4 , which is significantly slower than
the rate of n−1/2 for 1-Wasserstein distance. We
introduce a new family of distances parameterized
by k ≥ 0, called k-RPW that is based on computing the partial 2-Wasserstein distance. We show
that (1) k-RPW satisfies the metric properties, (2)
k-RPW is robust to small outlier mass while retaining the sensitivity of 2-Wasserstein distance
to minor geometric differences, and (3) when k
is a constant, k-RPW distance between empirical distributions on n samples in R2 converges
to the true distance at a rate of n−1/3 , which
is faster than the convergence rate of n−1/4 for
the 2-Wasserstein distance. Using the partial pWasserstein distance, we extend our distance to
any p ∈ [1, ∞]. By setting parameters k or p appropriately, we can reduce our distance to the total
variation, p-Wasserstein, and the Lévy-Prokhorov
distances. Experiments show that our distance
function achieves higher accuracy in comparison to the 1-Wasserstein, 2-Wasserstein, and TV
distances for image retrieval tasks on noisy realworld data sets.

X ×X
∗

Let γ be a minimum-cost transport plan between µ and ν.
Then, the p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν is defined
as Wp (µ, ν) := wp (γ ∗ ).
The p-Wasserstein distance is a powerful metric for measuring similarities between probability distributions. Due
to its numerous mathematical properties, the p-Wasserstein
distance has found diverse applications including in machine learning (Chang et al., 2023; Chuang et al., 2022;
Mohajerin Esfahani & Kuhn, 2018; Janati et al., 2019; Luise
et al., 2018; Oquab et al., 2023; Vincent-Cuaz et al., 2021),
computer vision (Backurs et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2010;
Lai et al., 2022), and natural language processing (AlvarezMelis & Jaakkola, 2018; Huang et al., 2016; Yurochkin
et al., 2019). One can estimate the p-Wasserstein distance
between two unknown distributions µ and ν by simply taking n samples from each µ and ν and then computing the
p-Wasserstein distance between the discrete distributions
over these samples (each sample point is assigned a mass of
1/n). For p ∈ [1, ∞), it is well-known that as n → ∞, this
empirical p-Wasserstein distance converges to the true pWasserstein distance. Due to this law of weak convergence,
the p-Wasserstein distance is used as a loss function in training generative models (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Genevay et al.,
2018; Salimans et al., 2018).

1. Introduction

The p-Wasserstein distance is sensitive to geometric dissimilarities between the distributions. Consider two distributions
µ and ν = (1 − δ)µ + δν ′ that differ only by a mass of δ.
The p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν can be as high
as δ 1/p Wp (µ, ν ′ ). Thus, as p increases, the Wp (µ, ν) increases by a rate of δ 1/p , making Wp more sensitive to such
differences for larger values of p. The higher sensitivity
of p-Wasserstein distance for p > 1 makes it an attractive
choice as a dissimilarity metric between distributions. Con-

Given two probability distributions µ and ν with supports
A and B, let, for any (a, b) ∈ A × B, d(a, b) be the cost
1

North Carolina State University 2 Virginia Tech. Correspondence to: S. Raghvendra <skraghve@ncsu.edu>, P. Shirzadian
<pshirzadian@vt.edu>, K. Zhang <kaiyiz@vt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

