Beyond the Calibration Point: Mechanism Comparison in Differential Privacy

Georgios Kaissis * 1 Stefan Kolek * 2 Borja Balle 3 Jamie Hayes 3 Daniel Rueckert 1
tion against specific attacks, such as membership inference
(MIA) and data reconstruction attacks. However, the proper
application of DP to defend against such threats relies on
a correct understanding of the quantitative aspects of privacy protection, which are expressed differently under the
various DP interpretations. For instance, in approximate
DP, the privacy budget is quantified using two parameters
pε, δq. Most relevant DP mechanisms, e.g. the subsampled
Gaussian mechanism (SGM) typically used in DP-SGD, satisfy DP across a continuum of pε, δpεqq-values rather than
a single pε, δq tuple. For these mechanisms, δ is a function
of ε, represented as the privacy profile (Balle et al., 2020a).
An equivalent (dual) functional view is expressed by the
trade-off function in f -DP (Dong et al., 2022).

Abstract
In differentially private (DP) machine learning,
the privacy guarantees of DP mechanisms are often reported and compared on the basis of a single
pε, δq-pair. This practice overlooks that DP guarantees can vary substantially even between mechanisms sharing a given pε, δq, and potentially introduces privacy vulnerabilities which can remain
undetected. This motivates the need for robust,
rigorous methods for comparing DP guarantees in
such cases. Here, we introduce the ∆-divergence
between mechanisms which quantifies the worstcase excess privacy vulnerability of choosing one
mechanism over another in terms of pε, δq, f -DP
and in terms of a newly presented Bayesian interpretation. Moreover, as a generalisation of the
Blackwell theorem, it is endowed with strong
decision-theoretic foundations. Through application examples, we show that our techniques can
facilitate informed decision-making and reveal
gaps in the current understanding of privacy risks,
as current practices in DP-SGD often result in
choosing mechanisms with high excess privacy
vulnerabilities.

However, despite the fact that the DP guarantee of such
mechanisms can only be characterised by a collection of
pε, δq-values, it is common practice in literature to calibrate
against and report a single pε, δq-pair to express the privacy
guarantee of a DP mechanism (Abadi et al., 2016; Papernot
et al., 2021; De et al., 2022). This highlights a potential
misconception that such a single pair is sufficient to fully
characterise or compare DP guarantees. This assumption is
not generally true, as mechanisms can conform to the same
pε, δq-values but still differ significantly, as seen in Figure 1.
In other words: two DP mechanisms can be calibrated
to share an pε, δq-guarantee while offering substantially
different privacy protections.

1. Introduction
Protecting private information in machine learning (ML)
workflows involving sensitive data is of paramount importance. Differential Privacy (DP) has emerged as the preferred method for providing rigorous and verifiable privacy
guarantees, quantifiable by a privacy budget. This represents the privacy loss incurred by publicly releasing data
that has been processed by a system using DP, e.g. when a
deep learning model is trained on sensitive data using DP
stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD, (Abadi et al., 2016)).
In principle, workflows utilising DP can offer strong protec-

0.4

σ = 0.5, p = 0.9
σ = 0.3, p = 0.1

δ (ε)

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

*

Equal contribution 1 AI in Healthcare and Medicine and Institute of Radiology, Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
Mathematical Foundations of AI, LMU Munich 3 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Georgios Kaissis <g.kaissis@tum.de>.

0

2

4

ε

6

8

10

Figure 1: Privacy profiles of two SGMs with different noise
scales σ and sampling rates p. Both satisfy p4.00, 0.08q-DP,
but offer otherwise different levels of privacy protection.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

