Sampling-based Multi-dimensional Recalibration

Youngseog Chung 1 Ian Char 1 Jeff Schneider 1 2

Abstract

Within the general principle of “aligning predicted and empirical probabilities”, various notions of calibration exist,
and these definitions also vary slightly between classification and regression settings. In this work, we focus on the
regression setting where both the inputs, X, and targets, Y ,
are continuous.

Calibration of probabilistic forecasts in the regression setting has been widely studied in the
single dimensional case, where the output variables are assumed to be univariate. In many problem settings, however, the output variables are
multi-dimensional, and in the presence of dependence across the output dimensions, measuring
calibration and performing recalibration for each
dimension separately can be both misleading and
detrimental. In this work, we focus on representing predictive uncertainties via samples, and propose a recalibration method which accounts for
the joint distribution across output dimensions to
produce calibrated samples. Based on the concept
of highest density regions (HDR), we define the
notion of HDR calibration, and show that our recalibration method produces samples which are
HDR calibrated. We demonstrate the performance
of our method and the quality of the recalibrated
samples on a suite of benchmark datasets in multidimensional regression, a real-world dataset in
modeling plasma dynamics during nuclear fusion
reactions, and on a decision-making application
in forecasting demand.

We begin our discussion from the observation that the most
widely studied notions of calibration in regression are usually confined to the setting where the targets are single
dimensional (Gneiting et al., 2007; Pearce et al., 2018;
Kuleshov et al., 2018; Song et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2020;
Zhao et al., 2020; Sahoo et al., 2021; Kuleshov & Deshpande, 2022). While multi-dimensional regression models
are widely used in machine learning, especially in applications such as model-based control (Chua et al., 2018; Malik
et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020) or modeling in the physical sciences (Sexton et al., 2012; Duraisamy
et al., 2019; Abbate et al., 2021; Char et al., 2023a), we find
that methods which account for the joint multi-dimensional
distribution in assessing calibration and recalibrating the
prediction is generally lacking. In lieu of more sophisticated
methods, calibration is often considered for each output
dimension independently. However, failing to account for
interplay among the output dimensions may be problematic
when dependence does exist. In this case, the collection of
marginals is not sufficient to provide an accurate assessment
of the prediction quality (see Figure 1 for an example).

1. Introduction

In this work, we address the problem of calibration in multidimensional regression by first formalizing a notion of calibration which can account for dependence among the output
dimensions and further proposing a recalibration algorithm
for the joint predictive distribution. We summarize our main
contributions as follows:

Calibration in probabilistic forecasting, in general terms,
refers to the alignment between the predicted probabilities
and empirical frequencies of the true observations. Alongside other quantitative metrics to assess predictive distributions, e.g. negative log-likelihood (NLL) or simply accuracy
of the mean, calibration is considered an important and desirable quality of probabilistic forecasts, and many works
have appraised the utility of calibration in various application settings (Gneiting et al., 2007; Malik et al., 2019;
Deshpande & Kuleshov, 2021; Chung et al., 2023).

• By leveraging existing ideas in highest density regions
(HDR), we propose the notion of HDR calibration,
which accounts for dependence in the output dimensions in defining and evaluating calibration for multidimensional distributional predictions.

1

Machine Learning Department; 2 Robotics Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Correspondence to:
Youngseog Chung <youngsec@cs.cmu.edu>.

• We develop a recalibration algorithm for multidimensions which produces HDR calibrated predictive
distributions via a sampling procedure.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• We provide extensive demonstrations of the merits
1

