Characterizing Overfitting in Kernel Ridgeless Regression
Through the Eigenspectrum

Tin Sum Cheng 1 Aurelien Lucchi 1 Anastasis Kratsios 2 David Belius 3

Abstract

adaptability of kernel regression positions it as a crucial tool
in various machine learning applications, making it imperative to comprehensively understand its behavior, particularly
concerning overfitting.

We derive new bounds for the condition number of kernel matrices, which we then use to enhance existing non-asymptotic test error bounds
for kernel ridgeless regression (KRR) in the overparameterized regime for a fixed input dimension.
For kernels with polynomial spectral decay, we
recover the bound from previous work; for exponential decay, our bound is non-trivial and novel.
Our contribution is two-fold: (i) we rigorously
prove the phenomena of tempered overfitting and
catastrophic overfitting under the sub-Gaussian
design assumption, closing an existing gap in the
literature; (ii) we identify that the independence
of the features plays an important role in guaranteeing tempered overfitting, raising concerns
about approximating KRR generalization using
the Gaussian design assumption in previous literature.

Despite the increasing attention directed towards kernel
ridge regression, the existing literature predominantly concentrates on overfitting phenomena in either the high input dimensional regime or the asymptotic regime (Liang
& Rakhlin, 2020; Mei & Montanari, 2022; Misiakiewicz,
2022), also known as the ultra-high dimensional regime
(Zou & Zhang, 2009; Fan et al., 2009). Notably, the focus on asymptotic bounds, requiring the input dimension
to approach infinity, may not align with the finite nature of
real-world datasets and target functions. Similarly, classical Rademacher-based bounds, e.g. (Bartlett & Mendelson,
2002), require that the weights of the kernel regressor satisfy data-independent bounds, a restriction that is also not
implemented in standard kernel ridge regression algorithms.
These mismatches between idealized mathematical assumptions and practical implementation standards necessitate a
more nuanced exploration of overfitting in kernel regression
in a fixed input dimension.

1. Introduction
Kernel ridge regression (KRR) plays a pivotal role in machine learning since it offers an expressive and rapidly trainable framework for modeling complex relationships in data.
In recent years, kernels have regained significance in deep
learning theory since many deep neural networks (DNNs)
can be understood as converging to certain kernel limits.

Contributions This work aims to understand the overfitting behaviour for kernel ridge regression (KRR). Our main
contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We rigorously derive tight non-asymptotic upper and
lower bounds for the test error of the minimum norm
interpolant under a sub-Gaussian design assumption
on the features. While this assumption assumes independence of the features, this point will be relaxed in
contribution #3.

Its significance has been underscored by its ability to approximate deep neural network (DNN) training under certain
conditions, providing a tractable avenue for analytical exploration of test error and robust theoretical guarantees (Jacot
et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019; Bordelon et al., 2020). The

2. Consequently, we show that a polynomially decaying
spectrum yields tempered overfitting (Theorem 4.2),
whereas an exponentially decaying spectrum leads to
catastrophic overfitting (Theorem 4.3), filling a gap in
the existing literature.

1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel, Switzerland 2 Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, McMaster University and Vector Institute, Canada
3
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, UniDistance
Suisse, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Tin Sum Cheng <tinsum.cheng@unibas.ch>.

3. We extend our analysis to the case of sub-Gaussian but
possibly dependent features. We discover a qualitative
difference in overfitting behavior that was previously
unknown in the literature using the Gaussian design

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

