Integrated Hardware Architecture and Device Placement Search
Irene Wang 1 Jakub Tarnawski 2 Amar Phanishayee 2 Divya Mahajan 1

Abstract

Distributed deep learning divides a workload along various
dimensions such as data parallel, pipeline parallel, and
tensor model parallel, which mitigates the large memory
requirements of training while boosting the throughput.
When designing a hardware accelerator for a single or set
of models, an important question arises: "what architecture
and model distribution strategy can achieve the optimal
performance for end-to-end deep learning training?"

Distributed execution of deep learning training
involves a dynamic interplay between hardware
accelerator architecture and device placement
strategy. This is the first work to explore the
co-optimization of determining the optimal
architecture and device placement strategy
through novel algorithms, improving the balance
of computational resources, memory usage,
and data distribution. Our architecture search
leverages tensor and vector units, determining
their quantity and dimensionality, and on-chip
and off-chip memory configurations. It also
determines the microbatch size and decides
whether to recompute or stash activations,
balancing the memory footprint of training and
storage size. For each explored architecture
configuration, we use an Integer Linear
Program (ILP) to find the optimal schedule
for executing operators on the accelerator.
The ILP results then integrate with a dynamic
programming solution to identify the most
effective device placement strategy, combining
data, pipeline, and tensor model parallelism
across multiple accelerators. Our approach
achieves higher throughput on large language
models compared to the state-of-the-art TPUv4
and the Spotlight accelerator search framework.
The entire source code of P HAZE is available at
https://github.com/msr-fiddle/phaze.

However, these two crucial aspects – the model distribution
strategy and the specific hardware – have generally been
examined in isolation. Some studies focus on identifying
the most suitable architecture for deep learning execution,
typically only for inference tasks (Kao et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2022a; Sakhuja et al., 2023). Others propose strategies
for distributing models across accelerators, assuming
a fixed domain-specific architecture (Jia et al., 2018;
Tarnawski et al., 2020). The hardware architecture search
explores the on- and off-chip resource utilization, whereas
device placement strategy search offers a balance between
memory footprint, networking overhead, and overall
training throughput. Thus, only performing architecture
search (Adnan et al., 2024) with a fixed device placement
strategy can lead to under-utilization of the accelerator.
Whereas, performing a device placement strategy on a fixed
architecture (Tarnawski et al., 2021) might only search
through a sub-optimal space of memory footprint and
networking overhead. As such, identifying an optimal
solution that co-optimizes accelerator architecture and
distributed execution strategy for deep learning, remains a
significant, yet unresolved, research challenge.
To tackle this challenge, we introduce P HAZE, a novel
framework for co-optimizing hardware architecture, device
placement strategy, and per-chip operator scheduling. This
combined exploration of architecture configurations and
its schedule is complex, particularly when execution
is distributed across multiple devices, resulting in a
computationally vast multi-dimensional search space. Thus,
to determine an accelerator architecture, P HAZE utilizes a
hardware template derived from previous works, including
both tensor and vector cores (Jouppi et al., 2017; Ghodrati
et al., 2024). The hardware template defines the scope
of the architecture search, with tensor cores handling
matrix multiplication operators and vector cores executing
point-wise and activation functions. For the device
placement search, P HAZE determines model splits using

1. Introduction
Deep learning training, due to its unique data flow, memory,
and compute requirements of modern models, is often
executed on specialized hardware known as domain-specific
accelerators (Jouppi et al., 2023; Mahajan et al., 2016; Park
et al., 2017). Moreover, due to the large memory footprint,
training also needs to be executed in a distributed manner.
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA 2 Microsoft
Research, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Irene Wang
<irene.wang@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

