Stationary Latent Weight Inference
for Unreliable Observations from Online Test-Time Adaptation

Jae-Hong Lee 1 Joon-Hyuk Chang 1

Abstract

vision and speech recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; He et al., 2016; Hinton et al.,
2012; Graves et al., 2013). The success of DNNs predominantly depend on the assumption that the training and testing
datasets encompass independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d) samples under the same distribution (Goodfellow
et al., 2016; Murphy, 2023). However, this assumption
can be easily invalidated in real-world scenarios because
of minor changes such as varying weather conditions or
noise introduced by aging sensors (Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019b; Koh et al., 2021). Moreover, data collected in realworld environments often exhibit biases towards specific
environments or labels owing to limitations in data collection methodologies. Therefore, the performance of DNNs
degrades significantly when there are distribution shifts
(Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2017), and
addressing domain adaptation under varying distribution
shifts becomes a crucial issue.

In the rapidly evolving field of online test-time
adaptation (OTTA), effectively managing distribution shifts is a pivotal concern. State-of-the-art
OTTA methodologies often face limitations such
as an inadequate target domain information integration, leading to significant issues like catastrophic forgetting and a lack of adaptability in
dynamically changing environments. In this paper, we introduce a stationary latent weight inference (SLWI) framework, a novel approach to
overcome these challenges. The proposed SLWI
uniquely incorporates Bayesian filtering to continually track and update the target model weights
along with the source model weight in online settings, thereby ensuring that the adapted model
remains responsive to ongoing changes in the target domain. The proposed framework has the
peculiar property to identify and backtrack nonlinear weights that exhibit local non-stationarity,
thereby mitigating error propagation, a common
pitfall of previous approaches. By integrating and
refining information from both source and target
domains, SLWI presents a robust solution to the
persistent issue of domain adaptation in OTTA,
significantly improving existing methodologies.
The efficacy of SLWI is demonstrated through
various experimental setups, showcasing its superior performance in diverse distribution shift
scenarios.

Online test-time adaptation (OTTA) has emerged as a potent solution to domain adaptation in distribution shifts. It
involves concurrent training and testing on the streaming
data from the target domain where distribution shifts occur.
The OTTA framework performs unsupervised source-free
domain adaptation. As OTTA operates in real-time, relying
on human annotation for training is impractical, necessitating an unsupervised learning approach. Furthermore, access
to source-domain data is often restricted, and only models
pre-trained on source data are available. Owing to these
limitations, OTTA methods employ unsupervised objective
functions for the source model. In general, test entropy
minimization (TENT) (Wang et al., 2020) has demonstrated
the effectiveness of entropy minimization in single domains.
However, recent studies have shown that entropy minimization often fails under more diverse domain shifts, such as in
multiple domains (Boudiaf et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2022). In distribution shifts, an overlap of information with particular domains can occur, leading to
model overfitting for specific information and subsequently
forgetting previous knowledge. This results in catastrophic
forgetting of the target models that are adapted to the target
data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success across various applications, particularly in computer
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Correspondence to:
Jae-Hong Lee <ljh93ljh@hanyang.ac.kr>, Joon-Hyuk Chang
<jchang@hanyang.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

To mitigate catastrophic forgetting, recent OTTA methods

1

