StyDeSty: Min-Max Stylization and Destylization
for Single Domain Generalization

Songhua Liu 1 Xin Jin 2 1 Xingyi Yang 1 Jingwen Ye 1 Xinchao Wang 1

Abstract

𝕏!, 𝕏", 𝕏#… 𝕏$ : Data from Different Domains; ℒ%&'( : Task Loss Function

Single domain generalization (single DG) aims at
learning a robust model generalizable to unseen
domains from only one training domain, making it a highly ambitious and challenging task.
State-of-the-art approaches have mostly relied on
data augmentations, such as adversarial perturbation and style enhancement, to synthesize new
data and thus increase robustness. Nevertheless,
they have largely overlooked the underlying coherence between the augmented domains, which
in turn leads to inferior results in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose a simple yet
effective scheme, termed as StyDeSty, to explicitly account for the alignment of the source and
pseudo domains in the process of data augmentation, enabling them to interact with each other in
a self-consistent manner and further giving rise to
a latent domain with strong generalization power.
The heart of StyDeSty lies in the interaction between a stylization module for generating novel
stylized samples using the source domain, and a
destylization module for transferring stylized and
source samples to a latent domain to learn contentinvariant features. The stylization and destylization modules work adversarially and reinforce
each other. During inference, the destylization
module transforms the input sample with an arbitrary style shift to the latent domain, in which
the downstream tasks are carried out. Specifically,
the location of the destylization layer within the
backbone network is determined by a dedicated
neural architecture search (NAS) strategy. We
evaluate StyDeSty on multiple benchmarks and
demonstrate that it yields encouraging results, outperforming the state of the art by up to 13.44% on
classification accuracy. Codes are available here.

ℒ%&'(

?

Train on
Raw Source

Test on
Target

…
𝕏! 𝕏"

ℒ%&'(

?

Train on
Pseudo
Source

Test on
Target

… *

𝕏*" 𝕏*)

𝕏#$!

𝕏*#

Aug.

𝕏#$!

𝕏#

(a) General DG solution

𝕏!
(b) Existing single DG solution

NAS

ℒ%&'(

?

Train on
Shared
Source

Test on
Target

$
𝕏

$
𝕏

Align

Align

𝕏*" 𝕏*) … 𝕏*#$!

𝕏*#

Destylize

Aug.
Stylize

𝕏!
(c) Proposed single DG solution

Figure 1. Workflows of general DG solution, existing single DG
solution, and the proposed solution. (a) General DG methods
are trained on multiple source domains to learn domain-invariant
representations for generalization. (b) Existing single DG methods
typically leverage data augmentation techniques to increase the
domain diversity and then conduct training directly on the pseudo
domains. (c) The proposed single DG solution enables an explicit
stylization and destylization mechanisms to learn a latent domain,
where the downstream tasks are performed. The stylization and
destylization work in an adversarial fashion, and the location of
destylization is determined by a NAS algorithm.

1. Introduction
Domain generalization (DG) (Wang et al., 2021a; Sinha
et al., 2017; Volpi & Murino, 2019; Volpi et al., 2018) aims
to tackle the distribution shift problem between source and
target domain, and has recently demonstrated unprecedentedly promising results. The conventional setup of DG, as
shown in Figure 1(a), includes multiple source domains
X1 , X2 , · · · , XN during training and a novel domain during
testing. As such, standard DG approaches have largely relied on learning a domain-invariant representation from the
given domains, so that the model can be successfully generalized to other unseen domains. Nevertheless, access to data
from multiple domains is, in reality, often infeasible due to
data availability such as privacy and budgeting issues. This
further calls for the single domain generalization (single
DG) that handles the generation-learning task using only
one source domain (Qiao et al., 2020).

1

National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Eastern Institute
of Technology, Ningbo, China. Correspondence to: Xinchao Wang
<xinchao@nus.edu.sg>.

Unfortunately, off-the-shelf solutions to multi-domain DG
are not applicable to single DG, since the former relies on domain identifiers as supervision signals for learning domaininvariant representation (Balaji et al., 2018; Chattopadhyay
et al., 2020; Dou et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019), which are how-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

