Mean Estimation in the Add-Remove Model of Differential Privacy

Alex Kulesza * 1 Ananda Theertha Suresh * 1 Yuyan Wang * 1

Abstract

However, despite the ubiquitous nature of differentially private mean estimation, fundamental questions remain about
the optimal error that can be achieved under commonly used
variants of differential privacy. We begin with the general
definition of a differentially private mechanism.
Definition 1.1 (Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2014)). A
randomized, real-valued algorithm A satisfies ε-differential
privacy if for any two neighboring datasets D, D0 and for
any output S ⊆ R, it holds that

Differential privacy is often studied under two
different models of neighboring datasets: the
add-remove model and the swap model. While
the swap model is frequently used in the academic literature to simplify analysis, many practical applications rely on the more conservative
add-remove model, where obtaining tight results
can be difficult. Here, we study the problem of
one-dimensional mean estimation under the addremove model. We propose a new algorithm and
show that it is min-max optimal, achieving the
best possible constant in the leading term of the
mean squared error for all ε, and that this constant is the same as the optimal algorithm under
the swap model. These results show that the addremove and swap models give nearly identical
errors for mean estimation, even though the addremove model cannot treat the size of the dataset
as public information. We also demonstrate empirically that our proposed algorithm yields at least a
factor of two improvement in mean squared error
over algorithms frequently used in practice. One
of our main technical contributions is a new hourglass mechanism, which might be of independent
interest in other scenarios.

Pr[A(D) ∈ S] ≤ eε · Pr[A(D0 ) ∈ S].
It remains to specify what makes two datasets neighbors.
Two definitions are commonly used. The first, called the
swap model (Dwork et al., 2006; Vadhan, 2017), defines
two datasets D and D0 as neighboring if and only if
|D \ D0 | = 1 and |D0 \ D| = 1.
The second, called the add-remove model (Dwork et al.,
2014, Definition 2.4), defines D and D0 as neighboring if
and only if
|D \ D0 | + |D0 \ D| = 1.
Intuitively, under the swap model, D0 is obtained from D
by changing a value, while under the add-remove model, it
is obtained by adding or removing a value.
While both neighborhood models of differential privacy
are studied in the literature, the add-remove model is more
frequently used for statistical queries in practice (McSherry, 2009; Wilson et al., 2019; Rogers et al., 2020; Amin
et al., 2022), likely because it is more conservative: the addremove model protects the size of the input dataset, while
the swap model does not. Furthermore, a ε-DP algorithm under the add-remove model is also a 2ε-DP algorithm under
the swap model, so in this sense the relationship is strict.

1. Introduction
Mean estimation is one of the simplest and most widely used
techniques in statistics, and is often deployed as a subroutine
for more complex analyses. However, the mean of a dataset
can reveal private information, and so a variety of differentially private methods have been proposed to estimate
it. These include private mean estimation with robustness
(Liu et al., 2021), mean estimation under statistical models
(Kamath et al., 2020), and techniques with instance-specific
guarantees (Huang et al., 2021; Dick et al., 2023).

Here, we revisit the problem of scalar mean estimation in the
add-remove model of differential privacy, proposing a new
algorithm that is min-max optimal, including the constant
on the leading term of the error, and showing that the addremove and swap models give nearly identical errors despite
the former’s additional protections.

*
In alphabetical order 1 Google Research, NYC. Correspondence to: Yuyan Wang <wangyy@google.com>.

1.1. Setting
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Let Dn (`, u) denote the set of all datasets consisting of n
real values in the range [`, u], let D≥n (`, u) denote the set of
1

