Optimal Recurrent Network Topologies for Dynamical Systems Reconstruction

Christoph Jürgen Hemmer 1 2 Manuel Brenner 1 2 Florian Hess 1 2 Daniel Durstewitz 1 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
In scientific settings we are commonly interested in the
dynamical rules that govern the temporal evolution of an
observed system. Recent data-driven deep learning approaches aim to infer (approximate) these from time series
measurements of the system under study, often based on
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) like LSTMs (Vlachas
et al., 2018; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), reservoir
computers (Pathak et al., 2018; Platt et al., 2021), piecewise
linear RNNs (Durstewitz, 2017; Brenner et al., 2022; Hess
et al., 2023), or neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs; Chen et al. (2018); Ko et al. (2023)). Producing
a generative model of the dynamical process that underlies
the observed time series, including its geometrical structure
in state space and its invariant (long-term) statistics, we call
dynamical systems (DS) reconstruction (DSR).

In dynamical systems reconstruction (DSR) we
seek to infer from time series measurements a
generative model of the underlying dynamical
process. This is a prime objective in any scientific
discipline, where we are particularly interested in
parsimonious models with a low parameter load.
A common strategy here is parameter pruning, removing all parameters with small weights. However, here we find this strategy does not work
for DSR, where even low magnitude parameters
can contribute considerably to the system dynamics. On the other hand, it is well known that
many natural systems which generate complex
dynamics, like the brain or ecological networks,
have a sparse topology with comparatively few
links. Inspired by this, we show that geometric
pruning, where in contrast to magnitude-based
pruning weights with a low contribution to an
attractor’s geometrical structure are removed, indeed manages to reduce parameter load substantially without significantly hampering DSR quality. We further find that the networks resulting
from geometric pruning have a specific type of
topology, and that this topology, and not the magnitude of weights, is what is most crucial to performance. We provide an algorithm that automatically generates such topologies which can be used
as priors for generative modeling of dynamical
systems by RNNs, and compare it to other well
studied topologies like small-world or scale-free
networks.

In science we usually prefer small models, with as few
relevant parameters as possible, to reduce training and
simulation times, and to ease subsequent model analysis
(interpretability). Magnitude-based parameter pruning is
a well established strategy in deep learning to carve out
such a low-dimensional (in parameter space) network
structure (Blalock et al., 2020). It is based on the insight
that successfully trained models often contain a ‘winning
ticket’, a small subnetwork with performance almost equal
to that of the full large network (Frankle & Carbin, 2019).
Here, however, we demonstrate that magnitude-based
parameter tuning does not work well for DSR. Instead,
we find that parameters even small in relative size could
substantially influence the dynamics of the trained model
(Fig. 1). This might be related to the fact that in dynamical
systems neighborhood relations (topological structure)
are often more important. Natural systems, like the brain
(Bullmore & Sporns, 2009; Pajevic & Plenz, 2012), climate
systems (Tziperman et al., 1997), or ecological and social
networks (Watts & Strogatz, 1998), rarely follow an
“all-to-all” connectivity, but have a well defined topology
owing to physical and spatial constraints on the system.
This suggests that deep learning models trained on time
series from natural systems may inherit similar organizing
principles, i.e. a low-dimensional parameter representation
is conceivable, but it may be less related to the relative size
of parameters.

1
Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany 2 Faculty of Physics
and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence to: Christoph
Hemmer <Christoph.Hemmer@zi-mannheim.de>, Daniel Durstewitz <Daniel.Durstewitz@zi-mannheim.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

