MathScale: Scaling Instruction Tuning for Mathematical Reasoning

Zhengyang Tang

123

Xingxing Zhang

Abstract

2

Benyou Wang

13

Furu Wei

2

ficiency in solving mathematical problems remains inadequate, potentially due to the inherent necessity for multi-step
complex reasoning in mathematical problem-solving. Instruction Tuning (Wei et al., 2021) is an effective approach
to unlock certain capabilities in LLMs. Unfortunately, this
approach is constrained by the limited size of the currently
available datasets on mathematical reasoning. For example,
the most popular math datasets, GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021)
and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b), each only contains
around 7.5K training examples.

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in problemsolving. However, their proficiency in solving
mathematical problems remains inadequate. We
propose MathScale, a simple and scalable method
to create high-quality mathematical reasoning
data using frontier LLMs (e.g., GPT-3.5). Inspired by the cognitive mechanism in human
mathematical learning, it first extracts topics and
knowledge points from seed math questions and
then build a concept graph, which is subsequently
used to generate new math questions. MathScale
exhibits effective scalability along the size axis of
the math dataset that we generate. As a result, we
create a mathematical reasoning dataset (MathScaleQA) containing two million math questionanswer pairs. To evaluate mathematical reasoning
abilities of LLMs comprehensively, we construct
M WP B ENCH, a benchmark of Math Word Problems, which is a collection of 9 datasets (including GSM8K and MATH) covering K-12, college,
and competition level math problems. We apply MathScaleQA to fine-tune open-source LLMs
(e.g., LLaMA-2 and Mistral), resulting in significantly improved capabilities in mathematical reasoning. Evaluated on M WP B ENCH, MathScale7B achieves state-of-the-art performance across
all datasets, surpassing its best peers of equivalent size by 42.8% in micro average accuracy and
43.6% in macro average accuracy, respectively.

An effective method to tackle this challenge is to augment
existing high-quality math datasets using frontier LLMs
such as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. For instance, WizardMath
(Luo et al., 2023) introduces an array of operations for
GPT-3.5 to generate math questions with increased complexity. MetaMath (Yu et al., 2023) bootstraps questions in
GSM8K and MATH through answer augmentation, question rephrasing, self-verification and FOBAR questions. The
newly generated examples by these methods exhibit substantial similarity to the original examples contained within
the training set, which limits their power in generating large
scale math datasets.
We therefore propose a conceptually simple and scalable
method MathScale, which is less dependent on original
training examples. Specifically, we first prompt GPT-3.5
to extract high level concepts (i.e., topics and knowledge
points) from existing seed math questions. In this step, we
convert concrete math questions to extractions and the dependency to original questions is largely removed. Given
these extractions, we then build a concept graph, which is
used to estimate the connections between different concepts.
Finally, we can instruct GPT-3.5 to generate new math
questions based on randomly sampled concepts from the
graph. Intuitively, we can generate significantly more examples using different combination of concepts than using
augmentation-based methods, since the resulting number
of new examples is bounded by the number of augmentation operations. MathScale also bears resemblance to the
cognitive mechanisms underlying the process of mathematical learning in humans (Tall, 2013). Tall (2013) argues
that the learning process of human involves two distinct
steps called concept compression and connection forging.
Concept compression mirrors the process of high level concept extraction, while connection forging is similar to our

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in problem-solving. However, their pro1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China Shenzhen Research
Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to:
Xingxing Zhang <xingxing.zhang@microsoft.com>, Benyou
Wang <wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn>.
2

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

