In-Context Decision Transformer: Reinforcement Learning via Hierarchical
Chain-of-Thought

Sili Huang 1 2 Jifeng Hu 1 Hechang Chen * 1 Lichao Sun 3 Bo Yang * 2

Abstract

text (Brown et al., 2020b), image (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020),
and audio (Alayrac et al., 2022). In the field of reinforcement learning (RL), large transformer models can treat the
RL tasks as a type of sequential prediction problem, which
has proven successful in using solely offline training (Lee
et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). A notable shortcoming
lies with these methods to self-improve when employed in
online environments. To overcome this, in-context RL methods have been introduced, which enable continued policy
improvement (Laskin et al., 2023).

In-context learning is a promising approach for
offline reinforcement learning (RL) to handle online tasks, which can be achieved by providing
task prompts. Recent works demonstrated that incontext RL could emerge with self-improvement
in a trial-and-error manner when treating RL tasks
as an across-episodic sequential prediction problem. Despite the self-improvement not requiring gradient updates, current works still suffer
from high computational costs when the acrossepisodic sequence increases with task horizons.
To this end, we propose an In-context Decision
Transformer (IDT) to achieve self-improvement
in a high-level trial-and-error manner. Specifically, IDT is inspired by the efficient hierarchical
structure of human decision-making and thus reconstructs the sequence to consist of high-level
decisions instead of low-level actions that interact with environments. As one high-level decision can guide multi-step low-level actions, IDT
naturally avoids excessively long sequences and
solves online tasks more efficiently. Experimental results show that IDT achieves state-of-the-art
in long-horizon tasks over current in-context RL
methods. In particular, the online evaluation time
of our IDT is 36× times faster than baselines in
the D4RL benchmark and 27× times faster in the
Grid World benchmark.

Recent works demonstrated that in-context RL can automatically improve its performance in a trial-and-error manner
when across-episodic contexts serve as prompt conditions
(Lee et al., 2023a). The construction of the across-episodic
context is flexible and easy to implement, such as a chain
of experience that consists of multiple historical trajectories
arranged in ascending order of returns (Hao Liu, 2023). Despite the progress made, current methods are mostly limited
to short-horizon tasks with less than 100 timesteps (Laskin
et al., 2023). This arises from (1) the quadratic complexity
of the self-attention mechanism and (2) the significant increase in the length of sequences caused by across-episodic
contexts. Such huge computational costs severely limit incontext RL to apply the trial-and-error ability on traditional
RL tasks, which often reach 1000 timesteps, such as MuJoCo (Fu et al., 2020) and Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013).
In fact, trial-and-error is the central idea of modern RL algorithms (Sutton & Barto, 2018). It is an animal behavior
originated by a psychologist Thorndike (1927) who considers trial-and-error as an elementary way of combining
search and memory. Correspondingly, the across-episodic
contexts provide memory, and the self-attention mechanism
reviews historical actions in the memory to search for better
actions. However, human decision-making is more complex
and operates on multiple levels of temporal abstraction (Sutton et al., 1999b). For example, travelers tend to decide on
their budget first, then their mode of transportation, right
down to the smallest action. Inspired by this idea, a natural
perspective emerges:

1. Introduction
Large transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have shown
impressive abilities across a variety of domains, including
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China 2 Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and
Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin University, China 3 Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA.
Correspondence to: Bo Yang <ybo@jlu.edu.cn>, Hechang Chen
<chenhc@jlu.edu.cn>.

“Can human multi-level decision-making bring out a more
efficient trial-and-error?”

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

As one high-level decision can guide multi-step low-level
1

