ULAREF: A Unified Label Refinement Framework
for Learning with Inaccurate Supervision

Congyu Qiao 1 2 Ning Xu 1 2 Yihao Hu 1 2 Xin Geng 1 2

Abstract

2011), crowdsourcing (Arpit et al., 2017; Ibrahim et al.,
2023), ecoinformatics (Tang & Zhang, 2017), multimedia
content analysis (Zeng et al., 2013), among others, where
handling inaccurate supervision is a challenging problem.
Typical learning paradigms related to inaccurate supervision
encompass learning with noisy labels (Natarajan et al., 2013;
Liu & Tao, 2016), where instances may be annotated with
incorrect labels replacing the correct ones, and learning with
partial labels (Jin & Ghahramani, 2002; Nguyen & Caruana,
2008), where instances are annotated with a candidate label
set that hides the correct label. Under these paradigms, characterized by mistakes or ambiguity, the predictive model
tends to overfit to inaccurate annotations, adversely affecting
its generalization ability.

Learning with inaccurate supervision is often encountered in weakly supervised learning, and researchers have invested a considerable amount
of time and effort in designing specialized algorithms for different forms of annotations in inaccurate supervision. In fact, different forms of
these annotations share the fundamental characteristic that they all still incorporate some portion
of correct labeling information. This commonality can serve as a lever, enabling the creation
of a cohesive framework designed to tackle the
challenges associated with various forms of annotations in learning with inaccurate supervision. In
this paper, we propose a unified label refinement
framework named U LAREF, i.e., a Unified LAbel
REfinement Framework for learning with inaccurate supervision, which is capable of leveraging
label refinement to handle inaccurate supervision.
Specifically, our framework trains the predictive
model with refined labels through global detection of reliability and local enhancement using an
enhanced model fine-tuned by a proposed consistency loss. Also, we theoretically justify that the
enhanced model in local enhancement can achieve
higher accuracy than the predictive model on the
detected unreliable set under mild assumptions.

To address this challenge, a number of approaches have
been proposed. For noisy labels, selection-based strategies
(Jiang et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020) backpropagate the loss for the clean label of an instance obtained
by a sample selection algorithm to remove the mistakes in
inaccurate annotations. When dealing with partial labels,
identification-based strategies (Zhang et al., 2016a; Lv et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021) focus on iteratively identify one
label from the candidate label set as the correct label to
reduce the ambiguity in inaccurate annotations. Besides,
to learn from crowdsourcing, correction-based strategies
(Zhang et al., 2016b; Ibrahim et al., 2019; Ibrahim & Fu,
2021) correct and integrate labels via estimating the annotators’ confusion parameters, which attempts to alleviate both
mistakes and ambiguity in inaccurate annotations.

1. Introduction

Previously, researchers tend to devote significant time and
effort to develop specialized learning algorithms for various
forms of annotations under inaccurate supervision. In fact,
different forms of these annotations share the fundamental
characteristic that they all still incorporate some portion of
correct labeling information. This commonality can serve
as a lever, enabling the creation of a cohesive framework
designed to tackle the challenges associated with various
forms of annotations in learning with inaccurate supervision
and avoid designing specialized approaches that consume a
substantial amount of resources.

Due to the time-consuming and expensive nature of acquiring large-scale high-quality data, the necessity for weakly
supervised learning has emerged in various real-world scenarios. These scenarios include online queries (Liu et al.,
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 2 Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. E-mail:
{qiaocy, xning, yhhu, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn. Correspondence to:
Ning Xu <xning@seu.edu.cn>, Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose a unified label refinement framework named U LAREF, i.e., a Unified LAbel REfinement
1

