SΩI: Score-based O-INFORMATION Estimation
Mustapha Bounoua 1 2 Giulio Franzese 2 Pietro Michiardi 2

Abstract

metrics (Dosi & Roventini, 2019), and machine learning
(Tax et al., 2017), to name a few.

The analysis of scientific data and complex multivariate systems requires information quantities
that capture relationships among multiple random
variables. Recently, new information-theoretic
measures have been developed to overcome the
shortcomings of classical ones, such as mutual
information, that are restricted to considering pairwise interactions. Among them, the concept of
information synergy and redundancy is crucial
for understanding the high-order dependencies
between variables. One of the most prominent
and versatile measures based on this concept is
O - INFORMATION , which provides a clear and
scalable way to quantify the synergy-redundancy
balance in multivariate systems. However, its
practical application is limited to simplified cases.
In this work, we introduce SΩI, which allows to
compute O - INFORMATION without restrictive
assumptions about the system while leveraging
a unique model. Our experiments validate our
approach on synthetic data, and demonstrate the
effectiveness of SΩI in the context of a real-world
use case.

A recent attempt to overcome such limitations, and to extend
the applicability of information-theoretic tools to multivariate systems, is represented by Partial Information Decomposition (PID) (Williams & Beer, 2010). The key idea behind
such method is the decomposition of the overall MI between
a set of source variables and a given target variable into
non-negative constituents. In particular, PID quantifies how
much of the total information about the target variable is
encoded redundantly, synergistically or uniquely into given
subsets of variables. Redundancy quantifies information that
is shared between subsets of the partition, synergy describes
the additional information that is endowed to all subsets
observed jointly but that is not available from individual
constituents of the partition, and uniqueness quantifies the
information that is lost when a given subset is not observed,
removing the amount of redundant and synergistic information associated to that subset. The PID method requires
partitioning the source system into all its possible subsets
and computing the information decomposition of all constituents with respect to the target variable.
Despite its elegance, this measure is not without drawbacks.
Indeed, there is no consensus on the best way to define
and compute PID, and several variants have emerged, including (Barrett, 2014), who reformulate synergy and redundancy for Gaussian systems (but that has been judged
as poorly motivated by (Venkatesh et al., 2023)), (Finn &
Lizier, 2020), who use the algebraic structure of information
sharing, (Ay et al., 2019), who rely on cooperative game
theory, (Rosas et al., 2020), who build on concepts related
to data privacy and disclosure, (Kolchinsky, 2019), who use
set theory, (van Enk, 2023), who deal with scalability issues by pooling probabilities, (Gutknecht et al., 2023), who
use a mereological formulation, and (Makkeh et al., 2021;
Ehrlich et al., 2023), who advocate for methods based on
the exclusions of probability mass. Nevertheless, the main
limitations of PID persist in all variants. Indeed, computational complexity grows extremely fast, precisely as the
Dedekind number of variables (which is more than 1031 for
9 variables). Moreover, PID computation relies on a partition of the system into a set of sources and a unique target.
This can be an artificial distinction which limits usability
and interpretability of the results. This latter problem is

1. Introduction
Mutual Information (MI) is a fundamental measure which
allows investigation of the non-linear dependence between
random variables (Shannon, 1948; MacKay, 2003). Despite
its success in various domains, classical MI suffers from
limitations when analyzing systems composed by more than
two variables. This constitutes an important limitation, considering that many scientific endeavors aim at an accurate
statistical characterization of systems which are composed
of many random variables. Examples includes neuroscience
(Latham & Nirenberg, 2005; Ganmor et al., 2011; Gat &
Tishby, 1998), climate models (Runge et al., 2019), econo1

Ampere Software Technology,
of Data Science, Eurecom, France.
<mustapha.bounoua@eurecom.fr>.

France 2 Department
Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

