Evolving Subnetwork Training for Large Language Models

Hanqi Li 1 Lu Chen 1 2 Da Ma 1 Zijian Wu 1 Su Zhu 3 Kai Yu 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2020). This highlights the importance of researching
efficient algorithms for training large language models.

Large language models have ushered in a new
era of artificial intelligence research. However,
their substantial training costs hinder further development and widespread adoption. In this paper, inspired by the redundancy in the parameters
of large language models, we propose a novel
training paradigm: Evolving Subnetwork Training (EST). EST samples subnetworks from the
layers of the large language model and from commonly used modules within each layer, MultiHead Attention (MHA) and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). By gradually increasing the size of
the subnetworks during the training process, EST
can save the cost of training. We apply EST to
train GPT2 model and TinyLlama model, resulting in 26.7% FLOPs saving for GPT2 and 25.0%
for TinyLlama without an increase in loss on the
pre-training dataset. Moreover, EST leads to performance improvements in downstream tasks, indicating that it benefits generalization. Additionally, we provide intuitive theoretical studies based
on training dynamics and Dropout theory to ensure the feasibility of EST.

The enormous training cost of large language models stems
from their massive number of parameters. For instance,
the GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020) model has 175 billion parameters, requiring 355 GPU-years and incurring a training
cost of $4.6M. However, numerous studies have highlighted
the redundancy in the parameters of large language models,
manifested in the over-parameterization (Li et al., 2020) and
conditional sparsity (Li et al., 2023b) of these models. This
inspires us to optimize the training process by exploring
the possibility of not training the complete model at certain stages but focusing on training subnetworks, thereby
reducing the overall training cost of large language models.
In this paper, we propose a novel training paradigm, Evolving Subnetwork Training (EST), towards efficient training for large language models. EST paradigm consists of
two main components: 1) sample from the large language
model for subnetwork training. We maintain the complete
model and sample subnetworks in each training step from
the model across three dimensions, including the number
of attention heads, the intermediate size of multi-layer perceptron, and the total number of Transformer layers. 2) We
design a sampling scheduler to plan the training process.
By increasing the size of subnetworks during training and,
finally, training the complete model, EST achieves training
acceleration.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become significantly
larger recently, bringing tremendous potential in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks. The computational cost
of training such large language models has become a bottleneck, hindering further development in research and applications. Additionally, the escalating hardware demands
and increasing carbon footprints associated with training
large language models are also crucial issues (Schwartz

To demonstrate the effectiveness of EST, we first conduct
experiments on GPT2 model (Radford et al., 2019), and
conduct scale-up experiments on 1.1B TinyLlama (Zhang
et al., 2024) model. The results show that: 1) EST saves
26.7% training cost for GPT2 model and 25.0% training
cost for TinyLlama model, with a comparable loss on the
pre-training dataset. 2) Models trained by EST achieve
even higher downstream performance, indicating that EST
benefits model generalization.

1
X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Suzhou
Laboratory, Suzhou, China 3 AISpeech Co., Ltd., Suzhou, China.
Correspondence to: Lu Chen <chenlusz@sjtu.edu.cn>, Kai Yu
<kai.yu@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Furthermore, we dive into theoretical studies to answer the
following two questions: 1) why EST can save training cost
without compromising model performance? 2) Why EST
can benefit model generalization? We provide a comprehensive theoretical framework based on deep learning dynamics
and Dropout theory to ensure the superiority and feasibility
of EST.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

