Explorations of Self-Repair in Language Models

Cody Rushing 1 Neel Nanda

Abstract

pythia-160m
pythia-160m

Prior interpretability research studying narrow distributions has preliminarily identified self-repair,
a phenomena where if components in large language models are ablated, later components will
change their behavior to compensate. Our work
builds off this past literature, demonstrating that
self-repair exists on a variety of models families
and sizes when ablating individual attention heads
on the full training distribution. We further show
that on the full training distribution self-repair is
imperfect, as the original direct effect of the head
is not fully restored, and noisy, since the degree
of self-repair varies significantly across different
prompts (sometimes overcorrecting beyond the
original effect). We highlight two different mechanisms that contribute to self-repair, including
changes in the final LayerNorm scaling factor and
sparse sets of neurons implementing Anti-Erasure.
We additionally discuss the implications of these
results for interpretability practitioners and close
with a more speculative discussion on the mystery
of why self-repair occurs in these models at all,
highlighting evidence for the Iterative Inference
hypothesis in language models, a framework that
predicts self-repair.

gpt2-small
gpt2-small

pythia-410m
pythia-410m

gpt2-medium
gpt2-medium

gpt2-large
gpt2-large

pythia-1b
pythia-1b

llama-7b
llama-7b

1.5

Self-Repair (as logits)

Self-Repairing Behavior
1

0.5

0

Early-Layer Breakage
−0.5

−1

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

%th Layer in Model

Figure 1. We measure the self-repair of an attention head when
resample ablated on the top 2% of tokens according to its direct
effect. For each model, we plot both the self-repair of the individual
heads and a trend line that averages across the heads in each layer.
Self-Repair exists across many later layers in different models,
although the amount varies between heads.

downstream of ablations compensate for them. As such,
the ablation of model components doesn’t always lead to
easily predictable changes in model performance; instead,
the removal of the components behavior can be compensated
for by downstream components in a way which masks the
loss of the original component.
This is a challenge for interpretability efforts which rely on
ablation-based metrics to define the importance of model
components. In particular, self-repair mechanisms minimize
the impact of ablating components deemed critical by other
metrics.

1. Introduction

Past literature has looked at self-repair in incomplete settings: self-repair was first discovered in the Indirect Object Identification distribution as "Backup Behavior" (Wang
et al., 2023), for which the behavior was explained partially as a byproduct of Copy Suppression (McDougall et al.,
2023). The self-repair phenomena was then further explored
in McGrath et al. 2023, but only across the Counterfact
dataset and with the ablation of entire model layers.

Interpretability efforts aim to reveal human-understandable
behaviors in large language model components. A common
interpretability technique is model ablations, where outputs
of individual model components are replaced with outputs
from other distributions. Ideally, if an attention head is
critical for a task, ablating it would harm model performance
on that task.
However, recent work (McGrath et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023) has uncovered preliminary evidence of self-repair, a
phenomena in large language models where components
1
University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Cody
Rushing <thisiscodyr@gmail.com>.

We strengthen this prior work by investigating self-repair
across the whole pretraining distribution, by focusing on
individual attention heads, and by investigating the mechanisms behind self-repair on the whole distribution. Our key
findings are:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1. Direct effect self-repair is an imperfect, noisy process.
It occurs across the full pretraining distribution, even
while ablating individual heads (rather than full layers).
1

