Conditional Language Learning with Context

Xiao Zhang 1 Miao Li 1 Ji Wu 1 2

Abstract

2020; Jang et al., 2022) due to modifying the pretrained
model. It is also observed that finetuning can lead to overadaptation to the statistical properties of the domain corpus,
causing the model to be biased heavily towards certain topics and styles (Zhang & Wu, 2024).

Language models can learn sophisticated language understanding skills from fitting raw text.
They also unselectively learn useless corpus statistics and biases, especially during finetuning on
domain-specific corpora. In this paper, we propose a simple modification to causal language
modeling called conditional finetuning, which performs language modeling conditioned on a context. We show that a context can “explain away”
certain corpus statistics and make the model avoid
learning them. In this fashion, conditional finetuning achieves selective learning from a corpus, learning knowledge useful for downstream
tasks while avoiding learning useless corpus statistics like topic biases. This selective learning effect leads to less forgetting and better stabilityplasticity tradeoff in domain finetuning, potentially benefitting lifelong learning with language
models.

In domain finetuning, it would be desirable to improve the
model’s domain knowledge without learning useless statistics and biases from the corpus. The causal language modeling objective maximizes likelihood of all the tokens in
the corpus, and is therefore unselective in what kind of
information to learn from the corpus. In this paper, we propose a simple enhancement to causal language modeling
called conditional finetuning, that uses contexts to achieve
selective learning of useful information from the corpus.
It is well-known that the behavior of pretrained language
models is sensitive to contextual information in the input
during inference. For example, few-shot prompting can let
models learn to perform tasks based on examples in the
context (Dong et al., 2023). Specific instructions like chainof-thought (Wei et al., 2022) and self-verification (Weng
et al., 2023) could guide the model towards certain behaviors
like multi-step reasoning. For dialog and assistant use cases,
language models can be further finetuned on instructionfollowing data to make them more sensitive to instructions
in the context (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Sanh
et al., 2022). While the effect of context during inference
has been extensively studied, its role during the pretraining
phase is less explored. In this paper, we investigate how
adding a context to language modeling could affect the
model’s learning behavior during pretraining and domain
finetuning.

1. Introduction
Language models pretrained on large-scale corpus have
shown impressive performance on a wide variety of downstream tasks (Chung et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a;
OpenAI, 2023). It is impressive that these language models
learn sophisticated knowledge and reasoning abilities solely
from training on raw text with a causal language modeling
objective. The objective is also used when adapting the
pretrained general-purpose language models to specific domains, via finetuning on a domain corpus (also called “continual pretraining”) (Chen et al., 2021; Lewkowycz et al.,
2022; Singhal et al., 2023).

The two main contributions of the paper are:
We propose conditional finetuning, a domain finetuning
method for language models that adds a context to causal
language modeling. We reveal how adding a context affects
the language modeling objective. In conditional finetuning,
we use a piece of text as context and prepend it to corpus
text during finetuning. The idea of the method is illustrated
in Figure 1. We show that the context can “explain away”
statistical properties of the corpus so that the model would
ignore them and avoid learning them in finetuning. For
example, when finetuning on a domain corpus with a domain
hint as context, the model can keep its topic prior almost

Although finetuning effectively improves the model’s domain knowledge and performance on domain tasks, it can
also lead to forgetting of existing knowledge (Chen et al.,
1

Department of Electronics Engineering, Tsinghua University
College of AI, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Ji Wu
<wuji ee@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

