Learning to Model the World With Language

Jessy Lin 1 Yuqing Du 1 Olivia Watkins 1 Danijar Hafner 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Dan Klein 1 Anca Dragan 1

language affords much richer communication beyond task
specification. Consider a household robot—beyond delegating tasks to it one after another (“clean the dishes...pick up
the toy...”), one would imagine that a truly natural interaction would allow us to communicate beyond the “here and
now” (Hockett & Hockett, 1960): sharing knowledge such
as “the top left button turns off the TV,” providing situational
information such as “we’re out of milk,” and coordinating
by saying “I already vacuumed the living room.” Language
communicates what we know about the state of the world
or how things work, not just what to do.

Abstract
To interact with humans and act in the world,
agents need to understand the range of language
that people use and relate it to the visual
world. While current agents can learn to
execute simple language instructions, we aim
to build agents that leverage diverse language—
language like “this button turns on the TV” or
“I put the bowls away”—that conveys general
knowledge, describes the state of the world,
provides interactive feedback, and more. Our
key idea is that agents should interpret such
diverse language as a signal that helps them
predict the future: what they will observe, how
the world will behave, and which situations
will be rewarded. This perspective unifies
language understanding with future prediction
as a powerful self-supervised learning objective.
We instantiate this in Dynalang, an agent that
learns a multimodal world model to predict future
text and image representations, and learns to act
from imagined model rollouts. While current
methods that learn language-conditioned policies
degrade in performance with more diverse types
of language, we show that Dynalang learns to
leverage environment descriptions, game rules,
and instructions to excel on tasks ranging from
game-playing to navigating photorealistic home
scans. Finally, we show that our method enables
additional capabilities due to learning a generative
model: Dynalang can be pretrained on text-only
data, enabling learning from offline datasets, and
generate language grounded in an environment.

1

It is unclear how to best integrate diverse kinds of language
with vision and action in a single agent. In many ways,
current methods are specialized for learning from language
instructions, e.g. by embedding a task description (“pick
up the blue block”) at the beginning of an episode and outputting a sequence of motor controls (Brohan et al., 2023;
Nair et al., 2021). To freely collaborate with humans, agents
ideally would continuously integrate language inputs while
acting in the environment. This natural interaction requires
us to move beyond language “prompting” towards methods
that input and output language continuously, along with action and video. More crucially, we hypothesize that directly
mapping diverse language to optimal actions is a difficult
learning problem, because language and optimal actions
may only be weakly correlated if their dependency is complex. Consider the example “I put the bowls away”: if the
task at hand is cleaning up, the agent should respond by
moving on to the next cleaning step, whereas if it is serving
dinner, the agent should retrieve the bowls. The key question
is thus what the right learning signal is for understanding
the full range of language while acting in the world.
In this work, we propose that agents can ground diverse
kinds of language by using it to predict the future. We
instantiate this idea with Dynalang, an agent that learns a
joint generative model of language and vision (i.e., a multimodal world model; Ha & Schmidhuber (2018)), and uses
the model to plan and act. We build on the DreamerV3
algorithm (Hafner et al., 2023), training the world model
to predict future latent representations of all observation
modalities, using experience collected from acting in the environment. In contrast to directly predicting what to do with
a language-conditioned policy, Dynalang decouples learning to model the world with language (supervised learning

Introduction

A long-standing goal of artificial intelligence is to develop
agents that can use language to interact naturally with people
in the physical world (Winograd, 1972). Current embodied agents can follow basic instructions like “bring me the
apple” (Driess et al., 2023). However, the full potential of
1

UC Berkeley. Website: dynalang.github.io
Correspondence to: Jessy Lin <jessy_lin@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

