COALA: A Practical and Vision-Centric Federated Learning Platform

Weiming Zhuang * 1 Jian Xu † * 2 Chen Chen 1 Jingtao Li 1 Lingjuan Lyu 1

Abstract

few years in many application domains such as computer
vision (CV) (He et al., 2021), natural language processing
(NLP) (Wang et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2023), recommendation
systems (Luo et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a) and information retrieval (Yang et al., 2023). In particular, FL shows a
great potential in computer vision applications as they are
often associated with critical privacy issues due to sensitive
information in images (e.g., facial recognition (Niu & Deng,
2022) and medical imaging (Nguyen et al., 2022)). Therefore, it is of significant interest and importance to exploit
the potential of FL across broader CV tasks.

We present COALA, a vision-centric Federated
Learning (FL) platform, and a suite of benchmarks for practical FL scenarios, which we categorize into three levels: task, data, and model.
At the task level, COALA extends support from
simple classification to 15 computer vision tasks,
including object detection, segmentation, pose estimation, and more. It also facilitates federated
multiple-task learning, allowing clients to tackle
multiple tasks simultaneously. At the data level,
COALA goes beyond supervised FL to benchmark both semi-supervised FL and unsupervised
FL. It also benchmarks feature distribution shifts
other than commonly considered label distribution shifts. In addition to dealing with static data,
it supports federated continual learning for continuously changing data in real-world scenarios.
At the model level, COALA benchmarks FL with
split models and different models in different
clients. COALA platform offers three degrees of
customization for these practical FL scenarios, including configuration customization, components
customization, and workflow customization. We
conduct systematic benchmarking experiments
for the practical FL scenarios and highlight potential opportunities for further advancements in
FL.

To facilitate the fast development of FL, many FL benchmarks and libraries have been developed, the majority of
which focus on addressing the data heterogeneity and scalability challenges. Particularly, several benchmarks (Caldas
et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2020; Lai et al., 2022; He et al., 2020)
provide datasets to simulate data heterogeneity in FL, where
the data distributions among clients are different. Besides,
considerable efforts of FL frameworks or libraries (Lai et al.,
2022; Garcia et al., 2022; Huba et al., 2022; Beutel et al.,
2020; Bonawitz et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022) aim to
support the simulation or real-world deployment of FL at
scale. However, these benchmarks and libraries cannot well
support the latest development of FL in CV applications in
the following three aspects:
Task level. Most research works are limited to the simple
image classification task (McMahan et al., 2017). Other
more challenging but practical CV tasks such as object
detection had been mostly overlooked. Although several
benchmarks support several other CV tasks, they are either
task-specific (Zhuang et al., 2020) or consider only one task
in FL at a time (He et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020). Recent
work (Zhuang et al., 2023c) has demonstrated the potential
of training multiple CV tasks together with a significantly
improved trade-off between performance and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning
technique where a central server coordinates model training
on decentralized clients (e.g., edge devices and institutions),
which preserves data privacy by avoiding centralizing raw
data from these clients (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al.,
2019). It has received tremendous attention over the past

Data level. The majority of works focus only on supervised
learning, where all the training samples in clients contain
labels. Recently, semi-supervised or unsupervised FL has
emerged as an important topic as it is hard to obtain data
labels on clients (Diao et al., 2022; Zhuang et al., 2022c). In
addition, the existing libraries mostly consider skewed label
distribution in data heterogeneity, while the feature shifts
where the data in each client is from different domains are
often overlooked. Moreover, static data distribution among

†

Contributed during an internship at Sony AI * Equal contribution Sony AI 2 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Lingjuan
Lyu <lingjuan.lv@sony.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

