Efficient Denoising Diffusion via Probabilistic Masking

Weizhong Zhang * 1 Zhiwei Zhang * 2 Renjie Pi * 2 Zhongming Jin 3 Yuan Gao 4 Jieping Ye 3 Kani Chen 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

Diffusion models have exhibited remarkable advancements in generating high-quality data. However, a critical drawback is their computationally
intensive inference process, which requires a large
number of timesteps to generate a single sample.
Existing methods address this challenge by decoupling the forward and reverse processes, and they
rely on handcrafted rules for sampling acceleration, leading to the risk of discarding important
steps. In this paper, we propose an Efficient Denoising Diffusion method via Probabilistic Masking (EDDPM) that can identify and skip the redundant steps during training. To determine whether
a timestep should be skipped or not, we employ
probabilistic reparameterization to continualize
the binary determination mask. The mask distribution parameters are learned jointly with model
weights. By incorporating a real-time sparse constraint, our method can effectively identify and
eliminate unnecessary steps during the training
iterations, thereby improving inference efficiency.
Notably, as the model becomes fully trained, the
random masks converge to a sparse and deterministic one, retaining only a small number of essential steps. Empirical results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed EDDPM over the state-ofthe-art sampling acceleration methods across various domains. EDDPM can generate high-quality
samples with only 20% of the steps for time series imputation and achieve 4.89 FID with 5 steps
for CIFAR-10. Moreover, when starting from a
pretrained model, our method efficiently identifies the most informative timesteps within a single epoch, which demonstrates the potential of
EDDPM to be a practical tool to explore large
diffusion models with limited resources.

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful generative
technique, achieving unprecedented success in various domains, including image generation (Ho et al., 2020; Saharia et al., 2022; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), speech synthesis (Kong et al., 2020; Jeong et al., 2021), text generation (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022), 3D shape
generation (Luo & Hu, 2021) and time series forecasting
and imputation (Tashiro et al., 2021; Rasul et al., 2021).
These models employ an iterative sampling procedure to
generate each sample by progressively removing noise from
random initial vectors.
One significant drawback of diffusion models is their reliance on a large number of denoising steps, ranging from
hundreds to thousands, to transform Gaussian noise into
a sample. As a result, diffusion models are considerably slower compared to other generative models like
GANs (Brock et al., 2018). In recent years, several acceleration techniques have been proposed to address this issue,
which can be divided into learning-free and learning-based
methods according whether additional training is required.
It is worth noting that learning-free methods (Song et al.,
2020a; Bao et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Bao et al., 2022)
often employ handcrafted rules, whereas learning-based
methods (Watson et al., 2021a;b; Dockhorn et al., 2022;
Salimans & Ho, 2021; Luhman & Luhman, 2021) decouple the training and inference schedules. This decoupling
allows for separate learning of the training and sampling
schedules. However, both approaches have the potential to
result in suboptimal performance. Therefore, exploring the
determination of the optimal sampling step during training
is a promising direction worth investigating.
In this paper, we propose an efficient denoising diffusion
model (EDDPM) to enhance the sampling efficiency. The
fundamental concept is illustrated in Figure 2. Figure 1
highlights redundant sampling steps in the denoising process. Removing these steps has a negligible effect on the
quality of the samples or may even improve the sample
quality. To automatically and safely skip redundant steps
in the forward and reverse diffusion processes, we propose
EDDPM, which is a diffusion model equipped with a novel
probabilistic masking module. This module gradually identifies and masks the less informative steps. To be precise, we

*
1
Equal contribution
Fudan University 2 Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 3 Alibaba Group
4
Wuhan University. Correspondence to: Weizhong Zhang
<weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

