Behavior Generation with Latent Actions
Seungjae Lee 1 2 Yibin Wang 1 Haritheja Etukuru 1 H. Jin Kim 2 3
Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah * 1 Lerrel Pinto * 1

Abstract

video (Bar-Tal et al., 2024), follows a similar recipe: collect
a large in-domain dataset, use a large model that fits the
dataset, and possibly as a cherry on top, improve the model
output using some domain-specific feedback or datasets.
However, such a large, successful model for generating human or robot actions in embodied environments has been
absent so far, and the issues are apparent. Action sequences
are semantically diverse but temporally highly correlated,
human behavior distributions are massively multi-modal and
noisy, and the hard-and-fast grounding in the laws of physics
means that unlike audio, language or video-generation, even
the smallest discrepancies may cause a cascade of consequences that lead to catastrophic failures in as few as tens
of timesteps (Ross et al., 2011; Rajaraman et al., 2020).
The desiderata for a good model of behaviors and actions
thus must contain the following abilities: to model longand short-term dependencies, to capture and generate from
diverse modes of behavior, and to replicate the learned behaviors precisely (Shafiullah et al., 2022; Chi et al., 2023).

Generative modeling of complex behaviors from
labeled datasets has been a longstanding problem
in decision-making. Unlike language or image
generation, decision-making requires modeling
actions – continuous-valued vectors that are multimodal in their distribution, potentially drawn
from uncurated sources, where generation errors
can compound in sequential prediction. A recent class of models called Behavior Transformers
(BeT) addresses this by discretizing actions using
k-means clustering to capture different modes.
However, k-means struggles to scale for highdimensional action spaces or long sequences, and
lacks gradient information, and thus BeT suffers
in modeling long-range actions. In this work, we
present Vector-Quantized Behavior Transformer
(VQ-BeT), a versatile model for behavior generation that handles multimodal action prediction,
conditional generation, and partial observations.
VQ-BeT augments BeT by tokenizing continuous
actions with a hierarchical vector quantization
module. Across seven environments including
simulated manipulation, autonomous driving, and
robotics, VQ-BeT improves on state-of-the-art
models such as BeT and Diffusion Policies. Importantly, we demonstrate VQ-BeT’s improved
ability to capture behavior modes while accelerating inference speed 5× over Diffusion Policies.
Videos can be found https://sjlee.cc/vq-bet/

Prior work by (Shafiullah et al., 2022) shows how transformers can capture the temporal dependencies well, and to
some extent even capture the multi-modality in the data with
clever tokenization. However, that tokenziation relies on kmeans clustering, a method typically based on an ℓ2 metric
space that unfortunately does not scale to high-dimensional
action spaces or temporally extended actions with lots of
inter-dependencies. More recent works have also used tools
from generative modeling to address the problem of behavior modeling (Pearce et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023), but issues remain, for example in high computational cost when scaling to long-horizons, or failing to
express multi-modality during rollouts.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose Vector-Quantized Behavior Transformer (VQ-BeT), which combines the long-horizon modeling capabilities of transformers with the expressiveness
of vector-quantization to minimize the compute cost while
maintaining high fidelity to the data. We posit that a large
part of the difficulty in behavior modeling comes from representing the continuous-valued, multi-modal action vectors.
A ready answer is learning discrete representations using
vector quantization (Van Den Oord et al., 2017) used extensively to handle the output spaces in audio (Dhariwal
et al., 2020), video (Wu et al., 2021), and image (Rombach

The presently dominant paradigm in modeling human
outputs, whether in language (Achiam et al., 2023), image (Podell et al., 2023), audio (Ziv et al., 2024), or
1
New York University 2 Department of Aerospace Engineering,
Seoul National University 3 Artificial Intelligence Institute of SNU
* Equal Advising. Correspondence to: Nur Muhammad Mahi
Shafiullah <mahi@cs.nyu.edu>. Code is avaliable at https:
//github.com/jayLEE0301/vq_bet_official
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

