Navigating Scaling Laws:
Compute Optimality in Adaptive Model Training

Sotiris Anagnostidis * 1 Gregor Bachmann * 1 Imanol Schlag 2 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract

puter vision tasks (Dehghani et al., 2023a; Chen et al.,
2023b). An inherent and pivotal feature of such models
lies in their scalability, whereby their performance can be
reliably predicted as a power law across the number of parameters and the volume of data or computational resources
utilized (Cortes et al., 1993; Hestness et al., 2017; Rosenfeld et al., 2019; Kaplan et al., 2020). These principles are
succinctly encapsulated by the neural scaling laws that motivate the choice of a particular model and dataset size given
a fixed budget of training compute (Hoffmann et al., 2022).
The ability to accurately predict performance offers an undeniable reassurance in the often uncertain world of deep
learning. It nevertheless, introduces an intimidating realization;

In recent years, the state-of-the-art in deep learning has been dominated by very large models
that have been pre-trained on vast amounts of
data. The paradigm is very simple: investing
more computational resources (optimally) leads
to better performance, and even predictably so;
neural scaling laws have been derived that accurately forecast the performance of a network for a
desired level of compute. This leads to the notion
of a ‘compute-optimal’ model, i.e. a model that
allocates a given level of compute during training optimally to maximize performance. In this
work, we extend the concept of optimality by allowing for an ‘adaptive’ model, i.e. a model that
can change its shape during training. By doing
so, we can design adaptive models that optimally
traverse between the underlying scaling laws and
outpace their ‘static’ counterparts, leading to a
significant reduction in the required compute to
reach a given target performance. We show that
our approach generalizes across modalities and
different shape parameters.

Given a training scheme, a fixed further improvement in
performance requires exponentially more compute or
parameters.
Finding solutions to address this issue becomes increasingly paramount, as staying competitive in the realm of
deep learning increasingly depends on the availability of
substantial computational resources. Delving deeper into
the preceding statement, we highlight a pivotal assumption: the shape of the model, and therefore the number
of FLOPs for a forward pass, remains fixed throughout the
training process. By ‘shape’ we refer to any characteristic
of a model that can be smoothly varied throughout training without leading to strong deterioration in performance.
Such a static approach (i.e. where every model shape remains fixed) may however not always be optimal. For example, it has already been observed that the optimal model
size grows smoothly with the loss target and the compute
budget (Kaplan et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Deep learning has gradually undergone a paradigm shift,
where instead of training specialized models for a
given task, a so-called frontier model is prompted/fewshoted/fine-tuned for different desired downstream tasks.
Frontier models are typically defined by their large-scale
architectures, often rooted in the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), and their exposure to extensive
and diverse data during their pre-training process, yielding remarkable advancements in both natural language understanding (OpenAI, 2023; Köpf et al., 2023) and com-

This paper challenges the assumption of a static model
outlined above and explores adaptable training methodologies designed to surpass conventional scaling laws. In
other words, our aim is to achieve equivalent performance
for a specified model with fewer computational resources
(FLOPs) than initially projected. To that end, we adapt the
shape of the model throughout training, allowing the optimal traversal between different scaling laws. This enables
us to leverage the optimality of all shape configurations in

*

1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Sci2
ence, ETH Zürich ETH AI Center.
Correspondence to:
<{sanagnos,gregorb}@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

