A decoder-only foundation model for time-series forecasting

Abhimanyu Das 1 Weihao Kong 1 Rajat Sen 1 Yichen Zhou 1

Abstract

ent kinds of creative content, and answer your questions in
an informative way (Radford et al., 2019). They are trained
on massive amounts of data, which allows them to learn the
patterns of human language. This makes them very powerful tools that can be used for a variety of downstream tasks,
often in a zero-shot learning mode.

Motivated by recent advances in large language
models for Natural Language Processing (NLP),
we design a time-series foundation model for
forecasting whose out-of-the-box zero-shot performance on a variety of public datasets comes
close to the accuracy of state-of-the-art supervised forecasting models for each individual
dataset. Our model is based on pretraining a decoder style attention model with input patching,
using a large time-series corpus comprising both
real-world and synthetic datasets. Experiments
on a diverse set of previously unseen forecasting
datasets suggests that the model can yield accurate zero-shot forecasts across different domains,
forecasting horizons and temporal granularities.

This motivates the question: “Can large pretrained models trained on massive amounts of time-series data learn
temporal patterns that can be useful for time-series forecasting on previously unseen datasets?” In particular, can
we design a time-series foundation model that obtains good
zero-shot out-of-the-box forecasting performance ? Such a
pretrained time-series foundation model, if possible, would
bring significant benefits for downstream forecasting users
in terms of no additional training burden and significantly
reduced compute requirements. It is not immediately obvious that such a foundation model for time-series forecasting is possible. Unlike in NLP, there is no well defined
vocabulary or grammar for time-series. Additionally, such
a model would need to support forecasting with varying
history lengths (context) , prediction lengths (horizon) and
time granularities. Furthermore, unlike the huge volume
of public text data for pretraining language models, vast
amounts of time-series data is not readily available. In spite
of these issues, we provide evidence to answer the above
question in the affirmative.

1. Introduction
Time-series data is ubiquitous in various domains such as
retail, finance, manufacturing, healthcare and natural sciences. In many of these domains, one of the most important use-cases of time-series data is forecasting. Timeseries forecasting is critical to several scientific and industrial applications, like retail supply chain optimization, energy and traffic prediction, and weather forecasting. In recent times, Deep learning models (Salinas et al., 2020; Oreshkin et al., 2019) have emerged as a popular approach for
forecasting rich, multivariate, time-series data, often outperforming classical statistical approaches such as ARIMA
or GARCH (Box & Jenkins, 1968). In several forecasting competitions such as the M5 competition (Makridakis
et al., 2022) and IARAI Traffic4cast contest (Kopp et al.,
2021) deep network based solutions performed very well.

In particular, we design TimesFM, a single foundation
model for time-series forecasting that, when applied to
a variety of previously-unseen forecasting datasets across
different domains, obtains close to state-of-the-art zeroshot accuracy (compared to the best supervised models
trained individually for these datasets). Our model can
work well across different forecasting history lengths, prediction lengths and time granularities at inference time.
The key elements of our foundation model are twofold: 1)
a large-scale time-series corpus built using both real-world
(mostly time-series data from web search queries1 and
Wikipedia page visits2 ) and synthetic data, which meets the
volume and diversity of data needed for training our foundation model, and 2) a decoder style attention architecture
with input patching, that can be efficiently pre-trained on
this time-series corpus.

At the same time, we are witnessing a rapid progress in the
Natural Language Processing (NLP) domain on large foundation models for downstream NLP tasks. Large language
models (LLMs) are growing in popularity because they can
be used to generate text, translate languages, write differ1

Google Research. Correspondence to: Rajat Sen <senrajat@google.com>, Yichen Zhou <yichenzhou@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).
Author names are listed in alphabetical order.

1
2

1

https://trends.google.com
https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/

