BiE: Bi-Exponent Block Floating-Point for Large Language Models Quantization

Lancheng Zou 1 Wenqian Zhao 1 Shuo Yin 1 Chen Bai 1 Qi Sun 2 Bei Yu 1

Abstract

INT scale range
Outliers uncovered

Nowadays, Large Language Models (LLMs)
mostly possess billions of parameters, bringing
significant challenges to hardware platforms. Although quantization is an efficient approach to
reduce computation and memory overhead for inference optimization, we stress the challenge that
mainstream low-bit quantization approaches still
suffer from either various data distribution outliers or a lack of hardware efficiency. We also
find that low-bit data format has further potential
expressiveness to cover the atypical language data
distribution. In this paper, we propose a novel numerical representation, Bi-Exponent Block Floating Point (BiE), and a new quantization flow. BiE
quantization shows accuracy superiority and hardware friendliness on various models and benchmarks.

FP value range
Wide but redundant
No value, waste bits
OPT-66B
Activation Outliers

Figure 1. Normalized value distribution of input activations in one
Linear Layer of OPT-66B model. Integer quantization may not
cover outliers due to limited value range. Floating Point may result
in redundant bit number and complex calculation.

tizing the weight and activation into a lower-bit numerical
representation format can reduce the memory footprint and
computational overhead.

1. Introduction

Benefiting from GPU native support, fixed point quantization like INT8 is the mainstream for prior quantization
works. Moreover, due to limited value range of INT type,
some choose different scaling factors at a finer granularity
than per-tensor or per-token level (Dettmers et al., 2022; Yao
et al., 2022), (Zhang et al., 2023) systemically investigates
block-based arithmetic quantization. Among the blockbased numerical representations, the 6-bit block floating
point (BFP), which is a fixed-point-variant, shows promising potential for LLMs quantization without any complex
transformation or shifting operations. However, we found
that BFP can not maintain accuracy in 4-bit and lower-bit
LLMs quantization, which is a result of the homogeneity
of its numerical representation. Inspired by these observations, we theoretically investigate the properties of BFP and
claim that fixed point inherently cannot handle superposition of distributions in LLM activition scenario, as shown
in Figure 1.

Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2022a) exhibit superior efficacy in a multitude of tasks
within the domain of natural language processing (NLP).
Furthermore, LLMs’ remarkable language comprehension
capabilities can be effectively extended to multi-modal tasks
(Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). Nevertheless, LLMs’ computational and memory requirements are significant factors
that affect their sustained use and further development. For
example, the GPT-3 model (Brown et al., 2020), which contains 175B parameters, requires 350GB memory to load and
at least 5×A100-80G GPUs for inference.
The importance of model compression techniques for efficient large model deployment is increasing (Han et al.,
2015; Hinton et al., 2015). Among these techniques, quantization (Jacob et al., 2018) has surfaced as a prevalent and
fundamental methodology for model compression. Quan1

However, scaling up LLMs beyond 6.7B parameters will
lead to the emergence of systematic outliers with large
magnitudes in activations (Dettmers et al., 2022), which
makes quantization for LLMs challenging, as visualized
in Figure 1. To prevent quantization errors and performance
degradation, LLM.int8() (Dettmers et al., 2022) introduces

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
Zhejiang University, China. Correspondence to: Qi Sun
<qisunchn@zju.edu.cn>, Bei Yu <byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

