Distributed Bilevel Optimization with Communication Compression

Yutong He * 1 Jie Hu * 1 Xinmeng Huang 2 Songtao Lu 3 Bin Wang 4 Kun Yuan 1 5 6

Abstract

ing, multiple workers collaborate to solve a global problem
through inter-worker communications. In most current implementations (Smola & Narayanamurthy, 2010; Li et al.,
2014; Strom, 2015; Gibiansky, 2017), each worker transmits
full-dimensional gradients to a central server for updating
model parameters. Since the size of full-dimensional gradients is massive, communicating them per iteration incurs
substantial overhead, which impedes algorithmic efficiency
and scalability (Seide et al., 2014; Chilimbi et al., 2014).

Stochastic bilevel optimization tackles challenges
involving nested optimization structures. Its fastgrowing scale nowadays necessitates efficient distributed algorithms. In conventional distributed
bilevel methods, each worker must transmit fulldimensional stochastic gradients to the server every iteration, leading to significant communication overhead and thus hindering efficiency and
scalability. To resolve this issue, we introduce
the first family of distributed bilevel algorithms
with communication compression. The primary
challenge in algorithmic development is mitigating bias in hypergradient estimation caused by
the nested structure. We first propose C-SOBA,
a simple yet effective approach with unbiased
compression and provable linear speedup convergence. However, it relies on strong assumptions
on bounded gradients. To address this limitation,
we explore the use of moving average, error feedback, and multi-step compression in bilevel optimization, resulting in a series of advanced algorithms with relaxed assumptions and improved
convergence properties. Numerical experiments
show that our compressed bilevel algorithms can
achieve 10× reduction in communication overhead without severe performance degradation.

To mitigate this issue, communication compression (Alistarh et al., 2017; Bernstein et al., 2018; Stich et al., 2018;
Richtárik et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022) has been developed to reduce overhead. Instead of transmitting full
gradient/model tensors, these strategies communicate compressed tensors with substantially smaller sizes per iteration.
Two prevalent approaches of compression are quantization
and sparsification. Quantization (Alistarh et al., 2017; Horvath et al., 2019; Seide et al., 2014) involves mapping input
tensors from a large, potentially infinite, set to a smaller set
of discrete values, such as 1-bit quantization (Seide et al.,
2014) or natural compression (Horvath et al., 2019). In contrast, sparsification (Wangni et al., 2018; Stich et al., 2018;
Safaryan et al., 2021) entails dropping a certain number of
entries to obtain sparse tensors for communication, such as
rand-K or top-K compressor (Stich et al., 2018). Both approaches have demonstrated strong empirical performance
in communication savings.
Communication compression has widespread application
in single-level stochastic optimization. However, many machine learning tasks, including adversarial learning (Madry
et al., 2018), meta-learning (Bertinetto et al., 2019), hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018), reinforcement learning (Hong et al., 2023), neural architecture search
(Liu et al., 2018), and imitation learning (Arora et al., 2020)
involve upper- and lower-level optimization formulations
that go beyond the conventional single-level paradigm. Addressing such nested problems has prompted substantial attention towards stochastic bilevel optimization (Ghadimi &
Wang, 2018; Ji et al., 2021). While tremendous efforts have
been made (Yang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Tarzanagh
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023b) to solve distributed stochastic bilevel optimization, no existing algorithms, to the best
of our knowledge, have been developed under communication compression. To fill this gap, this paper provides the

1. Introduction
Large-scale optimization and learning have emerged as indispensable tools in numerous applications. Solving such
large and intricate problems poses a formidable challenge,
usually demanding hours or days to complete. Consequently,
it is imperative to expedite large-scale optimization and
learning with distributed algorithms. In distributed learn*

Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 IBM Research 4 Zhejiang University 5 National Engineering
Labratory for Big Data Analytics and Applications 6 AI for Science Institute, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Kun Yuan
<kunyuan@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

