Stable Differentiable Causal Discovery

Achille Nazaret * 1 2 Justin Hong * 1 2 Elham Azizi 1 2 3 David Blei 1 4

Abstract

can either be interventional, where some variables were
purposely manipulated, or purely observational, where there
has been no manipulation.

Inferring causal relationships as directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) is an important but challenging
problem. Differentiable Causal Discovery (DCD)
is a promising approach to this problem, framing the search as a continuous optimization. But
existing DCD methods are numerically unstable,
with poor performance beyond tens of variables.
In this paper, we propose Stable Differentiable
Causal Discovery (SDCD), a new method that improves previous DCD methods in two ways: (1)
It employs an alternative constraint for acyclicity; this constraint is more stable, both theoretically and empirically, and fast to compute. (2)
It uses a training procedure tailored for sparse
causal graphs, which are common in real-world
scenarios. We first derive SDCD and prove its
stability and correctness. We then evaluate it with
both observational and interventional data and in
both small-scale and large-scale settings. We find
that SDCD outperforms existing methods in convergence speed and accuracy, and can scale to
thousands of variables.

The challenge of causal discovery is that searching for the
true DAG underlying the data is an NP-hard problem. Exact
methods are intractable, even for modest numbers of variables (Chickering, 1996). Yet datasets in fields like biology
routinely involve thousands of variables (Dixit et al., 2016).
To address this problem, Zheng et al. (2018) introduced
differentiable causal discovery (DCD), which formulates
the DAG search as a continuous optimization over the
space of all graph adjacency matrices. An essential element
of this strategy is an acyclicity constraint, in the form of
a penalty, that guides an otherwise unconstrained search
toward acyclic graphs.
This optimization-oriented formulation often scales better
than previous methods, and it has opened opportunities to
harness neural networks (Lachapelle et al., 2019), incorporate interventional data (Brouillard et al., 2020), and use
matrix approximation techniques (Lopez et al., 2022). But,
while promising, existing DCD methods still struggle to
scale consistently beyond tens of variables, or they rely on
approximations that limit their applicability (see Section 5).
In this paper, we study the problems of DCD and improve
on it, so that it can scale more easily and apply to many
types of causal discovery problems. We trace the issues
with DCD to the instability of its objective function; in
particular, properties of the acyclicity constraint it uses to
find a DAG solution. We formalize this notion of stability,
show that previous DCD methods are unstable, and then
formulate a method that is stable and scalable.

1. Introduction
Inferring cause-and-effect relationships between variables is
a fundamental challenge in many scientific fields, including
biology (Sachs et al., 2005), climate science (Zhang et al.,
2011), and economics (Hoover, 2006). Mathematically, a set
of causal relations can be represented with a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) where nodes are variables, and directed edges
indicate direct causal effects. The goal of causal discovery
is to recover the graph from the observed data. The data

In details, this paper makes several contributions. First, we
present a unifying theoretical view of existing acyclicity constraints, which explains their intrinsic numerical instability.
We then employ a constraint, the spectral acyclicity constraint (Lee et al., 2019), that is both faster to compute and
offers improved numerical stability. We prove its stability
and corroborate its good properties with experiments.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Columbia University, New York, USA 2 Irving Institute for Cancer
Dynamics, Columbia University, New York, USA 3 Department
of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York,
USA 4 Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York,
USA. Correspondence to: Elham Azizi <ea2690@columbia.edu>,
David Blei <david.blei@columbia.edu>.

Finally, we develop Stable Differentiable Causal Discovery
(SDCD). SDCD is a two-stage optimization procedure for
causal discovery that is stable and computationally efficient.
In its first stage, it prunes edges without regard for acyclicity.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

