Towards Global Optimality for Practical Average Reward Reinforcement
Learning without Mixing Time Oracles

Bhrij Patel 1 Wesley A. Suttle 2 Alec Koppel 3 Vaneet Aggarwal 4 Brian M. Sadler 5 Dinesh Manocha 1
Amrit Singh Bedi 6

Abstract

tributed (i.i.d.) assumption commonly encountered in machine learning analyses, rendering the theoretical analysis
of RL methods challenging. In discounted RL, the impact
of temporal dependence is typically mitigated, as the effect
of the discount factor renders the stationary behavior of
the induced Markov chains irrelevant. On the other hand,
in average-reward RL, stationary behavior under induced
policies is of fundamental importance. In particular, understanding the effect of mixing time, a measure of how
long a Markov chain takes to approach stationarity, is critical to the development and analysis of average-reward RL
methods (Suttle et al., 2023; Riemer et al., 2021). Given
the usefulness of the average-reward regime in applications
such as robotic locomotion (Zhang & Ross, 2021), traffic
engineering (Geng et al., 2020), and healthcare (Ling et al.,
2023), improving our understanding of the issues inherent
in average-reward RL is increasingly important.

In the context of average-reward reinforcement
learning, the requirement for oracle knowledge
of the mixing time, a measure of the duration
a Markov chain under a fixed policy needs to
achieve its stationary distribution, poses a significant challenge for the global convergence of
policy gradient methods. This requirement is particularly problematic due to the difficulty and expense of estimating mixing time in environments
with large state spaces, leading to the necessity
of impractically long trajectories for effective gradient estimation in practical applications. To address this limitation, we consider the Multi-level
Actor-Critic (MAC) framework, which incorporates a Multi-level Monte-Carlo (MLMC) gradient estimator. With our approach, we effectively
alleviate the dependency on mixing time knowledge, a first for average-reward MDPs global convergence. Furthermore, our approach exhibits
√
the tightest available dependence of O τmix
known from prior work. With a 2D grid world
goal-reaching navigation experiment, we demonstrate that MAC outperforms the existing state-ofthe-art policy gradient-based method for average
reward settings.

Key to theoretically understanding a learning method is
characterizing its convergence behavior. For a method to be
considered sound, we should ideally be able to prove that,
under suitable conditions, it converges to a globally optimal
solution while remaining sample-efficient. Convergence to
global optimality of policy gradient (PG) methods (Sutton
& Barto, 2018), a subset of RL methods well-suited to problems with large and complex state and action spaces, has
been extensively studied in the discounted setting (Bhandari
& Russo, 2024; Liu et al., 2020; Bedi et al., 2022; Gaur et al.,
2023; Mondal & Aggarwal, 2024; Gaur et al., 2024). Due
to gradient estimation issues arising from the mixing time
dependence inherent in the average-reward setting, however, the problem of obtaining global optimality results for
average-reward PG methods remained open until recently.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL) problems, temporal dependence of data breaks the independent and identically dis1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland,
College Park, USA. 2 US Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi,
MD, USA. 3 JP Morgan AI Research, New York, USA. 4 School
of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, Indiana, USA.
5
Department of Computer Sicence, University of Texas, Austin,
USA. 6 Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Florida, USA.. Correspondence to: Bhrij Patel
<bbp13@umd.edu>.

In Bai et al. (2024), the Parameterized Policy Gradient with
Advantage Estimation (PPGAE) method was proposed and
shown to converge to a globally optimal solution in averagereward problems under suitable conditions. However, the
implementation of the PPGAE algorithm relies on oracle
knowledge of mixing times, which are typically unknown
and costly to estimate, and requires extremely long trajectory lengths at each gradient estimation step. These drawbacks render PPGAE costly and sample-inefficient, leav-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

