Accelerating Parallel Sampling of Diffusion Models

Zhiwei Tang 1 * Jiasheng Tang 2 3 Hao Luo 2 3 Fan Wang 2 Tsung-Hui Chang 1 4

Abstract

et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Song et al., 2020b).
These models are also notably easy to train and can be effectively extended to conditional generation (Ho & Salimans,
2022). Broadly speaking, diffusion models work by learning to reverse the diffusion of data into noise, a process that
can be described by a stochastic differential equation (SDE)
(Song et al., 2020b; Karras et al., 2022):

Diffusion models have emerged as state-of-the-art
generative models for image generation. However, sampling from diffusion models is usually
time-consuming due to the inherent autoregressive nature of their sampling process. In this
work, we propose a novel approach that accelerates the sampling of diffusion models by parallelizing the autoregressive process. Specifically,
we reformulate the sampling process as solving a
system of triangular nonlinear equations through
fixed-point iteration. With this innovative formulation, we explore several systematic techniques
to further reduce the iteration steps required by
the solving process. Applying these techniques,
we introduce ParaTAA, a universal and trainingfree parallel sampling algorithm that can leverage extra computational and memory resources
to increase the sampling speed. Our experiments
demonstrate that ParaTAA can decrease the inference steps required by common sequential sampling algorithms such as DDIM and DDPM by
a factor of 4∼14 times. Notably, when applying ParaTAA with 100 steps DDIM for Stable
Diffusion, a widely-used text-to-image diffusion
model, it can produce the same images as the sequential sampling in only 7 inference steps. The
code is available at https://github.com/
TZW1998/ParaTAA-Diffusion.

dxt = f (t)xt dt + g(t)dwt ,

(1)

where dwt is the standard Wiener process, and f (t) and
g(t) are the drift and diffusion coefficients, respectively.
def.
The reverse process relies on the score function ϵ(xt , t) =
∇x log p(xt ), and its closed form can be expressed either as
an ordinary differential equation (ODE) (Song et al., 2020b):


1 2
dxt = f (t)xt − g (t)ϵ(xt , t) dt,
(2)
2
or as an SDE:

dxt = f (t)xt − g 2 (t)ϵ(xt , t) dt + g(t)dwt .

(3)

With the ability to evaluate ϵ(xt , t), it becomes possible to
generate samples from noise by numerically solving the
ODE (2) or the SDE (3). The training process, therefore,
involves learning a parameterized surrogate ϵθ (xt , t) for
ϵ(xt , t) following a denoising score matching framework
described in (Song et al., 2020b; Karras et al., 2022).
Accelerating Diffusion Sampling. As previously mentioned, the sampling process in diffusion generative models
involves solving the ODE (2) or SDE (3). This process requires querying the learned neural network ϵθ in an autoregressive way, which can limit sampling speed particularly
when ϵθ represents a large model such as Stable Diffusion
(SD) (Rombach et al., 2022). To accelerate the sampling
process, existing works explore several avenues, which we
summarize briefly here.

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models have been recognized as
state-of-the-art for generating high-quality images, demonstrating exceptional resolution, fidelity, and diversity (Ho
*
This work was done when Zhiwei Tang was intern at DAMO
Academy. 1 School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Hupan Lab, Zhejiang Province 4 Shenzhen Research
Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Tang <zhiweitang1@link.cuhk.edu.cn>.

One avenue is to distill the ODE trajectory of the diffusion
sampling process into another neural network that enables
fewer-step sampling, with representative works including
(Song et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2023; Sauer et al., 2023;
Salimans & Ho, 2022; Meng et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2023).
However, this class of methods often leads to degradation
in image quality and diversity.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

