Jetfire: Efficient and Accurate Transformer Pretraining with
INT8 Data Flow and Per-Block Quantization

Haocheng Xi 1 2 * Yuxiang Chen 1 Kang Zhao 1 KAI JUN TEH 1 Jianfei Chen 1 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Pretraining transformers are generally timeconsuming. Fully quantized training (FQT) is
a promising approach to speed up pretraining.
However, most FQT methods adopt a quantizecompute-dequantize procedure, which often leads
to suboptimal speedup and significant performance degradation when used in transformers
due to the high memory access overheads and
low-precision computations. In this work, we propose Jetfire, an efficient and accurate INT8 training method specific to transformers. Our method
features an INT8 data flow to optimize memory
access and a per-block quantization method to
maintain the accuracy of pretrained transformers.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our INT8
FQT method achieves comparable accuracy to
the FP16 training baseline and outperforms the
existing INT8 training works for transformers.
Moreover, for a standard transformer block, our
method offers an end-to-end training speedup of
1.42x and a 1.49x memory reduction compared to
the FP16 baseline.

Figure 1. Visualization of INT8 data flow. (a) Floating point training with FP data flow. (b) Existing works on quantized training
with FP data flow. (c) Ours INT8 training forward process, with
INT8 data flow. X refers to the activation, and S refers to the
corresponding quantization scale factors.

high-bandwidth memory for updating weights and accessing huge amounts of training tokens, respectively.
To accelerate the pre-training of transformers, fully quantized training (FQT) has emerged as a promising technique
to speed up both the forward and backward passes. FQT
integrates quantizers and dequantizers into the original fullprecision computational graph. In this way, the expensive
floating-point operations during training are replaced with
cheaper low-precision alternatives, and activations saved for
the backward pass are stored with fewer bits. Thus, both
computations and memory bandwidths are largely reduced.
Typical FQT works include (Banner et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2018b; Micikevicius et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2023; Xi et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2020; Chmiel
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Recently, large-scale pre-trained transformer-based models
such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), LLAMA (Touvron et al.,
2023), and PaLM (Anil et al., 2023) have attained significant breakthroughs in multiple fields, including natural
language processing and computer vision. However, pretraining transformers from scratch are extremely resourceintensive since they require numerous computations and
*
This work was done during an internship in the Department of
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. 1 Dept. of
Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University 2 Institute
for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Jianfei Chen <jianfeic@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

However, the existing FQT studies still have three limitations: 1) Existing FQT methods are not accurate enough for
Transformer models. Previous FQT methods were mainly
designed for CNNs (Zhu et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021a),
and directly applying these methods to transformer models
will result in significant accuracy degradation. Those few
papers that focus on transformers often encounter significant quantization errors when computing weight gradients.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

