Extending Test-Time Augmentation with Metamorphic Relations for
Combinatorial Problems
Siwei Wei 1 2 Xudong Zhang 1 2 Zhiyang Zhou 1 Yan Cai 1

Abstract

Mazyavkina et al., 2021; Cappart et al., 2023). However, the
intrinsic characteristics of combinatorial problems, such as
their discrete nature and NP-hardness, still pose significant
challenges to machine learning techniques.

The application of machine learning methods to
solve combinatorial problems has garnered considerable research interest. In this paper, we
propose MAGG (Metamorphic Aggregation), a
method to augment machine learning models for
combinatorial problems at inference time using
metamorphic relations. MAGG models metamorphic relations using directed graphs, which
are then fed to a Graph Neural Network (GNN)
model to improve the aggregation of predictions
across transformed input instances. By incorporating metamorphic relations, MAGG essentially
extends standard Test-Time Augmentation (TTA),
eliminating the necessity of label-preserving transformations and expanding its applicability to a
broader range of supervised learning tasks for
combinatorial problems. We evaluate the proposed MAGG method on three mainstream machine learning tasks for combinatorial problems,
namely Boolean Satisfiability Prediction (SAT),
Decision Traveling Salesman Problem Satisfiability Prediction (Decision TSP), and Graph Edit
Distance Estimation (GED). The evaluation result
shows significant improvements over base models
in all three tasks, corroborating the effectiveness
and versatility of the proposed method.

Test-time augmentation (TTA) (Moshkov et al., 2020;
Lyzhov et al., 2020; Shanmugam et al., 2021; Kim et al.,
2020) is a technique aiming at enhancing a pretrained model
at inference time. The workflow of standard TTA (defined in
(Shanmugam et al., 2021)) is shown in Figure 1 (b). It turns
target instance into different versions using label-preserving
transformations such as rotation (see Figure 4). Model
predictions on these versions of target instance are then
averaged to give a better prediction. TTA has proven to
provide more accurate and robust prediction than one-shot
prediction (see Figure 1 (a)) in computer vision tasks.
However, standard TTA has many shortcomings, prohibiting it from applying to augment machine learning models
for combinatorial problems. First, it is not easy to find
label-preserving transformations for combinatorial problems, which are required by both standard TTA and conventional data augmentation methods to give unbiased predictions (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Duan et al., 2022).
Second, there exists numerous semantic relations between
instances of combinatorial problems (since combinatorial
problems are formally definable), but standard TTA fails to
leverage them. Third, standard TTA uses a fixed average
strategy to aggregate model predictions, making it infeasible
to adapt to different models.

1. Introduction

Enlightened by works on metamorphic testing (Segura et al.,
2016; Chen et al., 2018; Segura et al., 2018), we propose to
extend TTA technique with metamorphic relations to amend
its shortcomings. Metamorphic testing is a software testing
technique that leverages the relationship among different
outputs of the target system (i.e. metamorphic relation)
for test. It is widely used to test deep learning based utilities (Zhang et al., 2021b; Wang & Su, 2019; Naidu et al.,
2021; Dwarakanath et al., 2018). Metamorphic relations
are necessary properties of the target system (see Definition 3.1). An example is given in Figure 3. Suppose one
wants to test an implementation of SAT whose aim is to
predict whether a boolean formula is satisfiable. Then for
the two instances q and q ′ , SAT (q ′ ) → SAT (q). If the

Solving combinatorial problems efficiently is a pivotal and
challenging task in the field of computer science (Korte et al.,
2011; Papadimitriou & Steiglitz, 1998). Recently, many
works have been proposed to solve combinatorial problems
using machine learning techniques (Bengio et al., 2021;
1

Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of
Sciences) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute
of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 Co-first authors.
Correspondence to: Yan Cai <yancai@ios.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

