Scene Graph Generation Strategy with Co-occurrence Knowledge and
Learnable Term Frequency

Hyeongjin Kim 1 Sangwon Kim 2 Dasom Ahn 1 Jong Taek Lee 3 Byoung Chul Ko 1

Abstract

: Head

Scene graph generation (SGG) is an important
task in image understanding because it represents
the relationships between objects in an image as
a graph structure, making it possible to understand the semantic relationships between objects
intuitively. Previous SGG studies used a messagepassing neural networks (MPNN) to update features, which can effectively reflect information
about surrounding objects. However, these studies have failed to reflect the co-occurrence of objects during SGG generation. In addition, they
only addressed the long-tail problem of the training dataset from the perspectives of sampling and
learning methods. To address these two problems, we propose CooK, which reflects the Cooccurrence Knowledge between objects, and the
learnable term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-l-IDF) to solve the long-tail problem. We applied the proposed model to the SGG
benchmark dataset, and the results showed a performance improvement of up to 3.8% compared
with existing state-of-the-art models in SGGen
subtask. The proposed method exhibits generalization ability from the results obtained, showing
uniform performance improvement for all MPNN
models.

: Body

(a)

: Tail

: Head

K

Coo

(b)

: Body

: Tail

(c)

Figure 1. A novel learning recipe for SGG. (a) shows the class
distribution and scene graph results of SGG performed using a
conventional MPNN-based method. The proposed CooK + TF-lIDF layer can be easily applied to existing MPNN-based models, as
shown in (b). By updating the features according to the knowledge
of object co-occurrence and the label inverse frequency, as shown
in (c), it is possible to generate accurate relations between objects
and successfully alleviate the long-tail problem.

SGG has been applied to various computer vision tasks,
including image retrieval (Johnson et al., 2015; Schroeder
& Tripathi, 2020), image captioning (Hossain et al., 2019;
Zeng et al., 2022b), visual questions and answers (Ghosh
et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2022c; Zeng et al.,
2022a), and action recognition (Hu et al., 2022). The most
common SGG approach is using an object detector (Ren
et al., 2015; Redmon et al., 2016; Carion et al., 2020) to infer
the relationships between detected objects in an image as a
< subject, predicate, object> triplet. This triplet
is then represented as a graph with a predicate edge between
the subject and object nodes. For example, in the scene
graph shown in Figure 1, the subject is ‘man,’ the predicate
is ‘carrying,’ and the object is ‘surfboard.’ The relationship between ‘man’ and ‘surfboard’ is represented by the
predicate edge ‘carrying,’ which indicates that the ‘a man is
carrying a surfboard’. However, there are many challenges
with respect to accurately and effectively inferring the understood content. SGG has evolved to address the challenging
problem of inferring relationships between objects. (Johnson et al., 2015) first proposed the use of scene graphs for

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) is a type of image understanding that infers and interprets the relationships between
objects in an image and expresses them as a language graph.
1
Department of Computer Engineering, Keimyung University, Daegu, South Korea 2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Daegu 42994, South Korea
3
Department of Computer Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea. Correspondence to: Byoung Chul Ko
<niceko@kmu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

