Reinforcement Learning and Regret Bounds for Admission Control

Lucas Weber 1 Ana Bušić 1 Jiamin Zhu 2
measures the difference between the maximum reward that
could have been achieved and the actual collected rewards.
For a concrete application, minimizing the regret or maximizing the average reward asymptotically yield an optimal
policy. However, by minimizing the regret, we control the
quality of transient policies. Minimizing the regret allows
to better manage jobs appearing during the learning and
limits the loss of revenue for the system operator due to the
exploration.

Abstract
The expected regret of any reinforcement
√ learning

algorithm is lower bounded by Ω
DXAT
for undiscounted returns, where D is the diameter of the Markov decision process, X the size
of the state space, A the size of the action space
and T the number of time steps. However, this
lower bound is general. A smaller regret can be
obtained by taking into account some specific
knowledge of the problem structure. In this article, we consider an admission control problem to
an M/M/c/S queue with m job classes and classdependent rewards and holding costs. Queuing
systems often have a diameter that is exponential
in the buffer size S, making the previous lower
bound prohibitive for any practical use. We propose an algorithm inspired by UCRL2, and use
the structure of the problem to upper
√ bound the
expected total regret by O(S log T + mT log T )
in the finite server case. In the infinite server case,
we prove that the dependence of the regret on S
disappears.

The admission control problem is highly relevant in communication systems that experience losses due to limited
buffer space or service capacity. To ensure uninterrupted
data flow for critical traffic types, like voice or streaming
media, while still providing best-effort service for noncritical services, such as web traffic or file transfers, these jobs
are categorized into priority classes in Quality of Service
(QoS)-differentiated services (Carpenter & Nichols, 2002;
Zhou et al., 2017). Admission control protocols seek to
find a balance by accommodating as many jobs as possible while ensuring preferential treatment for higher-priority
jobs. Priority can be modeled through adequate definitions
of rewards and holding costs. Similar balancing issues can
be found in various fields, one example being electric vehicles charging with different priorities (Alsabbagh et al.,
2019).

1. Introduction

With the increasing success of reinforcement learning for industrial applications, it has now become important to study
not only the asymptotic optimality, but also regret minimization for admission control.

In the admission control problem, jobs arrive at the entrance
of a finite buffer queue, and the system decides whether to
accept or reject a job based on the filling status of the queue
and the job’s class. The arrivals of jobs follow independent
Poisson processes with class-specific rates. Accepted jobs
generate class-dependent rewards, while rejected jobs leave
without waiting. The system also incurs class-dependent
holding costs when accepted jobs that are not served immediately wait for service.

1.1. Related work
The admission control literature is rich with articles interested in finding structural properties of the policies maximizing the long-term average reward. Feinberg and Yang (2011)
extended Haviv and Puterman’s work (1998) and Lewis et
al.’s article (1999) by considering several job classes and
class-dependent holding costs. This corresponds to our setting, except that we minimize the regret and that we learn
the arrival rates. Feinberg and Yang have characterized optimal, bias optimal, and Blackwell optimal policies, and have
adapted Miller’s Policy Iteration (PI) (1969) which yields
an optimal average reward policy to the continuous-time
admission control problem.

Our goal is to minimize the expected total regret, which
1

Inria and DI ENS, École Normale Supérieure, PSL University,
Paris, France 2 IFP Energies nouvelles, 1 et 4 avenue de Bois-Préau,
92852 Rueil-Malmaison, France. Correspondence to: Lucas Weber <lucas.weber@inria.fr>, Ana Bušić <ana.busic@inria.fr>,
Jiamin Zhu <jiamin.zhu@ifpen.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

