GNNs Also Deserve Editing, and They Need It More Than Once

Shaochen (Henry) Zhong * 1 Duy Le * 2 Zirui Liu 1 Zhimeng Jiang 3 Andrew Ye 2 Jiamu Zhang 2 Jiayi Yuan 1
Kaixiong Zhou 4 Zhaozhuo Xu 5 Jing Ma 2 Shuai Xu 2 Vipin Chaudhary 2 Xia Hu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
When training and evaluating models, comprehensive metrics like classification accuracy are regarded as some of
the most pursued and crucial criteria for machine learning.
Indeed, even a slight but consistent improvement in these
metrics often transfers to immediate practical gain when
these systems are deployed. Yet, metrics that evaluate such
models at large critically lack the capability to effectively
address the particular errors that these same models may
potentially accrue over their training period. Simply classifying outputs to a degree of correctness is not enough, since
two wrong outputs that appear the same on paper can
result in drastically different impacts in the real world,
as some mistakes are inherently more damaging than others.
Take, for instance, a self-driving car that wrongfully classifies a sedan as an SUV versus another one that wrongfully
classifies a street-crossing child as a bunny — while both
mistakes are considered just “one wrong prediction” under
metrics like overall accuracy, the latter one is undoubtedly
more catastrophic.

Suppose a self-driving car is crashing into pedestrians, or a chatbot is instructing its users to conduct criminal wrongdoing; the stakeholders of
such products will undoubtedly want to patch
these catastrophic errors as soon as possible. To
address such concerns, Model Editing: the study
of efficiently patching model behaviors without
significantly altering their general performance,
has seen considerable activity, with hundreds of
editing techniques developed in various domains
such as CV and NLP. However, the graph
learning community has objectively fallen behind with only a few Graph Neural Networkcompatible — and just one GNN-specific —
model editing methods available, where all of
which are limited in their practical scope. We argue that the impracticality of these methods lies in
their lack of Sequential Editing Robustness: the
ability to edit multiple errors sequentially, and
therefore fall short in effectiveness, as this setup
mirrors how errors are discovered and addressed
in the real world. In this paper, we delve into
the specific reasons behind the difficulty of editing
GNNs in succession and observe the root cause
to be model overfitting. We subsequently propose
a simple yet effective solution — SEED-GNN —
by leveraging overfit-prevention techniques in a
GNN-specific context to derive the first and only
GNN model editing method that scales practically. Additionally, we formally frame the task
paradigm of GNN editing and hope to inspire
future research in this crucial but currently overlooked field. Please refer to our GitHub repository
for code and checkpoints.

Model Editing — or Knowledge Editing — aims to address
this oversight by studying the efficient patching of particular undesirable model outputs without significantly altering the model’s general behavior on unrelated input (Yao
et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2023). The approach has since been
widely adopted due to its ability to efficiently deliver (ideally
guaranteed) patches on errors that models may make. Furthermore, editing techniques often carry great practical
significance due to their relevance in model development
and maintenance, as high-profile failure cases will almost
always occur during commercial deployment and after initial development (e.g., training, fine-tuning, and internal
testing). As such, the ability to efficiently address post-hoc
high-profile failure cases without expensive and perhaps
unrealistic remedies — such as a complete retraining of the
model — is not only valuable but, in some cases, the only
practical way to correct model behavior.

*
Equal contribution 1 Rice University 2 Case Western Reserve
University 3 Texas A&M University 4 North Carolina State University 5 Stevens Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Shaochen (Henry) Zhong <shaochen.zhong@rice.edu>.

1.1. GNNs Deserve Model Editing Too, but Why Don’t
They Get Any?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Despite the rapid advancement of model editing in domains
like Computer Vision (CV) (Sotoudeh & Thakur, 2021;
1

