Performance Bounds for Active Binary
Testing with Information Maximization

Aditya Chattopadhyay 1 Benjamin D. Haeffele 1 René Vidal 2 Donald Geman 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
In many applications like experimental design,
group testing, and medical diagnosis, the state of
a random variable Y is revealed by successively
observing the outcomes of binary tests about Y .
New tests are selected adaptively based on the history of outcomes observed so far. If the number of
states of Y is finite, the process ends when Y can
be predicted with a desired level of confidence
or all available tests have been used. Finding the
strategy that minimizes the expected number of
tests needed to predict Y is virtually impossible in
most real applications. Therefore, the commonly
used strategy is the greedy heuristic of Information Maximization (InfoMax) that selects tests
sequentially in order of information gain. Despite
its widespread use, existing guarantees on its performance are often vacuous when compared to
its empirical efficiency. In this paper, for the first
time to the best of our knowledge, we establish
tight non-vacuous bounds on InfoMax’s performance. Our analysis is based on the assumption
that at any iteration of the greedy strategy, there is
always a binary test available whose conditional
probability of being ‘true’, given the history, is
within δ units of one-half. This assumption is motivated by practical applications where the available set of tests often satisfies this property for
modest values of δ, say, 0.1 ≤ δ ≤ 0.4. Specifically, we analyze two distinct scenarios: (i) all
tests are functions of Y , and (ii) test outcomes
are corrupted by a binary symmetric channel. For
both cases, our bounds guarantee the near-optimal
performance of InfoMax for modest δ values. It
requires only a small multiplicative factor of the
entropy of Y , in terms of the average number of
tests needed to make accurate predictions.

Many applications of machine learning in science and engineering can be posed as an active testing problem of sequentially carrying out tests to predict a target variable Y
such that the expected number of tests needed is minimized.
Perhaps the simplest example is the classical parlour game
“twenty questions”, where the objective might be to identify
a famous person one player thinks of (the Y in this case)
by asking the minimum number of questions about Y on
average, where each of these questions can be viewed as a
test about Y .1 Other examples include Bayesian optimal
experimental design (Lindley, 1956), sensor fault detection
(Zheng et al., 2012) and medical diagnosis (Peng et al.,
2018). Since computing the optimal sequence of tests for
such scenarios is NP-complete in general (Hyafil & Rivest,
1976), the “greedy” heuristic of choosing tests in each iteration that reduce the uncertainty about Y the most, given
the outcomes observed so far, is commonly employed in
practice. More precisely, this is mathematically equivalent
to choosing the test whose outcome has maximum mutual
information with Y given the sequence of test outcomes
observed so far and is popularly known as the Information
Maximization (InfoMax) algorithm. InfoMax has found
numerous uses in recent applications (Sznitman & Jedynak, 2010; Branson et al., 2014; Geman et al., 2015; Ma
et al., 2018; Foster et al., 2019; Cuturi et al., 2020; He et al.,
2022; Chattopadhyay et al., 2022; 2023; Covert et al., 2023).
Given the natural intuition behind InfoMax, one might ask
how efficient this greedy heuristic is in practice. However,
despite its popularity, theoretical guarantees about the performance of the InfoMax algorithm are scarce (Chen et al.,
2015).
In this paper, we analyze the InfoMax algorithm for binary
tests and derive bounds on its performance. Throughout this
paper, by performance, we mean the expected number of
tests needed to make accurate predictions. If one has access
to all possible binary functions of Y as tests, then it is
known that the performance of the greedy strategy is upper
bounded by H(Y ) + 1 (Garey & Graham, 1974), where
H(Y ) denotes the entropy of Y . This is nearly optimal since
H(Y ) is a lower bound on the best possible performance

1

Johns Hopkins University, USA 2 University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Aditya Chattopadhyay
<achatto1@jh.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

For example, one possible question could be “Is Y still alive?”

