Can Implicit Bias Imply Adversarial Robustness?

Hancheng Min 1 René Vidal 1

Abstract

to be a fundamental challenge. For example, Fawzi et al.
(2018); Dohmatob (2019); Shafahi et al. (2018) show the
non-existence of robust classifiers for certain data distributions. Recently, Pal et al. (2023) show that having a data
distribution that concentrates within a small-volume subset of the ambient space is necessary for the existence of a
robust classifier. These results highlight the importance of
understanding and exploiting data structure in the process
of finding classifiers with certified robustness, yet almost
none of the existing defense strategies do so.

The implicit bias of gradient-based training algorithms has been considered mostly beneficial
as it leads to trained networks that often generalize well. However, Frei et al. (2023) show that
such implicit bias can harm adversarial robustness. Specifically, they show that if the data consists of clusters with small inter-cluster correlation, a shallow (two-layer) ReLU network trained
by gradient flow generalizes well, but it is not robust to adversarial attacks of small radius. Moreover, this phenomenon occurs despite the existence of a much more robust classifier that can be
explicitly constructed from a shallow network. In
this paper, we extend recent analyses of neuron
alignment to show that a shallow network with
a polynomial ReLU activation (pReLU) trained
by gradient flow not only generalizes well but
is also robust to adversarial attacks. Our results
highlight the importance of the interplay between
data structure and architecture design in the implicit bias and robustness of trained networks.

Besides data distribution, additional issues arise from the
training algorithms. For example, Vardi et al. (2022) and
Frei et al. (2023) show that when the data consists of clusters with small inter-cluster correlation, a shallow (twolayer) ReLU network trained by gradient flow generalizes
well but fails to be robust against adversarial attacks of
small radius, despite the existence of a much more robust
classifier that can be explicitly constructed from a shallow
network. This study unveils new challenges in the search
for robust classifiers: Even if we know robust classifiers
exist for certain data distribution, the implicit bias from our
training algorithm (the choice of network architecture, optimization algorithm, etc.) may prevent us from finding it.
Paper contributions. In this paper, we show that under
the same setting studied in Frei et al. (2023), the implicit
bias of gradient flow that leads to non-robust networks
can be altered to favor robust networks by modifying the
ReLU activation. Specifically, we consider a data distribution consisting of a mixture of K Gaussians, referred to as
subclasses, which have small inter-subclass correlation and
are grouped into two superclasses/classes. When training a
two-layer binary classification network, we show, with formal theorems, and with conjectures validated experimentally, that (also illustrated in Figure 1):

1. Introduction
Behind the success of deep neural networks in many application domains lies their vulnerability to adversarial attacks, i.e., small and human-imperceptible perturbations to
the input data. Such a phenomenon was observed in the
seminal paper of Szegedy et al. (2014) and has motivated a
large body of work on building defenses against such attacks (Shafahi et al., 2019; Papernot et al., 2016; Wong
et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Levine
& Feizi, 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Sulam et al., 2020; Kinfu
& Vidal, 2022).

• If the activation is a ReLU, neurons (rows of the first
layer weight matrix) tend to learn only the average direction of each class, leading to a classifier that generalizes well on clean data, but is vulnerable
to an adversar
1
ial attack with l2 radius O √K , i.e. the trained network is non-robust with many subclasses. This leads to
a new neural alignment perspective on the nonrobustness
of ReLU networks identified by Frei et al. (2023).

However, many defense strategies have been shown to fail
against new adaptive attacks (Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini et al., 2019), and understanding these failures seems
1
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Hancheng Min <hanchmin@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

• If the activation is replaced by a novel polynomial ReLU
1

