Sample as you Infer:
Predictive Coding with Langevin Dynamics

Umais Zahid * 1 Qinghai Guo 2 Zafeirios Fountas 1

Abstract

2018; Mumford, 1992; Hosoya et al., 2005; Hohwy et al.,
2008; Bastos et al., 2012; Shipp, 2016; Feldman & Friston,
2010; Fountas et al., 2022). Despite their predictive appeal
in the cognitive sciences, and a growing literature focused
on their export to the general field of supervised machine
learning (see Table 1 in Salvatori et al. (2023)), the practical
applicability and performance of PC - and adjacent algorithms such as neural generative coding (Ororbia & Kifer,
2022) - in training unsupervised deep generative models, on
complex datasets, has yet to be fully realized (Zahid et al.,
2023b); with few, if any, instances - as far as the authors
are aware - of algorithms that are both competitive or better
than their ML counterparts, while also remaining computationally desirable (Zahid et al., 2023a) on current in-silico
frameworks.

We present Langevin Predictive Coding (LPC), a
novel algorithm for deep generative model learning that builds upon the predictive coding framework of computational neuroscience. By injecting
Gaussian noise into the predictive coding inference procedure and incorporating an encoder network initialization, we reframe the approach as an
amortized Langevin sampling method for optimizing a tight variational lower bound. To increase
robustness to sampling step size, we present a
lightweight preconditioning technique inspired
by Riemannian Langevin methods and adaptive
SGD. We compare LPC against VAEs by training generative models on benchmark datasets; our
experiments demonstrate superior sample quality
and faster convergence for LPC in a fraction of
SGD training iterations, while matching or exceeding VAE performance across key metrics like
FID, diversity and coverage.

Concurrent to these developments in the cognitive sciences,
a separate revolution has been occurring in the statistical
literature driven by the use of gradient-based Monte Carlo
sampling methods such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)
(Roberts & Tweedie, 1996; Neal, 2011; Hoffman & Gelman, 2011; Girolami & Calderhead, 2011; Ma et al., 2019).
These methods facilitate the sampling of intractable distributions through the intelligent construction of Markov chains
with proposals informed by gradient information from the
log density being sampled. Notably, one of the simplest
algorithms within this class is the overdamped Langevin
algorithm (Rossky et al., 1978; Roberts & Tweedie, 1996;
Roberts & Rosenthal, 1998), which admits an interpretation
as both a limiting case of HMC, and as a discretisation of a
Langevin diffusion (Neal, 2011).

1. Introduction
In recent decades the Bayesian brain hypothesis has emerged
as a compelling general framework for understanding perception and learning in the brain (Pouget et al., 2013; Clark,
2013; Kanai et al., 2015). Under this framework, the brain
is posited as encoding a probabilistic generative model engaged in a joint scheme of inference over the hidden causes
of its observations and learning over its model parameters.
One of the most popular instantiations of this view is predictive coding (PC), a computational scheme which employs
hierarchical latent Gaussian generative models with complex, non-linear conditional parameterizations. In recent
years, PC has garnered substantial attention for its potential
to elucidate cortical function (Rao & Ballard, 1999; Friston,

This paper introduces several advancements aimed at extending the PC framework using techniques from gradient-based
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) for use in training
deep generative models:

Huawei Technologies R&D, London, UK 2 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. Correspondence to:
Umais Zahid <umaiszahid@outlook.com>.

• We show that by injecting appropriately scaled Gaussian noise, the standard PC inference procedure may be
interpreted as an (unadjusted) overdamped Langevin
sampling.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• Utilizing these Langevin samples, we compute gradients with respect to a tight evidence lower bound
(ELBO), which model parameters may be optimised

1

1

