Scalable Online Exploration via Coverability

Philip Amortila * 1 Dylan J. Foster * 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy * 2

Abstract

paradigms (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Kober
et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016), a recent
body of theoretical research provides structural conditions
that facilitate sample-efficient exploration, as well as an
understanding of fundamental limits (Russo & Van Roy,
2013; Jiang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020b; Du et al., 2021;
Jin et al., 2021a; Foster et al., 2021; 2023). Yet, computational efficiency remains a barrier: outside of simple settings
(Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2020b), our understanding of
algorithmic primitives for efficient exploration is limited.

Exploration is a major challenge in reinforcement
learning, especially for high-dimensional domains
that require function approximation. We propose
exploration objectives—policy optimization objectives that enable downstream maximization of
any reward function—as a conceptual framework
to systematize the study of exploration. We
introduce a new objective, L1 -Coverage, which
generalizes previous exploration schemes and
supports three fundamental desiderata:

In this paper, we propose exploration objectives as a conceptual framework to develop efficient algorithms for exploration. Informally, an exploration objective is an optimization objective that incentivizes a policy (or policy ensemble)
to explore the state space and gather data that can be used
for downstream tasks (e.g., policy optimization or evaluation). To enable practical and efficient exploration, such an
objective should satisfy three desiderata:

1. Intrinsic complexity control. L1 -Coverage
is associated with a structural parameter,
L1 -Coverability, which reflects the intrinsic
statistical difficulty of the underlying MDP,
subsuming Block and Low-Rank MDPs.
2. Efficient planning.
For a known MDP,
optimizing L1 -Coverage efficiently reduces to
standard policy optimization, allowing flexible
integration with off-the-shelf methods such as
policy gradient and Q-learning approaches.
3. Efficient exploration. L1 -Coverage enables
the first computationally efficient model-based
and model-free algorithms for online (rewardfree or reward-driven) reinforcement learning
in MDPs with low coverability.

1. Intrinsic complexity control. Any policy (ensemble) that
optimizes the objective should cover the state space to the
best extent possible, enabling sample complexity guarantees for downstream learning that reflect the intrinsic
statistical difficulty of the underlying MDP.
2. Efficient planning. When the MDP of interest is known, it
should be possible to optimize the objective in a computationally efficient manner, ideally in a way that flexibly
integrates with existing pipelines.

Empirically, we find that L1 -Coverage effectively drives off-the-shelf policy optimization
algorithms to explore the state space.

3. Efficient exploration. When the MDP is unknown,
it should be possible to optimize the objective in a
computationally and statistically efficient manner; the
first two desiderata are necessary, but not sufficient here.

1. Introduction
Many applications of reinforcement learning and control
demand agents to maneuver through complex environments
with high-dimensional state spaces that necessitate function
approximation and sophisticated exploration. Toward addressing the high sample complexity of existing empirical

Our development of exploration objectives, particularly our
emphasis on integrating with existing pipelines, is motivated
by the large body of empirical research equipping policy
gradient methods and value-based methods with exploration
bonuses (Bellemare et al., 2016; Tang et al., 2017; Pathak
et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018; Ash
et al., 2022). Although a number of prior theoretical works
either implicitly or explicitly develop exploration objectives,
they are either too general to admit efficient planning and
exploration (Jiang et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2018; Jin et al.,

1
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 2 Microsoft Research. Full version appears at [arXiv:2403.06571].

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

