Random Scaling and Momentum for Non-smooth Non-convex Optimization

Qinzi Zhang 1 Ashok Cutkosky 1

Abstract

we focus on first-order stochastic optimization algorithms,
which can only access to the stochastic gradient ∇f (x, z)
as an estimate of the unknown true gradient ∇F (x). We
measure the “cost” of an algorithm by counting the number
of stochastic gradient evaluations it requires to achieve some
desired convergence guarantee. We will frequently refer to
this count as the number of “iterations” employed by the
algorithm.

Training neural networks requires optimizing a
loss function that may be highly irregular, and
in particular neither convex nor smooth. Popular
training algorithms are based on stochastic gradient descent with momentum (SGDM), for which
classical analysis applies only if the loss is either
convex or smooth. We show that a very small
modification to SGDM closes this gap: simply
scale the update at each time point by an exponentially distributed random scalar. The resulting
algorithm achieves optimal convergence guarantees. Intriguingly, this result is not derived by a
specific analysis of SGDM: instead, it falls naturally out of a more general framework for converting online convex optimization algorithms to
non-convex optimization algorithms.

When the objective function is non-convex, finding a global
minimum can be intractable. To navigate this complexity,
many prior works have imposed various smoothness assumptions on the objective. These include, but not limited
to, first-order smoothness (Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Carmon
et al., 2017; Arjevani et al., 2022; Carmon et al., 2019),
second-order smoothness (Tripuraneni et al., 2018; Carmon et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2019; Arjevani et al., 2020),
and mean-square smoothness (Allen-Zhu, 2018; Fang et al.,
2018; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019; Arjevani et al., 2022).
Instead of finding the global minimum, the smoothness conditions allow us to find an ϵ-stationary point x of F such
that ∥∇F (x)∥ ≤ ϵ.

1. Introduction
Non-convex optimization algorithms are one of the fundamental tools in modern machine learning, as training neural
network models requires optimizing a non-convex loss function. This paper provides a new theoretical framework for
building such algorithms. The simplest application of this
framework almost exactly recapitulates the standard algorithm used in practice: stochastic gradient descent with
momentum (SGDM).

The optimal rates for smooth non-convex optimization
are now well-understood. When the objective is smooth,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) requires O(ϵ−4 ) iterations to find ϵ-stationary point, matching the optimal rate
(Arjevani et al., 2019). When F is second-order smooth, a
variant of SGD augmented with occasional random perturbations achieves the optimal rate O(ϵ−7/2 ) (Fang et al., 2019;
Arjevani et al., 2020). Moreover, when F is mean-square
smooth, variance-reduction algorithms, such as SPIDER
(Fang et al., 2018) and SNVRG (Zhou et al., 2018), achieve
the optimal rate O(ϵ−3 ) (Arjevani et al., 2019). All of these
algorithms can be viewed as variants of SGD.

The goal of any optimization algorithm used to train a neural
network is to minimize a potentially non-convex objective
function. Formally, given F : Rd → R, the problem is to
solve
min F (x) = Ez [f (x, z)],

In addition to these theoretical optimality results, SGD and
its variants are also incredibly effective in practice across
a wide variety of deep learning tasks. Among these variants, the family of momentum algorithms have become
particularly popular (Sutskever et al., 2013; Kingma & Ba,
2014; You et al., 2017; 2019; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2019;
Cutkosky & Mehta, 2020; Ziyin et al., 2021). Under smoothness conditions, the momentum algorithms also achieve the
same optimal rates.

x∈Rd

where f is a stochastic estimator of F . In practice, x denotes
the parameters of a neural network model, and z denotes
the data point. Following the majority of the literature,
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston
University, Boston, USA. Correspondence to: Qinzi Zhang
<qinziz@bu.edu>, Ashok Cutkosky <ashok@cutkosky.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

However, modern deep learning models frequently incorpo1

