Position: Optimization in SciML Should Employ the Function Space Geometry

Johannes Müller 1 Marius Zeinhofer 2

Abstract

solution of partial differential equations (PDEs).

Scientific machine learning (SciML) is a relatively
new field that aims to solve problems from different fields of natural sciences using machine
learning tools. It is well-documented that the
optimizers commonly used in other areas of machine learning perform poorly on many SciML
problems. We provide an infinite-dimensional
view on optimization problems encountered in
scientific machine learning and advocate for the
paradigm first optimize, then discretize for their
solution. This amounts to first choosing an appropriate infinite-dimensional algorithm which is
then discretized in a second step. To illustrate this
point, we show that recently proposed state-ofthe-art algorithms for SciML applications can be
derived within this framework. As the infinitedimensional viewpoint is presently underdeveloped in scientific machine learning, we formalize
it here and advocate for its use in SciML in the
development of efficient optimization algorithms.

Recently, efforts have been made to apply machine learning
methods to scientific problems posed in function spaces.
Among the goals are the seamless integration of observational data and (partial) physical knowledge in the form
of PDEs using physics-informed neural networks (PINNs),
the solution of high-dimensional PDEs, such as the manyelectron Schrödinger equation, and the design of fast neural
surrogate models for many-query applications to replace
computationally expensive physics-based models, typically
referred to as neural operators. We collect these different
approaches under the name Scientific Machine Learning
(SciML), see also Subsection 2.1 for more details. Common to all of the methods is that they can be formulated in
infinite-dimensional function spaces that are dictated by the
underlying PDEs.
Many of the SciML methods lead to notoriously hard optimization problems in practice, different from purely datadriven deep learning applications. For PINNs in particular, it
is well documented that first-order methods plateau without
reaching high accuracy (Krishnapriyan et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022), which has led many people
to believe that

1. Introduction
The investigation of optimization problems in function
spaces dates back at least to Newton’s minimal resistance
problem (Newton, 1687), sparking the field today known as
the calculus of variations. It took the mathematical community until the beginning of the 20th century for the rigorous
concept of function spaces to emerge, initiated by works of
Fréchet, Hilbert, Riesz, and Fischer among many others. Today, optimization problems in function spaces are the basis
for many applications in engineering and science, including
fluid dynamics, solid mechanics, quantum mechanics, and
optimal design to name but a few areas of applications. Optimization in function spaces is intimately connected to the

there has been a lack of research on optimization
tasks for PINNs (Cuomo et al., 2022).

In particular, for neural network based PDE solvers, the optimization error seems to be dominating the approximation
and generalization error, hence rendering these problems
very different from many deep learning related tasks. More
principled approaches to optimization in SciML have just
started to be developed (Müller & Zeinhofer, 2023; Zeng
et al., 2022; anonymous, 2024). For variational Monte Carlo
methods with neural network ansatz functions the gold standard is K-FAC (Hermann et al., 2022), however, the optimization process is still very resource-consuming (Pfau
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023). In general, there is no clear
consensus on best practices for principled choices of optimization algorithms, however, there is a tendency towards
second-order optimization algorithms unlike in standard
deep learning applications.

1

Chair of Mathematics of Information Processing, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 2 Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway. Correspondence to: Johannes Müller
<mueller@mathc.rwth-aachen.de>, Marius Zeinhofer <mariusz@simula.no>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

