GATE: How to Keep Out Intrusive Neighbors

Nimrah Mustafa 1 Rebekka Burkholz 1

Abstract

The message-passing mechanism of GNNs (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019) involves two key steps: a
transformation of the node features, and the aggregation of
these transformed features from a node’s neighborhood to
update the node’s representation during training. While this
has proven to be largely successful in certain cases, it generally introduces some problems for learning with GNNs,
the most notorious of which is over-smoothing (Li et al.,
2018). The enforced use of structural information in addition to node features may be detrimental to learning the
node classification task, as shown by recent results where
state-of-the-art GNNs perform the same as or worse than
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) (Gomes et al., 2022; Yan
et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022). One such task is where node
labels can be easily determined by informative node features and require no contribution from the neighborhood.
Here, standard neighborhood aggregation, as in most GNN
architectures, would impair model performance, particularly with an increase in model depth.

Graph Attention Networks (GATs) are designed
to provide flexible neighborhood aggregation
that assigns weights to neighbors according to
their importance. In practice, however, GATs are
often unable to switch off task-irrelevant neighborhood aggregation, as we show experimentally and analytically. To address this challenge,
we propose GATE, a GAT extension that holds
three major advantages: i) It alleviates oversmoothing by addressing its root cause of unnecessary neighborhood aggregation. ii) Similarly to perceptrons, it benefits from higher depth
as it can still utilize additional layers for (non)linear feature transformations in case of (nearly)
switched-off neighborhood aggregation. iii) By
down-weighting connections to unrelated neighbors, it often outperforms GATs on real-world
heterophilic datasets. To further validate our
claims, we construct a synthetic test bed to analyze a model’s ability to utilize the appropriate amount of neighborhood aggregation, which
could be of independent interest.

A popular standard GNN architecture that, in principle,
tries to resolve this problem is the Graph Attention Network (GAT) (Veličković et al., 2018; Brody et al., 2022).
By design, neighborhood aggregation in GATs is characterized by learnable coefficients intended to assign larger
weights to more important neighboring nodes (including
the node itself) in order to learn better node representations.
Therefore, in the above example, GATs should ideally resort to assigning near-zero importance to neighbor nodes,
effectively switching off neighborhood aggregation. However, we find that, counter-intuitively, GATs are unable to
do this in practice and continue to aggregate the uninformative features in the neighborhood which impedes learning.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005) are a
standard class of models for machine learning on graphstructured data that utilize node feature and graph structure information jointly to achieve strong empirical performance, particularly on node classification tasks. Input graphs to GNNs stem from various domains of realworld systems such as social (Bian et al., 2020), commercial (Zhang & Chen, 2020), academic (Hamaguchi
et al., 2017), economic (Monken et al., 2021), biochemical(Kearnes et al., 2016), physical (Shlomi et al., 2021),
and transport (Wu et al., 2019) networks that are diverse in
their node feature and graph structure properties.

One may ask why one would employ a GAT (or any GNN
architecture) if an MLP suffices. In practice, we do not
know whether neighborhood aggregation (of raw features
or features transformed by a perceptron or MLP), would be
beneficial or not beforehand. This raises a pertinent question for the GNN research community: How much neighborhood aggregation is needed for a given task?. Ideally,
it is what we would want a model to learn. Otherwise, the
right task-specific architecture would need to be identified
by time and resource-intensive manual tuning.

1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, 66123
Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Nimrah Mustafa
<nimrah.mustafa@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

We address the challenge faced by GAT to effectively de-

1

