Selective Mixup Helps with Distribution Shifts,
But Not (Only) because of Mixup

Damien Teney 1 Jindong Wang 2 Ehsan Abbasnejad 3

Abstract

random pairs of examples, proving successful e.g. for image
classification (Yun et al., 2019b), semantic segmentation (Islam et al., 2023), natural language processing (Verma et al.,
2019), and speech processing (Meng et al., 2021).

Context. Mixup is a highly successful technique
to improve generalization by augmenting training
data with combinations of random pairs. Selective
mixup is a family of methods that apply mixup
to specific pairs e.g. combining examples across
classes or domains. Despite remarkable performance on benchmarks with distribution shifts,
these methods are still poorly understood.

This paper focuses on scenarios of distribution shift and
variants of mixup that improve out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization. We examine the family of methods that apply mixup on selected pairs of examples, which we refer to
as selective mixup (Hwang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Lu
et al., 2022a; Palakkadavath et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2023;
Xu et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022b). These methods propose
various selection critera,2 e.g. combining examples across
classes (Yao et al., 2022b) (Figure 1) or across domains (Xu
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2022a). These heuristics have claimed remarkable improvements on benchmarks
such as DomainBed, WILDS, and Wild-Time (Gulrajani
and Lopez-Paz, 2020; Koh et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2022a).

Findings. We find that an overlooked aspect of
selective mixup explains some of its success in a
completely new light. The non-random selection
of pairs affects the training distribution and improves generalization by means completely unrelated to the mixing. For example in binary classification, mixup across classes implicitly resamples
the data to uniform class distribution — a classical solution to label shift. We verify empirically
that this resampling explains some of the improvements reported in prior work. Theoretically, the
effect relies on a “regression toward the mean”,
an accidental property we find in several datasets.

Despite impressive empirical performance, the theoretical
mechanisms of selective mixup remain obscure. For example, the selection criteria in Yao et al. (2022b) include the
selection of pairs of the same class / different domains but
also the exact opposite. This raises these questions:

Outcomes. We now better understand why selective mixup works. This lets us predict a yetunknown failure mode and conditions where the
method is detrimental. We also use the equivalence to resampling to design variants with better
combinations of mixing and resampling.

1. What makes each selection criterion suitable to any
specific dataset?
2. Are there multiple mechanisms responsible for the
improvements obtained with selective mixup?
This paper presents surprising answers, highlighting an overlooked side effect of selective mixup. The non-random
selection of pairs implicitly biases the training distribution, which can improve generalization by means completely unrelated to the mixing. We verify empirically
that forming mini-batches with the instances of the selected
pairs (without mixing them) sometimes produces the same
improvements as mixing them. This critical ablation was
absent from prior studies.

1. Introduction
Mixup and its variants are some of the few methods that
improve generalization across tasks and modalities with no
domain-specific information (Zhang et al., 2017). Standard
mixup replaces training data with linear combinations of
1
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland 2 Microsoft
Research Asia, Beijing, China 3 AIML, University of Adelaide, Australia.
Correspondence to:
Damien Teney
<damien.teney@idiap.ch>.

We also analyze theoretically the resampling induced by
different selection criteria. We find that conditioning on a
“different attribute” (e.g. combining examples across classes
or domains) brings the training distribution of this attribute

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2
We focus on the basic implementation of Yao et al. (2022b)
with no modification to the standard learning objective.

1

