Interaction-based Retrieval-augmented Diffusion Models
for Protein-specific 3D Molecule Generation

Zhilin Huang * 1 2 Ling Yang * 3 Xiangxin Zhou 4 Chujun Qin 5 Yijie Yu 1 2
Xiawu Zheng 2 6 Zikun Zhou 2 Wentao Zhang 3 Yu Wang 2 Wenming Yang 1 2

Abstract
Retrieval

…
Pocket
Reference Pool

Vina Score: -12.07

Condition

Ranked by Binding Affinity

Generating ligand molecules that bind to specific protein targets via generative models holds
substantial promise for advancing structurebased drug design. Existing methods generate
molecules from scratch without reference or template ligands, which poses challenges in model
optimization and may yield suboptimal outcomes.
To address this problem, we propose an innovative interaction-based retrieval-augmented 3D
molecular diffusion model named IRD IFF to facilitate target-aware molecule generation. IRD IFF
leverages a curated set of ligand references, i.e.,
those with desired properties such as high binding affinity, to steer the diffusion model towards
synthesizing ligands that satisfy design criteria. Specifically, we design a geometric proteinmolecule interaction network (PMINet), and pretrain it with binding affinity signals to: (i) retrieve target-aware ligand molecules with high
binding affinity to serve as references, and (ii)
incorporate essential protein-ligand binding structures for steering molecular diffusion generation
with two effective augmentation mechanisms,
i.e., retrieval augmentation and self augmentation. Empirical studies on CrossDocked2020
dataset show IRD IFF can generate molecules with
more realistic 3D structures and achieve stateof-the-art binding affinities towards the protein
targets, while maintaining proper molecular properties. The codes and models are available at
https://github.com/YangLing0818/IRDiff.

Docking Result

Docking

… Augmentation Diffusion
Models

Vina Score: -11.59 Vina Score: -10.03

Generated Molecule

Top-K Reference Molecules

Figure 1. Interaction-based Retrieval-augmentation SBDD with
the ligands with high binding affinities towards target protein.

1. Introduction
Designing ligand molecules that can bind to specific protein
targets and modulate their function, also known as structurebased drug design (SBDD) (Anderson, 2003; Batool et al.,
2019), is a fundamental problem in drug discovery and
can lead to significant therapeutic benefits. SBDD requires
models to synthesize drug-like molecules with stable 3D
structures and high binding affinities to the target. Nevertheless, it is challenging and involves massive computational
efforts because of the enormous space of synthetically feasible chemicals (Ragoza et al., 2022a) and freedom degree of
both compound and protein structures (Hawkins, 2017).
Recently, several new generative methods have been proposed for the SBDD task (Li et al., 2021; Luo et al.,
2021; Peng et al., 2022; Powers et al., 2022; Ragoza et al.,
2022b; Zhang et al., 2023), which learn to generate ligand
molecules by modeling the complex spatial and chemical
interaction features of the binding site. For instance, some
methods adopt autoregressive models (ARMs) (Luo & Ji,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2022) and show promising
results in SBDD tasks, which generate 3D molecules by iteratively adding atoms or bonds based on the target binding
site. However, ARMs tend to suffer from error accumulation, and it is difficult to find an optimal generation order,
which are both nontrivial for 3D molecular graphs. Aiming
to address these limitations of ARMs, recent works (Guan
et al., 2023a; Schneuing et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022) adopt

*
Equal contribution 1 Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Peking University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences 5 China Southern Power Grid 6 Xiamen University.
Correspondence to: Yu Wang <wangy20@pcl.ac.cn>, Wenming
Yang <yangelwm@163.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

