MOKD: Cross-domain Finetuning for Few-shot Classification via
Maximizing Optimized Kernel Dependence

Hongduan Tian 1 2 Feng Liu 3 Tongliang Liu 4 Bo Du 5 Yiu-ming Cheung 2 Bo Han 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract
In cross-domain few-shot classification, nearest
centroid classifier (NCC) aims to learn representations to construct a metric space where few-shot
classification can be performed by measuring the
similarities between samples and the prototype of
each class. An intuition behind NCC is that each
sample is pulled closer to the class centroid it belongs to while pushed away from those of other
classes. However, in this paper, we find that there
exist high similarities between NCC-learned representations of two samples from different classes.
In order to address this problem, we propose a
bi-level optimization framework, maximizing optimized kernel dependence (MOKD) to learn a set
of class-specific representations that match the
cluster structures indicated by labeled data of the
given task. Specifically, MOKD first optimizes
the kernel adopted in Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC) to obtain the optimized
kernel HSIC (opt-HSIC) that can capture the dependence more precisely. Then, an optimization problem regarding the opt-HSIC is addressed
to simultaneously maximize the dependence between representations and labels and minimize
the dependence among all samples. Extensive
experiments on Meta-Dataset demonstrate that
MOKD can not only achieve better generalization
performance on unseen domains in most cases
but also learn better data representation clusters.
The project repository of MOKD is available at:
https://github.com/tmlr-group/MOKD.

Cross-domain few-shot classification (Dvornik et al., 2020;
Li et al., 2021a; Liu et al., 2021a; Triantafillou et al., 2020),
also known as CFC, is a learning paradigm which aims at
learning to perform classification on tasks sampled from
previously unseen data or domains with only a few labeled
data available. Compared with conventional few-shot classification (Finn et al., 2017; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017; Snell
et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016) which learns to adapt to
new tasks sampled from unseen data with the same distribution as seen data, cross-domain few-shot classification
is a much more challenging learning task since there exist
discrepancies between the distributions of source and target
domains (Chi et al., 2021; Kuzborskij & Orabona, 2013).
Due to its simplicity and scalability, nearest centroid classifier (NCC) (Snell et al., 2017) has been widely applied
in recent works (Doersch et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021a; Liu
et al., 2021a; Triantafillou et al., 2020) regarding crossdomain few-shot classification. The goal of NCC is to learn
representations to construct a metric space where few-shot
classification can be performed by measuring the similarities
between samples and the prototype of each class. Intuitively,
the learning process via NCC is pulling each sample closer
to the class centroid it belongs to while pushing it away from
other class centroids. Thus, the learned representations are
expected to be specific enough to be distinguished from
other classes while identified by the class they belong to.
However, in this paper, we find that there exist high similarities between NCC-learned representations of two samples
coming from different classes. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1(a), the heatmap of the similarity matrix, which depicts
the similarities among support data representations, reveals
that the NCC-learned representations of each sample not
only resemble the samples that belong to the same class but
also have high similarities with samples from other classes.
Such undesirable high similarities among samples may induce uncertainty and further result in misclassification of
samples. Thus, learning a set of class-specific representations, where similarities among samples within the same
class are maximized while similarities between samples
from different classes are minimized, is crucial for CFC.

1

TMLR Group, Hong Kong Baptist University 2 Department
of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University 3 TMLR
Group, University of Melbourne 4 Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 5 National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Computer Science, Wuhan Univeristy. Correspondence to: Bo
Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

