Non-stationary Online Convex Optimization with Arbitrary Delays

Yuanyu Wan 1 2 3 Chang Yao 1 2 3 Mingli Song 1 3 Lijun Zhang 4 1

Abstract

(Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2016; Orabona, 2019). In
OCO, an online player acts as the decision maker, which
chooses a decision xt from a convex set K ⊆ Rn at each
round t ∈ [T ]. After the decision xt is committed, the
player suffers a loss ft (xt ), where ft (x) : K 7→ R is a
convex function selected by an adversary. To improve the
performance in subsequent rounds, the player needs to update the decision by exploiting information about loss functions in previous rounds. Plenty of algorithms and theories
have been introduced to guide the player (Zinkevich, 2003;
Shalev-Shwartz & Singer, 2007; Hazan et al., 2007).

Online convex optimization (OCO) with arbitrary
delays, in which gradients or other information
of functions could be arbitrarily delayed, has received increasing attention recently. Different
from previous studies that focus on stationary environments, this paper investigates the delayed
OCO in non-stationary environments, and aims to
minimize the dynamic regret with respect to any
sequence of comparators. To this end, we first propose a simple algorithm, namely DOGD, which
performs a gradient descent step for each delayed
gradient according to their arrival order. Despite
its simplicity, our novel analysis shows that the
dynamic regret√of DOGD can be automatically
¯ (PT +1)) under mild assumpbounded by O(√ dT
tions, and O( dT (PT + 1)) in the worst case,
where d¯ and d denote the average and maximum
delay respectively, T is the time horizon, and PT
is the path-length of comparators. Furthermore,
we develop an improved algorithm, which reduces
those p
dynamic regret bounds achieved
by DOGD
p
dT (PT + 1)) and O( dT (PT + 1)), reto O( ¯
spectively. The key idea is to run multiple DOGD
with different learning rates, and utilize a metaalgorithm to track the best one based on their delayed performance. Finally, we demonstrate that
our improved algorithm is optimal in the worst
case by deriving a matching lower bound.

However, most of existing studies assume that the information about each function ft (x) is revealed at the end of
round t, which is not necessarily satisfied in many real applications. For example, in online advertisement (McMahan
et al., 2013; He et al., 2014), each loss function depends
on whether a user clicks an ad or not, which may not be
decided even when the user has observed the ad for a long
period of time. To tackle this issue, there has been a surge of
research interest in OCO with arbitrary delays (Joulani et al.,
2013; McMahan & Streeter, 2014; Quanrud & Khashabi,
2015; Joulani et al., 2016; Flaspohler et al., 2021; Wan
et al., 2022a;b; 2023a), where the information about ft (x)
is revealed at the end of round t + dt − 1, and dt ≥ 1
denotes the delay. However, these studies focus on developing algorithms
of the player,
PT to minimize the static
Pregret
T
i.e., R(T ) = t=1 ft (xt ) − minx∈K t=1 ft (x), which is
only meaningful for stationary environments where at least
one fixed decision can minimize the cumulative loss well,
and thus cannot handle non-stationary environments where
the best decision is drifting over time.

1. Introduction

To address this limitation, we investigate the delayed OCO
with a more suitable performance metric called dynamic
regret (Zinkevich, 2003):

Online convex optimization (OCO) has become a popular
paradigm for solving sequential decision-making problems
1

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China 3 Hangzhou HighTech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security,
Hangzhou, China 4 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence
to: Yuanyu Wan <wanyy@zju.edu.cn>.

R(u1 , . . . , uT ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) −

T
X

ft (ut )

t=1

which compares the player against any sequence of changing
comparators u1 , . . . , uT ∈ K. It is well-known that in the
non-delayed setting, online gradient
√ descent (OGD) can attain a dynamic regret bound of O( T (PT + 1)) (Zinkevich,
PT
2003), where PT = t=2 ∥ut − ut−1 ∥2 is the path-length
of comparators, and multiple OGD with different learning

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

