In-Context Language Learning: Architectures and Algorithms

Ekin Akyürek 1 Bailin Wang 1 Yoon Kim 1 Jacob Andreas 1
over natural language strings simply by performing nexttoken prediction following a sequence of examples from the
distribution of interest. ICL is a crucial tool for steering
large pre-trained language models (LMs), and a growing
body of work aims to understand when and how these LMs
perform ICL. Because of the complexity of large-scale LMs
trained on natural text (and the lack of public information
about many LMs’ training data), almost all work on understanding ICL has focused on smaller LMs trained on simple
model problems like in-context linear regression (Garg
et al., 2022), character classification (Chan et al., 2022), and
associative recall (Fu et al., 2023). Despite their simplicity,
these model problems have played a key role in identifying
properties (and limitations) of ICL in current LMs.

Abstract
Some neural language models (LMs) exhibit a
remarkable capacity for in-context learning (ICL):
they can fit predictors to datasets provided as input. While the mechanisms underlying ICL are
well-studied in the context of synthetic problems
like in-context linear regression, there is still some
divergence between these model problems and the
“real” ICL exhibited by LMs trained on large text
corpora. In this paper, we study ICL through the
lens of a new family of model problems we term
in context language learning (ICLL). In ICLL,
LMs are presented with a set of strings from a
formal language, and must generate additional
strings from the same language. We focus on incontext learning of regular languages generated by
random finite automata. We evaluate a diverse set
of neural sequence models on regular ICLL tasks.
We first show that Transformers significantly outperform neural sequence models with recurrent
or convolutional representations on ICLL tasks.
Next, we provide evidence that they do so by
computing in-context n-gram statistics using specialized attention heads. Finally, we show that
hard-wiring these heads into neural models improves performance not just on synthetic ICLL,
but natural language modeling, reducing the perplexity of 340M-parameter Transformers by up
to 1.14 points (6.7%) on the SlimPajama dataset.
Our results highlight the usefulness of in-context
formal language learning as a tool for understanding ICL in models of natural text.

However, there remains a significant gap between these
model problems and the capabilities exhibited by large-scale
LMs. In particular, most model problems require relatively
simple forms of learning: computing a fixed function of
the entire training set (Akyürek et al., 2023; von Oswald
et al., 2023a;b), or retrieving a single example relevant to
the current input (Fu et al., 2023). In contrast, natural LMs
exhibit richer and much more varied forms of ICL—in some
cases producing structured generative models of text or code
from a handful of inputs (Shin & Van Durme, 2022; Drozdov
et al., 2023).
How can we systematically study these more complex forms
of ICL? In this paper, we introduce a new family of model
ICL problems that we collectively term in-context language
learning (ICLL). In ICLL, LMs are prompted with a finite
collection of strings from an unknown formal language, and
must infer the distribution over strings corresponding to the
full language (Figure 1). ICLL exercises essential features
of ICL in natural models: it involves structured outputs,
probabilistic predictions, and algorithmic reasoning about
input data. In this paper, we present a focused study of
ICLL in regular languages—the class of formal languages
generated by finite automata.

1. Introduction
One of the most striking features of modern neural language
models is their capacity for in-context learning (ICL)—the
ability to infer a conditional or unconditional distribution
1
MIT CSAIL. Correspondence to:
<akyurek@mit.edu>.

We begin by providing general background about neural
sequence models, ICL and formal languages in Section 2,
then define the ICLL task in Section 3. Next, we explore
three questions about in-context language learning in neural
sequence models:1

Ekin Akyürek

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Code & data are released at github.com/berlino/seq icl

