Conformalized Survival Distributions:
A Generic Post-Process to Increase Calibration
Shi-ang Qi 1 Yakun Yu 2 Russell Greiner 1 3

Abstract

surements are useful if, for example we want to rank the
severity levels of the patients on the waiting list so that we
can prioritize the most severe to receive the earliest surgery.

Discrimination and calibration represent two important properties of survival analysis, with the
former assessing the model’s ability to accurately
rank subjects and the latter evaluating the alignment of predicted outcomes with actual events.
With their distinct nature, it is hard for survival
models to simultaneously optimize both of them
especially as many previous results found improving calibration tends to diminish discrimination
performance. This paper introduces a novel approach utilizing conformal regression that can
improve a model’s calibration without degrading
discrimination. We provide theoretical guarantees
for the above claim, and rigorously validate the
efficiency of our approach across 11 real-world
datasets, showcasing its practical applicability and
robustness in diverse scenarios.

While discrimination is helpful, this evaluation might not
assess some important aspects of a prediction. For example, imagine a model estimates Mr. Smith’s chance of survival as 90% within 1 year, 50% in 2 years, and 30% in
10 years. Discrimination does not reflect how well the
model’s predicted survival probabilities match the actual
distribution of observations across a population – a concept
known as calibration (D’Agostino & Nam, 2003; Haider
et al., 2020). There are two main types of calibration measurements: distribution calibration (D-cal) and single-time
calibration (1-cal), which offer distinct but related insights
(see Section 2 for illustration and comparison). Calibrated
predictions are essential as they ensure the reliability of survival probabilities, which is fundamental for both individual
assessments and population-level decision-making strategies. By evaluating how well a model corresponds to the
world, calibration aids in aligning model predictions closely
with real-world outcomes. The importance of calibration is
emphasized across various fields – e.g., forecasting (DeGroot & Fienberg, 1983), Bayesian analysis (Dawid, 1982),
and risk assessment (Pepe & Janes, 2013).

1. Introduction
Survival analysis is a useful tool, especially in biomedical
applications. Given a patient’s covariates, we focus on
survival models that can provide a time-to-event distribution
(aka, survival distribution). Accurate estimates of these
times-to-event can help clinicians prescribe personalized
treatment strategies or allocate resources for the healthcare
system. Learning such survival models is challenging as
many training datasets include censored subjects – instances
where we only know a lower bound of their time-to-event.

2

Many research projects attempt to enhance calibration performance by incorporating a calibration-related loss function into the optimization process. However, this approach
presents several challenges during the model’s training
phase, including increased difficulty in model convergence
and the need to tune more hyperparameters. More importantly, many of these approaches found that improving calibration tends to diminish discriminative performance (Goldstein et al., 2020; Chapfuwa et al., 2020b). This phenomenon, known as the discrimination-calibration tradeoff (Kamran & Wiens, 2021), limits the applicability of
these methods, particularly in contexts where discriminative
accuracy remains important.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Contributions: To address this challenge, this paper
introduces the Conformalized Survival Distribution (CSD)
framework – a plug-in post-processing method designed
to enhance the calibration of a survival distribution model,
without compromising its discriminative power. This

Many survival models seek to optimize discriminative performance, which prioritizes the ability to accurately rank
subjects (Harrell Jr et al., 1996) in terms of their survival
probabilities or time-to-event times. Discrimination mea1

Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Eletrical Computer Engineeering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 3 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton,
Canada. Correspondence to: Shi-ang Qi <shiang@ualberta.ca>,
Russell Greiner <rgreiner@ualberta.ca>.

1

