Position: Machine Learning-powered Assessments of the EU Digital Services Act
Aid Quantify Policy Impacts on Online Harms

Eleonora Bonel * 1 Luca Nannini * 2 3 Davide Bassi 2 Michele Joshua Maggini 2

Abstract

exposure pose risks of exacerbating disinformation spread
if deployed irresponsibly by profit-driven platforms. For example, large language models (LLMs) exhibit capabilities to
generate synthetic text and imagery that may promote false
narratives (Da San Martino et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2023).
The computational propaganda tactics involving psychographic targeting that emerged in the Cambridge Analytica
scandal revealed machine learning’s risks in enabling manipulation at scale when coupled to unethical business practices
(Bakir, 2020). Additionally, excessive personalization in recommender systems can distort exposure diversity, enabling
‘filter bubbles’ that intensify attitude polarization by limiting
viewpoint plurality (De Biasio et al., 2023). These trends underscore the need to ensure transparency and oversight while
keeping up with artificial intelligence (AI) developments.
The latter, despite promising great progress, also carries
potential for considerable societal harms from misuse.

While machine learning shows promise in automated knowledge generation, current techniques
such as large language models and micro-targeted
influence operations can be exploited for harmful purposes like the proliferation of disinformation. The European Union’s Digital Services Act
(DSA) is an exemplary policy response addressing these harms generated by online platforms.
In this regard, it necessitates a comprehensive
evaluation of its impact on curbing the harmful
downstream effects of these opaque practices. Despite their harmful applications, we argue that
machine learning techniques offer immense, yet
under-exploited, potential for unraveling the impacts of regulations like the DSA. Following an
analysis that reveals possible limitations in the
DSA’s provisions, we call for resolute efforts to
address methodological barriers around appropriate data access, isolating marginal regulatory effects, and facilitating generalization across different contexts. Given the identified advantages of
data-driven approaches to regulatory delivery, we
advocate for machine learning research to help
quantify the policy impacts on online harms.

In this context, an increasing body of policy responses
aimed at managing and mitigating machine learning risks
has emerged. The recent EU Digital Services Act (DSA)
(European Parliament and Council, 2022a) represents one
such policy effort to expand governance over major platforms accused of inadequately combating online harms.
Effective November 2022, the DSA categorizes platforms
by size and risk, imposing graduated obligations such as
notice-and-takedown procedures, risk assessments, transparency duties, and independent auditing. It targets issues
like election interference, public health emergencies, and the
spread of disinformation by requiring platforms to exercise
heightened due diligence.

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) becomes increasingly embedded
in important societal systems and automated knowledge generation, it requires careful governance to mitigate emerging
threats. In particular, recent advances in generative modelling, micro-targeted influence campaigns and selective

Ultimately, as the expectations on the scope of such a regulatory text grow, evidence-based assessment of their realworld impacts becomes pivotal. Open questions remain
around the DSA’s tangible impacts amidst the legal, technical and enforcement ambiguities characterising dominant
platforms’ governance of algorithmic accountability and
content moderation practices (Leiser, 2023; Klonick, 2017;
Hacker et al., 2023; Heldt, 2022; Sullivan, 2023; Kuczerawy, 2021; Trust Lab, 2023). Indeed, without empirical
assessment, the effectiveness of this regulatory mechanism
in achieving stated aims of mitigating viral falsehoods and
protecting democratic integrity is yet not granted.

*
Equal contribution 1 École d’Affaires Publique, Sciences Po,
Paris, France 2 Centro Singular de Investigación en Tecnoloxı́as
Intelixentes da USC (CiTIUS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain
3
Minsait, Indra Sistemas SA, Madrid, Spain. Correspondence to:
Eleonora Bonel <eleonora.bonel@sciencespo.fr>, Luca Nannini
<l.nannini@usc.es>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

