No Wrong Turns: The Simple Geometry Of Neural Networks Optimization Paths

Charles Guille-Escuret * 1 2 Hiroki Naganuma * 1 2 Kilian Fatras 1 3 4 Ioannis Mitliagkas 1 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the theoretical complexity of their loss landscapes,
deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable empirical reliability across a broad range of applications. Blum
& Rivest (1992) proved decades ago that neural network
training is NP-hard. The intricacy of their loss functions,
especially the non-convexity implying potential bad local
minima and saddle points, has led to an enduring conundrum
concerning the empirical efficiency of stochastic first-order
optimization methods for training neural networks.

Understanding the optimization dynamics of neural networks is necessary for closing the gap between theory and practice. Stochastic first-order
optimization algorithms are known to efficiently
locate favorable minima in deep neural networks.
This efficiency, however, contrasts with the nonconvex and seemingly complex structure of neural
loss landscapes. In this study, we delve into the
fundamental geometric properties of sampled gradients along optimization paths. We focus on
two key quantities, the restricted secant inequality
and error bound, as well as their ratio γ, which
hold high significance for first-order optimization.
Our analysis reveals that these quantities exhibit
predictable, consistent behavior throughout training, despite the stochasticity induced by sampling
minibatches. Our findings suggest that not only
do optimization trajectories never encounter significant obstacles, but they also maintain stable
dynamics during the majority of training. These
observed properties are sufficiently expressive to
theoretically guarantee linear convergence and
prescribe learning rate schedules mirroring empirical practices. We conduct our experiments on
image classification, semantic segmentation and
language modeling across different batch sizes,
network architectures, datasets, optimizers, and
initialization seeds. We discuss the impact of each
factor. Our work provides novel insights into the
properties of neural network loss functions, and
opens the door to theoretical frameworks more
relevant to prevalent practice.

Numerous studies have strived to reconcile this apparent
contradiction, focusing on the behaviors of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants at local minima and
saddle points (Panageas et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019). The
central hypothesis in these works posits that the efficiency
of training arises from the ability of these algorithms to
navigate complex loss landscapes adeptly and manage nonconvexity.
Conversely, other investigations have empirically found loss
landscapes to be simpler than their theoretical complexity
might suggest (Lucas et al., 2021). Notably, Goodfellow
et al. (2015) observed that “in fact, on a straight path from
initialization to solution, a variety of state of the art neural
networks never encounter any significant obstacles.“
Notwithstanding, our current understanding of how neural loss landscapes are empirically simpler than expected
remains quite limited. There is yet to emerge a robust mathematical characterization of this empirical simplicity. Consequently, we contend that the theoretical assumptions currently in use fail to accurately capture the objective functions
typical in deep learning. This discrepancy is a significant
barrier to applying theoretical insights effectively in the
optimization of neural networks.
One such common assumption, smoothness, is illustrative
*
Equal contribution 1 Mila, Montreal, Canada 2 Université de
Montréal Montreal, Canada 3 University of McGill, Montreal,
Canada 4 Dreamfold 5 Archimedes Unit, Athena Research Center, Athens. Correspondence to: Charles Guille-Escuret <guillech@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

