How do Transformers Perform In-Context Autoregressive Learning?

Michaël E. Sander 1 Raja Giryes 2 Taiji Suzuki 3 Mathieu Blondel 4 Gabriel Peyré 1

Abstract

a sequence (also termed as context) s1:T := (s1 , · · · , sT ).
An intriguing property of large Transformers is their ability
to adapt their computations given the context s1:T . In this
work, we make a step towards understanding this in-context
learning ability. More precisely, assuming the tokens satisfy
a relation sT +1 = φW (s1:T ), with W a context-dependent
parameter varying with each sequence, we say that a trained
Transformer autoregressively learns this relation in-context
if it decomposes its prediction into 2 steps: first, estimating
W through an in-context mapping, and then applying a
simple prediction mapping, which is equal or closely related
to φW (see Definition 1).

Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance in language modeling tasks. However,
the reasons behind their tremendous success are
still unclear. In this paper, towards a better understanding, we train a Transformer model on a simple next token prediction task, where sequences
are generated as a first-order autoregressive process st+1 = W st . We show how a trained Transformer predicts the next token by first learning W
in-context, and then applying a prediction mapping. We call the resulting procedure in-context
autoregressive learning. More precisely, focusing on commuting orthogonal matrices W , we
first show that a trained one-layer linear Transformer implements one step of gradient descent
for the minimization of an inner objective function when considering augmented tokens. When
the tokens are not augmented, we characterize
the global minima of a one-layer diagonal linear
multi-head Transformer. Importantly, we exhibit
orthogonality between heads and show that positional encoding captures trigonometric relations
in the data. On the experimental side, we consider
the general case of non-commuting orthogonal
matrices and generalize our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction

1
0

1 0
s1 1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

0

1

s2

1
Ecole Normale Supérieure and CNRS, France 2 Tel
Aviv University, Israel 3 University of Tokyo and RIKEN
AIP, Japan 4 Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
<michael.sander@ens.fr>.

40
30
20
10
0

t

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in natural language processing tasks
(Devlin et al., 2018). They now serve as the backbone for
large language models, such as GPT (Radford et al., 2018;
Brown et al., 2020), Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022),
PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023), LLama (Touvron et al.,
2023) or Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023). These models, which
are causal, are trained to predict the next token sT +1 given

s3

The goal of this paper is to fully characterize the autoregressive in-context learning process for optimally-trained
Transformers. More precisely, building on the work of
Von Oswald et al. (2023b), we focus on a simple autoregressive (AR) process of order 1, where each sequence is generated following the recursion sT +1 = φW (s1:T ) := W sT ,
and W is a randomly sampled orthogonal matrix, referred
to as the context matrix. Such a process is illustrated in
dimension 3 in Figure 1 for two different matrices W . We
investigate the training of a linear Transformer to predict
the next token in these AR processes, examining how it
estimates W in-context and makes predictions for sT +1 .
Depending on the input tokens encoding, the in-context
mapping can correspond to gradient descent on an inner
objective, as suggested by Von Oswald et al. (2023b). Alternatively, the context matrix W might be determined in
closed form if the model possesses sufficient expressiveness.
This paper investigates both scenarios.

Figure 1. Illustration of the autoregressive process in R3 . Dots
and crosses correspond to two different orthogonal matrices W .

1

