Learning Reward for Robot Skills Using Large Language Models via
Self-Alignment

Yuwei Zeng 1 Yao Mu 2 1 Lin Shao 1

Abstract

matically learning the reward function from expert demonstrations. Still the process can be exceedingly costly for
expert demonstration gathering to cover the vast variety and
complexity of the state space and yield a robust control.

Learning reward functions remains the bottleneck
to equip a robot with a broad repertoire of skills.
Large Language Models (LLM) contain valuable
task-related knowledge that can potentially aid in
the learning of reward functions. However, the
proposed reward function can be imprecise, thus
ineffective which requires to be further grounded
with environment information. We proposed a
method to learn rewards more efficiently in the
absence of humans. Our approach consists of
two components: We first use the LLM to propose features and parameterization of the reward,
then update the parameters through an iterative
self-alignment process. In particular, the process
minimizes the ranking inconsistency between the
LLM and the learnt reward functions based on the
execution feedback. The method was validated
on 9 tasks across 2 simulation environments. It
demonstrates a consistent improvement over training efficacy and efficiency, meanwhile consuming
significantly fewer GPT tokens compared to the alternative mutation-based method. Project website:
https://sites.google.com/view/rewardselfalign.

Recently, Large Languaged Models (LLMs), trained using
extensive human data, have demonstrated to be embedded
with richly useful task-related knowledge. Several existing
studies have used LLM to directly propose action (Liang
et al., 2023) or reward values (Kwon et al., 2023; Adeniji
et al., 2023). However, using LLM to learn reward functions still presents a challenge due to the task sensitivity
to the exact numerical values while LLM shows limited
capacity. In addition, such value setting in general requires
to be grounded to the specific setup. For example, In (Yu
et al., 2023) LLM set the target torso height for a quadruped
to 0.3m for moon walk instruction. With further inquiring
about rationale behind the number, LLM explains ”the specific value here is arbitrary and should be adjusted based
on the robot’s design and requirements”. Previous works
address such limitation with human feedback or in-context
example (Yu et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023),
or evolutionary method (Ma et al., 2023) with success rate
feedback to LLM, both are still in a form of trial and error
from LLM update, that might end up with fluctuated instead
of improving performance.

1. Introduction

In this work, we aim to answer the question: is there a way
we can learn the reward more efficiently in the absence of
humans? It is observed that LLMs have shown promising
ability in summarizing and classifying text, which allows
them to effectively distinguish different observations in textual form. We propose to utilize such ability to extract
ranking signals from LLM, which could be more robust to
guide reward learning than direct value prediction of the
parameters. We first utilize LLM to break down a task into
steps with Dos and Don′ ts through Chain of Thought (CoT)
(Wei et al., 2022) and propose the initial reward parameterization, particularly the feature selection and template
structure. Next, we iteratively update the parameters of the
proposed reward function in a self-alignment process which
operates on a double-loop structure. The inner loop induces
the optimal policy from the current reward function, samples trajectories using this policy and generates execution

Reinforcement learning has demonstrated the effectiveness
in acquiring complex skills from walking over uneven terrain (Valsecchi et al., 2020; Manchester et al., 2011) to
dexterous manipulation(Akkaya et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2023). However, such effectiveness largely depends on a
well-designed reward function that relies on expert knowledge of tasks, followed by non-trivial tuning often to both
optimize the efficacy and prevent the policy from exploiting
flaws that can be easily introduced during reward shaping.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Abbeel & Ng, 2004;
Ho & Ermon, 2016) seeks to resolve this issue by auto1
National University of Singapore 2 The University of Hong
Kong. Correspondence to: Lin Shao <linshao@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

