The Perception-Robustness Tradeoff in Deterministic Image Restoration

Guy Ohayon 1 Tomer Michaeli 2 Michael Elad 1

We study the behavior of deterministic methods
for solving inverse problems in imaging. These
methods are commonly designed to achieve two
goals: (1) attaining high perceptual quality, and
(2) generating reconstructions that are consistent
with the measurements. We provide a rigorous
proof that the better a predictor satisfies these
two requirements, the larger its Lipschitz constant
must be, regardless of the nature of the degradation involved. In particular, to approach perfect
perceptual quality and perfect consistency, the
Lipschitz constant of the model must grow to
infinity. This implies that such methods are necessarily more susceptible to adversarial attacks.
We demonstrate our theory on single image superresolution algorithms, addressing both noisy and
noiseless settings. We also show how this undesired behavior can be leveraged to explore the
posterior distribution, thereby allowing the deterministic model to imitate stochastic methods.

le
ib
ss n
po gio
Im re

K lower bound

Abstract

Wp (pX,Y , pX̂,Y )

Figure 1: Qualitative illustration of Theorem 4.1. In any
restoration task with a non-invertible degradation (Definition 3.1), the Lipschitz constant K of a deterministic estimator X̂ = f (Y ) is lower bounded by a function that grows to
infinity as the Wasserstein distance between pX̂,Y and pX,Y
decreases to zero.

quality that are also consistent with the input measurements.
Perceptual quality is commonly measured by the extent to
which human observers cannot distinguish between the estimator’s outputs and natural images (Isola et al., 2017; Dahl
et al., 2017; Denton et al., 2015; Guadarrama et al., 2017;
Iizuka et al., 2016; Salimans et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016;
2017). This can be quantified by the statistical distance between the distributions pX̂ and pX (Blau & Michaeli, 2018).
Of course, perceptual quality by itself does not necessarily
indicate the usefulness of an algorithm. For instance, an
estimator that completely ignores the input and outputs samples from pX attains perfect perceptual quality (pX̂ = pX ),
but is obviously useless. Indeed, a good estimator is one
whose outputs are also consistent with the measurements.

1. Introduction
Inverse problems arise in numerous imaging applications.
Indeed, the images we use on our phones, in medical diagnosis devices, and in remote sensing systems, are all
created by algorithms that reconstruct and enhance raw,
low-quality observations. Examples include image denoising, super-resolution, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
reconstruction, and any image-to-image translation task.

Consistency with the measurements is best understood in
the case where the degradation is deterministic, such that
Y = D(X). In this case, X̂ is perfectly consistent if
D(X̂) = Y , and as a measure, consistency is typically quantified by the discrepancy between D(X̂) and Y (Lugmayr
et al., 2021; 2022). As with perceptual quality, consistency
by itself is not a sufficient indication that an algorithm is
useful. Indeed, the fact that the outputs are consistent with
the measurements does not guarantee that they look natural. Moreover, consistency becomes a questionable concept
in the setting of stochastic degradations: What can be regarded as a consistent reconstruction when many different
measurements can emerge from the same source image?

Denoting a natural image as a random vector X, the degraded measurement as Y , and their joint distribution as
pX,Y , a deterministic image restoration algorithm1 X̂ (an estimator) often strives to generate outputs of high perceptual
1

Faculty of Computer Science, Technion, Haifa, Israel
Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion,
Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to: Guy Ohayon <ohayonguy@campus.technion.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
An algorithm that always produces the same output per input.

1

