3D Geometric Shape Assembly via Efficient Point Cloud Matching

Nahyuk Lee * 1 Juhong Min * 2 Junha Lee 1 Seungwook Kim 2 Kanghee Lee 3 Jaesik Park 3 4 Minsu Cho 1 2

Abstract

demands for comprehensive understanding of geometric
structures and analyses of pairwise relationships between
local surfaces of given input parts for accurate assembly.

Learning to assemble geometric shapes into a
larger target structure is a pivotal task in various practical applications. In this work, we
tackle this problem by establishing local correspondences between point clouds of part shapes
in both coarse- and fine-levels. To this end, we
introduce Proxy Match Transform (PMT), an approximate high-order feature transform layer that
enables reliable matching between mating surfaces of parts while incurring low costs in memory and compute. Building upon PMT, we introduce a new framework, dubbed Proxy Match
TransformeR (PMTR), for the geometric assembly task. We evaluate the proposed PMTR on
the large-scale 3D geometric shape assembly
benchmark dataset of Breaking Bad and demonstrate its superior performance and efficiency compared to state-of-the-art methods. Project page:
https://nahyuklee.github.io/pmtr.

There have been several recent attempts (Schor et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2020a; Wu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b; Huang
et al., 2020; Narayan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Wu
et al., 2023b) to address the task of shape assembly, but these
methods fall short of achieving accurate assembly. They
typically represent each part as a global embedding and
perform regression to predict a placement for each part. The
global encoding strategy for each part, while simplifying
the process, greatly limits local information by collapsing
spatial resolutions, which is necessary to localize mating
surface. Indeed, accurate shape assembly requires a detailed
analysis of both fine- and coarse-level spatial information
of the parts in recognizing mating surfaces and establishing correspondences between the surfaces. Therefore, a
promising approach would be to retain the spatially-rich
part representations during the encoding phase and analyze
pairwise local correspondence relationships between them
for reliable localization and matching of mating surfaces.
In the realm of correspondence analysis within image matching, prior methods (Rocco et al., 2018; Min & Cho, 2021;
Kim et al., 2022; Min et al., 2021; Rocco et al., 2020)
typically utilize a high-order feature transform, i.e., highdimensional convolution or attention, to achieve objectives
of localizing relevant instances and establishing correspondences between them. The high-order feature transforms,
which assess structural patterns of correlations in highdimensional spaces, have been empirically validated for
their efficacy in identifying accurate visual matches. However, the quadratic complexity with respect to input spatial
resolution still remains as a significant drawback, limiting
their application to only low-resolution (coarse-grained)
inputs. Such a limitation becomes particularly problematic in the context of geometric assembly since meticulous
alignment between parts requires to analyze high-resolution
(fine-grained) to precisely identify ‘geometric compatibility’
between mating surfaces to match.

1. Introduction
Shape assembly aims to determine a precise placement for
each constituent part and construct a larger target shape
as a whole. This task holds paramount significance, especially in the context of various applications encompassing
robotics (Wang & Hauser, 2019; Zakka et al., 2020; Zeng
et al., 2021), manufacturing (Tian et al., 2022), computer
graphics (Li et al., 2012), and computer-aided design (Chen
et al., 2015; Jacobson, 2017). Despite its pivotal role in
industrial productivity and the plethora of applications, the
field of shape assembly remains relatively underexplored
in the literature due to the intricate challenge it presents:
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea 2 Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea 4 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Minsu Cho
<mscho@postech.ac.kr>.

In this paper, we address this issue by introducing a new
form of low-complexity high-order feature transform layer,
dubbed Proxy Match Transform (PMT), to tackle the challenges of geometric shape assembly. The layer is designed

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

