Understanding Retrieval-Augmented Task Adaptation
for Vision-Language Models

Yifei Ming 1 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract

scenarios. Such datasets often encompass fine-grained categories that were not adequately represented during the initial
pre-training phase, posing a notable hurdle for the models
in adapting to these nuanced distinctions.

Pre-trained contrastive vision-language models have demonstrated remarkable performance
across a wide range of tasks. However, they often
struggle on fine-trained datasets with categories
not adequately represented during pre-training,
which makes adaptation necessary. Recent works
have shown promising results by utilizing samples
from web-scale databases for retrieval-augmented
adaptation, especially in low-data regimes. Despite the empirical success, understanding how retrieval impacts the adaptation of vision-language
models remains an open research question. In
this work, we adopt a reflective perspective by
presenting a systematic study to understand the
roles of key components in retrieval-augmented
adaptation. We unveil new insights on uni-modal
and cross-modal retrieval and highlight the critical role of logit ensemble for effective adaptation.
We further present theoretical underpinnings that
directly support our empirical observations.

In the low-data regime, retrieval-augmented adaptation has
demonstrated promise, where a wealth of external resources
is readily available on the Internet and can be retrieved
efficiently to enhance adaptation. Recent works (Udandarao et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) showcase encouraging results by leveraging large-scale text and image
databases (Schuhmann et al., 2022). Retrieval-augmented
adaptation involves two main steps: first retrieving the most
relevant data from an external source, and then adapting
to downstream task based on the retrieved samples. While
existing works have primarily focused on developing new
adaptation algorithms or integrating different knowledge
sources, there remains a notable gap in understanding
how retrieval augmentation impacts adaptation for visionlanguage models. Such an understanding is imperative to
guide the future development of effective algorithms.
In this work, we adopt a reflective perspective by presenting a systematic study to understand retrieval-augmented
adaptation, and establishing new theoretical underpinnings.
Our empirical analysis reveals key insights revolving around
two aspects: (1) the impact of the retrieval method, and (2)
how retrieved samples help adaptation. First, we show that
image-to-image (I2I) retrieval consistently outperforms textto-image (T2I) retrieval for a wide range of downstream
tasks. Under the same retrieval budget, these two retrieval
methods differ by the query samples used: I2I employs a few
seed images from the target data distribution, whereas T2I
employs the textual description of each class label. While
both I2I and T2I retrieval introduce distributional shifts
w.r.t. the target data, we show that I2I achieves strong performance that matches more closely with the oracle when
we directly retrieve from the target distribution (i.e., no
distributional shifts). Secondly, we show that ensembling
the zero-shot prediction together with I2I retrieved samples is the key to improved adaptation performance. For
a given test sample, the ensembling is achieved by taking
a weighted average between the logit from the retrieved
feature cache and the logit of the zero-shot inference. We

1. Introduction
Contrastive vision-language pre-training has emerged as a
fundamental cornerstone for a wide array of tasks in natural
language processing and computer vision (Radford et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022b; Mu
et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024).
These models excel in capturing the intricate relationships
present in both visual and textual data, enabling them to
understand context, semantics, and associations holistically.
It is now a common practice to employ aligned multi-modal
features from web-scale pre-training. However, a challenge
arises when these pre-trained models encounter real-world
downstream datasets, particularly in low-data (few-shot)
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison. Correspondence to: Yifei Ming <ming5@wisc.edu>,
Yixuan Li <sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

