NE X T: Teaching Large Language Models to Reason about Code Execution

Ansong Ni 1 Miltiadis Allamanis 2 Arman Cohan 1 Yinlin Deng 3 Kensen Shi 2
Charles Sutton 2 Pengcheng Yin 2

Abstract

explaining (Hu et al., 2018), and reviewing (Li et al., 2022)
code, they still struggle on more complex software engineering tasks that require reasoning about the runtime execution
behavior of programs (Ma et al., 2023). On the other hand,
it is not always sufficient for the model to suggest good code
solutions, but it is often necessary to provide an explanation
to developers to document what the change does and why
it is needed. These explanations can help developers better
understand the code solutions from models and make more
informative decisions. (Cito et al., 2022; Ross et al., 2023;
Kang et al., 2023).

A fundamental skill among human developers is
the ability to understand and reason about program execution. As an example, a programmer
can mentally simulate code execution in natural
language to debug and repair code (aka. rubber
duck debugging). However, large language models (LLMs) of code are typically trained on the
surface textual form of programs, thus may lack a
semantic understanding of how programs execute
at run-time. To address this issue, we propose
NE X T, a method to teach LLMs to inspect the
execution traces of programs (variable states of
executed lines) and reason about their run-time
behavior through chain-of-thought (CoT) rationales. Specifically, NE X T uses self-training to
bootstrap a synthetic training set of executionaware rationales that lead to correct task solutions
(e.g., fixed programs) without laborious manual
annotation. Experiments on program repair tasks
based on M BPP and H UMAN E VAL demonstrate
that NE X T improves the fix rate of a PaLM 2
model, by 26.1% and 10.3% absolute, respectively, with significantly improved rationale quality as verified by automated metrics and human
raters. Our model can also generalize to scenarios
where program traces are absent at test-time.

For example, program repair (Chen et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2020; Le Goues et al., 2019) is the task of fixing bugs in
a program. Human developers usually learn to debug and
fix code by interacting with code interpreters or debuggers
to inspect the variable states of executed lines (Siegmund
et al., 2014). Such practice helps them acquire a mental
model of program execution (Heinonen et al., 2022), so
that they could mentally simulate code execution in a more
abstract manner using natural language as in rubber duck
debugging (Hunt & Thomas, 1999). Therefore, a program
repair model would be more helpful to developers if the
model could carry out similar reasoning about program
execution in order to explain bugs to programmers.
With this inspiration, our goal is to improve the ability of
LLMs to reason about program execution when solving coding tasks. In this paper we propose Naturalized Execution
Tuning (NE X T), which aims to teach LLMs to reason with
code execution by inspecting program execution traces and
reasoning about the code’s runtime behavior in natural language (NL). At a general level, for a coding task, the main
idea is to train a model to generate intermediate NL rationales, as in chain-of-thought reasoning (Wei et al., 2022a),
but to provide the model with a trace of the execution of the
program in question, so the rationale can be more accurate
and grounded on program semantics. Teaching LLMs to
reason about program execution in NL would not only offer
better interpretability, it could also increase the diversity of
solutions predicted by the model (Yin et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the burgeoning of large language models (LLMs) trained on code (Austin et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021a; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023; Roziere et al., 2023). While those LLMs
achieve impressive performance in assisting developers with
writing (Chen et al., 2021a), editing (Fakhoury et al., 2023),
∗
Work done during Ansong and Yinlin’s internship at Google
DeepMind. 1 Yale University 2 Google DeepMind 3 University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Ansong Ni
<ansong.ni@yale.edu>, Pengcheng Yin <pcyin@google.com>.

Fig. 1 illustrates our proposed approach when applied to program repair. Given an NL task instruction (x in Fig. 1) and
a buggy program (ỹ), as well as the execution traces of the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

