Differentially Private Bias-Term Fine-tuning of Foundation Models

Zhiqi Bu 1 Yu-xiang Wang 1 2 Sheng Zha 1 George Karypis 1

Abstract

training epochs. However, full fine-tuning on large models, from hundreds of millions (He et al., 2016; Chen et al.,
2016) to billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020), can
be burdensome in terms of the computation and the deployment, since a full copy of fine-tuned model parameters is
needed for each task.

We study the problem of differentially private
(DP) fine-tuning of large pre-trained models – a
recent privacy-preserving approach suitable for
solving downstream tasks with sensitive data. Existing work has demonstrated that high accuracy
is possible under strong privacy constraint, yet
requires significant computational overhead or
modifications to the network architecture. We propose differentially private bias-term fine-tuning
(DP-BiTFiT), which matches the state-of-the-art
accuracy for DP algorithms and the efficiency
of the standard BiTFiT. DP-BiTFiT is model agnostic (not modifying the network architecture),
parameter efficient (only training about 0.1% of
the parameters), and computation efficient (almost removing the overhead caused by DP, in
both the time and space complexity). On a wide
range of tasks, DP-BiTFiT is 2 ∼ 30× faster
and uses 2 ∼ 8× less memory than DP full finetuning, even faster than the standard full finetuning. This amazing efficiency enables us to conduct DP fine-tuning on language and vision tasks
with long-sequence texts and high-resolution images, which were computationally difficult using
existing methods. We open-source our code at
FastDP (https://github.com/awslabs/
fast-differential-privacy).

To alleviate this issue, the parameter efficient fine-tuning
only trains a substantially small portion of the model parameters, in contrast to the full fine-tuning. At a high level,
the parameter efficient fine-tuning methods can be divided
into two categories. ⟨1⟩ Model-aware methods, meaning a
relatively small number of parameters are introduced into
the neural network architecture and only the new parameters
are optimized. Examples include LoRA (Hu et al., 2021),
Adapter (Houlsby et al., 2019), and Compacter (Mahabadi
et al., 2021). ⟨2⟩ Model-agnostic methods, meaning that
only a subset of existing parameters are trainable. Examples
include training only the output linear layer (linear probing,
(Kornblith et al., 2019)), only the layer normalization layer
(Houlsby et al., 2019) and bias-term fine-tuning (BiTFiT)
(Zaken et al., 2022). We illustrate the differences as follows:
W0 , b0 are the pre-trained weights and biases, ˆ indicates
trainable parameters, and θ is the additional parameters.


full fine-tuning
f (x; Ŵ, b̂)
f (x; W0 , b0 ) → f (x; W0 , b0 , θ̂) model-aware

|
{z
}

f (x; W0 , b̂)
bias-term only
pre-trained model

1
Amazon AI 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Zhiqi Bu <zhiqibu@amazon.com>.

Empirically, these parameter efficient fine-tuning methods
have achieved high accuracy that is comparable to full finetuning in the standard non-private setting. For instance,
linear probing of ResNet (He et al., 2016) and Vision Transformer (ViT, (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)) achieves 80% accuracy on the ImageNet dataset (Sun et al., 2017; Kornblith
et al., 2019); LoRA and BiTFiT of RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019) and BERT (Kenton & Toutanova, 2019) achieve about
94% on SST2 and on average 85% across the General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) datasets (He et al.,
2021; Hu et al., 2021). In addition, parameter efficient methods are faster than full fine-tuning and save the communication cost significantly in distributed learning.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Parallel to these developments, the success of deep learning
models relies on the availability of large datasets, which
may contain sensitive information to be protected rigorously.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning large pre-trained neural networks is one of the
most critical technique in deep learning, yielding strong
performance in a variety of domains (Pan & Yang, 2009;
Kenton & Toutanova, 2019; Goyal et al., 2017). Among
different methods, full fine-tuning is the most prevalent one,
which trains all the model parameters on the downstream
tasks and achieves high accuracy within a small number of

1

