Self-Supervised Coarsening of Unstructured Grid with Automatic Differentiation

Sergei Shumilin 1 Alexander Ryabov 1 Nikolay Yavich 1 Evgeny Burnaev 1 2 Vladimir Vanovskiy 1

Abstract

putational load of these problems. In the field of subsurface
fluid flow, one of the most traditional approach is upscaling,
(Qi & Hesketh, 2005). The goal is to substitute the original
fine grid with a coarser grid and to upscale the equation coefficients (permeability, porosity and other), i.e. to transfer
fine grid values to cells on the coarse grid.

Due to the high computational load of modern
numerical simulation, there is a demand for approaches that would reduce the size of discrete
problems while keeping the accuracy reasonable.
In this work, we present an original algorithm to
coarsen an unstructured grid based on the concepts of differentiable physics. We achieve this
by employing k-means clustering, autodifferentiation and stochastic minimization algorithms. We
demonstrate performance of the designed algorithm on two PDEs: a linear parabolic equation
which governs slightly compressible fluid flow in
porous media and the wave equation. Our results
show that in the considered scenarios, we reduced
the number of grid points up to 10 times while
preserving the modeled variable dynamics in the
points of interest. The proposed approach can
be applied to the simulation of an arbitrary system described by evolutionary partial differential
equations.

In other words, upscaling is a means to substitute a heterogeneous region with a homogeneous. The standard approaches
use arithmetic or harmonic averages over coarse grid blocks
(clusters). There are also more advanced approaches that
estimate upscaled coefficients by solving the flow equations
within coarse grid blocks. The techniques differ in the way
they average fine-grid data and form coarse grid blocks but
they all tend to reduce modelling grid size and thus save
computational time.
The main feature of the upscaling approaches is that they try
to coarsen the problem based on the fine grid and equation
coefficients but not use the modelled data. Reduced-order
modelling (ROM) methods work differently. They use some
modelled data (e.g. early times) to reduce computational
load of the rest of the problem (late times). The family of
ROM methods was actively developing in the last decades.
One of its most well-known representatives is proper orthogonal decomposition (POD), see e.g. (Kerschen et al., 2005;
Rowley, 2005; Guo & Hesthaven, 2019) and references
therein. It approximates complex fluid flow by using several
dominant spatial eigenvectors. Thus the method is directly
related to the principle component analysis (PCA). The dynamic mode decomposition (DMD), (Kutz et al., 2016), is
another popular approach in the recent years. It uses both
spatial and temporal frequencies to represent fluid dynamics
and predict its future state. The DMD is an equation-free
technique, i.e. it provides an explicit solutions without solving the reduced model.

1. Introduction
Modelling of fluid flow in general and subsurface fluid flow
in particular are known to be highly computationally demanding problems. However, such problems arise in various practical engineering applications. High computational
demand comes from the need to deal with detailed time and
spatial resolutions as well as possible non-linearity of governing partial differential equations. On the practical side,
the problem is even worse since modellers typically run
simulations several times with different sets of parameters.
There are different approaches that tend to reduce the com-

If thinking about upscaling from the supervised learning
prospective, the following naive idea might come up: what if
we try to search the coarse grid by trying to fit physical fields
modelled on coarse grid to original grid data? However,
this is not practical since data modelled with conventional
numerical modelling algorithms is not differentiable with
respect to grid nodes locations. To address issue, we follow
the concept of differentiable physics.

1

Applied AI Center, Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 AIRI Institute, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Sergei Shumilin <s.shumilin@skoltech.ru>,
Alexander
Ryabov
<a.ryabov@skoltech.ru>,
Nikolay
Yavich
<n.yavich@skoltech.ru>,
Evgeny
Burnaev
<e.burnaev@skoltech.ru>,
Vladimir
Vanovskiy
<v.vanovskiy@skoltech.ru>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

A set of techniques known as differentiable physics sim1

