Adaptive Feature Selection for No-Reference Image Quality Assessment by
Mitigating Semantic Noise Sensitivity

Xudong Li * 1 Timin Gao * 1 Runze Hu * 2 Yan Zhang 1 Shengchuan Zhang 1 Xiawu Zheng 1 Jingyuan Zheng 3
Yunhang Shen 4 Ke Li 4 Yutao Liu 5 Pingyang Dai 1 Rongrong Ji 1

Abstract

MOS: 50.4

The current state-of-the-art No-Reference Image
Quality Assessment (NR-IQA) methods typically
rely on feature extraction from upstream semantic
backbone networks, assuming that all extracted
features are relevant. However, we make a key
observation that not all features are beneficial, and
some may even be harmful, necessitating careful
selection. Empirically, we find that many image pairs with small feature spatial distances can
have vastly different quality scores, indicating
that the extracted features may contain qualityirrelevant noise. To address this issue, we propose a Quality-Aware Feature Matching IQA Metric (QFM-IQM) that employs an adversarial perspective to remove harmful semantic noise features from the upstream task. Specifically, QFMIQM enhances the semantic noise distinguish capabilities by matching image pairs with similar
quality scores but varying semantic features as adversarial semantic noise and adaptively adjusting
the upstream task’s features by reducing sensitivity to adversarial noise perturbation. Furthermore,
we utilize a distillation framework to expand the
dataset and improve the model’s generalization
ability. Extensive experiments conducted on eight
standard IQA datasets have demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed QFM-IQM.

MOS: 41.5

Distorted: Racket 、Flower

MOS: 49.6

Distorted: Racket 、
Flower

Semantic Noise: Human

Semantic Noise: Human

MOS: 29.3

MOS: 30.9

MOS: 43.8

(a) Different quality image pairs

(b) Feature Aliasing (c) Quality-aware Feature

Figure 1. Images in the first column: the sample images in the
KonIQ dataset. Images in the medium column: DEIQT (Qin
et al., 2023) suffers from feature aliasing that focuses excessively
on semantic-level noise that is less relevant to quality perception (e.g., the human in the yellow box). Images in the last
column: Our QFM-IQAM is not sensitive to semantic noise and
can clearly distinguish between image pairs with similar semantic
content but different quality scores. As a result, our model’s predictions are more aligned with the Mean Opinion Scores (MOS).

1. Introduction
No-Reference Image Quality Assessment (NR-IQA) is a fundamental research area (Ding et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2015b; Hu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024), which
simulates the human subjective system to estimate distortion
of the given image. Current state-of-the-art methods (Zhang
et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023) generally leverage pre-trained
upstream backbone to extract semantic features, and then,
finetuning on NR-IQA datasets. This pipeline provides an
effective and efficient training procedure while reducing the
requirement of data volume. Since the semantic features
obtained from the pre-trained upstream backbone have no direct correlation with the image quality representation (Yang
et al., 2020), many researchers focus on the optimization of
semantic features in IQA research. For instance, (Talebi &
Milanfar, 2018) proposed a model based on Deep Convolutional Neural Networks pre-trained on the ImageNet (Deng
et al., 2009) and end-to-end training to optimize semantic
features. (Su et al., 2020) integrated NR-IQA tasks with se-

*
Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of
2
China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
School of
Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100080, China. 3 School of Medicine, Xiamen University.
4
Tencent Youtu Lab. 5 School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China.. Correspondence to: Yan Zhang
<bzhy986@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

