Image Hijacks: Adversarial Images can Control Generative Models at Runtime

Luke Bailey * 1 Euan Ong * 2 Stuart Russell 3 Scott Emmons 3

Abstract

We expect that this question will only become more pressing
in the coming years. For one, we expect foundation models to become more powerful and more widely embedded
across society. In order to make AI systems more useful to
consumers, there will be economic pressure to give them
access to untrusted data and sensitive personal information,
and to let them take actions in the world on behalf of a user.
For instance, an AI personal assistant might have access to
email history, which includes sensitive data; it might browse
the web and send and receive emails; and it might be able
to download files, make purchases, and execute code.

Are foundation models secure against malicious
actors? In this work, we focus on the image input
to a vision-language model (VLM). We discover
image hijacks, adversarial images that control
the behaviour of VLMs at inference time, and
introduce the general Behaviour Matching algorithm for training image hijacks. From this, we
derive the Prompt Matching method, allowing
us to train hijacks matching the behaviour of an
arbitrary user-defined text prompt (e.g. ‘the Eiffel
Tower is now located in Rome’) using a generic,
off-the-shelf dataset unrelated to our choice of
prompt. We use Behaviour Matching to craft hijacks for four types of attack: forcing VLMs to
generate outputs of the adversary’s choice, leak
information from their context window, override
their safety training, and believe false statements.
We study these attacks against LLaVA, a state-ofthe-art VLM based on CLIP and LLaMA-2, and
find that all attack types achieve a success rate of
over 80%. Moreover, our attacks are automated
and require only small image perturbations.

Foundation models must be secure against input-based attacks. Specifically, untrusted input data should not be able
to control a model’s behaviour in undesirable ways. For instance, making it leak a user’s personal data, install malware
on the user’s computer, or help the user commit crimes. We
call attacks attempting to violate this property hijacks.
Worryingly, we discover image hijacks: adversarial images
that, with only small perturbations to their original image,
can control the behaviour of VLMs at inference time. As
illustrated in Figure 1, image hijacks can exercise a high
degree of control over a VLM: they can cause it to generate
arbitrary outputs at runtime (regardless of user input), to
leak its context window, to circumvent its own safety training, and to believe false information. We can even craft
image hijacks that force VLMs to behave as though they
were presented with a particular user-defined text prompt.

1. Introduction
Following the success of large language models (LLMs), the
past year has witnessed the emergence of vision-language
models (VLMs), LLMs adapted to process images as well
as text. The leading AI research laboratories are investing
heavily in the training of VLMs – such as OpenAI’s GPT-4
(OpenAI, 2023) and Google’s Gemini (Pichai, 2023) – and
the ML research community has been quick to adapt stateof-the-art open-source LLMs into VLMs. While allowing
models to see enables a wide range of downstream applications, the addition of a continuous input channel introduces
a new vector for adversarial attack, raising the question:
how secure are VLMs against input-based attacks?

The field of adversarial robustness offers no easy way to
eliminate this class of attacks. Despite hundreds of papers
trying to patch adversarial examples in computer vision,
progress has been slow. According to RobustBench (Croce
et al., 2020), the state-of-the-art robust accuracy on CIFAR10 under an ℓ∞ perturbation constraint of 8/255 grew from
65.88% in Oct 2020 (Gowal et al., 2020) to 70.69% in
Aug 2023 (Wang et al., 2023), a gain of only 4.81%. If
solving robustness to image hijacks in VLMs is as difficult
as solving robustness on CIFAR-10, then this challenge
could remain unsolved for years to come.

*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard University 2 Cambridge University 3 University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Scott
Emmons <emmons@berkeley.edu>.

Our contributions can be summarised as follows:
1. We introduce the concept of image hijacks – adversarial images that control the behaviour of VLMs at
inference time – and introduce the general Behaviour

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

