O DIN: Disentangled Reward Mitigates Hacking in RLHF

Lichang Chen * 1 Chen Zhu * 2 Jiuhai Chen 1 Davit Soselia 1
Tianyi Zhou Tom Goldstein 1 Heng Huang 1 Mohammad Shoeybi 3 Bryan Catanzaro 3
1

Abstract

2021; Ouyang et al., 2022), which has led to the success of
ChatGPT (Schulman et al., 2022) and many other AI systems (Pichai, 2023; Anthropic, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023).
RLHF trains a reward model (RM) on human preferences
for the responses of given prompts, followed by training
the language model to generate responses that maximize
the learned reward through reinforcement learning. Such
a paradigm simplifies human data collection, as acquiring
human ratings is easier than collecting demonstrations for
supervised fine-tuning. Moreover, it has been observed
that RLHF has weak-to-strong generalization, where the
policy becomes more creative than the supervision it receives (Burns et al., 2023).

In this work, we study the issue of reward hacking
on the response length, a challenge emerging in
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) on LLMs. A well-formatted, verbose but
less helpful response from the LLMs can often deceive LLMs or even human evaluators and achieve
high scores. The same issue also holds for some
reward models in RL. To address the challenges
in both training and evaluation, we establish a
more reliable evaluation protocol for comparing
different training configurations, which inspects
the trade-off between LLM evaluation score and
response length obtained by varying training hyperparameters. Based on this evaluation, we conduct large-scale studies, where the results shed
insights into the efficacy of hyperparameters and
tricks used in RL on mitigating length bias. We
further propose to improve the reward model by
jointly training two linear heads to predict the
preference, one trained to correlate with length
and the other trained to decorrelate with length
and therefore focusing more on the actual content. We then discard the length head in RL to
ignore the spurious length reward. Experiments
demonstrate that our approach eliminates the reward correlation with length, and improves the
obtained policy by a significant margin.

Despite the promises, one subtle issue of RLHF is reward
hacking, or reward model over-optimization, i.e., the policy
obtains a high reward but does not fulfill the actual objectives. It happens because the RM is not a perfect proxy of human preferences and has limited out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization, but the policy is a capable LLM that can
learn to generate OOD examples to exploit the vulnerabilities of the RM (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Ramé et al., 2024).
More critically, the human preference data can often be biased and inconsistent due to the difficulty and subjectivity
of the task itself, flaws in the rating criteria, and the limited
quality of raters. The most common pattern of reward hacking in practice is verbosity: the language models generate
more tokens to make the response appear more detailed or
better formatted after RLHF (usually for helpfulness) but
the actual quality does not improve (Singhal et al., 2023;
Wang et al., 2023b). This tendency is largely due to a preference among human raters for longer responses, which could
be exploited by RM easily and cause the length hacking.
Given the challenges in controlling the quality of human
data, it becomes increasingly important and beneficial to
study mitigating the impact of spurious features from the
reward modeling and algorithmic perspective.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
has emerged as a critical technique to elicit the capabilities
from pretrained large language models (LLMs) to generate more helpful, honest, and harmless responses that align
with human preferences (Ziegler et al., 2019; Askell et al.,

In this paper, we take a step towards mitigating reward hacking by conducting a comprehensive study on the impact of
reward models and the RL algorithm on the verbosity and
performance of the learned policy. Considering the challenges in model-based evaluations due to their biases (Zeng
et al., 2023), e.g., open-sourced LLMs climb up on AlpacaEval (Li et al., 2023a) leaderboard by utilizing the length

*

Equal contribution, order is random. 1 University of Maryland,
College Park 2 Meta, work done while at Nvidia 3 Nvidia. Correspondence to: Lichang Chen <bobchen@cs.umd.edu>, Chen Zhu
<chenzhu@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

