Robustness of Deep Learning for Accelerated MRI:
Benefits of Diverse Training Data

Kang Lin 1 Reinhard Heckel 1

Abstract

et al., 2021).

Deep learning based methods for image reconstruction are state-of-the-art for a variety of imaging tasks. However, neural networks often perform worse if the training data differs significantly
from the data they are applied to. For example,
a model trained for accelerated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on one scanner performs
worse on another scanner. In this work, we investigate the impact of the training data on a
model’s performance and robustness for accelerated MRI. We find that models trained on the
combination of various data distributions, such
as those obtained from different MRI scanners
and anatomies, exhibit robustness equal or superior to models trained on the best single distribution for a specific target distribution. Thus
training on such diverse data tends to improve
robustness. Furthermore, training on such a diverse dataset does not compromise in-distribution
performance, i.e., a model trained on diverse data
yields in-distribution performance at least as good
as models trained on the more narrow individual
distributions. Our results suggest that training a
model for imaging on a variety of distributions
tends to yield a more effective and robust model
than maintaining separate models for individual
distributions.

Imaging accuracy is typically measured as in-distribution
performance: A model trained on data from one source is
applied to data from the same source. However, in practice
a neural network for imaging is typically applied to slightly
different data than it is trained on. For example, a neural
network for accelerated magnetic resonance imaging trained
on data from one hospital is applied in a different hospital.
Neural networks for imaging often perform significantly
worse under such distribution-shifts. For accelerated MRI, a
model trained on knees performs worse on brains when compared to the same model trained on brains. Similar performance loss occurs for other natural distribution-shifts (Knoll
et al., 2019; Johnson et al., 2021; Darestani et al., 2021).
To date, much of research in deep learning for imaging
has focused on developing better models and algorithms to
improve in-distribution performance. Nevertheless, recent
literature on computer vision models, in particular multimodal models, suggest that a model’s robustness is largely
impacted by the training data, and a key ingredient for robust
models are large and diverse training sets (Fang et al., 2022;
Nguyen et al., 2022; Gadre et al., 2023).
In this work, we take a step towards a better understanding
of the training data for learning robust deep networks for
imaging, in particular for accelerated MRI.
First, we investigate whether deep networks for accelerated
MRI compromise performance on individual distributions
when trained on more than one distribution. We find for
various pairs of distributions (different anatomies, image
contrasts, and magnetic fields), that training a single model
on two distributions yields the same performance as training
two individual models.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models trained end-to-end for image reconstruction are fast and accurate and outperform traditional
methods for a variety of imaging tasks ranging from denoising over super-resolution to accelerated magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) (Jin et al., 2017; Dong et al., 2014; Muckley

Second, we demonstrate for a variety of distribution-shifts
(anatomy, image contrast, and magnetic field shift) that the
robustness of models, regardless of its architecture, is largely
determined by the training set. A diverse set enhances
robustness towards distribution-shifts. We further show that
robustness improvements highly correlate with similarity
between train and test set.

1

Department of Computer Engineering, Technical University
of Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Kang Lin
<ka.lin@tum.de>, Reinhard Heckel <reinhard.heckel@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Third, we consider a distribution-shift from healthy to non1

