Break the Sequential Dependency of LLM Inference Using
L OOKAHEAD D ECODING
Yichao Fu 1 Peter Bailis 2 Ion Stoica 3 Hao Zhang 1

Abstract

time is proportional to the number of decoding steps. Second, each decoding step largely underutilizes the parallel
processing capabilities of modern accelerators (e.g., GPUs).
Given the pressing need for low latency in various applications, improving autoregressive decoding remains a central
challenge.

Autoregressive decoding of large language models (LLMs) is memory bandwidth bounded, resulting in high latency and significant wastes of
the parallel processing power of modern accelerators. Existing methods for accelerating LLM
decoding often require a draft model (e.g., speculative decoding), which is nontrivial to obtain
and unable to generalize. In this paper, we introduce L OOKAHEAD D ECODING, an exact, parallel decoding algorithm that accelerates LLM
decoding without needing auxiliary models or
data stores. It allows trading per-step log(FLOPs)
to reduce the number of total decoding steps, is
more parallelizable on single or multiple modern
accelerators, and is compatible with concurrent
memory-efficient attention (e.g., FlashAttention).
Our implementation of L OOKAHEAD D ECODING
can speed up autoregressive decoding by up to
1.8x on MT-bench and 4x with strong scaling on
multiple GPUs in code completion tasks. Our
code is avialable at https://github.com
/hao-ai-lab/LookaheadDecoding

Several approaches have been proposed – one such approach
is speculative decoding (Chen et al., 2023a; Leviathan et al.,
2023) and its variants (He et al., 2023; Stern et al., 2018;
Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023; Miao
et al., 2024). These methods all follow a guess-and-verify
approach: they use a draft model to speculate several subsequent tokens and then use the original (base) LLM to verify
these tokens in parallel. Since the draft model requires much
fewer resources and the cost of verifying multiple tokens in
parallel is similar to the cost of generating a single token,
these methods can achieve considerable speedups. However,
their speedups are bounded by the token acceptance rate
(§4.1), i.e., the fraction of tokens generated by the draft
model that passes the verification test of the base model.
This is because every token that fails verification needs to
be regenerated by the base model. In the worst case, if most
proposed tokens fail verification, these methods may slow
down the decoding process. Therefore, achieving a high acceptance rate is essential for these methods. Unfortunately,
training a draft model to achieve a high acceptance rate is
non-trivial, and the trained draft model does not generalize
across base models and datasets.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are transforming the AI
industry. As they are increasingly integrated into diverse
applications such as search (Team et al., 2023) and chatbots (Ouyang et al., 2022), generating long sequences at
low-latency using LLMs is becoming one significant requirement. However, current LLMs (Touvron et al., 2023a;b;
Jiang et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) generate text based on
autoregressive decoding, which falls short in efficiency, primarily for two reasons. First, autoregressive decoding generates only one token at a time. Hence, the overall generation

To address these problems, this paper develops L OOKA HEAD D ECODING . We build upon a key observation: autoregressive decoding can be equivalently formulated as
solving a non-linear system via the fixed point Jacobi iteration method (§2), which has been termed as Jacobi decoding (Santilli et al., 2023). Each Jacobi decoding step can
generate multiple tokens in parallel at different positions.
Although these tokens may appear at incorrect positions, we
can leverage this parallel generation approach to have the
LLM generate several disjoint n-grams in parallel in a single step. These n-grams could potentially be integrated into
future parts of the generated sequence, pending verification
by the base model to maintain the output distribution.

⋆

Work done when Yichao Fu was visiting UCSD 1 UCSD
Google 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Hao Zhang
<haozhang@ucsd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

L OOKAHEAD D ECODING takes advantage of the partic1

