DiracDiffusion: Denoising and Incremental Reconstruction
with Assured Data-Consistency

Zalan Fabian 1 Berk Tinaz 1 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 1

Abstract

reversing a diffusion process that gradually corrupts a clean
image by adding Gaussian noise. DMs have been explored from two perspectives: Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020) and Score-Based Models (Song & Ermon,
2020a;b), which have been unified under a general framework of Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) (Song
et al., 2020). DMs have established new state of the art in
image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Saharia et al.,
2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022), audio
(Kong et al., 2020) and video synthesis (Ho et al., 2022).
Recently, there has been a push to broaden the notion of
Gaussian diffusion, such as extension to other noise distributions (Deasy et al., 2021; Nachmani et al., 2021; Okhotin
et al., 2023). In the context of image generation, there has
been work to generalize the corruption process, such as
blur diffusion (Lee et al., 2022; Hoogeboom & Salimans,
2022), inverse heat dissipation (Rissanen et al., 2022) and
arbitrary linear corruptions (Daras et al., 2022) with Bansal
et al. (2022) questioning the necessity of stochasticity in
the generative process all together. However, these are general frameworks for unconditional image generation and
are not readily applicable for image reconstruction. The
key challenge introduced by the inverse problem setting
is the strong requirement for producing final images that
are consistent with the observation. This adds a significant
layer of complexity that requires novel solutions both in
theory and algorithm design.

Diffusion models have established new state of
the art in a multitude of computer vision tasks,
including image restoration. Diffusion-based inverse problem solvers generate reconstructions
of exceptional visual quality from heavily corrupted measurements. However, in what is
widely known as the perception-distortion tradeoff, the price of perceptually appealing reconstructions is often paid in declined distortion
metrics, such as PSNR. Distortion metrics measure faithfulness to the observation, a crucial requirement in inverse problems. In this work, we
propose a novel framework for inverse problem
solving, namely we assume that the observation
comes from a stochastic degradation process that
gradually degrades and noises the original clean
image. We learn to reverse the degradation process in order to recover the clean image. Our
technique maintains consistency with the original measurement throughout the reverse process,
and allows for great flexibility in trading off perceptual quality for improved distortion metrics
and sampling speedup via early-stopping. We
demonstrate the efficiency of our method on different high-resolution datasets and inverse problems, achieving great improvements over other
state-of-the-art diffusion-based methods with respect to both perceptual and distortion metrics1 .

In inverse problems, one wishes to recover a signal x from
a noisy observation y = A(x) + z where A is typically
non-invertible. The unconditional score function learned
by DMs has been successfully leveraged to solve inverse
problems without any task-specific training (Kadkhodaie &
Simoncelli, 2021; Jalal et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2021) resulting in reconstructions with exceptional perceptual quality. However, these methods underperform in distortion
metrics, such as PSNR and SSIM (Chung et al., 2022a)
due to the so called perception-distortion trade-off (Blau &
Michaeli, 2018). Authors in Delbracio & Milanfar (2023)
observe that in their framework, the total number of restoration steps controls the perception-distortion trade-off, with
less steps yielding results closer to the minimum distortion estimate. Similar observation is made in Whang et al.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) are powerful generative models
capable of synthesizing samples of exceptional quality by
1

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. Correspondence to: Zalan
Fabian <zfabian@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
z-fabian/dirac-diffusion

1

