Hierarchical Novelty Detection via Fine-Grained Evidence Allocation

Spandan Pyakurel 1 Qi Yu 1

Abstract
Traffic
Sign

By leveraging a hierarchical structure of known
classes, Hierarchical Novelty Detection (HND)
offers fine-grained detection results that pair detected novel samples with their closest (known)
parent class in the hierarchy. Prior knowledge
on the parent class provides valuable insights to
better understand these novel samples. However,
traditional novelty detection methods try to separate novel samples from all known classes using
uncertainty or distance based metrics so they are
incapable of locating the closest known parent
class. Since the novel class is also part of the
hierarchy, the model can more easily get confused
between samples from known classes and those
from novel ones. To achieve effective HND, we
propose to augment the known (leaf-level) classes
with a set of novel classes, each of which is associated with one parent (i.e., non-leaf) class in
the original hierarchy. Such a structure allows us
to perform novel fine-grained evidence allocation
to differentiate known and novel classes guided
by a uniquely designed loss function. Our thorough theoretical analysis shows that fine-grained
evidence allocation creates an evidence margin to
more precisely separate known and novel classes.
Extensive experiments conducted on real-world
hierarchical datasets demonstrate the proposed
model outperforms the strongest baselines and
achieves the best HND performance.

Regulatory
Sign
Stop

Yield

Recreation
Sign
Hiking
Trail

(a)

Picnic
Area

True Label

HND

Stop

Stop

Do Not Enter

Novel
Regulatory

Food

Novel
Recreation

(b)

Figure 1. An illustrative example of Hierarchical Novelty Detection (HND): (a) A hierarchy of traffic signs with known classes
(Stop, Yield, Hiking Trail and Picnic Area); (b) Testing samples
from both known and novel classes.

Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Uncertainty or distance based metrics are commonly leveraged to quantify
how a testing sample is different from known ones. However, most existing methods only provide a binary detection result, indicating whether the sample is novel or not.
Such a coarse-grained result does not offer additional insight on the nature of the novel sample to further inform
decision-making. For example, when detecting a new type
of malware, it may be beneficial to identify the closest software family it belongs to, which can help security engineers
quickly develop a defense strategy. Similar cases can be
found in many other domains: when a newly synthesized
protein is discovered, locating the most similar existing protein type can equip biologists with valuable prior knowledge
to study the novel one and advance scientific discovery.
To perform fine-grained novelty detection, it is beneficial to
leverage existing hierarchical structures that humans commonly use to organize information. For example, most
real-world objects can be described using a hierarchical
structure based on their relationship with other relevant objects. Many benchmark datasets also organize the training
classes into a hierarchical structure. With a hierarchy of
known classes in place, fine-grained novelty detection can
be achieved by simultaneously performing novelty detection while accurately identifying a parent class within the
hierarchy that the novel sample is most similar to. We refer
to this problem as hierarchical novelty detection (HND). As
shown in Figure 1, given a set of known types of traffic

1. Introduction
Novelty detection aims to tackle the challenging real scenarios, where test samples may come from previously unseen
classes outside of the training distribution. Various novelty
detection techniques have been developed with promising
detection performance (Chen et al., 2021; Vaze et al., 2021;
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York. Correspondence to: Qi Yu <qi.yu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

