Multigroup Robustness

Lunjia Hu* 1 Charlotte Peale* 1 Judy Hanwen Shen* 1

Abstract

strong worst-case adversarial assumption, data corruption
issues are often far more localized in reality. In surveys,
response bias may compromise answers from certain subpopulations (Meng, 2018; Bradley et al., 2021). As another
example, when amassing internet data for training large
models, certain sources can be less trustworthy or more
toxic than others (Dodge et al., 2021). Since limitations to
datasets may be isolated to certain groups, it is important
to develop a fine-grained notion of robustness that ensures
groups do not suffer undue harm due to corruption in unrelated data.

To address the shortcomings of real-world
datasets, robust learning algorithms have been designed to overcome arbitrary and indiscriminate
data corruption. However, practical processes of
gathering data may lead to patterns of data corruption that are localized to specific partitions of
the training dataset. Motivated by critical applications where the learned model is deployed to
make predictions about people from a rich collection of overlapping subpopulations, we initiate the
study of multigroup robust algorithms whose robustness guarantees for each subpopulation only
degrade with the amount of data corruption inside
that subpopulation. When the data corruption
is not distributed uniformly over subpopulations,
our algorithms provide more meaningful robustness guarantees than standard guarantees that are
oblivious to how the data corruption and the affected subpopulations are related. Our techniques
establish a new connection between multigroup
fairness and robustness.

A fine-grained robustness notion We consider a new
data-aware notion of robustness that we term multigroup
robustness. At a high-level, a multigroup-robust learning
algorithm guarantees that the effects of dataset corruption on
every subpopulation-of-interest are bounded by the amount
of corruption to data within that subpopulation (Figure 1).
More formally, we consider a binary-label learning problem
where data from a domain X labeled with y ∈ {0, 1} is
inputted into a deterministic learning algorithm A : (X ×
{0, 1})∗ → [0, 1]X that outputs a predictor p ∈ [0, 1]X .
Given a set of subpopulations C ⊆ 2X , we say that A
is multigroup robust with respect to C if, given a dataset
S = {(x1 , y1 ), ..., (xn , yn )} where the xi s are each drawn
i.i.d. from some unknown distribution DX , given any other
′
potentially corrupted dataset S ′ = {(x′1 , y1′ ), ..., (x′m , ym
)},
we can guarantee that the difference in the mean prediction
of every group C ∈ C is bounded by the amount of change
to C between S and S ′ , i.e.,

1. Introduction
The gap between standard distributional assumptions and
practical dataset limitations has been well-studied in machine learning literature – from unintended distribution shift
to adversarially crafted data manipulations. Corresponding
notions of robustness have been developed to reflect the goal
of learning well in the presence of adversarially corrupted
data, as well as attacks demonstrating that small amounts of
corrupted data can seriously impact performance.

|EDX [(A(S)(x) − A(S ′ )(x)) 1[x ∈ C]]| ≤ distC (S, S ′ )
where distC (S, S ′ ) is a measure of the changes to the set
of points belonging to C between S and S ′ , which we will
formalize in Section 4.

While attacks that target specific subgroups have been proposed (Jagielski et al., 2021), they give the adversary the
power to change any point in the dataset to achieve its goal–
even the ability to modify seemingly unrelated points outside the subgroup of interest. While this is reasonable as a

Intuitively, this definition asks that when the points from a
group are unchanged or change very little in S ′ (i.e., translating to a small distC (S, S ′ )), then the average prediction
outputted by A on that group should also not change by
much, thus preserving the group’s accuracy-in-expectation.
It is easy to construct algorithms that satisfy multigroup
robustness, but are not very useful as learning algorithms;
for example, the algorithm that always outputs the same
predictor for any dataset. Thus, we will concentrate on the

*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to: Charlotte Peale <cpeale@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

