eCeLLM: Generalizing Large Language Models for E-commerce
from Large-scale, High-quality Instruction Data

Bo Peng * 1 Xinyi Ling * 1 Ziru Chen 1 Huan Sun 1 2 Xia Ning 1 2 3

Abstract

drawing considerable attention from researchers. In recent years, tremendous research efforts have been dedicated
to developing effective e-commerce models (Yang et al.,
2022; Geng et al., 2022). Though promising, conventional
e-commerce models generally suffer from two issues. (1)
Limited success in generalist e-commerce modeling (Zhang
et al., 2023b): Conventional e-commerce models are typically task-specific (e.g., gSASRec for sequential recommendation (Petrov & Macdonald, 2023), SUOpenTag for attribute value extraction (Xu et al., 2019)). However, contemporary e-commerce platforms, such as Amazon and eBay,
are highly complex and consistently expanding, with many
interdependent tasks. In this context, generalist modeling is
particularly suitable and desired on these platforms due to its
cost-effectiveness and extensibility, while the task-specific
modeling scheme struggles with scalability. (2) Unsatisfactory performance on new users and new products (Hou
et al., 2024): Cold start (i.e., performing e-commerce tasks
on new users or new products) (Lika et al., 2014), the
typical out-of-domain (OOD) generalization challenge in
e-commerce, has been a long-standing and difficult problem (Ding et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). Existing taskspecific e-commerce models are typically tailored to existing users and products and lack the ability to effectively
extrapolate to new users and new products (Lika et al., 2014).
However, new users and new products are very common and
highly wanted in the dynamic landscape of e-commerce.

With tremendous efforts in developing effective
e-commerce models, conventional e-commerce
models show limited success in generalist
e-commerce modeling, and suffer from unsatisfactory performance on new users and new products – a typical out-of-domain generalization challenge. Meanwhile, large language models (LLMs)
demonstrate outstanding performance in generalist modeling and out-of-domain generalizability
in many fields. Toward fully unleashing their
power for e-commerce, in this paper, we construct
ECInstruct, the first open-sourced, large-scale,
and high-quality benchmark instruction dataset
for e-commerce. Leveraging ECInstruct, we
develop eCeLLM, a series of e-commerce LLMs,
by instruction-tuning general-purpose LLMs.
Our comprehensive experiments and evaluation
demonstrate that eCeLLM models substantially
outperform baseline models, including the most
advanced GPT-4, and the state-of-the-art taskspecific models in in-domain evaluation. Moreover, eCeLLM exhibits excellent generalizability
to out-of-domain settings, including unseen products and unseen instructions, highlighting its superiority as a generalist e-commerce model. Both
the ECInstruct dataset and the eCeLLM models
show great potential in empowering versatile and
effective LLMs for e-commerce. ECInstruct
and eCeLLM models are publicly accessible
through https://ninglab.github.io/eCeLLM/.

Recently, large language models (LLMs), such as
GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Claude 2 (Anthropic, 2023),
Gemini (Team et al., 2023), and Llama 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023b), have demonstrated exceptional performance in
natural language processing (Zhao et al., 2023), information retrieval (Spatharioti et al., 2023), and many other
fields (Frieder et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023). However,
their power for e-commerce is not fully unleashed. While
limited efforts (Yang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a; Li
et al., 2024) have been dedicated to leveraging LLMs for
e-commerce, most of them focus on studying the utility
of pre-trained LLMs in single or homogenous tasks (e.g.,
e-commerce authoring). Some recent efforts employ instruction tuning to adapt LLMs for e-commerce applications (Shi et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Geng et al., 2022).
However, they fall short in the covered e-commerce tasks

1. Introduction
The Internet’s evolution and the rise of the digital economy have made e-commerce an integral part of daily life,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, The Ohio State University, USA. 2 Translational Data Analytics Institute, The Ohio State University, USA.
3
Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, USA. Correspondence to: Xia Ning <ning.104@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

