Learning in Feature Spaces via Coupled Covariances:
Asymmetric Kernel SVD and Nyström method

Qinghua Tao * 1 Francesco Tonin * 2 Alex Lambert 1 Yingyi Chen 1 Panagiotis Patrinos 1 Johan A.K. Suykens 1

Abstract

One can for example think of kernel principal components
analysis (KPCA, Schölkopf et al. (1998)) where one tries to
find orthonormal directions in the feature space that maximize the variance associated to a symmetric Gram matrix,
or kernel canonical correlation analysis (KCCA, Lai & Fyfe
(2000)) where the maximization of a correlation based on
two different views of the data leads to an optimization
problem governed by two symmetric Gram matrices.

In contrast with Mercer kernel-based approaches
as used e.g. in Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA), it was previously shown that Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) inherently relates to asymmetric kernels and asymmetric Kernel Singular Value Decomposition (KSVD) has
been proposed. However, the existing formulation
to KSVD cannot work with infinite-dimensional
feature mappings, the variational objective can be
unbounded, and needs further numerical evaluation and exploration towards machine learning.
In this work, i) we introduce a new asymmetric
learning paradigm based on coupled covariance
eigenproblem (CCE) through covariance operators, allowing infinite-dimensional feature maps.
The solution to CCE is ultimately obtained from
the SVD of the induced asymmetric kernel matrix, providing links to KSVD. ii) Starting from
the integral equations corresponding to a pair of
coupled adjoint eigenfunctions, we formalize the
asymmetric Nyström method through a finite sample approximation to speed up training. iii) We
provide the first empirical evaluations verifying
the practical utility and benefits of KSVD and
compare with methods resorting to symmetrization or linear SVD across multiple tasks.

In many real-world applications however, there is an inherent degree of asymmetry. Among others, directed graphs
of citation networks (Ou et al., 2016), biclustering (Kluger
et al., 2003), attention in Transformers (Wright & Gonzalez,
2021; Chen et al., 2023) typically involve an asymmetry that
cannot be captured when working with reproducing kernels.
Often the asymmetric matrices are first symmetrized before
applying some matrix decomposition such as singular value
decomposition (SVD, Strang (2006); Golub & Van Loan
(2013)) so that only one set of eigenvectors is obtained.
As a fundamental linear algebra tool, SVD can process arbitrary non-symmetric matrices and jointly learns both left
and right singular vectors, e.g., embeddings of source and
target nodes (Estrada, 2012). However, SVD alone lacks
flexibility for nonlinear feature learning. Suykens (2016)
propose asymmetric kernel SVD (KSVD), a variational
principle based on least-square support vector machines
(LSSVMs) that leads to the matrix SVD and mentions that
nonlinear extensions can be obtained when the SVD is applied to an asymmetric kernel matrix rather than the given
data matrix. However, their formulation only allows finitedimensional feature mappings to induce the kernel and its
variational objective is unbounded unless the regularization
hyperparameters are properly selected. Yet, Suykens (2016)
does not provide numerical evaluations on the practical utility and applications of KSVD, leaving this topic largely
unexplored. While infinite-dimensional feature maps are
common in all kernel methods, including the asymmetric
ones, e.g., Wright & Gonzalez (2021) focus on the understandings of the asymmetric dot-product attention kernel
resulting from the queries and keys through a pair of Banach
spaces in the supervised setting, little literature addresses
learning with generic asymmetric kernel machines with
infinite-dimensional maps. Differently, our work provides a

1. Introduction
Feature mappings can transport the data in a Hilbert space
of a typically higher dimension. They are intimately linked
through inner products with reproducing kernels (Aronszajn,
1950) and thus often associated with symmetric learning.
*

Equal contribution 1 ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven, Belgium 2 LIONS, EPFL, Switzerland (most of the work was
done at ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven). Correspondence to:
Qinghua Tao, Francesco Tonin <qinghua.tao@esat.kuleuven.be,
francesco.tonin@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

