Consistent Diffusion Meets Tweedie:
Training Exact Ambient Diffusion Models with Noisy Data

Giannis Daras 1 2 Alexandros G. Dimakis 3 Constantinos Daskalakis 4 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, we have witnessed remarkable progress in
image generation as exemplified by state-of-the-art models
such as Stable Diffusion (-XL) (Rombach et al., 2022;
Podell et al., 2023) and DALL-E (2, 3) (Betker et al., 2023).
This progress has been driven by two major enablers: i) the
diffusion modeling framework (Ho et al., 2020; Song &
Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020b); and ii) the existence
of massive datasets of image-text pairs (Schuhmann et al.,
2022; Gadre et al., 2023).

Ambient diffusion is a recently proposed framework for training diffusion models using corrupted data. Both Ambient Diffusion and alternative SURE-based approaches for learning
diffusion models from corrupted data resort to
approximations which deteriorate performance.
We present the first framework for training diffusion models that provably sample from the uncorrupted distribution given only noisy training
data, solving an open problem in Ambient diffusion. Our key technical contribution is a method
that uses a double application of Tweedie’s formula and a consistency loss function that allows
us to extend sampling at noise levels below the
observed data noise. We also provide further evidence that diffusion models memorize from their
training sets by identifying extremely corrupted
images that are almost perfectly reconstructed,
raising copyright and privacy concerns. Our
method for training using corrupted samples can
be used to mitigate this problem. We demonstrate
this by fine-tuning Stable Diffusion XL to generate samples from a distribution using only noisy
samples. Our framework reduces the amount of
memorization of the fine-tuning dataset, while
maintaining competitive performance.

The need for high-quality, web-scale data and the intricacies
involved in curating datasets at that scale often result in
the inclusion of copyrighted content. Making things worse,
diffusion models memorize training examples more than
previous generative modeling approaches (Carlini et al.,
2023; Somepalli et al., 2023), such as Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al., 2020), often replicating
parts or whole images from their training set.
A recently proposed strategy for mitigating the memorization issue is to train (or fine-tune) diffusion models using
corrupted data (Daras et al., 2023b; Somepalli et al., 2023;
Daras & Dimakis, 2023). Indeed, developing a capability for
training diffusion models using corrupted data can also find
applications in domains where access to uncorrupted data is
expensive or impossible, e.g. in MRI (Aali et al., 2023) or
black-hole imaging (Lin et al.; The Event Horizon Telescope
Collaboration, 2019). Unfortunately, existing methods for
learning diffusion models from corrupted data (Daras et al.,
2023b; Aali et al., 2023; Kawar et al., 2023; Xiang et al.,
2023) resort to approximations (during training or sampling)
that significantly hurt performance. Our contributions are
as follows:

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University of Texas at Austin 2 Archimedes AI 3 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Texas at Austin 4 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, MIT. Correspondence to: Giannis Daras <giannisdaras@utexas.edu>, Alexandros G. Dimakis <dimakis@austin.utexas.edu>, Constantinos Daskalakis
<costis@csail.mit.edu>.

i We propose the first exact framework for learning diffusion models using only corrupted samples. Our key
technical contributions are: i) a computationally efficient method for learning optimal denoisers for all levels
of noise σ ≥ σn , where σn is the standard deviation
of the noise in the training data, obtained by applying Tweedie’s formula twice; and ii) a consistency loss
function (Daras et al., 2023a) for learning the optimal
denoisers for noise levels σ ≤ σn . Note that given sam-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

