Translating Subgraphs to Nodes Makes Simple GNNs
Strong and Efficient for Subgraph Representation Learning

Dongkwan Kim 1 Alice Oh 1

Abstract

2022). However, specialized models suffer from large memory and computational requirements from a large global
graph. Their complex operations also lead to limitations
in learning both local and global interactions of subgraphs.
Here, we address a fundamental yet underexplored question
in subgraph representation learning before model design:
How can we efficiently and effectively process subgraphs
as data for representation learning?

Subgraph representation learning has emerged
as an important problem, but it is by default approached with specialized graph neural networks
on a large global graph. These models demand
extensive memory and computational resources
but challenge modeling hierarchical structures of
subgraphs. In this paper, we propose SubgraphTo-Node (S2N) translation, a novel formulation
for learning representations of subgraphs. Specifically, given a set of subgraphs in the global graph,
we construct a new graph by coarsely transforming subgraphs into nodes. Demonstrating both
theoretical and empirical evidence, S2N not only
significantly reduces memory and computational
costs compared to state-of-the-art models but also
outperforms them by capturing both local and
global structures of the subgraph. By leveraging
graph coarsening methods, our method outperforms baselines even in a data-scarce setting with
insufficient subgraphs. Our experiments on eight
benchmarks demonstrate that fined-tuned models with S2N translation can process 183 – 711
times more subgraph samples than state-of-the-art
models at a better or similar performance level.

In this paper, we propose ‘Subgraph-To-Node (S2N)’, a
novel data structure to solve subgraph-level prediction tasks
efficiently. This data structure is a new graph translated from
the original global graph and subgraphs, where its nodes
are the original subgraphs, and its edges are the relations
among the original subgraphs. Then, we can get the results
of the subgraph-level tasks by performing node-level tasks
from these node representations.
For example, Alsentzer et al. (2020) introduces a fitness social network where subgraphs are users, nodes are workouts,
and edges indicate if multiple users complete workouts.
By using S2N translation, a new graph is created; users
become nodes, and edges express relations between them.
This graph directly shows the relationships between users,
following the conventional approach of describing social
networks where nodes are users. As seen in this example,
S2N can provide a more precise description of real-world
problems than a form of subgraphs.

1. Introduction

The S2N translation enables efficient subgraph representation learning. The number of nodes in the S2N graph is
decreased to the number of original subgraphs. The edges
of the S2N graph are also significantly reduced, which we
theoretically prove and empirically confirm in real-world
datasets. We can load large batches of subgraphs on the
GPU memory and parallelize the training and inference.
Since S2N translation does not interfere with model selection, even simple GNNs without complex operations can
encode node representations in the S2N graph.

Subgraph representation learning has been shown to be useful for various real-world problems (Bordes et al., 2014;
Luo, 2022; Hamidi Rad et al., 2022; Maheshwari et al.,
2024). Current research uses the default data structures for
graph-level tasks, treating the subgraph as just a subset of the
global graph. Existing studies on subgraph representation
learning focus on developing graph neural networks specialized for subgraphs (Alsentzer et al., 2020; Wang & Zhang,
1

School of Computing, KAIST, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Dongkwan Kim <dongkwan.kim@kaist.ac.kr>, Alice Oh
<alice.oh@kaist.edu>.

There can be various implementations of S2N translation,
and here, we create new edges as the number of shared edges
across a pair of subgraphs. Then, we normalize and sparsify
edges based on weights to approximate the structure of the
global graph. This process makes a coarse S2N graph carry

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

