Membership Inference Attacks on Diffusion Models via Quantile Regression

Shuai Tang * 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu * 1 2 Sergul Aydore 1 Michael Kearns 1 3 Aaron Roth 1 3

Abstract

the last decade, so has the privacy concern that these largescale diffusion models may reveal sensitive information
about the dataset they are trained on.

Recently, diffusion models have become popular
tools for image synthesis due to their high-quality
outputs. However, like other large models, they
may leak private information about their training data. Here, we demonstrate a privacy vulnerability of diffusion models through a membership inference (MI) attack, which aims to identify
whether a target example belongs to the training set when given the trained diffusion model.
Our proposed MI attack learns quantile regression
models that predict (a quantile of) the distribution
of reconstruction loss on examples not used in
training. This allows us to define a granular hypothesis test for determining the membership of a
point in the training set, based on thresholding the
reconstruction loss of that point using a custom
threshold tailored to the example. We also provide
a simple bootstrap technique that takes a majority membership prediction over “a bag of weak
attackers” which improves the accuracy over individual quantile regression models. We show that
our attack outperforms the prior state-of-the-art
attack while being substantially less computationally expensive — prior attacks required training
multiple “shadow models” with the same architecture as the model under attack, whereas our attack
requires training only much smaller models.

One of the most popular classes of methods to evaluate the
privacy risks of machine learning (ML) models is membership inference (MI) attacks (e.g., (Homer et al., 2008; Shokri
et al., 2017; Jayaraman & Evans, 2019; Jagielski et al., 2020;
Nasr et al., 2021; Carlini et al., 2022)), in which an attacker
aims to determine if a target example belongs to the training
dataset given the trained model. The success of an MI attack
falsifies privacy protections on the existence of any individual, i.e. differential privacy guarantees (Dwork & Roth,
2014). MI can also be disclosive if e.g. membership in the
training data is determined based on a sensitive attribute (as
it would if e.g. the dataset consisted of medical records for
patients with a particular disease). In addition, MI attacks
can be a building block for other more sophisticated attacks
such as extraction attacks on generative models (Carlini
et al., 2023). In general, a successful MI attack with reasonable side information is a strong indicator of privacy
vulnerability. Finally, when applied to differentially private
algorithms (Dwork et al., 2006), MI attacks can serve as
privacy auditing tools by providing lower bounds on the
privacy parameters, which in turn assess the tightness of the
privacy analyses (Jagielski et al., 2020; Nasr et al., 2023)
and help identify potential errors in the privacy proof or
implementation (Tramèr et al., 2022; Stadler et al., 2022).
A majority of the existing MI attacks focus on supervised
learning (Yeom et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Jayaraman
et al., 2020; Nasr et al., 2021; Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini
et al., 2022), and there has been significantly less development on MI attacks against generative models (e.g., (Hayes
et al., 2019; van Breugel et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2023)).
The goal of our work is to develop strong MI attacks against
state-of-the-art diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models, based on generative neural networks,
have gained attention in the field of image generation (Ho
et al., 2020; Song & Ermon, 2019). It has been shown that
diffusion models are remarkably capable of generating images that are higher-quality than previous approaches such
as GANs and VAEs, while also being more scalable. However, as the size of these models has grown drastically over

Our work extends the quantile-regression-based attacks in
(Bertran et al., 2023) for supervised learning to attacks for
diffusion models. For a given trained diffusion model parameterized by θ, our attack first learns a quantile regression
model on public auxiliary data that predicts the α-quantile
qα (z) of θ’s reconstruction loss on each example z (formally
defined in Definition 2.1). Then we indicate an example
is a member of the training set if its reconstruction loss is

*

Equal contribution 1 Amazon AWS AI/ML 2 Carnegie Mellon
University 3 University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Shuai
Tang <shuat@amazon.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

