Physics-Informed Neural Network Policy Iteration:
Algorithms, Convergence, and Verification

Yiming Meng * 1 Ruikun Zhou * 2 Amartya Mukherjee 2 Maxwell Fitzsimmons 2 Christopher Song 2 Jun Liu 2

Abstract

learning (Schulman et al., 2017) from human feedback to
fine-tune large language models. However, reinforcement
learning in continuous environments, where states and actions evolve continuously in both space and time, remains a
challenge (Duan et al., 2016). Theoretically speaking, when
considering continuous-time scenarios, the discrete-time
Bellman equation is replaced by a nonlinear partial differential equation (PDE) known as the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
(HJB) equation. Solving and analyzing this equation, in general, becomes a complex task due to its intricate nature. One
major challenge arises from the possibility that the optimal
cost function may not be differentiable, even for relatively
straightforward problems (Bertsekas, 2015). In such cases,
one has to resort to viscosity solutions (Crandall et al., 1984)
to study HJB equations.

Solving nonlinear optimal control problems
is a challenging task, particularly for highdimensional problems. We propose algorithms for
model-based policy iterations to solve nonlinear
optimal control problems with convergence guarantees. The main component of our approach is
an iterative procedure that utilizes neural approximations to solve linear partial differential equations (PDEs), ensuring convergence. We present
two variants of the algorithms. The first variant
formulates the optimization problem as a linear
least square problem, drawing inspiration from extreme learning machines (ELM) for solving PDEs.
This variant efficiently handles low-dimensional
problems with high accuracy. The second variant
is based on a physics-informed neural network
(PINN) for solving PDEs and has the potential to
address high-dimensional problems. We demonstrate that both algorithms outperform traditional
approaches, such as Galerkin methods, by a significant margin. We provide a theoretical analysis of
both algorithms in terms of convergence of neural
approximations towards the true optimal solutions
in a general setting. Furthermore, we employ formal verification techniques to demonstrate the
verifiable stability of the resulting controllers.

A rich literature exists on policy iteration techniques for
obtaining suboptimal solutions to the HJB equations (Leake
& Liu, 1967; Saridis & Lee, 1979; Beard, 1995; Beard
et al., 1997; 1998). One notable approach is to construct
successive approximations to solutions of the so-called Generalized Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (GHJB) equation, which
is a linear PDE and potentially easier to solve. Galerkin approximations for solving the GHJB are proposed in (Beard
et al., 1997; 1998) and have proven effective for solving lowdimensional problems. However, such approaches do not
scale well to high-dimensional problems. Indeed, Galerkin
methods are known to suffer from the curse of dimensionality.
Motivated by recent successes in solving PDEs using neural
networks (Raissi et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2006; Chen et al.,
2022; Han et al., 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018;
Weinan et al., 2021) and the potential of neural networks to
overcome the curse of dimensionality (Poggio et al., 2017),
we set out to revisit the policy iteration approach by solving
GHJB equations using neural networks. The main goal is to
answer the following questions:

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning in discrete environments has
achieved remarkable success over the past decade, from
AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017) to the recent breakthrough
of GPT-3 (Ouyang et al., 2022), which uses reinforcement
*

Equal contribution 1 Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign–Urbana, Illinois, United States 2 Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Jun Liu
<j.liu@uwaterloo.ca>.

1. Can neural approximations of the solutions to GHJB
converge to the viscosity solution of the HJB equation?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

2. Can neural approximations efficiently compute solutions of the HJB with high accuracy?
1

