Distributional Bellman Operators over Mean Embeddings

Li Kevin Wenliang 1 Grégoire Delétang 1 Matthew Aitchison 1 Marcus Hutter 1 Anian Ruoss 1
Arthur Gretton 1 2 Mark Rowland 1

Abstract

Typically, predictions of return distributions are represented
directly as approximate probability distributions, such as categorical distributions (Bellemare et al., 2017) and equallyweighted mixtures of Dirac deltas (Dabney et al., 2018b;
Nguyen-Tang et al., 2021). Rowland et al. (2019) proposed
an alternative framework where return distributions are represented via the values of statistical functionals, called a
sketch by Bellemare et al. (2023). This provided a new
space of distributional reinforcement learning algorithms,
leading to improvements in deep RL agents, and hypotheses
regarding distributional RL in the brain (Dabney et al., 2020;
Lowet et al., 2020). On the other hand, a potential drawback
of this approach is that, to perform each distributional Bellman update to this representation, these statistical functional
values must be “decoded” back into an approximate distribution via an expensive imputation strategy. In practice, this
can introduce significant computational overhead to Bellman updates, and is unlikely to be biologically plausible for
distributional return learning in the brain (Tano et al., 2020).

We propose a novel algorithmic framework for
distributional reinforcement learning, based on
learning finite-dimensional mean embeddings of
return distributions. The framework reveals a
wide variety of new algorithms for dynamic programming and temporal-difference algorithms
that rely on the sketch Bellman operator, which
updates mean embeddings with simple linearalgebraic computations. We provide asymptotic
convergence theory using a novel error analysis
approach, and examine the empirical performance
of the algorithms on a suite of tabular tasks. Further, we show that this approach can be straightforwardly combined with deep reinforcement learning to give competitive performances.

1. Introduction

Here, we focus on a notable instance of the sketch called
the mean embedding sketch. In short, the mean embedding
is the expectation of nonlinear functions under the distribution represented (Smola et al., 2007; Sriperumbudur et al.,
2010; Berlinet & Thomas-Agnan, 2011), and is related to
frames in signal processing (Mallat, 1999) and distributed
distributional code in theoretical neuroscience (Sahani &
Dayan, 2003; Vértes & Sahani, 2018).

In distributional approaches to reinforcement learning (RL),
the aim is to learn the full probability distribution of future returns (Morimura et al., 2010a; Bellemare et al., 2017;
2023), rather than just their expected values, as is typically the case in value-based reinforcement learning (Sutton
& Barto, 2018). Distributional RL was proposed in the
setting of deep reinforcement learning by Bellemare et al.
(2017), with a variety of precursor work stretching back
almost as far as Markov decision processes themselves (Jaquette, 1973; Sobel, 1982; Chung & Sobel, 1987; Morimura
et al., 2010a;b). Beginning with the work in Bellemare et al.
(2017), the distributional approach to reinforcement learning has been central across a variety of applications of deep
RL in simulation and in the real world (Bodnar et al., 2020;
Bellemare et al., 2020; Wurman et al., 2022; Fawzi et al.,
2022), and has motivated new theories of how neurons in
the brain represent uncertainties in rewards (Dabney et al.,
2020; Tano et al., 2020; Muller et al., 2024)

The core contributions of this paper are to revisit the approach to distributional reinforcement learning based on
sketches (Rowland et al., 2019), and to propose the sketch
Bellman operator that updates the implicit distributional
representation as a simple linear operation, obviating the
need for the expensive imputation strategies converting between sketches and distributions. This leads to a rich new
space of distributional RL algorithms that operate entirely in
the space of sketches. We provide theoretical convergence
analysis to accompany the framework, using a novel error
analysis approach. We then investigate the practical behaviour of various instantiations of the proposed algorithms
in tabular domains, and demonstrate the effectiveness in
deep reinforcement learning, showing that our approach is
robust enough to serve as the basis for a new variety of deep
distributional reinforcement learning algorithms.

1

Google DeepMind 2 Gatsby Unit, University College London. Correspondence to: LKW <kevinliw@google.com>, MR
<markrowland@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

