Self-Rewarding Language Models

Weizhe Yuan 1 2 Richard Yuanzhe Pang 1 2 Kyunghyun Cho 2
Xian Li 1 Sainbayar Sukhbaatar 1 Jing Xu 1 Jason Weston 1 2

Abstract

human preferences to train the LLM, as in Direct Preference Optimization (DPO; Rafailov et al., 2023). In both
cases, the approach is bottlenecked by the size and quality
of the human preference data. Futhermore, we hypothesize
that training solely on human preferences will constrain
models from improving beyond human level and achieving
superhuman performance, which will require superhuman
feedback.

We posit that to achieve superhuman agents, future models require superhuman feedback in order
to provide an adequate training signal. Current approaches commonly train reward models from human preferences, which may then be bottlenecked
by human performance level, and secondly these
reward models require additional human preferences data to further improve. In this work, we
study Self-Rewarding Language Models, where
the language model itself is used via LLM-asa-Judge prompting to provide its own rewards
during training. We show that during Iterative
DPO training, not only does instruction following ability improve, but also the ability to provide
high-quality rewards to itself. Fine-tuning Llama
2 70B on three iterations of our approach yields a
model that outperforms many existing systems on
the AlpacaEval 2.0 leaderboard, including Claude
2, Gemini Pro, and GPT-4 0613. While there is
much left still to explore, this work opens the door
to the possibility of models that can continually
improve in both axes.

In this work, we instead propose to train a self-improving
reward model in order to avoid this bottleneck. Unlike
traditional methods where the reward model is frozen or
requires human-labeled data in order to be updated, our
model is designed to continuously update itself during LLM
alignment. The key to such an approach is to develop an
agent that possesses all the abilities desired during training,
rather than separating them out into distinct models such
as a reward model and a language model. In the same
way that pretraining and multitasking training of instruction
following tasks allow task transfer by training on many tasks
at once (Collobert & Weston, 2008; Radford et al., 2019;
Ouyang et al., 2022), incorporating the reward model into
that same system allows task transfer between the reward
modeling task and the instruction following tasks.
We thus introduce Self-Rewarding Language Models, that
both (i) act as instruction following models generating responses for given prompts; and (ii) can generate and evaluate new instruction following examples to add to their own
training set. We train these models using an Iterative DPO
framework similar to that recently introduced in Xu et al.
(2023). Starting from a seed model, in each iteration there
is a process of Self-Instruction creation whereby candidate
responses are generated by the model for newly created
prompts, and are then assigned rewards by that same model.
The latter is implemented via LLM-as-a-Judge prompting,
which can also be seen as an instruction following task. A
preference dataset is built from the generated data, and the
next iteration of the model is trained via DPO, see Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Training Large Language Models (LLMs) using human
preference data can vastly improve the instruction following
performance of pretrained models (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022a). The standard approach of Reinforcement
Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) learns a reward
model from these human preferences. The reward model
is then frozen and used to train the LLM using RL, e.g.,
via PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), and the human labeling
process is then possibly repeated in order to improve the
reward model (Ziegler et al., 2019). A recent alternative is
to avoid training the reward model at all, and directly use

In our experiments, we start with a Llama 2 70B (Touvron
et al., 2023) seed model fine-tuned on Open Assistant (Köpf
et al., 2023), and then perform the above training scheme.
We find that not only does the instruction following performance improve from Self-Rewarding LLM alignment

1

Meta. 2 New York University. Correspondence to: Jason
Weston <jase@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

