Multi-Track Message Passing: Tackling Oversmoothing and
Oversquashing in Graph Learning via Preventing Heterophily Mixing

Hongbin Pei 1 Yu Li 1 Huiqi Deng 2 Jingxin Hai 1
Pinghui Wang 1 Jie Ma 1 Jing Tao 1 Yuheng Xiong 1 Xiaohong Guan 1

Abstract

However, the advancement toward deeper GNNs is currently
obscured by two inherent issues in the message passing
framework: oversmoothing (Li et al., 2018) and oversquashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021). Although considerable progress
has been made in tackling oversmoothing (Zhou et al., 2020;
2021b; Giovanni et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023) and in
tackling oversquashing (Topping et al., 2022; Abboud et al.,
2022; Black et al., 2023; Gutteridge et al., 2023), these two
issues remain insufficiently resolved to date.

The advancement toward deeper graph neural networks is currently obscured by two inherent issues in message passing, oversmoothing and oversquashing. We identify the root cause of these
issues as information loss due to heterophily mixing in aggregation, where messages of diverse
category semantics are mixed. We propose a
novel multi-track graph convolutional network to
address oversmoothing and oversquashing effectively. Our basic idea is intuitive: if messages are
separated and independently propagated according to their category semantics, heterophilic mixing can be prevented. Consequently, we present a
novel multi-track message passing scheme capable of preventing heterophilic mixing, enhancing
long-distance information flow, and improving
separation condition. Empirical validations show
that our model achieved state-of-the-art performance on several graph datasets and effectively
tackled oversmoothing and oversquashing, setting
a new benchmark of 86.4% accuracy on Cora.1

The oversmoothing refers to the issue that as GNNs become
deeper and undergo multiple rounds of message passing,
all node representations tend to converge towards the same
constant value, resulting in these nodes becoming indistinguishable, as illustrated in Fig. 1 A1. The oversquashing
is the issue that abundant messages from distant nodes are
“squashed” into fixed-sized representation vectors. This issue is particularly severe on heterophilic graphs (Pei et al.,
2020), and on graphs with long-distant dependences (Di Giovanni et al., 2023), as illustrated in Fig. 1 B1.
In this paper, we argue that the issues of oversmoothing and
oversquashing are both rooted in information loss resulting
from heterophily mixing in aggregation of message passing, i.e., the mixture of messages with different semantics
(e.g., categories information). Specifically, oversmoothing
happens when nodes belonging to different categories mutually mix their features, leading to a loss of their unique and
discriminative information. Oversquashing occurs when features from distant nodes within an exponentially large receptive field, containing a great diversity of category semantics,
are heterophily mixed into fixed-sized representation vectors with a limited capacity for information. Consequently,
information is inevitably lost in this mixing.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have proven to be powerful
for learning from graph-structured data (Goller & Kuchler,
1996; Scarselli et al., 2008; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Battaglia
et al., 2018), showing success in various applications such
as recommender systems (Wang et al., 2021), computational
chemistry (Pei et al., 2024a), and physical simulation (Zhao
et al., 2022). These successes can be largely attributed to
Message Passing mechanism (Gilmer et al., 2017).

Leveraging this understanding, we propose a novel MultiTrack Graph Convolutional Network (MTGCN) to effectively address the oversmoothing and oversquashing issues.
The basic idea behind MTGCN is intuitive: If messages
are separated and independently propagated according to
their category semantics, heterophilic mixing can be prevented. To realize the idea, we propose a novel concept,
message tracks, which are a set of isomorphic graphs sharing the same topology with graph. Each track is dedicated

1

MOE KLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to:
Jing Tao <peihongbin@xjtu.edu.cn, liyu1998@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
jtao@xjtu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code of experiments in this paper: https://github.
com/XJTU-Graph-Intelligence-Lab/mtgcn

1

