Partially Stochastic Infinitely Deep Bayesian Neural Networks

Sergio Calvo-Ordoñez * 1 2 Matthieu Meunier * 2 Francesco Piatti * 3 Yuantao Shi * 1 2

Abstract

it permits a nuanced balance between computational cost
and precision via adaptive computation tailored to specific
error tolerances, and it notably diminishes memory requirements during training. The latter is achieved by using the
adjoint method which allows reverse-time reconstruction of
states, facilitating the use of such models in time series and
diffusion applications (Calvo-Ordoñez et al., 2023).

In this paper, we present Partially Stochastic
Infinitely Deep Bayesian Neural Networks, a
novel family of architectures that integrates partial stochasticity into the framework of infinitely
deep neural networks. Our new class of architectures is designed to improve the computational
efficiency of existing architectures at training and
inference time. To do this, we leverage the advantages of partial stochasticity in the infinitedepth limit which include the benefits of full
stochasticity e.g. robustness, uncertainty quantification, and memory efficiency, whilst improving their limitations around computational complexity. We present a variety of architectural
configurations, offering flexibility in network design including different methods for weight partition. We also provide mathematical guarantees on the expressivity of our models by establishing that our network family qualifies as
Universal Conditional Distribution Approximators. Lastly, empirical evaluations across multiple tasks show that our proposed architectures
achieve better downstream task performance and
uncertainty quantification than their counterparts
while being significantly more efficient. The
code can be found at https://github.com/
Sergio20f/part_stoch_inf_deep

Previous work (Xu et al., 2022) proposed a framework
for implementing Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) in
this infinite-depth limit using Neural SDEs (Liu et al.,
2019). These models offer a probabilistic interpretation
of continuous-time neural networks by placing a prior distribution over the network’s weights and updating them
through Bayesian inference steps. This involves inferring
distributions over parameters rather than relying on point
estimates (Mackay 1992; Neal 1995). This approach introduces several key benefits like accounting for model uncertainty (Bergna et al. 2023; Van Amersfoort et al. 2020;
Ustyuzhaninov et al. 2020; He et al. 2023), which is key in
high-stakes environments such as financial forecasting (Arroyo et al. 2024; Moreno-Pino & Zohren 2022) or healthcare
(Vanderschueren et al. 2023).
However, for both continuous and discrete BNNs, the process of estimating the posterior distribution of network
weights typically involves computationally intensive techniques like Markov Chain Monte Carlo or variational inference methods, both of which can be resource-heavy and
time-consuming (Neal 1995; Blundell et al. 2015). These
methods often require a large number of iterations or complex optimisation procedures to accurately approximate the
posterior distribution. Additionally, the need to store and
process multiple samples for each weight during training
and inference further escalates the computational load.

1. Introduction
By conceptualising neural networks as a composition of
infinitely many residual layers, Neural ODEs (Chen et al.,
2018) transform the output of a network into the solution
of an ODE (Haber & Ruthotto, 2017). This approach of
infinite-depth parametrisation has two primary advantages:

To overcome these challenges, previous research has explored partially stochastic networks as a potential solution
in finite-depth settings (Daxberger et al. 2021b; Kristiadi
et al. 2020; Li et al. 2024). These networks restrict stochasticity to a subset of the model’s parameters, denoted as
Θ = ΘS ∪ ΘD , and the learning process involves estimating a distribution for ΘS while obtaining point estimates
for ΘD . These methods aim to achieve greater computational efficiency while retaining the benefits of Bayesian approaches. Initially, the main idea of these architectures was

*

Equal contribution 1 Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative
Finance, University of Oxford 2 Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford 3 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London. Correspondence to: Sergio Calvo-Ordoñez <sergio.calvoordonez@maths.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

