Surface-VQMAE: Vector-quantized Masked Auto-encoders on Molecular
Surfaces
Fang WU 1 Stan Z. Li† 1

Abstract

various paradigms such as amino acid sequences, 3D structures, and the distinctive attributes of surface regions. The
past decade has witnessed progress in high-throughput
sequencing (HTS) technologies, cryogenic electron microscopy, and sophisticated protein structure prediction algorithms (Jumper et al., 2021), which resulted in an explosion
of publicly accessible protein sequences and structures. To
leverage the large volume of those databases, many selfsupervised learning (SSL) studies have been introduced via
mechanisms like contrastive learning (Hermosilla & Ropinski, 2022; Zhang et al., 2022b), denoising diffusion (Liu
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), and self-prediction (Zhang
et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2022a; 2023d; Lee et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2023b;a).

Molecular surfaces imply fingerprints of interaction patterns between proteins. However, nonequivalent efforts have been paid to incorporating the abundant protein surface information for
analyzing proteins’ biological functions in juxtaposition to amino acid sequences and 3D structures. We propose a novel surface-based unsupervised learning algorithm termed SurfaceVQMAE to overcome this obstacle. In light of
surface point clouds’ sparsity and disorder properties, we first partition them into patches and
obtain the sequential arrangement via the Morton curve. Successively, a Transformer-based architecture named SurfFormer was introduced to
integrate the surface geometry and capture patchlevel relations. At last, we enhance the prevalent masked auto-encoder (MAE) with the vector quantization (VQ) technique, which establishes a surface pattern codebook to enforce a
discrete posterior distribution of latent variables
and achieve more condensed semantics. Our
work is the foremost to implement pretraining
purely on molecular surfaces and extensive experiments on diverse real-life scenarios including binding site scoring, binding affinity prediction, and mutant effect estimation demonstrate its
effectiveness. The code is available at https:
//github.com/smiles724/VQMAE.

Yet, many vital biological processes, including membrane
transport and cell signaling, are governed by intricate networks of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) rather than single proteins acting independently (Lin et al., 2024). In
contrast to sequence and structure, a protein’s molecular
surface, which is characterized by a compact and smooth
composition of atoms at its boundary and showcases both
chemical and geometric features, holds a more direct relevance to biomolecular interactions and function (Mylonas
et al., 2021; Riahi et al., 2023). Despite that, current efforts
in protein representation learning predominantly concentrate on encoding amino acid sequences (Rives et al., 2021;
Lin et al., 2022) and 3D structural elements (Zhang et al.,
2022b), overlooking the indispensable part of surfaces.
Conducting self-supervision on molecular surfaces is not
easy due to numerous reasons. Firstly, the information density of surface point clouds is sparse compared to languages
or images. Instead, they are natural signals with heavy redundancy thereby the pretraining tasks can be accomplished
even without holistic understanding (Chen et al., 2023).
Secondly and intuitively, surface point clouds are inherently
disordered and do not have a sequential arrangement like
words in a sentence or pixels in a picture. Moreover, it is
challenging to bridge the gap between the pretraining and
fine-tuning stages. Even though the popular masking and
reconstruction technique (Lin et al., 2022; Pang et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2022b; Luo et al., 2023) exhibits deep comprehension, no restriction has been imposed in the latent
space between the encoder and the decoder. On the contrary,

1. Introduction
Proteins are critical components of biological systems, performing a diverse range of functions that support a broad
spectrum of cellular processes and biological pathways.
These complex macromolecules exhibit intricate, multifaceted characteristics, which can be expressed through
1
School of Engineering, Westlake University. Correspondence
to: Stan Z. Li <stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

