Provably Scalable Black-Box Variational Inference with
Structured Variational Families
Joohwan Ko * 1 Kyurae Kim * 2 Woo Chang Kim 1 Jacob R. Gardner 2

Abstract

model correlations in the posterior by using full-rank covariance approximations (Kucukelbir et al., 2017). That
way, we should have been able to move away from meanfield (Peterson & Anderson, 1987; Hinton & van Camp,
1993), or diagonal covariance, approximations traditionally
required when performing coordinate-ascent VI (CAVI; see
the review by Blei et al. 2017). However, this promise has
shown to be elusive. Despite their theoretical and occasional
empirical superiority of “expressiveness,” going full-rank
does not always improve over mean-field. See, for example, the experiments in §3 by Zhang et al. (2022), §B.1 by
Agrawal et al. (2020), Footnote 2 by Giordano et al. (2018).

Variational families with full-rank covariance approximations are known not to work well in blackbox variational inference (BBVI), both empirically and theoretically. In fact, recent computational complexity results for BBVI have established that full-rank variational families scale
poorly with the dimensionality of the problem
compared to e.g. mean-field families. This is
particularly critical to hierarchical Bayesian models with local variables; their dimensionality increases with the size of the datasets. Consequently, one gets an iteration complexity with
an explicit 𝒪(𝑁 2 ) dependence on the dataset size
𝑁. In this paper, we explore a theoretical middle
ground between mean-field variational families
and full-rank families: structured variational families. We rigorously prove that certain scale matrix
structures can achieve a better iteration complexity of 𝒪 (𝑁), implying better scaling with respect
to 𝑁. We empirically verify our theoretical results
on large-scale hierarchical models.

A common explanation for the underwhelming performance
of full-rank approximations has been their excessive gradient variance. Indeed, recent results by Kim et al. (2023a);
Domke et al. (2023) establishing the computational complexity of BBVI confirm this intuition. Due to gradient
variance,
full-rank
covariance approximations result in a
(
)
𝒪 𝑑𝜅2 𝜖−1 iteration complexity for finding an 𝜖-accurate
solution on strongly log-concave posteriors with a condition
number
(
√ ) of 𝜅. This contrasts with mean-field for which a
𝒪 𝑑 dimensional dependence (Kim et al., 2023b) has
been established. The poor 𝑑 dependence explains why the
full-rank approximation is underwhelming in practice.

1. Introduction

Furthermore, for models with local variables (Hoffman &
Blei, 2015), the 𝒪 (𝑑) dimension dependence is especially
concerning; for these models, the dimensionality 𝑑 scales
with the size of the dataset 𝑁. This means that for a model
taking Θ (𝑁) datapoint queries to evaluate the (joint likeli)
hood, the sample complexity of BBVI will be 𝒪 𝑁 2 𝜅2 𝜖−1 ,
where 𝜅 also increases linearly with 𝑁 for Bayesian posteriors as 𝜅 = 𝒪(𝑁) due to posterior contraction. In terms of
scalability with respect to 𝑁, this 𝒪(𝑁 4 ) complexity highlights a clear challenge for BBVI with full-rank variational
families. (Note that, with our alternative proof technique,
this can be tightened to an 𝒪(𝑁 3 ) explicit dependence.)

A decade has passed since black-box variational inference
(BBVI; Ranganath et al., 2014; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla,
2014), also known as Monte Carlo variational inference and
stochastic gradient variational Bayes, has emerged. Among
various approaches to variational inference (VI; Jordan et al.,
1999; Blei et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019), BBVI has been
immensely successful in various fields such as statistics, machine learning, signal processing, and many more, thanks to
its general black-box nature and scalability to large datasets.
One of the promises of BBVI has been that we can better
*
Equal contribution 1 KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea, Republic
of 2 Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A.. Correspondence to:
Kyurae Kim <kyrkim@seas.upenn.edu>.

While mean-field is scalable, it is a crude approximation
as it fails to model correlations in the posterior. Therefore,
a natural question is, “Can we find a variational family
more expressive than mean-field families while maintaining
computational tractability?” In this paper, based on the
theoretical framework of Kim et al. (2023a); Domke et al.

Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

