Risk Estimation in a Markov Cost Process: Lower and Upper Bounds

Gugan Thoppe 1 Prashanth L. A. 2 Sanjay P. Bhat 3

Abstract

of investments. Similarly, in transportation, road users are
sensitive to the variations in the delay incurred and would
especially like to avoid a large delay even if it occurs infrequently. Risk-sensitive RL addresses such applications by
incorporating a risk measure in the optimization process,
either in the objective or as a constraint.

We tackle the problem of estimating risk measures of the infinite-horizon discounted cost of
a Markov cost process. The risk measures we
study include variance, Value-at-Risk (VaR), and
Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR). First, we show
that estimating any of these risk measures with
ϵ-accuracy, either in expected or high-probability
sense, requires at least Ω(1/ϵ2 ) samples. Then,
using a truncation scheme, we derive an upper
bound for the CVaR and variance estimation. This
bound matches our lower bound up to logarithmic factors. Finally, we discuss an extension of
our estimation scheme that covers more general
risk measures satisfying a certain continuity criterion, such as spectral risk measures and utilitybased shortfall risk. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to provide lower and
upper bounds for estimating any risk measure beyond the mean within a Markovian setting. Our
lower bounds also extend to the infinite-horizon
discounted costs’ mean. Even in that case, our
lower bound of Ω(1/ϵ2 ) improves upon the existing Ω(1/ϵ) bound (Metelli et al., 2023).

Going beyond the expected value, three well-known risk
measures are variance, Value-at-Risk (VaR) and Conditional
Value-at-Risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000). For a
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) F, the VaR vα (F)
and CVaR cα (F) at a given level α ∈ (0, 1) is defined by
vα (F) = inf{ξ : P [X ≤ ξ] ≥ α}, and

(1)

+

cα (F) = vα (X) +

E [X − vα (X)]
,
1−α

(2)

where X ∼ F. From the above, it is apparent that vα (F)
is a certain quantile of the CDF F. For a (strictly increasing) continuous distribution F, vα (F) = F −1 (α), while
CVaR can be equivalently written as cα (F) = E[X | X ≥
vα (X)] for X ∼ F. In words, CVaR is the expected value
of X, conditioned on the event that X exceeds the VaR.
Choosing a α close to 1 and taking X as modeling the
losses of a financial position, CVaR can be understood as
the expected loss given that losses have exceeded a certain
threshold (specified by a quantile). In the financial domain,
CVaR is preferred over VaR because CVaR is a coherent
risk measure (Artzner et al., 1999), while VaR is not. In
particular, with VaR as the risk measure, combining two
investment portfolios (diversification) can cause an increase
in the risk—a property that is undesirable in finance.

1. Introduction
In a traditional discounted reinforcement learning (RL) problem (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018),
the objective is to maximize the value function, which is the
expected value of the infinite-horizon cumulative discounted
cost. However, optimizing only the expected value is not
appealing in several practical applications. For instance,
in the financial domain, strategists like to consider the risk

Estimation of VaR and CVaR using independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples has received a lot of attention recently in the literature, cf. (Bhat & Prashanth, 2019;
Brown, 2007; Wang & Gao, 2010; Thomas & LearnedMiller, 2019; Kolla et al., 2019a; Prashanth et al., 2020).
The concentration bounds for CVaR have been useful in deriving sample complexity results in the context of empirical
risk minimization and bandit applications.

1

Dept. of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute
of Science (IISc), Bengaluru, India; Robert Bosch Centre for Data
Science and Artificial Intelligence, IIT Madras, Chennai, India.
2
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Madras, Chennai, India. 3 TCS Research, Hyderabad,
India.. Correspondence to: Gugan Thoppe <gthoppe@iisc.ac.in>,
Prashanth L. A. <prashla@cse.iitm.ac.in>.

In this paper, we are concerned with the problem of estimating a risk measure from a sample path of a discounted
Markov Cost Process (MCP). In the context of RL, this
is equivalent to the policy evaluation problem, albeit for a
risk measure. For this problem, we derive minimax sample

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

