On Multi-Armed Bandit with Impatient Arms

Yuming Shao 1 2 Zhixuan Fang 1 2

Abstract

computer networks (Zuo & Joe-Wong, 2021; Pase et al.,
2022; Feki & Capdevielle, 2011). In these applications, bandit algorithms attempt to find choices that maximize their
own benefits, while arms passively comply with and accept
the arrangements made by the algorithm.

In this paper, we investigate a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) setting where an arm exits the game if
the algorithm continuously neglects it. This setup
is motivated by real-world scenarios, such as online advertising and crowdsourcing, where arms
only gain benefits after being pulled by the algorithm. We identify the intrinsic hardness of this
problem and limitations in existing approaches.
We propose FC-SE algorithm with expected regret upper bounds as our solution to this problem.
As an extension, we even allow new arms to enter
after the game starts and design FC-Entry algorithm with performance guarantees for this setup.
Finally, we conduct experiments to validate our
theoretical results.

However, in many situations, bandit arms also have their
own interests, preferences, and even the right to make
choices. For instance, a series of recent studies (Liu et al.,
2020; 2021a; Kong et al., 2022; Basu et al., 2021; Sankararaman et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022) investigated multi-agent
multi-armed bandit in two-sided matching markets. In these
contexts, each arm selects its most preferred agent among
those who have chosen it. Beyond this, the arms’ preferences and choices can manifest in various ways. One
crucial aspect is their decision to participate in the game. If
participation promises satisfactory benefits, they may opt
to remain involved; conversely, if participation does not
yield sufficient benefits, they may be motivated to exit. To
illustrate this, we present the following real world scenarios:
Example 1 (Online Advertising). A website owner allocates
advertisement slots to advertisers across various time periods. The owner generally prefers advertisements with high
click-through rates to generate higher revenue. However,
for advertisers with low click-through rates, their ads may
remain undisplayed for an extended period. This situation
may lead to financial losses for advertisers and evoke their
dissatisfaction. Consequently, advertisers may find it advantageous to withdraw from the competition for ad slots on
this site.
Example 2 (Crowdsourcing). The crowdsourcing workers
participating in a dataset labeling task receive compensation
for each label they provide. A crowdsourcing system assuming control over the task assignments to workers (Zhang
et al., 2015) often continuously assigns tasks to workers
with proven proficiency, while potentially neglecting others. Given that workers are only compensated upon task
completion, certain workers might experience prolonged
periods without receiving any tasks, leading to a lack of
income from the platform. They may lose patience and turn
to alternative avenues for earning income.

1. Introduction
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB), first introduced in (Robbins,
1952), is a type of machine learning model used to describe
the decision-making problems with unknown information
that needs to be learned. In this model, each arm represents
a potential choice with unknown expected reward. The algorithm’s objective is to achieve the highest possible overall
reward. The central challenge in a MAB problem is to strike
a balance between exploiting the arms that have yielded
high rewards and exploring unknown arms to uncover their
potential. MAB algorithms find real-world applications in
various fields, such as online advertising (Schwartz et al.,
2017; Yang & Lu, 2016; Aramayo et al., 2023; Avadhanula
et al., 2021; Han & Gabor, 2020), clinical trials (Aziz et al.,
2021; Chakravorty & Mahajan, 2014), recommendation systems (Santana et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021; Mahadik et al.,
2020), crowdsourcing (Rangi & Franceschetti, 2018; Song
& Jin, 2021; Qin et al., 2023; Liu & Liu, 2017; Zhang et al.,
2015; Tran-Thanh et al., 2014), and resource allocation in
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Zhixuan Fang
<zfang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

What these two cases have in common is that if the algorithm frequently neglects an arm, it can harm the arm’s
interests, leading it to lose patience and ultimately incentivizing it to leave. Patience, to some extent, represents

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

