Position: Data-driven Discovery with Large Generative Models

Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder * 1 Harshit Surana * 2 Dhruv Agarwal * 3 Sanchaita Hazra 4
Ashish Sabharwal 1 Peter Clark 1

Abstract

simultaneously poses significant challenges for scientists
to absorb new findings, navigate interconnections, formulate novel hypotheses, and arrive at meaningful conclusions (Bianchini et al., 2022). To facilitate future scientific
progress, it is, therefore, imperative to develop automated
systems that are capable of continuous ingestion, creative
generation, and analytical reasoning at a massive scale.

With the accumulation of data at an unprecedented
rate, its potential to fuel scientific discovery is
growing exponentially. This position paper urges
the Machine Learning (ML) community to exploit the capabilities of large generative models
(LGMs) to develop automated systems for end-toend data-driven discovery—a paradigm encompassing the search and verification of hypotheses
purely from a set of provided datasets, without
the need for additional data collection or physical
experiments. We first outline several desiderata
for an ideal data-driven discovery system. Then,
through DATAVOYAGER, a proof-of-concept utilizing GPT-4, we demonstrate how LGMs fulfill several of these desiderata—a feat previously
unattainable—while also highlighting important
limitations in the current system that open up opportunities for novel ML research. We contend
that achieving accurate, reliable, and robust endto-end discovery systems solely through the current capabilities of LGMs is challenging. We
instead advocate for fail-proof tool integration,
along with active user moderation through feedback mechanisms, to foster data-driven scientific
discoveries with efficiency and reproducibility.

Developing an end-to-end discovery system is challenging.
Previous works have either severely lacked the requisite
computational power (Langley, 1981; Langley et al., 1984;
1983), developed domain-specific bespoke methodologies
(e.g., AlphaFold; Jumper et al. (2021)), or involved substantial human intervention (e.g., wet lab experiments) thus not
qualifying as autonomous end-to-end (CoScientist; Boiko
et al. (2023)). In this position paper, we argue that a focus
on data-driven discovery using large generative models
(LGMs) addresses each of these prior shortcomings and
presents a practical first step towards the goal of an end-toend system for automating the scientific process. Following Newell & Simon (1976), we define this paradigm as a
heuristic search framework that aims to describe a given
set of observations by uncovering the laws that govern its
data-generating process.
For example, consider the flow described in Figure 1. Given
a dataset of socio-economic variables collected from a set of
respondents, a user might formulate a hypothesis about the
relationship between the BMI of a subset of the respondents
and their financial behavior (variables present in the dataset;
top-left). A data-driven discovery system should be able
to automatically generate a verification plan and execute
multiple steps of statistical tests (e.g., OLS, GLM) over the
provided data to confirm or reject the hypothesis (bottomleft). Alternatively, a user might only provide a high-level
research question, such as specifying the domains of interest
(i.e., finance and health; top-middle). In this scenario, a discovery system must first identify the relevant variables and
then search the space of plausible hypotheses to generate
and verify interesting questions conditioned on the provided
data and existing world knowledge (bottom-middle). Finally,
users may have diverse information-seeking needs necessitating the ability to provide feedback to the system, such
as in using a particular statistical methodology for certain
types of data during automatic verification (top-right). An

1. Introduction
The deluge of data collected in the digital age by advanced
scientific instruments, sensors, and computational techniques has marked a transformative change in the process
and pace of scientific discovery (Anderson, 2008; Ramakrishnan & Grama, 1999; Jumper et al., 2021). This acceleration, however, paints a paradoxical scenario—while rapid
development indicates the advancement of knowledge, it
*
Equal contribution 1 Allen Institute for AI 2 OpenLocus
University of Massachusetts Amherst 4 University of Utah.
Correspondence to: Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder <bodhisattwam@allenai.org>, Harshit Surana <harshit@openlocus.ai>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

