D-Flow: Differentiating through Flows for Controlled Generation

Heli Ben-Hamu 1 2 * Omri Puny 2 Itai Gat 1 Brian Karrer 1 Uriel Singer 1 Yaron Lipman 1 2

Abstract
Taming the generation outcome of state of the art
Diffusion and Flow-Matching (FM) models without having to re-train a task-specific model unlocks a powerful tool for solving inverse problems,
conditional generation, and controlled generation
in general. In this work we introduce D-Flow, a
simple framework for controlling the generation
process by differentiating through the flow, optimizing for the source (noise) point. We motivate
this framework by our key observation stating
that for Diffusion/FM models trained with Gaussian probability paths, differentiating through the
generation process projects gradient on the data
manifold, implicitly injecting the prior into the optimization process. We validate our framework on
linear and non-linear controlled generation problems including: image and audio inverse problems and conditional molecule generation reaching state of the art performance across all.

GT

Distorted

GT

Ours

Distorted

α = 96.62

Ours

Figure 1: Free-form inpainting with a latent T2I FM model
(Ground truth image is taken from the MS-COCO validation
set), conditionally generated molecule and audio inpainting
using D-Flow.
model which in cases may be prohibitive; (ii) training-free
approaches that modify the generation process of a pretrained model, adding additional guidance (Bar-Tal et al.,
2023; Yu et al., 2023). The guidance is usually built upon
strong assumptions on the generation process that can lead
to errors in the generation and mostly limit the method to
observations that are linear in the target (Kawar et al., 2022;
Chung et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023a; Pokle et al., 2023);
lastly, (iii) adopt a variational perspective, framing the controlled generation as an optimization problem (Graikos et al.,
2023; Mardani et al., 2023; Wallace et al., 2023; Samuel
et al., 2023b), requiring only a differentiable cost to enforce
the control. This paper belongs to this third class.

1. Introduction
Controlled generation from generative priors is of great
interest in many domains. Various problems such as conditional generation, inverse problems, sample editing etc., can
all be framed as a controlled generation problem. In this
work we focus on controlled generation from diffusion/flow
generative models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020;
Lipman et al., 2023) as they are the current state-of-the-art
generative approaches across different data modalities.

The goal of this paper is to introduce a framework for adding
controlled generation to a pre-trained Diffusion or FlowMatching (FM) model based on differentiation through the
ODE sampling process. Our key observation is that for
Diffusion/FM models trained with standard Gaussian probability paths, differentiating an arbitrary loss L(x) through
the generation process of x with respect to the initial point,
x0 , projects the gradient ∇x L onto the “data manifold”, i.e.,
onto major data directions at x, implicitly injecting a valuable prior. Based on this observation we advocate a simple
general algorithm that minimizes an arbitrary cost function
L(x), representing the desired control, as a function of the
source noise point x0 used to generate x. That is,

There are three main approaches for controlled generation
from diffusion/flow models: (i) conditional training, where
the model receives the condition as an additional input during training (Song et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Ho & Salimans, 2022b), although performing very well
this approach requires task specific training of a generative
*

Work done as a research intern at FAIR, Meta. 1 Meta
Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence to: Heli BenHamu <heli.benhamu@weizmann.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

min L(x).
x0

1

(1)

