IM-Unpack: Training and Inference with Arbitrarily Low Precision Integers

Zhanpeng Zeng 1 Karthikeyan Sankaralingam 1 2 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract

tions in modern machine learning. Given matrices A and B
of size n × d and h × d respectively, the output of a GEMM
is calculated as
C = AB⊺

GEneral Matrix Multiply (GEMM) is a central operation in deep learning and corresponds to a large
chunk of the compute footprint. Therefore, improving its efficiency is an active topic of research.
A popular strategy is the use of low bit-width integers to approximate the original matrix entries.
This allows efficiency gains, but often requires
sophisticated techniques to control the rounding
error. In this work, we first verify that when the
low bit-width restriction is removed, for a variety
of Transformer-based models, integers are, in fact,
sufficient for all GEMMs need – for both training and inference stages, and achieve parity (with
floating point). No sophisticated techniques are
needed. We find that while a large majority of
entries in matrices (encountered in such models)
can be easily represented by low bit-width integers, the existence of a few heavy hitter entries
make it difficult to achieve efficiency gains via
the exclusive use of low bit-width GEMMs alone.
To address this issue, we develop a simple algorithm, Integer Matrix Unpacking (IM-Unpack),
to unpack a matrix with large integer entries into
a larger matrix whose entries all lie within the
representable range of arbitrarily low bit-width integers. This allows equivalence with the original
GEMM, i.e., the exact result can be obtained using
purely low bit-width integer GEMMs. This comes
at the cost of additional operations – we show that
for many popular models, this overhead is quite
small. Code is available at https://github.
com/vsingh-group/im-unpack.

Choosing the appropriate numerical precision or data type
(FP32, FP16, or BF16) for GEMM is often important, and
hinges on several factors including the specific application,
characteristics of the data, model architecture, as well as
numerical behavior such as convergence. This choice affects compute and memory efficiency most directly, since a
disproportionately large chunk of the compute footprint of
a model involves the GEMM operator. A good example is
the large improvement in latency and memory achieved via
low bit-width GEMM, and made possible due to extensive
ongoing work on quantization (to low bit-width data types)
and low-precision training (Banner et al., 2019; Nagel et al.,
2019; Kim et al., 2021; Dettmers et al., 2022; Li & Gu, 2023;
Xiao et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023b;a;
Lin et al., 2022; Li & Gu, 2023; Yuan et al., 2022; Ding et al.,
2022; Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018; Zhu
et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2023). Integer quantization is
being actively pursued for inference efficiency, and the use
of low bit-width integers is universal to deliver the efficiency
gains. However, this strategy often incurs large rounding
errors when representing all matrix entries as low bit-width
integers, and explains the drop in performance and thereby,
a need for error correction techniques (Frantar et al., 2023;
Xiao et al., 2023; Chee et al., 2023; Adepu et al., 2024).
So how much of the performance degradation is due to (a)
rounding to integers versus (b) restricting to low bit-width
integers? To answer this question, it appears worthwhile to
check whether integer GEMMs will achieve parity without
sophisticated techniques (for the inference stage, and more
aspirationally, for training) for popular models if we do not
restrict to low bit-width integers.

1. Introduction

Overview. The starting point of our work is to first experimentally verify that the aforementioned hypothesis –
that integer GEMM may work – is true (see §2). But by
itself, this finding offers no value proposition for efficiency.
Nonetheless, this experiment is useful for the following reason. For a particular class of models (e.g., Transformers),
we can easily contrast the corresponding input matrices A
and B between (a) integer GEMM and (b) low bit-width
integer GEMM and probe if any meaningful structure can

Calculating the product of two matrices using GEneral Matrix Multiply (GEMM) is one of the most widely used opera1
University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence to: Zhanpeng Zeng <zzeng38@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

