Peeking with PEAK: Sequential, Nonparametric Composite Hypothesis Tests for
Means of Multiple Data Streams

Brian Cho 1 Kyra Gan 1 Nathan Kallus 1

Abstract

experiments could potentially lead to cost reduction through
early stopping (Liang and Bojinov, 2023) and improved
experiment outcomes. For example, in digital interventions,
prompt “expert” feedback has been shown to increase user
engagement, resulting in better treatment outcomes (Sharpe
et al., 2017; Yardley et al., 2016). In this work, we aim to
provide anytime-valid inference in sequential experiments
for a task of interest (e.g., identifying the best arm/treatment
in the bandit/reinforcement learning setting), where data collection adapts based on previously observed outcomes. The
problem necessitates special inferential tools since naively
repeatedly applying conventional inference such as t-tests at
every time point will always at some point detect an effect
even when none exists.

We propose a novel nonparametric sequential test
for composite hypotheses for means of multiple
data streams. Our proposed method, peeking
with expectation-based averaged capital (PEAK),
builds upon the testing-by-betting framework and
provides a non-asymptotic α-level test across any
stopping time. Our contributions are two-fold:
(1) we propose a novel betting scheme and provide theoretical guarantees on type-I error control,
power, and asymptotic growth rate/e-power in the
setting of a single data stream; (2) we introduce
PEAK, a generalization of this betting scheme
to multiple streams, that (i) avoids using wasteful union bounds via averaging, (ii) is a test of
power one under mild regularity conditions on
the sampling scheme of the streams, and (iii) reduces computational overhead when applying the
testing-as-betting approaches for pure-exploration
bandit problems. We illustrate the practical benefits of PEAK using both synthetic and real-world
HeartSteps datasets. Our experiments show that
PEAK provides up to an 85% reduction in the
number of samples before stopping compared to
existing stopping rules for pure-exploration bandit
problems, and matches the performance of stateof-the-art sequential tests while improving upon
computational complexity.

In settings where sample sizes are limited and multiple arms
are to be compared, the ideal testing tools for sequential and
possibly adaptive experiments should fulfill the following
desiderata:
(a) Providing a non-asymptotic α-level test across any
stopping time under nonparametric assumptions;
(b) Efficiently rejecting hypotheses that are incorrect
across all potential distributions that satisfy our nonparametric assumptions;
(c) Enabling joint, composite hypothesis tests on multiple
streams of data in a computationally tractable manner.
The first tools for non-asymptotic, α-level tests were proposed by Wald (1945), but these approaches rely on likelihood ratios, which may not be applicable in composite and
nonparametric settings. To circumvent such issues, modern
tests satisfying desideratum (a) use the notion of e-processes
(Grünwald et al., 2023). It generalizes likelihood ratios to
the nonparametric, composite setting (Ramdas et al., 2023)
and offers an alternative to p-values that is more suitable for
testing under optional stopping and continuation (Vovk and
Wang, 2021; Ramdas et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Sequential experiments have important applications in various fields to optimize decision-making, including better
content recommendation (Bouneffouf et al., 2012), personalized learning (Clement et al., 2015; Cai et al., 2021), and
optimized digital interventions (Figueroa et al., 2021; Forman et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2020; Piette et al., 2022; Trella
et al., 2022; 2023; Yom-Tov et al., 2017). Providing informative and anytime-valid feedback during sequential

Various sequential testing methods focus on asymptotic guarantees (Bibaut et al., 2022; Robbins and Siegmund, 1970;
Waudby-Smith et al., 2021; Woong Ham et al., 2023), where
approximately valid (and powered) inference only starts after sufficiently large sample sizes. While these methods
appeal to other desiderata such as asymptotic calibration of

1

Department of ORIE, Cornell Tech, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Brian Cho <bmc233@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

