Layerwise Proximal Replay: A Proximal Point Method
for Online Continual Learning

Jason Yoo 1 Yunpeng Liu 1 2 Frank Wood 1 2 3 Geoff Pleiss 1 4

Abstract

ing rely on experience replay (Chaudhry et al., 2019), which
retains a small subset of prior data used during training to approximate the loss over all past data (Soutif-Cormerais et al.,
2023). Replay-based approaches are particularly dominant
in online continual learning for two reasons. First, training on prior data helps to prevent catastrophic forgetting
(French, 1999), arguably the primary bottleneck in continual learning. Second, replay increases the overall number
of training iterations where the network is exposed to past
data. This is especially crucial in the online setting, which
is otherwise prone to underfitting due to the rapid arrival of
new data and in many cases the inability to train models to
convergence (Zhang et al., 2022).

In online continual learning, a neural network incrementally learns from a non-i.i.d. data stream.
Nearly all online continual learning methods employ experience replay to simultaneously prevent
catastrophic forgetting and underfitting on past
data. Our work demonstrates a limitation of this
approach: neural networks trained with experience replay tend to have unstable optimization
trajectories, impeding their overall accuracy. Surprisingly, these instabilities persist even when the
replay buffer stores all previous training examples, suggesting that this issue is orthogonal to
catastrophic forgetting. We minimize these instabilities through a simple modification of the
optimization geometry. Our solution, Layerwise
Proximal Replay (LPR), balances learning from
new and replay data while only allowing for gradual changes in the hidden activation of past data.
We demonstrate that LPR consistently improves
replay-based online continual learning methods
across multiple problem settings, regardless of the
amount of available replay memory.

Despite their proven ability to mitigate catastrophic forgetting and underfitting, we hypothesize that online replay
methods are inefficient from an optimization perspective.
At any given training iteration, the new data batch and replay data both contribute to the overall training loss. However, since the network has already trained to some extent
on replay data, new data will in general contribute more
to the overall training loss. The resulting parameter update will then bias the network toward the new data and
cause the network function to forget its behavior on prior
data, at times severely (Caccia et al., 2021; De Lange et al.,
2022). Although past data performance can be partially
recovered after additional training on replay examples, this
optimization-time predictive instability can adversely affect
optimization efficiency and overall model accuracy.

1. Introduction
Continual learning is a subfield of machine learning that
studies how to enable models to continuously adapt to new
information over time without forgetting old information under memory and computation constraints. Online continual
learning is a particularly challenging form of continual learning where a neural network must learn from a non-stationary
data stream. Data arrive in small batches, typically between
1 to 10 data points, and the network can typically only train
for a few iterations before the next batch arrives.

In this work, we tackle these inefficiencies through a simple
optimizer modification, which maintains the advantages of
replay-based continual learning while improving its stability. Our method, which we refer to as Layerwise Proximal
Replay (LPR), applies a replay-tailored preconditioner to
the loss gradients and builds upon a growing literature of
continual learning methods that modify the gradient update
geometry (Chaudhry et al., 2018; Zeng et al., 2019; Kao
et al., 2021; Saha et al., 2021b; Saha & Roy, 2023). LPR’s
preconditioner balances two desiderata: 1) maximally learning from both new and past data while 2) only gradually
changing past data predictions (and internal representations)
to promote optimization stability and efficiency.

Almost all successful approaches to online continual learn1
University of British Columbia 2 Inverted AI 3 Mila 4 Vector
Institute. Correspondence to: Jason Yoo <jasony97@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Across several predictive tasks and datasets, we find that
1

