FRAPPÉ: A Group Fairness Framework for Post-Processing Everything

Alexandru Ţifrea∗ 1 Preethi Lahoti 2 Ben Packer 2 Yoni Halpern 2 Ahmad Beirami 2 Flavien Prost 2

Abstract
Despite achieving promising fairness-error tradeoffs, in-processing mitigation techniques for
group fairness cannot be employed in numerous
practical applications with limited computation
resources or no access to the training pipeline of
the prediction model. In these situations, postprocessing is a viable alternative. However, current methods are tailored to specific problem settings and fairness definitions and hence, are not as
broadly applicable as in-processing. In this work,
we propose a framework that turns any regularized in-processing method into a post-processing
approach. This procedure prescribes a way to
obtain post-processing techniques for a much
broader range of problem settings than the prior
post-processing literature. We show theoretically
and through extensive experiments that our framework preserves the good fairness-error trade-offs
achieved with in-processing and can improve over
the effectiveness of prior post-processing methods. Finally, we demonstrate several advantages
of a modular mitigation strategy that disentangles
the training of the prediction model from the fairness mitigation, including better performance on
tasks with partial group labels.1

Figure 1: Inference with FRAPPÉ and in-processing.
FRAPPÉ methods add the output of post-hoc module TPP to
the unfair scores output by pre-trained model fbase . Unlike
prior post-processing methods, FRAPPÉ does not require
sensitive attributes for inference. While in-processing trains
the entire prediction model fIP to induce fairness, FRAPPÉ
only trains the post-hoc module. Note that, for classification,
thresholding the predicted scores yields outputs Ŷ , while
for regression Ŷ coincides with the score.
subgroups in the data (i.e. group fairness) where groups are
determined by sensitive demographic attributes such as race,
sex, age, etc (Barocas et al., 2023). To operationalize fairness, one can choose between the several dozen alternative
definitions of fairness (Narayanan, 2018; Hort et al., 2023)
capturing different notions of equity.

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) algorithms are deployed in applications with a profound social impact, it becomes crucial
that the biases they exhibit (Bickel et al., 1975; Dastin, 2018;
Mehrabi et al., 2021) are properly mitigated. Of particular
importance is being equitable with respect to the different

One of the most studied mitigation paradigms for group
fairness is in-processing (Hort et al., 2023), which changes
the training procedure, for instance, by adding a fairness
regularizer or constraint to the training loss. In addition
to their good performance, in-processing methods are appealing thanks to their broad applicability: to induce a new
notion of fairness, one simply needs to quantify fairness
violations and use that as a regularizer or constraint to train
a new prediction model.

∗

Work done during an internship at Google. 1 Department
of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Alexandru Ţifrea <alexandru.tifrea@inf.ethz.ch>,
Flavien Prost <fprost@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
google-research/google-research/tree/
master/postproc_fairness.

In practice, however, retraining the prediction model to induce fairness is often infeasible. For example, complex prediction models are challenging to retrain when only limited
computational resources are available (Cruz & Hardt, 2023).
To make matters worse, there is often no access to the param1

