Nonsmooth Implicit Differentiation:
Deterministic and Stochastic Convergence Rates

Riccardo Grazzi 1 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2 Saverio Salzo 3 1

Abstract

evaluated, and the case that Φ has the composite form

We study the problem of efficiently computing the
derivative of the fixed-point of a parametric nondifferentiable contraction map. This problem has
wide applications in machine learning, including
hyperparameter optimization, meta-learning and
data poisoning attacks. We analyze two popular
approaches: iterative differentiation (ITD) and approximate implicit differentiation (AID). A key
challenge behind the nonsmooth setting is that the
chain rule does not hold anymore. We build upon
the work by Bolte et al. (2022), who prove linear
convergence of nonsmooth ITD under a piecewise
Lipschitz smooth assumption. In the deterministic case, we provide a linear rate for AID and an
improved linear rate for ITD which closely match
the ones for the smooth setting. We further introduce NSID, a new stochastic method to compute
the implicit derivative when the contraction map
is defined as the composition of an outer map and
an inner map which is accessible only through a
stochastic unbiased estimator. We establish rates
for the convergence of NSID, encompassing the
best available rates in the smooth setting. We also
present illustrative experiments confirming our
analysis.

Φpw, λq “ GpT pw, λq, λq
T pw, λq “ ErT̂ξ pwpλq, λqs,

where the external map G can be evaluated, but the inner
map T is accessible only via a stochastic estimator T̂ξ , with
ξ a random variable.
A main motivation for computing the implicit derivative
of (1) is provided by bilevel optimization, which aims to
minimize an upper level objective function of wpλq. Important examples are given by hyperparameter optimization
and meta-learning (Franceschi et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019),
where (1) expresses the optimality conditions of a lowerlevel minimization problem. Further examples include learning a surrogate model for data poisoning attacks (Xiao et al.,
2015; Muñoz-González et al., 2017), deep equilibrium models (Bai et al., 2019) or OptNet (Amos & Kolter, 2017).
All these problems may present nonsmooth mappings Φ.
For instance, consider hyperparameter optimization or data
poisoning attacks for SVMs, or meta-learning for image
classification, where Φ is evaluated through the forward
pass of a neural net with RELU activations (Bertinetto et al.,
2019; Lee et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2019). In addition,
when such settings are applied to large datasets, evaluating
the map Φ would be too costly, but we can usually apply
stochastic methods through the composite stochastic structure in (2), where only T involves a computation on the full
training set (e.g., a gradient descent step).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of efficiently approximating a generalized derivative (or Jacobian) of the solution
map of the parametric fixed point equation
wpλq “ Φpwpλq, λq

pλ P Rm q,

(2)

Nowadays, automatic differentiation techniques (Griewank
& Walther, 2008) popular for deep learning, can also be
used to efficiently, i.e. with a cost of the same order of that
of approximating wpλq, approximate Jacobian-vector (or
vector-Jacobian) products of wpλq by relying only on an
implementation of an iterative solver for problem (1). There
are two main approaches to achieve this: ITerative Differentiation (ITD) (e.g., Maclaurin et al. (2015); Franceschi et al.
(2017)), which differentiates through the steps of the solver
for (1), and Approximate Implicit Differentiation (AID)
(e.g., Pedregosa (2016); Lorraine et al. (2020)), which relies
on approximately solving the linear system emerging from
the implicit expression for the Jacobian-vector product. Despite the analysis of such methods has been usually done

(1)

when Φ is not differentiable, but only piecewise differentiable. We address both the case that Φ can be explicitly
1

CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy
Department of Computer Science, University College, London,
UK 3 Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica, Automatica e Gestionale, Universitá La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. Correspondence to:
Riccardo Grazzi <riccardo.grazzi@iit.it>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

