PinNet: Pinpoint Instructive Information for Retrieval Augmented
Code-to-Text Generation
Han Fu 1 Jian Tan 1 Pinhan Zhang 2 Feifei Li 1 Jianling Sun 2

Abstract

Input Code

Automatically generating high quality code descriptions greatly improves the readability and
maintainability of the codebase. Recently, retrieval augmented code-to-text approaches have
proven to be an effective solution, and have
achieved the state-of-the-art results on various
benchmarks. It brings out the potential to leverage large unlabeled code descriptions to further improve the generation quality. In spite of
the promising performance, retrieval-augmented
models however suffer from being deluded by
inconducive retrieved references, due to irrelevant or even misleading information contained
therein. To this end, we design PinNet, a new
framework for code-to-text generation. PinNet
relies on a discriminator to measure how well the
retrievals match the semantics of the input code.
Remarkably, the hidden representation of the reference from the last layer of the discriminator can
be leveraged to significantly improve the codeto-text generation through modifying the attention weights. It essentially pays high attention
to valuable information and eliminates misleading part. To effectively execute this idea, we also
propose a novel contrastive learning method to
quantify the semantical similarities between unlabeled references. Using extensive experiments
on code summarization and SQL-to-text generation, we demonstrate that the proposed method
can significantly outperform all of the baselines.

public String at(List<String> keys, Object ... args)
{
return messagesApi.get(lang, keys, args);
}

Ground
Truth

Get the message at the first defined key.

Retrieved
Reference

Gets the localized string corresponding to a key formatted with
a set of args.

Baseline

Gets the localized string corresponding to a list of keys.

PinNet

Get the message at the given keys.

Figure 1. The misleading information in the retrieved reference
deludes the baseline model in generating a wrong description in
italics. The accurate description by PinNet is shown in bold.

readability and maintainability of the codebase, and has become an emerging capability of AI coding assistant tools.
Recently, various methods based on natural language processing have been developed for code-to-text generation.
One prominent approach based on deep-learning (Iyer
et al., 2016; Ahmad et al., 2020) formulates it as a translation task. However, applying vanilla translation models, e.g., Seq2Seq (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al.,
2014) and Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), to code-totext is challenging due to the syntactic and semantic complexity of programming languages. Observing that many
similar code snippets are frequently reused in various scenarios, some works (Zhang et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020;
Parvez et al., 2021) propose to use reference samples collected from annotated codebases that may contain relevant
descriptions to further improve the generation quality.
Though effective, existing retrieval augmented code-to-text
methods suffer from the fact that the model could be seriously deluded if the retrieved description is irrelevant or
even misleading. The reason is that all existing models do
not consider how well the retrieved descriptions match with
the semantics of the input code. For example in Figure 1,
the retrieved reference is semantically different from the
ground truth, and the baseline model is negatively influenced to generate an inaccurate description.

1. Introduction
Generating accurate descriptions automatically for given
code snippets (code-to-text) can bring tremendous value for
1

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China 2 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
Correspondence to: Han Fu <fuhan.fh@alibaba-inc.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

Moreover, the accuracy of the retriever also plays a critical
1

