PairNet: Training with Observed Pairs to Estimate Individual Treatment Effect

Lokesh Nagalapatti * 1 Pranava Singhal * 1 Avishek Ghosh 1 Sunita Sarawagi 1

Abstract

recent research focus is harnessing this observational data to
train models for estimating treatment effects. For example,
a retail store might have millions of customers whose clickthrough rates on advertisements have been observed under
various settings of treatments such as discounts. Using such
datasets it may be possible to train a model to estimate the effect of discounts on click-through rate. However, a challenge
is that an individual is observed only under one treatment, and
there is no direct supervision of how an individual’s outcome
could change with changing treatment. Thus, one baseline
approach (Shalit et al., 2017; Nie et al., 2021; Shalit et al.,
2016; Chauhan et al., 2023; Curth & van der Schaar, 2021;
Zhang et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019) is to train a model to fit
outcomes separately for each treatment, and during inference
output the difference of predicted outcomes under the two
treatments. Another major line of work is to impute pseudooutcomes for missing treatments in the training dataset
and directly supervise outcome differences using them.
Imputation methods include meta-learners (Künzel et al.,
2019; Nie & Wager, 2021; Curth & van der Schaar, 2023),
matching methods (Stuart, 2010; Rosenbaum & Rubin,
1983; Iacus et al., 2012; Schwab et al., 2018; Kallus, 2020),
and generative models such as GANs (Bica et al., 2020;
Louizos et al., 2017). However, the success of such methods
depends on the quality of the inferred pseudo-outcomes.

Given a dataset of individuals each described by
a covariate vector, a treatment, and an observed
outcome on the treatment, the goal of the individual treatment effect (ITE) estimation task is to
predict outcome changes resulting from a change
in treatment. A fundamental challenge is that in
the observational data, a covariate’s outcome is
observed only under one treatment, whereas we
need to infer the difference in outcomes under two
different treatments. Several existing approaches
address this issue through training with inferred
pseudo-outcomes, but their success relies on the
quality of these pseudo-outcomes. We propose
PairNet, a novel ITE estimation training strategy
that minimizes losses over pairs of examples based
on their factual observed outcomes. Theoretical
analysis for binary treatments reveals that PairNet
is a consistent estimator of ITE risk, and achieves
smaller generalization error than baseline models.
Empirical comparison with thirteen existing
methods across eight benchmarks, covering both
discrete and continuous treatments, shows that
PairNet achieves significantly lower ITE error
compared to the baselines. Also, it is modelagnostic and easy to implement. We release the
code at the URL: https://github.com/
nlokeshiisc/pairnet_release.

We propose an alternative training strategy called PairNet,
that avoids committing to noisy supervision from pseudooutcomes and instead works only with observed factual
outcomes. Unlike all previous methods, PairNet imposes
a loss on the difference of outcomes of pairs of instances.
The pairs are chosen to be close in the covariate space while
having different treatments. We show that such paired
instance-based training more closely aligns with the ITE
estimation task than existing methods.

1. Introduction
Many applications in medicine, finance, and retail require
the ability to predict the change in outcome resulting from
changing actions or treatments. Classical methods relied on
expensive randomized control trial experiments, but with
the increasing availability of large observational datasets, a

We theoretically analyze Pair loss for binary treatments and
bound the ITE risk. These bounds, expressed in the form of
IPM distance between the provided training distribution and
a neighborhood distribution, are shown to be tighter when
compared to the baseline factual model, which relies on
the IPM distance between treated and control distributions.
Additionally, we establish that PairNet serves as a consistent
estimator of treatment effect.

*

1
Equal contribution
IIT Bombay.
Correspondence
to:
Lokesh Nagalapatti <nlokeshiisc@gmail.com>,
Pranava Singhal <pranava.psinghal@gmail.com>, Avishek
Ghosh
<avishek ghosh@iitb.ac.in>,
Sunita
Sarawagi
<sunita@iitb.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In summary, we make the following contributions:

1

