Convex and Bilevel Optimization for
Neural-Symbolic Inference and Learning

Charles Dickens 1 Changyu Gao 2 Connor Pryor 1 Stephen Wright 2 Lise Getoor 1

Abstract

isting NeSy methods, including DeepProblog (Manhaeve
et al., 2018; 2021), SATNet (Wang et al., 2019), logic tensor networks (Badreddine et al., 2022), and NeuPSL (Pryor
et al., 2023). NeSy-EBMs use neural network outputs to
parameterize an energy function and formulate an inference
problem that may be non-smooth and constrained. Thus,
predictions are not guaranteed to be a function of the inputs
and parameters with an explicit form or to be differentiable,
and traditional deep learning techniques are not directly applicable. Therefore, we equivalently formulate NeSy-EBM
learning as a bilevel problem. Moreover, to support firstorder gradient-based optimization, we propose a smoothing strategy that is novel to NeSy learning. Specifically,
we replace the constrained NeSy energy function with its
Moreau envelope. The augmented Lagrangian method for
equality-constrained minimization is then applied with the
new formulation.

We leverage convex and bilevel optimization techniques to develop a general gradient-based parameter learning framework for neural-symbolic
(NeSy) systems. We demonstrate our framework
with NeuPSL, a state-of-the-art NeSy architecture. To achieve this, we propose a smooth primal
and dual formulation of NeuPSL inference and
show learning gradients are functions of the optimal dual variables. Additionally, we develop
a dual block coordinate descent algorithm for
the new formulation that naturally exploits warmstarts. This leads to over 100× learning runtime
improvements over the current best NeuPSL inference method. Finally, we provide extensive
empirical evaluations across 8 datasets covering
a range of tasks and demonstrate our learning
framework achieves up to a 16% point prediction
performance improvement over alternative learning methods.

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed learning framework with NeuPSL. To ensure differentiability
and provide principled forms of gradients for learning, we
present a new formulation and regularization of NeuPSL
inference as a quadratic program. Moreover, we introduce a
dual block coordinate descent (dual BCD) inference algorithm for the quadratic program. The dual BCD algorithm
is the first NeuPSL inference method that produces optimal
dual variables for producing both optimal primal variables
and gradients for learning. Additionally, empirical results
demonstrate that dual BCD is able to leverage warm starts
effectively, thus improving learning runtime.

1. Introduction
The goal of neural-symbolic (NeSy) AI is a seamless integration of neural models for processing low-level data with
symbolic frameworks to reason over high-level symbolic
structures (d’Avila Garcez et al., 2002; 2009; 2019). In this
paper, we introduce a principled and general NeSy learning
framework that supports end-to-end neural and symbolic
parameter learning. Further, we propose a novel inference
algorithm and establish theoretical properties for a state-ofthe-art NeSy system that are crucial for learning.

Our key contributions are: (1) A bilevel formulation of the
NeSy-EBM learning problem that establishes a foundation
for applying smooth first-order gradient-based optimization
techniques; (2) A reformulation of NeuPSL inference that
is used to prove continuity properties and obtain explicit
forms of gradients for learning; (3) A dual BCD algorithm
for NeuPSL inference that naturally produces statistics necessary for computing gradients for learning and that fully
leverages warm-starts to improve learning runtime; (4) Two
parallelization strategies for dual BCD inference; and (5)
A thorough empirical evaluation demonstrating prediction
performance improvements on 8 different datasets and a
learning runtime speedup of up to 100×.

Our proposed learning framework builds upon NeSy energybased models (NeSy-EBMs) (Pryor et al., 2023), a general
class of NeSy systems that encompasses a variety of ex1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95060 2 Department of Computer
Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706.
Correspondence to: Charles Dickens <cadicken@ucsc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

