One for All: A Universal Generator for Concept Unlearnability
via Multi-Modal Alignment

Chaochao Chen 1 Jiaming Zhang 1 Yuyuan Li 2 1 Zhongxuan Han 1
Dataset-specific

Abstract

Dataset
Example
Perturbation
Unlearnable
Labels

The abundance of free internet data offers unprecedented opportunities for researchers and developers, but it also poses privacy risks. Utilizing data
without explicit consent raises critical challenges
in protecting personal information. Unlearnable
examples have emerged as a feasible protection
approach, which renders the data unlearnable, i.e.,
useless to third parties, by injecting imperceptible
perturbations. However, these perturbations only
exhibit unlearnable effects on either a particular
dataset or label-consistent scenarios, thereby lacking broad applicability. To address both issues
concurrently, we propose a universal perturbation generator that harnesses data with concept
unlearnability, thereby broadening the scope of
unlearnability beyond specific datasets or labels.
Specifically, we leverage multi-modal pre-trained
models to establish a connection between the data
concepts in a shared embedding space. This connection enables the information transformation
from image data to text concepts. Consequently,
we can align the text embedding using conceptwise discriminant loss, and render the data unlearnable. Extensive experiments conducted on
real-world datasets demonstrate the concept unlearnability, i.e., cross-dataset transferability and
label-agnostic utility, of our proposed unlearnable
examples, and their robustness against attacks.

Label-consistent

+
+

i1

i2

i3

Animal

i2

i3

Label-agnostic

+
+

i1

Animal

Cross-dataset Transferability
Concept
Unlearnability

+

i1

Animal

i2

i3

+

j1

j2

j3

j4

Dog

Figure 1. An illustration of the capability boundary of existing unlearnable examples and the desired capability of concept unlearnability, which exhibits both cross-dataset transferability (applicable
to a new dataset without retraining) and label-agnostic utility (applicable to data with different labels).

Liu et al., 2023b; 2021a; 2023a). However, this easy access
to vast amounts of data has raised concerns regarding privacy and data security. As data is increasingly used without
explicit consent from owners, protecting personal information becomes paramount. One emerging approach to address
this concern is generating unlearnable examples, which ensures that an unauthorized third-party model cannot retain
any useful information about the protected data (Huang
et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2023). Unlearnable
examples are generated by injecting imperceptible perturbations, making the data samples usable for humans but
unlearnable for models. The perturbation is typically errorminimizing noise that creates shortcut features which models can readily capture, thereby disregarding the data’s original features (Yu et al., 2022). Consequently, injecting this
perturbation renders the data sample unlearnable.

1. Introduction
In the past few decades, the abundance of free data available
on the internet has revolutionized the field of deep learning (Deng et al., 2009; Brown et al., 2020; Han et al., 2024;

However, the practical applicability of unlearnable examples
is limited. As shown in Figure 1, existing methods either
i) suffer from a lack of cross-dataset transferability (Ren
et al., 2023) or ii) are confounded by label-agnostic scenarios (Zhang et al., 2023). On the one hand, the majority of
perturbations are designed specifically for a target dataset,
resulting in a notable decrease in their unlearnability when
applied to other non-target datasets. The absence of crossdataset transferability necessitates generating perturbations,
i.e., retraining, for each dataset, posing challenges in real-

1
Colledge of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 School of Communication Engineering,
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence
to: Yuyuan Li <y2li@hdu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

