Graph Neural Networks Use Graphs When They Shouldn’t

Maya Bechler-Speicher 1 Ido Amos 2 Ran Gilad-Bachrach 3 Amir Globerson 1 4

Abstract

ically provided in the form of the graph-structure (i.e., its
adjacency matrix) as well as the features of its nodes.

Predictions over graphs play a crucial role in
various domains, including social networks and
medicine. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
emerged as the dominant approach for learning
on graph data. Although a graph-structure is
provided as input to the GNN, in some cases
the best solution can be obtained by ignoring it.
While GNNs have the ability to ignore the graphstructure in such cases, it is not clear that they
will. In this work, we show that GNNs actually
tend to overfit the given graph-structure. Namely,
they use it even when a better solution can be
obtained by ignoring it. We analyze the implicit
bias of gradient-descent learning of GNNs and
prove that when the ground truth function does
not use the graphs, GNNs are not guaranteed to
learn a solution that ignores the graph, even with
infinite data. We examine this phenomenon with
respect to different graph distributions and find
that regular graphs are more robust to this overfitting. We also prove that within the family of
regular graphs, GNNs are guaranteed to extrapolate when learning with gradient descent. Finally,
based on our empirical and theoretical findings,
we demonstrate on real-data how regular graphs
can be leveraged to reduce graph overfitting and
enhance performance.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017b;
Gilmer et al., 2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Hamilton
et al., 2017) have emerged as the leading approach for such
tasks. The fundamental idea behind GNNs is to use neuralnetworks that combine the node features with the graphstructure, in order to obtain useful graph representations.
This combination is done in an iterative manner, which
can capture complex properties of the graph and its node
features.
Although graph-structures are provided as input to the GNN,
in some cases the best solution can be obtained by ignoring
them. This may be due to these graph-structures being noninformative for the predictive task at hand. For instance,
some molecular properties such as the molar mass (i.e.,
weight) depend solely on the constituent atoms (node features), and not on the molecular structure. Another case is
when the provided graph-structure does contain valuable
information for the task, but the GNN cannot effectively exploit it. In such cases, better test accuracy may be achieved
by ignoring the graph-structure. In other cases, the node
features alone carry most of the information and the graphstructure conveys just a small added value. For example,
assume that node features contain the user’s zipcode. Then
the user’s income is highly predictable by that feature, and
their social structure will add little accuracy of this prediction.
Motivated by this observation, we ask a core question in
GNN learning: will GNNs work well in cases where it is
better to ignore the graph-structure or will they overfit the
graph-structure, resulting in reduced test accuracy? Answering this question has several far-reaching practical implications. To illustrate, if GNNs lack the ability to discern when
to disregard the graph, then providing a graph can actually
hurt the performance of GNNs, and thus one must carefully
re-think which graphs to provide a GNN. On the other hand,
if GNNs easily reject the structure when they fail to exploit
it, then practitioners should attempt to provide a graph, even
if their domain knowledge and expertise suggest that there
is only a small chance it is informative.

1. Introduction
Graph labeling problems arise in many domains, from social networks to molecular biology. In these settings, the
goal is to label a graph or its nodes given information about
the graph. The information for each graph instance is typ1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv Univer-

sity 2 School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University
3 Department of Bio-Medical Engineering and Edmond J. Safra
Center for Bioinformatics, Tel-Aviv University 4 Now also at
Google Research. Correspondence to: Maya Bechler-Speicher
<mayab4@mail.tau.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We consider the common setting of over-parameterized
GNNs. Namely, when the number of parameters the GNN
1

