InstructSpeech: Following Speech Editing Instructions via Large Language
Models
Rongjie Huang * 1 Ruofan Hu * 1 Yongqi Wang * 1 Zehan Wang 1 Xize Cheng 1 Ziyue Jiang 1 Zhenhui Ye 1
Dongchao Yang 2 Luping Liu 1 Peng Gao 3 Zhou Zhao 1

Abstract

which allows the user to edit the recorded speech without
degrading the quality and naturalness. However, existing
efforts (Tan et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023b) are quite limited due to 1) providing only a predefined set of content
operations such as inserting missed words, replacing mispronounced words, and removing unwanted speech, while
the acoustic attributes (e.g., timbre, volume, speed, emotion,
and style) have been relatively overlooked, and 2) requiring
a user-drawn mask, or per-example prompt to ensure that
iterative edits are applied only to the target region.

Instruction-guided speech editing aims to follow
the user’s natural language instruction to manipulate the semantic and acoustic attributes of a
speech. In this work, we construct triplet paired
data (instruction, input speech, output speech)
to alleviate data scarcity and train a multi-task
large language model named InstructSpeech. To
mitigate the challenges of accurately executing
user’s instructions, we 1) introduce the learned
task embeddings with a fine-tuned Flan-T5-XL to
guide the generation process towards the correct
generative task; 2) include an extensive and diverse set of speech editing and speech processing
tasks to enhance model capabilities; 3) investigate
multi-step reasoning for free-form semantic content editing; and 4) propose a hierarchical adapter
that effectively updates a small portion of parameters for generalization to new tasks. To assess
instruction speech editing in greater depth, we introduce a benchmark evaluation with contrastive
instruction-speech pretraining (CISP) to test the
speech quality and instruction-speech alignment
faithfulness. Experimental results demonstrate
that InstructSpeech achieves state-of-the-art results in eleven tasks, for the first time unlocking
the ability to edit the acoustic and semantic attributes of speech following a user’s instruction.

To address the aformentioned issues, instruction-based
speech editing aims to follow the user’s natural language
instruction to manipulate both semantic and acoustic attributes in speech, which benefits practicality as such guidance is more aligned with human intuition. For instance, a
user can provide a model with a speech sample and instruct
it to “Make it sound happy” or “Speed up pronunciation”,
effortlessly describing editing goals using natural language
instructions. Despite the significant benefits, achieving highquality instruction-guided speech inpainting remains challenging due to 1) data scarcity and 2) the complexity of
accurately executing instruction.
In this work, we propose InstructSpeech, introducing the
first speech editing model to follow human-written instructions. To mitigate the data scarcity, we generate triplet
paired data (instruction, input speech, output speech) by
combining large models pretrained on text and speech
modality. InstructSpeech casts conditional generation as
a sequence-to-sequence modeling task and trains a large
language model (LLM) using instruction and input speech
as conditions and generating output (edited) speech.

1

1. Introduction

To accurately process a variety of instructions, we 1) include
the learned task embeddings to steer the generation process
toward the correct generative task and fine-tune a Flan-T5XL to identify the task given any instruction, and 2) train
a LLM on an extensive and diverse set of tasks, including
both speech editing and speech processing tasks to enhance
its capabilities; 3) investigate the multi-step reasoning in
free-form semantic editing to alleviate the difficulties of
following human’s instruction; 4) propose a hierarchical
adapter and show that InstructSpeech can generalize to new

Speech editing (Borsos et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022) is a
widely-used application that millions engage with every day,
1

Zhejiang University 2 The Chinese University of Hong
Kong 3 Shanghai AI Lab. Correspondence to: Zhou Zhao
<ZhaoZhou@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Audio
samples
are
available
at
https://
InstructSpeech.github.io

1

