CATS: Enhancing Multivariate Time Series Forecasting by Constructing
Auxiliary Time Series as Exogenous Variables

Jiecheng Lu 1 Xu Han 2 Yan Sun 1 Shihao Yang 1

Abstract

tial issues: 1) The real-world benchmark datasets selected
for study may inherently possess weak inter-series relationships; 2) Previous models may lack the proper structure
needed to effectively capture inter-series relationships. This
inadequacy often leads to overfitting or fitting of wrong patterns. Moreover, in situations where intra-series (temporal)
relationships dominate, attempts to incorporate inter-series
information may inadvertently disrupt the learning of temporal dynamics, resulting in multivariate underperformance.
This highlights the need for models that can balance and
harness both types of relationships in MTSF.

For Multivariate Time Series Forecasting (MTSF),
recent deep learning applications show that univariate models frequently outperform multivariate ones. To address the deficiency in multivariate models, we introduce a method to Construct
Auxiliary Time Series (CATS) that functions
like a 2D temporal-contextual attention mechanism, which generates Auxiliary Time Series
(ATS) from Original Time Series (OTS) to effectively represent and incorporate inter-series
relationships for forecasting. Key principles of
ATS—continuity, sparsity, and variability—are
identified and implemented through different modules. Even with a basic 2-layer MLP as the core
predictor, CATS achieves state-of-the-art, significantly reducing complexity and parameters compared to previous multivariate models, marking it
as an efficient and transferable MTSF solution.

In this paper, we introduce an approach to effectively capture the two types of relationships in MTSF: Constructing
Auxiliary Time Series (CATS). This approach empowers a
time series predictor to handle diverse strengths of multivariate relationships without altering its model architecture,
even when the predictor is a structurally simple univariate
model. CATS operates by generating Auxiliary Time Series
(ATS) based on the Original Time Series (OTS), serving as
exogenous variables to represent the inter-series relationships. By predicting these exogenous time series, CATS
finds and incorporates multivariate information to the prediction of OTS, thereby boosting overall performance.

1. Introduction
Time series forecasting plays a pivotal role in domains like
finance, health, and traffic, focusing on predicting future
data based on historical records (Kaastra & Boyd, 1996;
Nihan & Holmesland, 1980; Sun & Yang, 2023; Ma et al.,
2022). The complexity of multivariate time series forecasting (MTSF) increases due to the need for understanding
dependencies among multiple series. Effectively modeling
these relationships is key to overcoming challenges such as
overfitting, thus enhancing the reliability of predictions.

We define ATS as the intermediary time series that are derived from the OTS input, reside in the same temporal domain as the original series. ATS can refine the univariate
forecasting results by incorporating inter-series information.
There are three key principles of ATS: continuity, sparsity,
and variability. These principles are crucial when the interseries relationships are weak, complex, or challenging to
learn, and allow the model to adaptively adjust itself to suit
datasets with varied characteristics. ATS are constructed
with these three principles using specific neural network
structures, gating operations, and loss terms. This construction allows the ATS to effectively extract and represent
multivariate relationships.

Recent research in MTSF with deep learning methods reveals a counter-intuitive trend: univariate models, which
ignore inter-series relationships, often outperform their multivariate counterparts (Zeng et al., 2023; Nie et al., 2022;
Lu et al., 2024). This phenomenon suggests two poten1

The key contributions of this paper can be summarized as:

2

Georgia Institute of Technology Amazon Web Services. Correspondence to: Shihao Yang <shihao.yang@isye.gatech.edu>.

1) We introduce the CATS approach, which constructs ATS
based on the multivariate OTS and empowers time series
predictors to efficiently capture inter-series relationships
through a 2D attention-like mechanism.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

