ATraDiff: Accelerating Online Reinforcement Learning with Imaginary
Trajectories

Qianlan Yang 1 Yu-Xiong Wang 1

Abstract
Training autonomous agents with sparse rewards
is a long-standing problem in online reinforcement learning (RL), due to low data efficiency.
Prior work overcomes this challenge by extracting
useful knowledge from offline data, often accomplished through the learning of action distribution
from offline data and utilizing the learned distribution to facilitate online RL. However, since
the offline data are given and fixed, the extracted
knowledge is inherently limited, making it difficult to generalize to new tasks. We propose
a novel approach that leverages offline data to
learn a generative diffusion model, coined as
Adaptive Trajectory Diffuser (ATraDiff). This
model generates synthetic trajectories, serving
as a form of data augmentation and consequently
enhancing the performance of online RL methods. The key strength of our diffuser lies in
its adaptability, allowing it to effectively handle
varying trajectory lengths and mitigate distribution shifts between online and offline data. Because of its simplicity, ATraDiff seamlessly integrates with a wide spectrum of RL methods.
Empirical evaluation shows that ATraDiff consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance
across a variety of environments, with particularly pronounced improvements in complicated
settings. Our code and demo video are available
at https://atradiff.github.io.

Action

State

ATraDiff
Trajectory

Replay Buffer
Transition

Normalized Return

100

80

Reward and
New State

w/o ATraDiff
w/ ATraDiff

60

40

20

0

SAC

RLPD

SPiRe

Algorithms

PARROT

Figure 1. Illustration and performance showcase of our ATraDiff.
ATraDiff can seamlessly integrate with a wide range of RL methods
and consistently improve their performance, by augmenting the
replay buffer with synthesized trajectories. Top: Overview of
online RL with ATraDiff. Bottom: Performance comparison of
RL methods with and without ATraDiff in D4RL Kitchen.

energy optimization (Specht & Madlener, 2023). Despite
its impressive performance, RL often requires extensive
online interactions with the environment, which can be prohibitively costly in practice. Such downside of RL is aggravated by the fact that in real-world scenarios, environments
are often characterized by sparse rewards, which further
necessitates an exceptionally large number of samples for
effective exploration. For example, when manipulating a
robotic arm to move an item, oftentimes the only reward
feedback given is at the success moment of the task, which
may take hundreds of steps to obtain. Consequently, a persistent challenge in RL is addressing the high sample costs,
particularly in contexts with sparse rewards.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great promise
in various applications, such as autonomous driving (Wang
et al., 2019), chip design (Mirhoseini et al., 2021), and
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to:
Qianlan Yang <qianlan2@illinois.edu>.

One prevalent solution to this challenge is leveraging
offline data, by directly learning policies from offline
data (Kostrikov et al., 2022; Ball et al., 2023) or extracting experiences that can enhance online training (Pertsch
et al., 2020), especially in the context of exploration. How-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

