Tuning-Free Stochastic Optimization

Ahmed Khaled 1 Chi Jin 1

Abstract

costly, and for large models might prove intractable (Black
et al., 2022). As a result, researchers often resort to using a
well-known optimizer like Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) or
AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with widely used or
default hyperparameters. For example, GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020), BLOOM (Workshop et al., 2022), LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a), and LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023b)
all use either Adam or AdamW with identical momentum
parameters and similar training recipes.

Large-scale machine learning problems make the
cost of hyperparameter tuning ever more prohibitive. This creates a need for algorithms that
can tune themselves on-the-fly. We formalize the
notion of “tuning-free” algorithms that can match
the performance of optimally-tuned optimization
algorithms up to polylogarithmic factors given
only loose hints on the relevant problem parameters. We consider in particular algorithms that can
match optimally-tuned Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). When the domain of optimization is
bounded, we show tuning-free matching of SGD
is possible and achieved by several existing algorithms. We prove that for the task of minimizing
a convex and smooth or Lipschitz function over
an unbounded domain, tuning-free optimization
is impossible. We discuss conditions under which
tuning-free optimization is possible even over unbounded domains. In particular, we show that the
recently proposed DoG and DoWG algorithms
are tuning-free when the noise distribution is sufficiently well-behaved. For the task of finding a
stationary point of a smooth and potentially nonconvex function, we give a variant of SGD that
matches the best-known high-probability convergence rate for tuned SGD at only an additional
polylogarithmic cost. However, we also give an
impossibility result that shows no algorithm can
hope to match the optimal expected convergence
rate for tuned SGD with high probability.

This situation presents an immense opportunity for algorithms that can tune hyperparameters on-the-fly. Yet such
algorithms and their limits are still poorly understood in the
setting of stochastic optimization. Let us make our setting
more specific. We consider the minimization problem
min f (x),

x∈X

(OPT)

where f : X → R is differentiable and lower bounded by
f∗ . We assume that we have access to (stochastic) gradients
g(x) that satisfy certain regularity conditions that we shall
make precise later.
Our main objects of study are tuning-free algorithms. To
make this notion more precise, let A be an optimization algorithm that takes in n problem parameters a =
(a1 , a2 , . . . , an ) and after T (stochastic) gradient accesses
returns a point x such that with high probability
f (x) − f∗ ≤ ErrorA (f, a, T ).

(1)

The function ErrorA characterizes how well the algorithm
A minimizes the function f in T steps given the supplied
parameters. Let a∗ = a∗ (f, T ) denote the set of parameters
that minimizes the right hand side of equation (1) for a
specific function f and number of steps T . In order for an
algorithm to find a∗ (f, T ), it must start somewhere. We
assume that we can easily find lower and upper bounds
on the optimal parameters: two sets a and a such that for
i = 1, 2, . . . , n we have

1. Introduction
The hyperparameters we supply to an optimization algorithm can have a significant effect on the runtime of the
algorithm and the quality of the final model (Yang et al.,
2021; Sivaprasad et al., 2020). Yet hyperparameter tuning is

ai ≤ a∗i ≤ ai .

1

Such hints on problem parameters can often be easily estimated in practice, and are a much easier ask than the optimal
parameters. To be a tuning-free version of A, an algorithm
B has to approximately match the performance of A with
optimally tuned parameters given those hints, a definition
we make rigorous next.

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Ahmed
Khaled <ahmed.khaled@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

