Audio Flamingo: A Novel Audio Language Model with Few-Shot Learning and
Dialogue Abilities

Zhifeng Kong 1 Arushi Goel 1 Rohan Badlani 1 Wei Ping 1 Rafael Valle 1 Bryan Catanzaro 1

Abstract

and iii) the ability to quickly adapt to unseen tasks without fine-tuning, for example, through in-context learning
(Alayrac et al., 2022) and retrieval augmented generation
(Lewis et al., 2020).

Augmenting large language models (LLMs) to
understand audio – including non-speech sounds
and non-verbal speech – is critically important
for diverse real-world applications of LLMs. In
this paper, we propose Audio Flamingo, a novel
audio language model with 1) strong audio understanding abilities, 2) the ability to quickly adapt to
unseen tasks via in-context learning and retrieval,
and 3) strong multi-turn dialogue abilities. We
introduce a series of training techniques, architecture design, and data strategies to enhance our
model with these abilities. Extensive evaluations
across various audio understanding tasks confirm
the efficacy of our method, setting new state-ofthe-art benchmarks. Our demo website is https:
//audioflamingo.github.io/ and the
code is open-sourced at https://github.
com/NVIDIA/audio-flamingo.

Our contribution to expand LLM’s ability to understand
sound is called Audio Flamingo: a novel audio language
model that supports in-context learning (ICL), retrieval augmented generation (RAG), and multi-turn dialogues. It
achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple audio understanding tasks.
Expanding LLM’s ability to understand sound is a challenging task. The first challenge is extracting features from
variable-length audio, and conditioning the LM on the audio
features. While prior works have designed representations
for audio of any length (Wu et al., 2023), they can lose
temporal information. In this work, we introduce an audio
feature extractor with sliding window based on Elizalde
et al. (2023b), which we believe to capture temporal information better. To condition the LM on audio inputs,
previous models prepended language tokens with audio tokens (Deshmukh et al., 2023; Chu et al., 2023; Tang et al.,
2023a). This approach may have excessive overhead especially for long audio, as the complexity is quadratic with
respect to the number of audio tokens. In contrast, we use
cross attentions to fuse audio inputs into the LM in a similar
way as Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022). In our approach
the complexity is linear in the number of audio tokens, thus
making Audio Flamingo able to generalize to many audio
inputs efficiently.

1. Introduction
The ability to understand sound is unarguably important and
necessary for an agent to interact with the world. While
large language models (LLMs) have shown an impressive
ability to understand and reason about the world through
text, their understanding of sound remains limited to transcriptions of speech (Lyu et al., 2023), thus making LLMs
agnostic to important information in non-speech sounds and
non-verbal speech. Even though recent contributions have
improved their ability to understand sound (Gong et al.,
2023c; Lyu et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023; Deshmukh
et al., 2023; Chu et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023a), there
exists no model that combines: i) strong audio understanding ability on various tasks (Deshmukh et al., 2023), ii) the
ability to execute multi-turn dialogues (Duan et al., 2023),

The second challenge is collecting and training on highly
heterogeneous data. Prior works have collected and combined different datasets for training (Doh et al., 2023; Deshmukh et al., 2023; Chu et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2023c). We
follow their approach and curate a heterogeneous dataset
with approximately 5.9 million audio-text pairs. Prior works
have also designed different training curriculum, such as
training on close-ended tasks first followed by open-ended
tasks (Gong et al., 2023c; Tang et al., 2023a). However,
these result in a trade-off between close-ended and openended tasks, limiting the overall performance (Deshmukh
et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023a). We use a different approach
based on a widely adopted and stable method to train LLMs

1

NVIDIA, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Zhifeng Kong
<zkong@nvidia.com>, Wei Ping <wping@nvidia.com>,
Rafael Valle <rafaelvalle@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright
2024 by the author(s).

1

