Theory of Consistency Diffusion Models: Distribution Estimation
Meets Fast Sampling

Zehao Dou 1 Minshuo Chen 2 Mengdi Wang 2 Zhuoran Yang 1

Abstract

Specifically, diffusion models utilize the forward and backward processes to generate new samples. In the forward
process, a clean data point is progressively contaminated
by random noise, while the backward process attempts to
remove the noise iteratively (typically taking 500 to 1000
steps (Song & Ermon, 2019)) with the help of a specific
type of neural network known as a score neural network.

Diffusion models have revolutionized various application domains, including computer vision and
audio generation. Despite the state-of-the-art performance, diffusion models are known for their
slow sample generation due to the extensive number of steps involved. In response, consistency
models have been developed to merge multiple
steps in the sampling process, thereby significantly boosting the speed of sample generation
without compromising quality. This paper contributes towards the first statistical theory for consistency models, formulating their training as a
distribution discrepancy minimization problem.
Our analysis yields statistical estimation rates
based on the Wasserstein distance for consistency
models, matching those of vanilla diffusion models. Additionally, our results encompass the training of consistency models through both distillation and isolation methods, demystifying their
underlying advantage.

1

Due to the enormous size of the score neural network, e.g.,
the smallest stable diffusion model uses a network of more
than 890M parameters (Rombach et al., 2022), the sample generation speed of diffusion models is limited (Song
et al., 2023), compared to Generative Adversarial Networks
(Goodfellow et al., 2020) and AutoEncoders (Kingma et al.,
2019). To overcome this shortcoming, there are extensive
methodological studies aiming to accelerate diffusion models. Notable methods include using stride in sampling to
reduce the number of backward steps (Nichol & Dhariwal,
2021; Song & Ermon, 2020; Lu et al., 2022), changing
the backward process to a deterministic probabilistic flow
(Song et al., 2020a; Karras et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022),
and utilizing pretrained variational autoencoders to reduce
the data dimensionality before applying diffusion models
(Rombach et al., 2022). These methods lead to sampling
speed acceleration, but may compromise the quality of the
generated samples.

Introduction

Diffusion models have reached state-of-the-art performance
in cross-domain applications, including computer vision
(Song & Ermon, 2019; Dathathri et al., 2019; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2020c), audio generation (Kong et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020), language generation (Li et al.,
2022; Yu et al., 2022; Lovelace et al., 2022), reinforcement
learning and control (Pearce et al., 2023; Chi et al., 2023;
Hansen-Estruch et al., 2023; Reuss et al., 2023), as well as
computational biology (Lee et al., 2022c; Luo et al., 2022;
Gruver et al., 2023). These break-through performances
are enabled by the unique design in the diffusion models.

More recently, consistency models (Song et al., 2023)
achieve a significant sampling speed boost, while maintaining the high quality in generated samples. Roughly
speaking, consistency models merge a large number of consecutive steps in the original backward process by additionally training a consistency network via distillation or
isolation. The distillation method requires a pretrained diffusion model, yet isolation lifts this requirement. In either
ways, it suffices to deploy the consistency model for very
few times or even a single time to generate a new sample.
Despite the empirical success, theoretical underpinnings of
consistency models are limited. In particular, the following
question is largely open:

1

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University,
New Haven, US 2 Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, US. Correspondence to: Zehao Dou
<zehao.dou@yale.edu>.

What is the statistical error rate of consistency models for
estimating the data distribution? How does it compare to
the vanilla diffusion models?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

