Federated Offline Reinforcement Learning:
Collaborative Single-Policy Coverage Suffices

Jiin Woo 1 Laixi Shi 2 Gauri Joshi 1 Yuejie Chi 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Offline RL (Levine et al., 2020), also known as batch RL, addresses the challenge of learning a near-optimal policy using
offline datasets collected a priori, without further interactions with an environment. Fueled by the cost-effectiveness
of utilizing pre-collected datasets compared to real-time
explorations, offline RL has received increasing attention.
However, the performance of offline RL crucially depends
on the quality of offline datasets due to the lack of additional interactions with the environment, where the quality
is determined by how thoroughly the state-action space is
explored during data collection.

Offline reinforcement learning (RL), which seeks
to learn an optimal policy using offline data, has
garnered significant interest due to its potential
in critical applications where online data collection is infeasible or expensive. This work explores the benefit of federated learning for offline
RL, aiming at collaboratively leveraging offline
datasets at multiple agents. Focusing on finitehorizon episodic tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs), we design FedLCB-Q, a variant
of the popular model-free Q-learning algorithm
tailored for federated offline RL. FedLCB-Q updates local Q-functions at agents with novel learning rate schedules and aggregates them at a central server using importance averaging and a carefully designed pessimistic penalty term. Our sample complexity analysis reveals that, with appropriately chosen parameters and synchronization
schedules, FedLCB-Q achieves linear speedup
in terms of the number of agents without requiring high-quality datasets at individual agents, as
long as the local datasets collectively cover the
state-action space visited by the optimal policy,
highlighting the power of collaboration in the federated setting. In fact, the sample complexity almost matches that of the single-agent counterpart,
as if all the data are stored at a central location, up
to polynomial factors of the horizon length. Furthermore, FedLCB-Q is communication-efficient,
where the number of communication rounds is
only linear with respect to the horizon length up
to logarithmic factors.

Encouragingly, recent research (Rashidinejad et al., 2021;
Shi et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2024b) indicates that being more conservative on unseen state-action
pairs, known as the principle of pessimism, enables learning
of a near-optimal policy even with partial coverage of the
state-action space, as long as the distribution of datasets
encompasses the trajectory of the optimal policy. However,
acquiring high-quality datasets that have good coverage
of the optimal policy poses challenges because it requires
the state-action visitation distribution induced by a behavior policy employed for data collection to be very close to
the optimal policy. Alternatively, multiple datasets can be
merged into one dataset to supplement insufficient coverage of one other, but this may be impractical when offline
datasets are scattered and cannot be easily shared due to
privacy and communication constraints.
Federated offline RL. Driven by the need to harvest multiple datasets to address insufficient coverage, there is a
growing interest in implementing offline RL in a federated
manner without the need to share datasets (Zhou et al., 2024;
Woo et al., 2023; Khodadadian et al., 2022). For modelbased RL, a study has proposed a federated variant of pessimistic value iteration (Zhou et al., 2024), which requires
sharing of model estimates. On the other hand, for modelfree RL, while Woo et al. (2023) introduced a federated Qlearning algorithm that achieves linear speedup with collaborative coverage of agents, due to the absence of pessimism,
it still carries the risk of overestimation on state-action pairs
that are insufficiently covered by the agents. Indeed, it remains unknown whether the principle of pessimism can be

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 2 Department of
Computing Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, CA 91125, USA. Correspondence to: Jiin Woo <jiinw@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

