Entropy-Reinforced Planning with Large Language Models for Drug Discovery

Xuefeng Liu 1 2 * Chih-chan Tien 1 2 * Peng Ding 1 Songhao Jiang 1 2 Rick L. Stevens 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
The emergence and rapid evolution of COVID-19 (Yuki
et al., 2020; Hadj Hassine, 2022) has created an urgent need
for the expedited discovery of effective drugs—a process in
which approaches based on large language models (LLM S)
have begun to play a pivotal role (Frey et al., 2023; Bagal
et al., 2021).

The objective of drug discovery is to identify
chemical compounds that possess specific pharmaceutical properties toward a binding target. Existing large language models (LLM S) can achieve
high token matching scores in terms of likelihood
for molecule generation. However, relying solely
on LLM decoding often results in the generation of molecules that are either invalid due to
a single misused token, or suboptimal due to unbalanced exploration and exploitation as a consequence of the LLM’s prior experience. Here
we propose ERP, Entropy-Reinforced Planning
for Transformer Decoding, which employs an
entropy-reinforced planning algorithm to enhance
the Transformer decoding process and strike a balance between exploitation and exploration. ERP
aims to achieve improvements in multiple properties compared to direct sampling from the Transformer. We evaluated ERP on the SARS-CoV2 virus (3CLPro) and human cancer cell target
protein (RTCB) benchmarks and demonstrated
that, in both benchmarks, ERP consistently outperforms the current state-of-the-art algorithm by
1-5 percent, and baselines by 5-10 percent, respectively. Moreover, such improvement is robust across Transformer models trained with different objectives. Finally, to further illustrate
the capabilities of ERP, we tested our algorithm
on three code generation benchmarks and outperformed the current state-of-the-art approach as
well. Our code is publicly available at: https:
//github.com/xuefeng-cs/ERP.

Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and Transformer-based
LLMs such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Achiam et al., 2023) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)
have shown remarkable success in diverse fields, from
robotics (Vemprala et al., 2023) to education (Tang et al.,
2023) and speech recognition (Yang et al., 2021). However,
LLM applications in drug discovery and molecular design
have not yet achieved comparable levels of performance—
shortcomings that we attribute to the challenges of generating molecular sequences that both are valid (difficult given
that even a single erroneous token can lead to complete
failure) and meet multiple other criteria simultaneously.
A consequence of these challenges is that existing LLMbased molecular discovery algorithms (Frey et al., 2023;
Bagal et al., 2021) must sample inordinate numbers of
molecular structures. The primary factor contributing to
this sample inefficiency is the use of the Transformer beam
search algorithm. While often an effective heuristic for text
generation (Meister et al., 2020), beam search has two major
deficiencies when used to generate molecular structures: it
can neither terminate generation early if it detects that the
molecular sequence being produced is likely to fail, nor
guide the generation process toward structures with superior
pharmaceutical properties.
Meanwhile, planning algorithms like Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) have shown promise for decision making problems. Since the introduction of the Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees (UCT) method (Kocsis and
Szepesvári, 2006), MCTS has demonstrated exceptional
performance in various domains, notably AlphaGo (Silver
et al., 2017), where MCTS was integrated with deep neural
networks (DNNs). However, when applied to molecular design it still incurs a non-trivial search cost on unpromising
molecules and thus also suffers from sample inefficiency.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA 2 Healin-AI LLC, Chicago,
IL, USA 3 Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Xuefeng Liu <xuefeng@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Given the vast search space for molecular sequences, rely1

