NaturalSpeech 3: Zero-Shot Speech Synthesis
with Factorized Codec and Diffusion Models
Zeqian Ju * 1 2 Yuancheng Wang * 3 Kai Shen * 4 2 Xu Tan * 2 Detai Xin 2 5 Dongchao Yang 2 Yanqing Liu 2
Yichong Leng 2 Kaitao Song 2 Siliang Tang 4 Zhizheng Wu 3 Tao Qin 2 Xiang-Yang Li 1 Wei Ye 6
Shikun Zhang 6 Jiang Bian 2 Lei He 2 Jinyu Li 2 Sheng Zhao 2

Abstract

IC In-Context Learning
𝒛𝒑/𝒄/𝒅 Prosody/Content/Detail Codes
𝒉𝒕 Timbre Embedding

While recent large-scale text-to-speech (TTS)
models have achieved significant progress, they
still fall shorts in speech quality, similarity, and
prosody. Considering that speech intricately
encompasses various attributes (e.g., content,
prosody, timbre, and acoustic details) that pose
significant challenges for generation, a natural
idea is to factorize speech into individual subspaces representing different attributes and generate them individually. Motivated by it, we propose
NaturalSpeech 3, a TTS system with novel factorized diffusion models to generate natural speech
in a zero-shot way. Specifically, 1) we design
a neural codec with factorized vector quantization (FVQ) to disentangle speech waveform into
subspaces of content, prosody, timbre, and acoustic details; 2) we propose a factorized diffusion
model, which generates attributes in each subspace following its corresponding prompt. With
this factorization design, NaturalSpeech 3 can
effectively and efficiently model the intricate
speech with disentangled subspaces in a divideand-conquer way. Experimental results show that
NaturalSpeech 3 outperforms the state-of-the-art
TTS systems on quality, similarity, prosody, and
intelligibility.

IC

Factorized Diffusion
Detail Diffusion

Speech 𝒙

Codec Decoder

Content Diffusion
Prosody Diffusion

𝒛𝒑 𝒛𝒄 𝒛𝒅

𝒉𝒕

Duration Diffusion
Phoneme Encoder

Text 𝒚

Codec Encoder
Speech 𝒙

Figure 1: The overview of NaturalSpeech 3, with a neural
speech codec for attribute factorization and a factorized
diffusion model.

1. Introduction
In recent years, significant advancements have been
achieved in text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis. Traditional
TTS systems (Wang et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018; Ren
et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2022) are typically trained on limited
datasets recorded in studios, and thus fail to support highquality zero-shot speech synthesis. Recent works (Shen
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Jiang et al., 2023c) have
made considerable progress for zero-shot TTS by largely
scaling up both the corpus and the model sizes. However,
the synthesis results of these large-scale TTS systems are
not satisfactory in terms of voice quality, similarity, and
prosody.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research & Microsoft Azure 3 The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 Zhejiang University 5 The University of Tokyo 6 Peking University. Correspondence to: Xu Tan <xuta@microsoft.com>, Zhizheng Wu
<wuzhizheng@cuhk.edu.cn>.

The challenges of inferior results stem from the intricate
information embedded in speech, since speech encompasses
numerous attributes, such as content, prosody, timbre, and
acoustic detail. Previous works using raw waveform (Kim
et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2022) and mel-spectrogram (Wang
et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018; Popov et al., 2021; Jiang
et al., 2023c; Le et al., 2023) as data representations suffer
from these intricate complexities during speech generation.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

