Offline Imitation from Observation via
Primal Wasserstein State Occupancy Matching

Kai Yan 1 Alexander G. Schwing 1 Yu-Xiong Wang 1

Abstract

data rather than an online interaction which is often costly
to conduct (e.g., autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021)).
Even without online interaction, methods achieve high sample efficiency. Such methods, however, require reward labels that are often missing when data are collected in the
wild (Chang et al., 2020). In addition, an informative reward
is expensive to obtain for many tasks, such as robotic manipulation, as it requires a carefully hand-crafted design (Yu
et al., 2019). To bypass the need for reward labels, offline
Imitation Learning (IL) has prevailed (Hakhamaneshi et al.,
2022; Ho & Ermon, 2016; Kim et al., 2022a). It enables the
agent to learn from existing demonstrations without reward
labels. However, just like reward labels, expert demonstrations are also expensive and often scarce, as they need to
be recollected repeatedly for every task of interest. Among
different types of expert data shortages, there is one widely
studied type: offline Learning from Observations (LfO). In
LfO, only the expert state, instead of both state and action, is
recorded. This setting is useful when learning from experts
with different embodiment (Ma et al., 2022) or from video
demonstrations (Chen et al., 2021a), where the expert action
is either not applicable or not available.

In real-world scenarios, arbitrary interactions with
the environment can often be costly, and actions
of expert demonstrations are not always available. To reduce the need for both, offline Learning from Observations (LfO) is extensively studied: the agent learns to solve a task given only
expert states and task-agnostic non-expert stateaction pairs. The state-of-the-art DIstribution
Correction Estimation (DICE) methods, as exemplified by SMODICE, minimize the state occupancy divergence between the learner’s and
empirical expert policies. However, such methods are limited to either f -divergences (KL and
χ2 ) or Wasserstein distance with Rubinstein duality, the latter of which constrains the underlying distance metric crucial to the performance of
Wasserstein-based solutions. To enable more flexible distance metrics, we propose Primal Wasserstein DICE (PW-DICE). It minimizes the primal Wasserstein distance between the learner
and expert state occupancies and leverages a contrastively learned distance metric. Theoretically,
our framework is a generalization of SMODICE,
and is the first work that unifies f -divergence and
Wasserstein minimization. Empirically, we find
that PW-DICE improves upon several state-ofthe-art methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/KaiYan289/PW-DICE.

Many methods have thus been proposed in offline LfO,
including inverse RL (Zolna et al., 2020; Torabi et al.,
2019; Kostrikov et al., 2019), similarity-based reward labeling (Sermanet et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2021a), and action
pseudo-labeling (Torabi et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2019).
The state-of-the-art solution to LfO is the family of DIstribution Correction Estimation (DICE) methods, which are
LobsDICE (Kim et al., 2022b) and SMODICE (Ma et al.,
2022): both methods perform a convex optimization in the
dual space to minimize the f -divergence of the state occupancy (visitation frequency) between the learner and the
empirical expert policies approximated from the dataset. Notably, DICE methods mostly focus on f -divergences (Kim
et al., 2022b; Ma et al., 2022; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Kim
et al., 2022a) (mainly KL-divergence and χ2 -divergence;
see Appendix B for definition), metrics that ignore some underlying geometric properties of the distributions (Stanczuk
et al., 2021). While there is a DICE variant, SoftDICE (Sun
et al., 2021), that introduces the Wasserstein distance to
DICE methods, it adopts the Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality (Kantorovich & Rubinstein, 1958; Peyré & Cuturi,

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advances in offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Chen et al., 2021b;
Kostrikov et al., 2022a;b): sequential decision-making problems are addressed with independently collected interaction
1

The Grainger College of Engineering, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA. Correspondence to:
Kai Yan <kaiyan3@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

