Fast Timing-Conditioned Latent Audio Diffusion

Zach Evans 1 CJ Carr 1 Josiah Taylor 1 Scott H. Hawley 2 Jordi Pons 1

Abstract

Another challenge with audio diffusion models is that those
are usually trained to generate fixed-size outputs (Huang
et al., 2023a), e.g., a model trained on 30 sec audio chunks
will generate 30 sec outputs. This is an issue when training
on and trying to generate audio of varying lengths, as is the
case when generating full songs or sound effects. Hence
audio diffusion models are commonly trained on randomly
cropped chunks from longer audios, cropped or padded to fit
the diffusion model’s training length. With music, e.g., this
causes the model to generate arbitrary sections of a song,
which may start or end in the middle of a musical phrase.

Generating long-form 44.1kHz stereo audio from
text prompts can be computationally demanding.
Further, most previous works do not tackle that
music and sound effects naturally vary in their
duration. Our research focuses on the efficient
generation of long-form, variable-length stereo
music and sounds at 44.1kHz using text prompts
with a generative model. Stable Audio is based
on latent diffusion, with its latent defined by a
fully-convolutional variational autoencoder. It is
conditioned on text prompts as well as timing
embeddings, allowing for fine control over both
the content and length of the generated music
and sounds. Stable Audio is capable of rendering stereo signals of up to 95 sec at 44.1kHz in
8 sec on an A100 GPU. Despite its compute efficiency and fast inference, it is one of the best in
two public text-to-music and -audio benchmarks
and, differently from state-of-the-art models, can
generate music with structure and stereo sounds.

Stable Audio is based on a latent diffusion model for audio
conditioned on a text prompt as well as timing embeddings,
allowing for control over the content and length of the generated music and sound effects. This additional timing
conditioning allows us to generate audio of a specified (variable) length up to the training window length. Due to the
compute efficient nature of latent diffusion modeling, it can
generate long-form content in short inference times. It can
render up to 95 sec (our training window length) of stereo
audio at 44.1kHz in 8 sec on an A100 GPU (40GB VRAM).
The commonly used metrics for generative audio are designed to evaluate short-form mono signals at 16kHz (Kilgour et al., 2018). Yet, our work focuses on generating longform full-band stereo signals. We propose: (i) a Fréchet Distance based on OpenL3 embeddings (Cramer et al., 2019)
to evaluate the plausibility of the generated long-form fullband stereo signals, (ii) a Kullback-Leibler divergence to
evaluate the semantic correspondence between lengthy generated and reference audios up to 32kHz, and (iii) a CLAP
score to evaluate how long-form full-band stereo audios adhere to the given text prompt. We also conduct a qualitative
study, assessing audio quality and text alignment, while also
pioneering the assessment of musicality, stereo correctness,
and musical structure. We show that Stable Audio can obtain state-of-the-art results on long-form full-band stereo
music and sound effects generation from text and timing
inputs. We also show that, differently from previous works,
Stable Audio is also capable to generate structured music
(with intro, development, outro) and stereo sound effects.

1. Introduction
The introduction of diffusion-based generative models (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) has lead to rapid
improvements in the quality and controllability of generated
images (Podell et al., 2023), video (Blattmann et al., 2023),
and audio (Rouard & Hadjeres, 2021; Liu et al., 2023a).
One challenge is that diffusion models working within the
raw signal space tend to be computationally demanding
during both training and inference. Diffusion models working in the latent space of a pre-trained autoencoder, termed
“latent diffusion models” (Rombach et al., 2022), are significantly more compute efficient. Working with a heavily
downsampled latent representation of audio allows for much
faster inference times compared to raw audio, and also allows generating long-form audio (e.g., 95 sec).
1
Stability AI. 2 Belmont University, work done while at Stability
AI. Correspondence to: Zach Evans <zach@stability.ai>.

Code to reproduce our model/metrics and demos is online1 .

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Model: https://github.com/Stability-AI/stable-audio-tools.
Metrics: https://github.com/Stability-AI/stable-audio-metrics.

1

