Momentor: Advancing Video Large Language Model
with Fine-Grained Temporal Reasoning

Long Qian 1 Juncheng Li 1 Yu Wu 2 Yaobo Ye 1 Hao Fei 3 Tat-Seng Chua 3 Yueting Zhuang 1 Siliang Tang 1
Please watch the segment of 23.0s to 46.2s . Could you please tell me

Abstract

why the woman is crying and pinpoint the corresponding timestamps?

Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate
remarkable proficiency in comprehending and
handling text-based tasks. Many efforts are being made to transfer these attributes to video
modality, which are termed Video-LLMs. However, existing Video-LLMs can only capture
the coarse-grained semantics and are unable
to effectively handle tasks related to comprehension or localization of specific video segments. In light of these challenges, we propose Momentor, a Video-LLM capable of accomplishing fine-grained temporal understanding
tasks. To support the training of Momentor, we
design an automatic data generation engine to
construct Moment-10M, a large-scale video instruction dataset with segment-level instruction
data. We train Momentor on Moment-10M,
enabling it to perform segment-level reasoning
and localization. Zero-shot evaluations on several tasks demonstrate that Momentor excels
in fine-grained temporally grounded comprehension and localization. Our project is available at
https://github.com/DCDmllm/Momentor.

The woman is crying because she won a swimming event (0s ~ 23.0s)
at the Paralympic Games (120.1s ~ 124.2s) .

Figure 1. Momentor can perform comprehensive reasoning
across multiple segments in a video.

these frames separately, and employ a projection layer (e.g.
a linear layer or Q-Former (Li et al., 2023a)) to adapt the
visual features to the feature space of an open-source LLM
((Touvron et al., 2023), (Chiang et al., 2023)). By training on video-level captioning and QA tasks, they establish
coarse-grained multimodal feature alignment and acquire
the capability of instruction following.
Despite being effective, existing Video-LLMs exhibit two
limitations: (1) Lack of effective temporal representation.
Existing models encode each sampled frame independently
and perform feature projection without retaining precise
temporal information in visual features. They lack an effective temporal representation for encoding time positions at
inputs and expressing temporal positions accurately at outputs. While directly expressing timestamps in text format
seems to be a feasible approach, such a method suffers inherently from precision variability and tokenization complexity
of decimals in LLM. (2) Lack of segment-level modeling.
Existing models mainly focus on capturing of global visual
semantics, while neglecting the modeling of segment-level
semantics and relationships. They are typically trained on
trimmed videos (usually around a few seconds) for videolevel semantic alignment (video captioning) and instructionfollowing (video QA). However, common untrimmed videos
generally last for several minutes and consist of multiple
segments with various contents. Consequently, existing
Video-LLMs are unable to provide appropriate responses
based on certain segments specified by the user, or locate
the segment containing specific content precisely.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), numerous studies across various fields are attempting to integrate Large Language Models (LLMs) with their domainspecific tasks, seeking to bring innovation to these fields.
For example, Video Large Language Models (Video-LLMs)
such as VideoChat (Li et al., 2023d) and Video-ChatGPT
(Maaz et al., 2023) adapt LLM to video modality, striving to
merge the understanding, reasoning and interactive skills of
LLM with video perception. They typically sample multiple
frames from the video, use an image encoder to encode
1

Zhejiang University 2 Wuhan University 3 National University of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Juncheng Li
<junchengli@zju.edu.cn>.

To address these challenges, we propose Momentor, a
Video-LLM with fine-grained temporal awareness and
segment-level reasoning capability. To enhance temporal
modeling, we introduce innovations in both model architec-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

