Two Stones Hit One Bird: Bilevel Positional Encoding
for Better Length Extrapolation

Zhenyu He * 1 Guhao Feng * 2 Shengjie Luo * 1 Kai Yang 2
Liwei Wang 1 3 Jingjing Xu 4 Zhi Zhang 4 Hongxia Yang 4 Di He 1
Code: https://github.com/zhenyuhe00/BiPE

Abstract

cally, we observed that for sequences with different lengths,
the distribution of the token number in each modular segment usually has bounded support and tends to be approximately similar. In Figure 1, we utilized the widely used PG19 text corpus (Rae et al., 2020a) for visualization (Please
refer to Appendix C for more results). It is evident that the
token number distribution in each segment (i.e., sentence)
remains remarkably consistent, regardless of the total sequence length. In contrast, the number of sentences linearly
increases as the sequence length grows.

In this work, we leverage the intrinsic segmentation of language sequences and design a new
positional encoding method called Bilevel Positional Encoding (BiPE). For each position, our
BiPE blends an intra-segment encoding and an
inter-segment encoding. The intra-segment encoding identifies the locations within a segment
and helps the model capture the semantic information therein via absolute positional encoding. The
inter-segment encoding specifies the segment index, models the relationships between segments,
and aims to improve extrapolation capabilities via
relative positional encoding. Theoretical analysis shows this disentanglement of positional information makes learning more effective. The
empirical results also show that our BiPE has superior length extrapolation capabilities across a
wide range of tasks in diverse text modalities.

Given the above observations, we argue that a popular research direction in language modeling, known as the length
extrapolation problem (Press et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2022;
Chi et al., 2022; 2023; Chowdhury & Caragea, 2023; Chen
et al., 2023b), should be better positioned as a number-ofsegment extrapolation problem. In the literature, previous
studies in this direction have either developed better positional encodings that can handle longer sequence (Raffel
et al., 2020; Su et al., 2021; Ruoss et al., 2023a; Kazemnejad
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023; Peng et al.,
2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023)
or proposed specific inductive biases associated with the attention patterns in language models (Ratner et al., 2023; Han
et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2023), or both (Press et al., 2022; Chi
et al., 2022; 2023; Sun et al., 2023). However, none of these
methods adequately consider or utilize the intrinsic segmentation of language data, nor do they specifically address the
extrapolation issue in terms of the number of segments.

1. Introduction
In many scenarios, text can be effectively decomposed into
modular segments, each expressing a self-contained unit
of thought (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2013). In natural languages, documents are typically composed of sentences.
Each sentence describes a distinct idea or argument. In programming languages, code is organized into lines or function classes that define coherent operation or functionality.
In mathematics, proofs unfold through a series of deductive steps, each representing a logical progression from its
predecessors to the final answer.

In this paper, we introduce BiPE (Bilevel Positional
Encoding), a simple yet effective positional encoding
scheme for improving length extrapolation. Different from
all existing length extrapolation approaches, BiPE employs
two distinct encodings for each position: an intra-segment
encoding and an inter-segment encoding. The intra-segment
encoding identifies the location of the token within its segment. As a complement, the inter-segment encoding specifies the segment to which it belongs. Using natural language
as an illustration, different words within the same sentence
share the same inter-segment positional encoding but possess different intra-segment encodings. Conversely, words
in different sentences but occupying the same inter-segment

The lengths of different text sequences may vary significantly (Press et al., 2022). What is intriguing is that empiri*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Peking University 2 School of EECS, Peking University 3 Center
for Machine Learning Research, Peking University 4 ByteDance
Inc. Correspondence to: Di He <dihe@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

