Constrained Reinforcement Learning Under Model Mismatch

Zhongchang Sun 1 Sihong He 2 Fei Miao 2 Shaofeng Zou 1 3

Abstract

The framework of constrained Markov Decision Process
(CMDP) was developed (Altman, 1999) to tackle the above
challenge and the goal is to search for one policy that maximizes the overall reward among the policies that satisfy the
constraint, and an optimal policy for CMDP can be found
via linear programming.

Existing studies on constrained reinforcement
learning (RL) may obtain a well-performing policy in the training environment. However, when
deployed in a real environment, it may easily violate constraints that were originally satisfied during training because there might be model mismatch between the training and real environments.
To address this challenge, we formulate the problem as constrained RL under model uncertainty,
where the goal is to learn a policy that optimizes
the reward and at the same time satisfies the constraint under model mismatch. We develop a Robust Constrained Policy Optimization (RCPO) algorithm, which is the first algorithm that applies
to large/continuous state space and has theoretical guarantees on worst-case reward improvement
and constraint violation at each iteration during
the training. We show the effectiveness of our
algorithm on a set of RL tasks with constraints.

When a well-performing policy trained using a simulator is
deployed in a real environment, it may easily violate constraints that were originally satisfied during training because
there might be model mismatch between the training and
real environments. This could be due to environment nonstationarity, sim-to-real gap and adversarial attacks. Despite
its practical importance, studies on the problem of robust
RL under constraints are rather limited in the literature. Several attempts were made in (Russel et al., 2020; Mankowitz
et al., 2020), where two heuristic approaches were proposed.
Their basic idea is to first evaluate the worst-case performance of the policy over the uncertainty set, and then use
that together with classical policy improvement methods,
e.g., policy gradient, to update the policy. However, there is
no guarantee to obtain an improved robust policy by doing
so. A robust primal-dual approach was developed in (Wang
et al., 2022), which however cannot guarantee monotonic
robust reward improvement or constraint satisfaction during the training. Also, the results in (Wang et al., 2022) are
limited to the tabular case with finite state and action spaces.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the agent aims to learn a
policy that maximizes the expected cumulative reward by
interacting with an environment (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
However, in real-life applications, e.g., robotics (Levine
et al., 2016; Ono et al., 2015), health care (Yu et al., 2019a),
autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2020; Fisac et al., 2018;
He et al., 2023a;b) and industry automation (Gasparik et al.,
2018), where it is crucial to meet constraints while maximizing reward, application of RL remains limited. For example,
an unmanned aerial vehicle performing post-disaster search
and rescue needs to return before running out of battery, and
communication system needs to maximize throughput while
adhering to power consumption constraints.

In this paper, we study the problem of constrained RL under model mismatch. Specifically, we consider an uncertainty set of transition kernels that characterizes the potential
model mismatch (see (Siddique et al., 2019) for an example
of uncertainty set construction). The goal is to guarantee
that for any MDP in the uncertainty set, the constraint is
always satisfied. Among these policies, we aim to identify
one that maximizes the worst-case accumulated reward over
the uncertainty set. Solution to the above problem is robust
in that for any MDP in the uncertainty set, the constraint is
always satisfied, and at the same time, the overall reward of
the obtained policy is also robust to model mismatch.

1

Department of Electrical Engineering, University at Buffalo,
New York, USA 2 School of Computing, University of Connecticut, Storrs, USA 3 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University at Buffalo, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Shaofeng Zou <szou3@buffalo.edu>.

We develop a robust constrained policy optimization
(RCPO) algorithm, and theoretically bound the constraint
violation for any transition kernel in the uncertainty set , and
the worst-case reward improvement over the uncertainty set
for every policy during training. One thing to highlight is

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

