Bottleneck-Minimal Indexing for Generative Document Retrieval

Xin Du * 1 Lixin Xiu * 2 Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii 3

Abstract

(a) The framework of generative document retrieval (GDR)
Second stage
First stage

We apply an information-theoretic perspective to
reconsider generative document retrieval (GDR),
in which a document x ∈ X is indexed by t ∈ T ,
and a neural autoregressive model is trained to
map queries Q to T . GDR can be considered
to involve information transmission from documents X to queries Q, with the requirement to
transmit more bits via the indexes T . By applying
Shannon’s rate-distortion theory, the optimality
of indexing can be analyzed in terms of the mutual information, and the design of the indexes
T can then be regarded as a bottleneck in GDR.
After reformulating GDR from this perspective,
we empirically quantify the bottleneck underlying
GDR. Finally, using the NQ320K and MARCO
datasets, we evaluate our proposed bottleneckminimal indexing method in comparison with various previous indexing methods, and we show that
it outperforms those methods.

query Q

ID string T

document X

1 1

indexing 1 2

LLM

2 1 1
2 1 2
2 2

(b) Our proposal: Bottleneck-minimal indexing
(b1) distortion optimal
document space X

based on p(X)

(b2) bottleneck minimizing
document space X
query space Q

based on p(X,Q)

Figure 1: (a) Generative document retrieval (GDR) framework. (b) Our contribution using bottleneck-minimal indexing: (b-1) distortion-optimal indexing for documents X ;
(b-2) optimal indexing for both documents and queries Q.
fier strings T for documents X in the first stage. Previously,
Tay et al. (2022) clustered X according to vectorial embeddings generated by the BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019),
by using the k-means algorithm. Bevilacqua et al. (2022)
used a substring of each document as its ID string. All of
those works were based on good intuition about how to semantically partition X , but we can theoretically reconsider
how best to partition it in terms of T .

1. Introduction
The importance of accurate document retrieval is increasing, especially with the limitation of recent large language
models. Generative document retrieval (GDR) is a new,
promising framework for information retrieval. First, every
document x ∈ X (a document set) is represented by a short,
distinct identifier string t ∈ T (the identifier set). Then, an
autoregressive model, typically a neural network, is trained
to map a query q ∈ Q (a query set) to an identifier string
t representing a document x. Figure 1(a) schematically
illustrates GDR.

For such reconsideration, it is natural to apply the ratedistortion theory initiated by Shannon (Shannon, 1948;
1959; Berger, 1968), which is based on the mutual information. Let X, T , and Q denote random variables defined over
X , T , and Q, respectively. As the rate-distortion theory
only involves two terms corresponding to X and T , the aim,
in short, is to acquire T that minimally distorts X. All previous GDR proposals thus consider its distortion optimality,
as illustrated in Figure 1(b-1).

GDR thus typically involves two stages, and the main research question has been about how to acquire good identi*
Equal contribution 1 Waseda Research Institute for Science and
Engineering, Waseda University 2 Department of Mathematical
Informatics, The University of Tokyo 3 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Waseda University. Correspondence
to: Xin Du <duxin@aoni.waseda.jp>, Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii <kumiko@waseda.jp>.

In this paper, we deal with the particularity of the second
stage, which involves mapping Q to T . The design of T ,
which we call indexing here, was previously considered
only with respect to X, but the best T can theoretically be
obtained by considering both X and Q. For this purpose,
we apply the information bottleneck theory by Tishby et al.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

