When is Transfer Learning Possible?

My Phan Kianté Brantley * 1 Stephanie Milani * 2 Soroush Mehri * 3 Gokul Swamy * 2 Geoffrey J. Gordon 2

Abstract

Our framework also helps us design models and decide
which components to transfer.

We present a general framework for transfer learning that is flexible enough to capture transfer in
supervised, reinforcement, and imitation learning. Our framework enables new insights into
the fundamental question of when we can successfully transfer learned information across problems. We model the learner as interacting with a
sequence of problem instances, or environments,
each of which is generated from a common structural causal model (SCM) by choosing the SCM’s
parameters from restricted sets. We derive a procedure that can propagate restrictions on SCM
parameters through the SCM’s graph structure to
other parameters that we are trying to learn. The
propagated restrictions then enable more efficient
learning (i.e., transfer). By analyzing the procedure, we are able to challenge widely-held beliefs
about transfer learning. First, we show that having sparse changes across environments is neither
necessary nor sufficient for transfer. Second, we
show an example where the common heuristic of
freezing a layer in a network causes poor transfer
performance. We then use our procedure to select
a more refined set of parameters to freeze, leading
to successful transfer learning.

We model the transfer learning problem by viewing the
world as a structural causal model (SCM, Pearl et al., 2000)
with unknown constraints on its parameters. Learning about
these constraints is what enables transfer. Within a world,
the learner interacts with a sequence of environments. In
each environment, the parameters of the SCM are chosen
from the constrained domains, and the data is generated
from the SCM with the chosen parameters. That is, each environment can be seen as a conditional intervention on a base
SCM that represents the world. From each environment’s
data, we learn its parameters, and thus gain information
about the unknown constraints. This view can be used to
describe covariate shift, representation learning, and transfer
learning in supervised learning, reinforcement learning, and
imitation learning (see Section 3).
Therefore the environments’ generation from the world follows the Independent Causal Mechanisms (ICM) Principle
(Schölkopf et al., 2021), where the model is composed of independent modules. Within each module, we can have constraints on its parameters (called local constraints). We show
how constraints on parameters across the model (called
global constraints) can be computed from local constraints,
allowing us to learn faster in new environments.
Contributions. In this work, we make the following contributions. First, we present a novel formalism for transfer
learning that helps unify previously distinct areas of research, including covariate shift, representation, few-shot
learning, and zero-shot learning, in which environments
are generated from worlds by choosing local parameters
of an SCM from constrained domains (Section 3). Second,
we show how the constraints of global distributions can be
computed from the constraints of local distributions, which
enables us to analyze if transfer is feasible and derive a
meta-algorithm to perform transfer (Section 4). Finally, we
present case studies to illustrate how our work may be used
to analyze and even challenge widely-held beliefs about
transfer learning. We show that sparse mechanism shifts are
neither necessary nor sufficient for transfer, and we show
that freezing a layer of a network may either succeed or fail
at transfer (Section 5).

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is a well-studied problem with many variations such as covariate shift, representation learning, imitation learning, and finding invariant predictors. In this
work, we present a framework that unifies multiple transfer
learning problems, and can be used broadly for analyzing transfer learning problems. As a result, we challenge
commonly-held assumptions about transfer, such as when
sparse mechanism shift and layer freezing can be helpful.
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Elementera AI. Correspondence to: My Phan
<mail.myphan@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

