Auditing Private Prediction

Karan Chadha 1 Matthew Jagielski 2 Nicolas Papernot 2 Christopher A. Choquette-Choo 2 Milad Nasr 2

Abstract

three insights: a large gap may indicate a potential slack
in the analysis; a lower bound surpassing the upper may
indicate an incorrect analysis or implementation (Tramer
et al., 2022); and tracking how these bounds shift with
changes to assumptions on the adversary’s capabilities and
knowledge can inform us of which assumptions contribute
most to the algorithm’s privacy leakage (Nasr et al., 2021).

Differential privacy (DP) offers a theoretical
upper bound on the potential privacy leakage of an
algorithm, while empirical auditing establishes a
practical lower bound. Auditing techniques exist
for DP training algorithms. However machine
learning can also be made private at inference. We
propose the first framework for auditing private
prediction where we instantiate adversaries with
varying poisoning and query capabilities. This
enables us to study the privacy leakage of four
private prediction algorithms: PATE (Papernot
et al., 2016), CaPC (Choquette-Choo et al., 2020),
PromptPATE (Duan et al., 2023), and PrivatekNN (Zhu et al., 2020). To conduct our audit, we
introduce novel techniques to empirically evaluate
privacy leakage in terms of Renyi DP. Our
experiments show that (i) the privacy analysis of
private prediction can be improved, (ii) algorithms
which are easier to poison lead to much higher
privacy leakage, and (iii) the privacy leakage is
significantly lower for adversaries without query
control than those with full control.

In the context of machine learning (ML), existing work has
exclusively audited differentially private training algorithms.
These algorithms train models satisfying DP (Abadi et al.,
2016), ensuring the privacy of all model predictions due
to DP’s post-processing property.1 However, machine
learning can also be made private at inference. Here, models
are trained non-privately and their predictions are noised
before release to satisfy DP. Despite the increasing relevance
of private prediction, notably to task adaptation of large
language models (Duan et al., 2023), there are no known
techniques to audit such algorithms. Our work addresses
this gap and proposes the first auditing framework to do so.
Private prediction algorithms diverge from private training
by training multiple non-private teacher models on separate
data partitions. At inference, they compile individual
model predictions into a histogram, introduce noise to each
histogram bin, and select the most frequent bin as the output.
To quantify the privacy leakage of private prediction, we
upper bound several cumulants of the log ratio of output
distributions (instead of the log ratio directly), resulting in a
Renyi DP (RDP) guarantee. RDP, an alternative formulation
of DP, offers enhanced compositional properties which is
beneficial when assessing privacy leakage that is composed
across multiple test queries. When reporting, we convert the
composed RDP guarantees to a classical DP guarantee.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) assesses an algorithm’s privacy
by examining its outputs on two adjacent datasets, S and
S 0 , which differ in one data point (Dwork et al., 2006). It
bounds the log ratio of output distribution probabilities on
these datasets using a parameter ε. A small ε ensures that
an adversary cannot confidently distinguish whether the
algorithm processed S or S 0 . Thus, ε analytically bounds
private information leakage from the algorithm’s outputs.
In contrast, auditing a private algorithm (Ding et al., 2018;
Jagielski et al., 2020) provides a lower bound on its privacy
leakage. Analyzing both upper and lower bounds can yield

To audit private prediction, the standard approach would
consider the full output set of multiple queries and audit
the resulting distribution using classical auditing techniques.
However, the discrete high dimensional nature of the output
distribution makes the application of these techniques nontrivial. Moreover, composition theorems in classical DP
analysis are lossy and composing corresponding lower
bounds is invalid. This necessitates developing a novel
methodology to audit RDP guarantees which we use to

1
Stanford University, Part of work done while an intern at
Google DeepMind. 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Karan Chadha <knchadha@stanford.edu>, Matthew Jagielski
<jagielski@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
An arbitrary function can be applied to the outputs of a DP
algorithm with no consequences to privacy.

1

