From Neurons to Neutrons: A Case Study in Interpretability

Ouail Kitouni * 1 2 Niklas Nolte * 3 Vı́ctor Samuel Pérez-Dı́az 1 4 5 6 Sokratis Trifinopoulos 1 2 Mike Williams 1 2

Abstract

learning has focused on understanding the low-dimensional
representations learned by these models, with a particular
emphasis on disentangled representations that separate the
underlying factors of variation in the data (Bengio et al.,
2013; Higgins et al., 2018; Locatello et al., 2019). Disentanglement aims to learn representations where each latent
dimension corresponds to a semantically meaningful factor,
such that varying one dimension while keeping others fixed
produces interpretable changes in the input space (Burgess
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Kim & Mnih, 2018).

Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) promises a path
toward fully understanding how neural networks
make their predictions. Prior work demonstrates that even when trained to perform simple arithmetic, models can implement a variety of algorithms (sometimes concurrently) depending on initialization and hyperparameters.
Does this mean neuron-level interpretability techniques have limited applicability? We argue that
high-dimensional neural networks can learn lowdimensional representations of their training data
that are useful beyond simply making good predictions. Such representations can be understood
through the mechanistic interpretability lens and
provide insights that are surprisingly faithful to
human-derived domain knowledge. This indicates
that such approaches to interpretability can be useful for deriving a new understanding of a problem
from models trained to solve it. As a case study,
we extract nuclear physics concepts by studying
models trained to reproduce nuclear data.

Given the success of deep learning at modeling a wide
variety of data, it seems plausible that interpretability can
help us learn from these models that are effectively domain
experts.1 In this work, we investigate the ability of machinelearned algorithms to re-derive insights in human-developed
understanding, taking nuclear theory as a case study of
mechanistic interpretability.
Modern machine learning posits the manifold hypothesis (Bengio et al., 2013), the idea that most natural data we
tend to care about lives in a low-dimensional manifold embedded in the high-dimensional measurement space. This is
observed across modalities and, more recently, in language
modeling where low-rank representations are ubiquitous in
fully-trained large language models (Hu et al., 2021; Aghajanyan et al., 2021; Li et al., 2018; Dettmers et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023). Due to the nature of the data or the
various implicit biases of the modern deep learning training
procedures, neural networks learn compact representations
that live in a small subspace of the inputs. Interpretability
in deep learning has always been an active area of research
(Kadir & Brady, 2001; Zhang et al., 2021) but the process
of understanding how neural networks operate to make particular predictions (macroscopic phenomena) by uncovering
the algorithms they implement (microscopic phenomena),
is a nascent field of deep learning built around the idea that
neural networks, despite their scale and complexity, can be
interpreted and understood (Elhage et al., 2021; Olah, 2022).
Here, we further posit that not only can they be understood,
but they can also be used to say something useful about the
nature of the problem they aim to solve. In the following,
we will investigate whether mechanistic approaches can

1. Introduction
The scientific process involves understanding highdimensional phenomena, often with large-scale data, and deriving low-dimensional theories that can accurately describe
and predict the outcome of observations. There is mounting evidence that modern machine learning operates in a
similar fashion, taking large-scale, high-dimensional data
and deriving low-dimensional representations from them.
For instance, recent work on the interpretability of deep
*

Equal contribution 1 NSF Institute for Artificial Intelligence
and Fundamental Interactions (IAIFI) 2 Massachusetts Institute
of Technology 3 FAIR at Meta 4 Harvard John A. Paulson School
of Engineering and Applied Sciences 5 Center for Astrophysics
| Harvard & Smithsonian 6 School of Engineering, Science and
Technology, Universidad del Rosario. Correspondence to: Ouail
Kitouni <kitouni@mit.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

There are of course some caveats here such as the question of
the robustness of learned representations.

1

