CarbonNovo: Joint Design of Protein Structure and Sequence
Using a Unified Energy-based Model

Milong Ren 1 2 Tian Zhu 1 2 Haicang Zhang # 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Proteins perform most of the biological functions fundamental for life. The task of de novo protein design is to create
new proteins and has broad applications in drug development (Khoury et al., 2014; Cao et al., 2020; Vorobieva et al.,
2021) and enzyme engineering (Dou et al., 2018). Computational methods traditionally focus on directed evolution
(Dougherty & Arnold, 2009; Arnold, 2015) and rational
design of novel proteins guided by geometric principles
(Polizzi & DeGrado, 2020) and existing energy function
(O’Meara et al., 2015; Park et al., 2016).

De novo protein design aims to create novel protein structures and sequences unseen in nature.
Recent structure-oriented design methods typically employ a two-stage strategy, where structure design and sequence design modules are
trained separately, and the backbone structures
and sequences are generated sequentially in inference. While diffusion-based generative models
like RFdiffusion show great promise in structure
design, they face inherent limitations within the
two-stage framework. First, the sequence design
module risks overfitting as the accuracy of the generated structures may not align with that of the
crystal structures used for training. Second, the
sequence design module lacks interaction with the
structure design module to further optimize the
generated structures. To address these challenges,
we propose CarbonNovo, a unified energy-based
model for jointly generating protein structure and
sequence. Specifically, we leverage a score-based
generative model and Markov Random Fields for
describing the energy landscape of protein structure and sequence. In CarbonNovo, the structure
and sequence design module communicates at
each diffusion step, encouraging the generation
of more coherent structure-sequence pairs. Moreover, the unified framework allows for incorporating the protein language models as evolutionary
constraints for generated proteins. The rigorous
evaluation demonstrates that CarbonNovo outperforms two-stage methods across various metrics,
including designability, novelty, sequence plausibility, and Rosetta energy.

Recent diffusion-based methods for de novo protein design
methods have made great progress in generating novel and
functional proteins (Trippe et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022;
Watson et al., 2023; Yim et al., 2023b; Ingraham et al.,
2023; Lin & Alquraishi, 2023). For example, RFdiffusion
(Watson et al., 2023) employs a Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) in structure space, while Chroma
and FrameDiff apply a score-based diffusion model. Additionally, flow-based generative models have been proposed
for protein structure design (Bose et al., 2023). All these
methods follow a two-stage framework where protein structures are generated first, and optimal sequences are subsequently generated through sequence design models like
ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al., 2022) and ESM-IF (Hsu
et al., 2022).
There are two primary issues in the two-stage framework.
First, the structures generated by the structure design models, such as RFDiffusion, contain inherent noise and are not
as accurate as the experimentally solved crystal structures
on which the sequence design models are trained. Consequently, the sequence design models are susceptible to
overfitting. Second, as the structure and sequence modules
are trained separately and the two modules interact only after the structure is generated from the last diffusion step, the
errors in the sequence design stage cannot provide feedback
to further optimize the generated structures. While structure and sequence co-design methods have been proposed,
primarily focusing on some special protein families like antibody design (Luo et al., 2022; Martinkus et al., 2023), these
methods (Lisanza et al., 2023) have not yet outperformed
the two-stage methods in designing general proteins (Ingra-

*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Haicang Zhang <zhanghaicang@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

