Characteristic Guidance:
Non-linear Correction for Diffusion Model at Large Guidance Scale

Candi Zheng * 1 2 Yuan Lan *

Abstract

ple contexts. However, such conditional DDPMs has weak
control over context hence do not work well to generate
desired content (Luo, 2022).

Popular guidance for denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) linearly combines distinct
conditional models together to provide enhanced
control over samples. However, this approach
overlooks nonlinear effects that become significant when guidance scale is large. To address
this issue, we propose characteristic guidance, a
guidance method that provides first-principle nonlinear correction for classifier-free guidance. Such
correction forces the guided DDPMs to respect
the Fokker-Planck (FP) equation of diffusion process, in a way that is training-free and compatible
with existing sampling methods. Experiments
show that characteristic guidance enhances semantic characteristics of prompts and mitigate irregularities in image generation, proving effective
in diverse applications ranging from simulating
magnet phase transitions to latent space sampling.

Guidance techniques, notably classifier guidance (Song
et al., 2020b; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) and classifierfree guidance (Ho, 2022), provide enhanced control at the
cost of sample diversity. Classifier guidance, requiring
an additional classifier, faces implementation challenges
in non-classification tasks like text-to-image generation.
Classifier-free guidance circumvents this by linearly combining conditional and unconditional DDPM weighted by
a guidance scale parameter. However, large guidance scale
often leads to overly saturated and unnatural images (Ho,
2022). Though techniques like dynamic thresholding (Saharia et al., 2022) can handle color issues by clipping outof-range pixel values, a systematic solution for general sampling tasks, including latent space diffusion (Rombach et al.,
2021) and those beyond image generation, remains absent.
This paper proposes characteristic guidance as a systematic
solution to the large guidance scale issue by addressing the
non-linearity neglicted in classifier-free guidance. The name
characteristic serves a dual purpose: Technically, characteristic guidance utilizes the method of characteristics in
solving the score Fokker-Planck (FP) equation (Lai et al.,
2022) for diffusion process, addressing its non-linearity to
which the classifier-free guidance fails to adhere. It demonstrates clear theoretical advantages on Gaussian models in
removing large guidance scale irregularities. Experimentally, characteristic guidance notably enhances the semantic
characteristics of images, ensuring closer alignment with
specified conditions. This is evident in our image generation
experiments on CIFAR-10, ImageNet 256, and Stable diffusion (Fig.1). Notably, it also mitigates color and exposure
issues common at large-scale guidance. Furthermore, characteristic guidance is compatible with any continuous data
type and is robust across continuous diverse applications,
ranging from simulating magnet phase transitions to latent
space sampling.

1. Introduction
The diffusion model (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2020b) is a family of generative models that produce high-quality samples utilizing the diffusion
processes of molecules. Denoising diffusion probabilistic
model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020) is one of the most popular
diffusion models whose diffusion process can be viewed
as a sequence of denoising steps. It is the core of several
large text-to-image models that have been widely adopted
in AI art production, such as the latent diffusion model (stable diffusion) (Rombach et al., 2021) and DALL·E (Betker
et al., 2023). DDPMs control the generation of samples by
learning conditional distributions that are specified by sam*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Department of Mechanics and Aerospace Engineering, Southern
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Candi Zheng <czhengac@connect.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

