Linguistic Calibration of Long-Form Generations

Neil Band 1 Xuechen Li 1 Tengyu Ma 1 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1

Abstract

(Ji et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). Currently, when an LM
lacks knowledge about a topic, it will do one of two things:
hallucinate incorrect claims with complete confidence, or,
in the case of a few strong closed-source models (OpenAI
et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2023), abstain from making claims.

Language models (LMs) may lead their users
to make suboptimal downstream decisions when
they confidently hallucinate. This issue can be
mitigated by having the LM verbally convey the
probability that its claims are correct, but existing
models cannot produce long-form text with calibrated confidence statements. Through the lens of
decision-making, we define linguistic calibration
for long-form generations: an LM is linguistically
calibrated if its generations enable its users to
make calibrated probabilistic predictions. This
definition enables a training framework where a
supervised finetuning step bootstraps an LM to
emit long-form generations with confidence statements such as “I estimate a 30% chance of...” or
“I am certain that...”, followed by a reinforcement
learning step which rewards generations that enable a user to provide calibrated answers to related
questions. We linguistically calibrate Llama 2 7B
and find in automated and human evaluations of
long-form generations that it is significantly more
calibrated than strong finetuned factuality baselines with comparable accuracy. These findings
generalize under significant domain shifts to scientific and biomedical questions and to an entirely
held-out person biography generation task. Our
results demonstrate that long-form generations
may be calibrated end-to-end by constructing an
objective in the space of the predictions that users
make in downstream decision-making.

1

Confident hallucinations are especially harmful. They decrease users’ trust in the errant LM and broadly make LMs
unsuitable for settings where factuality is paramount such
as medicine (Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023) and law (Dahl
et al., 2024). Perhaps most importantly, they lead the user
to confidently make poor decisions (Fig. 1). However, even
abstentions are suboptimal, because they provide the user
with no plausible claims and their likelihoods.
Linguistic calibration (Mielke et al., 2022)—conveying confidence levels in natural language that equal the likelihood
that one’s claims are correct—could mitigate the harms of
hallucination. If an LM was linguistically calibrated in a
manner interpretable to its users, they could make good
decisions regardless of the LM’s underlying knowledge.
For example, suppose a clinical LM generates a patient’s
case report, providing a diagnosis. If the LM was unsure
of the correct diagnosis, it could use numerical confidence
with its corresponding claim (“I estimate that the correct
diagnosis is Condition A with 60% confidence”). Then,
when the doctor faces a decision—deciding the patient’s
treatment—they have access to both a salient claim and an
approximate likelihood of its correctness. The manner of
conveying confidence is limited only by the use of language:
e.g., the LM could provide linguistic confidence statements
(“I am fairly sure that the correct diagnosis is A”) or many
mutually exclusive claims (“I estimate that the correct diagnosis is A with 60% confidence, though B or C are also
possibilities.”). However, both classic calibration methods
like temperature scaling (Guo et al., 2017) and methods for
LMs (Kadavath et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2023; Kuhn et al.,
2023; Mielke et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2021)
are restricted to classification or short outputs and hence
cannot calibrate the many claims made in each long-form
LM generation (cf. §5 for related work).

Introduction

The claims made by language models (LMs) are increasingly used to inform real-world decisions, e.g., what to order
at a restaurant, what information to provide someone else
about a topic, or which code completion to accept. However,
LMs have knowledge gaps which manifest as hallucinations
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Neil Band <nband@cs.stanford.edu>.

We make progress on this challenge by leveraging the connection between calibration and decision theory (Zhao et al.,
2021; Zhao & Ermon, 2021). LMs fit cleanly within the
framework of decision-making. Users query LMs, learn

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

