Subgraphormer: Unifying Subgraph GNNs and Graph Transformers
via Graph Products

Guy Bar-Shalom 1 Beatrice Bevilacqua 2 Haggai Maron 3 4

Abstract

particularly in terms of expressive power (Morris et al.,
2019; Xu et al., 2018), resulting in underwhelming performances in certain tasks. Over the past few years, multiple
GNN architectures have been proposed to mitigate these
problems (Morris et al., 2021).

In the realm of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
two exciting research directions have recently
emerged: Subgraph GNNs and Graph Transformers. In this paper, we propose an architecture that integrates both approaches, dubbed
Subgraphormer, which combines the enhanced expressive power, message-passing mechanisms, and aggregation schemes from Subgraph
GNNs with attention and positional encodings, arguably the most important components in Graph
Transformers. Our method is based on an intriguing new connection we reveal between Subgraph
GNNs and product graphs, suggesting that Subgraph GNNs can be formulated as Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) operating on a
product of the graph with itself. We use this formulation to design our architecture: first, we devise an attention mechanism based on the connectivity of the product graph. Following this, we
propose a novel and efficient positional encoding
scheme for Subgraph GNNs, which we derive
as a positional encoding for the product graph.
Our experimental results demonstrate significant
performance improvements over both Subgraph
GNNs and Graph Transformers on a wide range
of datasets.

In this paper, we focus on two different enhanced GNN
architecture families: Subgraph GNNs and Graph Transformers. In Subgraph GNNs (Zhang and Li, 2021; Cotta
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022; Bevilacqua et al., 2022;
Frasca et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023b), a GNN is applied
to a bag (multiset) of subgraphs, which is generated from
the original graph (for example, the multiset of subgraphs
obtained by deleting one node in the original graph). Notably, these architectures are provably more expressive than
the traditional message passing algorithms applied directly
to the original graph. In parallel, Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) have demonstrated outstanding performance
across a wide range of applications, including natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Kalyan et al., 2021;
Kitaev et al., 2020), computer vision (Khan et al., 2022;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022b), and, more recently, graph-based tasks (Ying et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2023b; Rampášek et al., 2022). Two of the most important
components of Graph Transformers are their attention mechanism and their positional encoding scheme, which captures
the graph structure. Graph Transformers have achieved
impressive empirical performance, demonstrated by their
state-of-the-art results on molecular tasks (Li et al., 2022a).
This work aims to integrate Subgraph GNNs and Graph
Transformers into a unified architecture, which we call
Subgraphormer, to leverage the benefits of both approaches. In order to define this hybrid approach, we develop two main techniques specifically adapted to subgraphs:
(1) A subgraph attention mechanism, dubbed Subgraph Attention Block (SAB); and (2) A subgraph positional encoding scheme, which we call product graph PE. We derive
these two mechanisms through a key observation: Subgraph
GNNs can be naturally interpreted as MPNNs operating
on a new product graph. This product graph is defined on
2-tuples of nodes and encodes both the subgraph structure
and their inter-subgraph aggregation schemes.

1. Introduction
Due to their scalability and elegant architectural design,
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) have become
the most popular type of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
Nonetheless, these architectures face significant limitations,
1

Department of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology 2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
3
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology 4 NVIDIA Research. Correspondence
to: Guy Bar-Shalom <guy.b@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our approach builds on the recent maximally expressive
1

