Critical feature learning in deep neural networks

Kirsten Fischer * 1 2 Javed Lindner * 1 3 4 David Dahmen 1 Zohar Ringel 5 Michael Krämer 4 Moritz Helias 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
A central quest of the theory of deep learning is to understand the inductive bias of network architectures, which is
their ability to find solutions that generalize well despite networks being highly overparametrized. The regime of lazy
learning (Chizat et al., 2019), in which the network width
N → ∞ tends to infinity while the number of training data
points P stays constant, is well understood in terms of the
neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) (Lee et al., 2018)
and the neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018).
The NNGP is, however, identical to training the readout
weights only (Lee et al., 2019; Yang, 2019). The NNGP
kernel follows from the central limit theorem applied to random networks, neglecting any adaptation to the data. While
the NTK describes the evolution of weights in all layers, it
applies to the case of small learning rates, effectively linearizing the mapping between weights and outputs around
the point of initialization. Consequently, weights change
only negligibly compared to initialization.

A key property of neural networks driving their
success is their ability to learn features from data.
Understanding feature learning from a theoretical
viewpoint is an emerging field with many open
questions. In this work we capture finite-width
effects with a systematic theory of network kernels in deep non-linear neural networks. We show
that the Bayesian prior of the network can be written in closed form as a superposition of Gaussian
processes, whose kernels are distributed with a
variance that depends inversely on the network
width N . A large deviation approach, which is
exact in the proportional limit for the number of
data points P = αN → ∞, yields a pair of
forward-backward equations for the maximum a
posteriori kernels in all layers at once. We study
their solutions perturbatively to demonstrate how
the backward propagation across layers aligns kernels with the target. An alternative field-theoretic
formulation shows that kernel adaptation of the
Bayesian posterior at finite-width results from
fluctuations in the prior: larger fluctuations correspond to a more flexible network prior and thus
enable stronger adaptation to data. We thus find a
bridge between the classical edge-of-chaos NNGP
theory and feature learning, exposing an intricate
interplay between criticality, response functions,
and feature scale.

At finite network width or when keeping the ratio α = P/N
constant and taking the limit N → ∞, the intermediate
network layers adapt to data; they learn “features”. Feature
learning typically outperforms networks in the lazy regime
(Novak et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2020; Geiger et al., 2020;
Petrini et al., 2022) and is also required to understand transfer learning, the central mechanism that enables modern
foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2022).
We here derive a theory of data-adaptive kernels in deep nonlinear networks trained in a Bayesian manner. We show that
the prior for the network outputs f can Rbe written as a superposition of Gaussian processes f ∼ N (0, C) p(C) dC.
Feature learning may be understood as a reweighing of
different components N (0, C) within this prior ensemble
according to the evidence p(Y |C) = N (Y |0, C) of the
training labels Y . As a result, the posterior is dominated
by those Gaussian components N (0, C) that have a high
evidence. A wide distribution p(C) leads to a rich prior (see
Fig. 1) and thereby enables strong adaptation to the training
data. This view allows us to connect feature learning to
the notion of criticality: these are points in hyperparameter space where the distribution p(C) becomes particularly
wide because the network is at the verge of transitioning
between two qualitatively different regimes.

*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Advanced Simulation (IAS6), Computational and Systems Neuroscience, Jülich Research
Centre, Jülich, Germany 2 RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 3 Department of Physics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany 4 Institute for Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 5 The Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
Israel. Correspondence to: Kirsten Fischer <ki.fischer@fzjuelich.de>, Javed Linder <javed.lindner@rwth-aachen.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

