Learning to Predict Mutational Effects of Protein-Protein Interactions by
Microenvironment-aware Hierarchical Prompt Learning

Lirong Wu 1 Yijun Tian 2 Haitao Lin 1 Yufei Huang 1 Siyuan Li 1 Nitesh V Chawla 2 Stan Z. Li† 1

Abstract

isms (Hu et al., 2021; Kastritis & Bonvin, 2013; Lu et al.,
2020; Gao et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024;
Wu et al., 2024a). A prime example is antibodies, a family of Y-shape proteins produced by the immune system to
recognize, bind, and interact with proteins on the surface
of pathogens (Murphy & Weaver, 2016; Tan et al., 2024).
Therefore, how to develop methods to modulate proteinprotein interactions has become a key issue, and one of the
most prevalent strategies is to mutate the amino acids at
the interaction interface (Luo et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023).
Considering the enormous combinatorial space of over 2030
amino acid mutations and the high variability of mutated
structures, it is not feasible to test all potential mutations
by experimental assays in the web laboratory, which calls
for computational methods to screen for desirable mutations
by predicting binding affinity changes of protein complexes
upon mutations. This problem, also known as the change in
binding free energy (∆∆G) prediction, is a core challenge
in the protein complex design (Marchand et al., 2022).

Protein-protein bindings play a key role in a variety of fundamental biological processes, and thus
predicting the effects of amino acid mutations on
protein-protein binding is crucial. To tackle the
scarcity of annotated mutation data, pre-training
with massive unlabeled data has emerged as a
promising solution. However, this process faces
a series of challenges: (1) complex higher-order
dependencies among multiple (more than paired)
structural scales have not yet been fully captured;
(2) it is rarely explored how mutations alter the
local conformation of the surrounding microenvironment; (3) pre-training is costly, both in data
size and computational burden. In this paper, we
first construct a hierarchical prompt codebook to
record common microenvironmental patterns at
different structural scales independently. Then,
we develop a novel codebook pre-training task,
namely masked microenvironment modeling, to
model the joint distribution of each mutation with
their residue types, angular statistics, and local
conformational changes in the microenvironment.
With the constructed prompt codebook, we encode the microenvironment around each mutation
into multiple hierarchical prompts and combine
them to flexibly provide information to wild-type
and mutated protein complexes about their microenvironmental differences. Such a hierarchical
prompt learning framework has demonstrated superior performance and training efficiency over
state-of-the-art pre-training-based methods in mutation effect prediction and a case study of optimizing human antibodies against SARS-CoV-2.

The computational methods for ∆∆G prediction have
undergone a paradigm shift from biophysics-based and
statistics-based techniques (Schymkowitz et al., 2005; Park
et al., 2016; Alford et al., 2017) to Deep Learning (DL)
techniques (Shan et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023). Despite the great progress made by DL-based methods, the scarcity of annotated experimental data and the
unavailability of mutated complex structures remain two
major challenges for effective supervised learning. Therefore, pre-training with massive unlabeled data is becoming
a promising solution. On the one hand, the general knowledge learned from the pre-training data can be transferred
for ∆∆G prediction, which solves the problem of data sparsity effectively. On the other hand, some of the pre-training
tasks can capture sequence-structure dependencies, enabling
the model to be implicitly aware of the mutated complex
structures rather than explicitly predicting them. Owing to
these two benefits, pre-training is becoming one of the most
prevalent strategies for ∆∆G prediction (Luo et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Proteins usually interact with other proteins to perform specific biological functions that are essential for all organ1
Westlake University 2 University of Notre Dame. Correspondence to: Stan Z. Li <stan.zq.li@westlake.edu.cn>.

Despite the fruitful progress, existing pre-training-based
methods still encounter several key issues. The first is the
ignorance of modeling multiple types of structural scales
and their dependencies. A protein can focus on different
structural scales to implement specific functions, and each

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

