Planning, Fast and Slow: Online Reinforcement Learning with Action-Free
Offline Data via Multiscale Planners
Chengjie Wu * 1 Hao Hu * 1 Yiqin Yang 2 Ning Zhang 3 Chongjie Zhang 3

Abstract

in effectively addressing challenging tasks in video games
(Reed et al., 2022; Bauer et al., 2023; Baker et al., 2022;
Kumar et al., 2023), robotics manipulation (Seo et al., 2022;
Chebotar et al., 2023), and scientific discovery (Jumper
et al., 2021; Fawzi et al., 2022). Offline RL (Levine et al.,
2020) holds great promise as it enables policy learning from
pre-collected datasets, thus circumventing the expensive and
sometimes infeasible exploration typically associated with
online RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Prudencio et al., 2022).
However, offline RL still requires an annotated dataset with
action and reward labels, and fails to exploit other unannotated datasets that are abundant and cheaper in the real
world, such as videos (Zhu et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023b).

The surge in volumes of video data offers unprecedented opportunities for advancing reinforcement
learning (RL). This growth has motivated the development of passive RL, seeking to convert passive observations into actionable insights. This
paper explores the prerequisites and mechanisms
through which passive data can be utilized to improve online RL. We show that, in identifiable dynamics, where action impact can be distinguished
from stochasticity, learning on passive data is statistically beneficial. Building upon the theoretical
insights, we propose a novel algorithm named
Multiscale State-Centric Planners (MSCP) that
leverages two planners at distinct scales to offer guidance across varying levels of abstraction.
The algorithm’s fast planner targets immediate
objectives, while the slow planner focuses on
achieving longer-term goals. Notably, the fast
planner incorporates pessimistic regularization to
address the distributional shift between offline
and online data. MSCP effectively handles the
practical challenges involving imperfect pretraining and limited dataset coverage. Our empirical
evaluations across multiple benchmarks demonstrate that MSCP significantly outperforms existing approaches, underscoring its proficiency in
addressing complex, long-horizon tasks through
the strategic use of passive data.

Inspired by recent success of unsupervised pretraining in
natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020) and computer vision (He et al., 2022), passive RL (Seo et al., 2022;
Zhu et al., 2023) aims to leverage an action-and-reward-free
dataset for pretraining to faciliate downstream online RL.
Passive RL helps extract the valuable information in passive
video-like observations and transform them into actionable
insights, receiving great attention from the community.
To understand when and how passive data is useful, we conduct a rigorous analysis on the statistical benefit of passive
data in linear MDPs. We show that when the effect of action
is distinguishable from intrinsic stochasticity, passive data
can reduce the effective horizon of the problem by providing dense training signals and improve learning efficiency
accordingly. However, previous methods still fall short in
solving challenging long-horizon tasks in online learning,
even equipped with passive data.

1. Introduction

We identify two significant challenges of passive RL. First,
the extrapolation error during the online stage can be severe due to the limited dataset coverage. Specifically, the
data collected during online exploration may significantly
deviate from the passive dataset. Compared with standard
offline-to-online settings (Nakamoto et al., 2023), this problem is exacerbated in passive RL because no policy can be
learned offline to initialize and regularize the behavior due
to lack of action labels. The second challenge involves the
extraction and utilization of information from the passive
dataset at various levels of abstraction. This is crucial for
guiding the online policy to learn in a manner that balances

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has
exhibited remarkable scalability with large amounts of data
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 3 Department
of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University
in St. Louis, MO, USA. Correspondence to: Chengjie Wu
<wucj19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

