Efficient and Effective Time-Series Forecasting with Spiking Neural Networks

Changze Lv 1 Yansen Wang 2 Dongqi Han 2 Xiaoqing Zheng 1 Xuanjing Huang 1 Dongsheng Li 2

Abstract

Nowadays, SNNs have achieved comparable performance
with artificial neural networks (ANNs) in image classification (Hu et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2021;
Zhou et al., 2023b; Yao et al., 2023a), text classification
(Lv et al., 2023b;a), sequential image classification (Jeffares
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023), and time-series classification
(Dominguez-Morales et al., 2018; Fang et al., 2020a). Nevertheless, the existing studies either completely neglect the
temporal nature of SNN or oversimplify the incorporation
of data into the event-driven paradigm despite the sequential
data format, e.g., by repeating the samples along the time
axis (Fang et al., 2021; Lv et al., 2023b) or only preserving
changes across data points (Reid et al., 2014; Fang et al.,
2020a). These strategies, while serving their purpose, can
not fully exploit the advantages of SNNs in the domain of
temporal signal processing.

Spiking neural networks (SNNs), inspired by the
spiking behavior of biological neurons, provide
a unique pathway for capturing the intricacies of
temporal data. However, applying SNNs to timeseries forecasting is challenging due to difficulties
in effective temporal alignment, complexities in
encoding processes, and the absence of standardized guidelines for model selection. In this paper,
we propose a framework for SNNs in time-series
forecasting tasks, leveraging the efficiency of spiking neurons in processing temporal information.
Through a series of experiments, we demonstrate
that our proposed SNN-based approaches achieve
comparable or superior results to traditional timeseries forecasting methods on diverse benchmarks
with much less energy consumption. Furthermore, we conduct detailed analysis experiments
to assess the SNN’s capacity to capture temporal dependencies within time-series data, offering
valuable insights into its nuanced strengths and
effectiveness in modeling the intricate dynamics
of temporal data. Our study contributes to the
expanding field of SNNs and offers a promising
alternative for time-series forecasting tasks, presenting a pathway for the development of more
biologically inspired and temporally aware forecasting models. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/SeqSNN.

Remarkably, to cater to the event-driven paradigm which
SNNs prefer, neuromorphic image datasets such as CIFAR10-DVS (Li et al., 2017a) and DVS-128-Gesture (Amir et al.,
2017) have been created from dynamic vision sensors (DVS)
(Leñero-Bardallo et al., 2011). DVS operates in an eventdriven manner, only transmitting information when there
is a change in the scene (pixel intensity changes), which
is well-aligned with the spiking nature of SNNs. SNNs
have demonstrated outstanding performance (Zhou et al.,
2023b; Yao et al., 2023a) upon these neuromorphic datasets,
showing their potential to be not only conceptual for energy
efficiency but also powerful and competitive in pursuing
state-of-the-art results with built-in temporal information.
However, the acquisition of dynamic image datasets for such
evaluations is often encumbered by high costs and logistical
inconveniences, thereby posing challenges in aligning with
the pragmatic requirements of real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Spiking neural network (SNN) is regarded as the third generation of neural network (Maass, 1997) for its energy efficiency, event-driven paradigm, and biological plausibility.

Acknowledging the mismatch between the preferable data
format of SNNs and practical needs, we identify time-series
forecasting as the potential ideal task. Time-series forecasting, a vital aspect of realistic data analysis including traffic
(Li et al., 2017b), energy (Lai et al., 2018), etc., aims to predict future values based on historical observations arranged
chronologically. Addressing this task often involves modeling the temporal dynamics, resonating profoundly with the
nature of neural coding.

The work was conducted during the internship of Changze Lv
(czlv22@m.fudan.edu.cn) at Microsoft Research Asia. 1 School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 2 Microsoft
Research Asia, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Xiaoqing Zheng <zhengxq@fudan.edu.cn>, Yansen Wang <yansenwang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Although SNNs are effective at managing temporal informa-

1

