Causal-IQA: Towards the Generalization of Image Quality
Assessment Based on Causal Inference
Yan Zhong 1 2 Xingyu Wu 3 Li Zhang 4 Chenxi Yang 1 2 Tingting Jiang 2 5

Abstract

be classified into Full-Reference IQA (FR-IQA), ReducedReference IQA (RR-IQA), and Blind IQA (BIQA) (Zhai &
Min, 2020), where BIQA exhibits broader applicability due
to its independence from reference image (Su et al., 2020;
Simeng Sun, 2023; Feng et al., 2021).

Due to the high cost of Image Quality Assessment
(IQA) datasets, achieving robust generalization
remains challenging for prevalent deep learningbased IQA methods. To address this, this paper
proposes a novel end-to-end blind IQA method:
Causal-IQA. Specifically, we first analyze the
causal mechanisms in IQA tasks and construct
a causal graph to understand the interplay and
confounding effects between distortion types, image contents, and subjective human ratings. Then,
through shifting the focus from correlations to
causality, Causal-IQA aims to improve the estimation accuracy of image quality scores by mitigating the confounding effects using a causalitybased optimization strategy. This optimization
strategy is implemented on the sample subsets
constructed by a Counterfactual Division process
based on the Backdoor Criterion. Extensive experiments illustrate the superiority of Causal-IQA.

Traditional BIQA methods aim to predict image quality
scores that align with subjective human ratings, such as
Mean Opinion Scores (MOS), by relying on manually extracted statistical features from the provided distorted images (Jiang et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2017).
Although these methods are flexible and easy to implement, they cannot achieve ideal performance when confronted with complex scenes or diverse distortions. Consequently, Deep Learning (DL)-based IQA methods have
received widespread attention due to their strong ability in
fusing discriminative features in visual domains. (Ke et al.,
2021; Talebi & Milanfar, 2018; Madhusudana et al., 2022;
Simeng Sun, 2023). However, the high cost of annotating IQA datasets restricts DL-based BIQA methods to be
trained only on small-scale datasets, leading to overfitting
and limited generalization on unseen distorted information
and images with authentical distortions (Yue et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

To address this issue, one intuitive strategy is to initialize
BIQA models with the backbones pre-trained on large-scale
databases in the field of image classification, such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Although this enables DL-based
models to learn general image features, its effectiveness in
IQA tasks is limited due to the lack of specific representation learning for distortions. Another strategy is to design
unsupervised IQA method for test time adaptation (Roy
et al., 2023), which can effectively mitigate distribution
shifts between train and test data, thus improving the performance. However, this strategy has limited applicability
as it requires additional unsupervised training to improve
the prediction accuracy on different test datasets. Furthermore, these studies often overlook the investigation of the
underlying factors that lead to the limited generalization
capability in IQA models. Therefore, we focus on exploring
an end-to-end BIQA method with good interpretability and
generalization capability.

Image quality assessment (IQA) plays a crucial role in optimizing visual experiences across different domains, including image denoising (Tian et al., 2020), restoration (Cui
et al., 2023), and generation (Elasri et al., 2022). Its primary
objective is to develop algorithms that accurately quantify
the perceptual quality of images. Based on the availability of reference information, existing IQA methods can
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing,
China 3 Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong SAR, China 4 Hefei Institute of Physical
Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China 5 National Biomedical Imaging
Center, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Tingting Jiang <ttjiang@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In the standard training paradigm for an IQA network fθ ,
the goal is to mine the correlation between distorted image
1

