ReMax: A Simple, Effective, and Efficient Reinforcement Learning Method for
Aligning Large Language Models

Ziniu Li 1 2 Tian Xu 3 4 Yushun Zhang 1 2 Zhihang Lin 1 Yang Yu 3 4 5 † Ruoyu Sun 1 6 2 † Zhi-Quan Luo 1 2

Abstract

>4 Hyper-parameters related
to the Value Model
Op mizer States of
the Value Model

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) is key to aligning Large Language Models (LLMs), typically paired with the Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm. While PPO
is a powerful method designed for general reinforcement learning tasks, it is overly sophisticated
for LLMs, leading to laborious hyper-parameter
tuning and significant computation burdens. To
make RLHF efficient, we present ReMax, which
leverages 3 properties of RLHF: fast simulation,
deterministic transitions, and trajectory-level rewards. These properties are not exploited in PPO,
making it less suitable for RLHF. Building on the
renowned REINFORCE algorithm, ReMax does
not require training an additional value model as
in PPO and is further enhanced with a new variance reduction technique. ReMax offers several
benefits over PPO: it is simpler to implement,
eliminates more than 4 hyper-parameters in PPO,
reduces GPU memory usage, and shortens training time. ReMax can save about 46% GPU memory than PPO when training a 7B model and enables training on A800-80GB GPUs without the
memory-saving offloading technique needed by
PPO. Applying ReMax to a Mistral-7B model
resulted in a 94.78% win rate on the AlpacaEval leaderboard and a 7.739 score on MT-bench,
setting a new SOTA for open-source 7B models.
These results show the effectiveness of ReMax
while addressing the limitations of PPO in LLMs.

reward

Reward Model

reward

Value Model
Reference Model

response

Reference Model

PPO

ReMax
update

LLM

update

Figure 1. Building blocks of PPO and ReMax. ReMax keeps the
reference model (for calculating KL penalty) and removes all the
components related to the value model in PPO.
ti

1. Introduction
Alignment is crucial for instructing Large Language Models
(LLMs) to adhere to human preferences. Two approaches
are commonly employed for this purpose: instruction tuning (Wei et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Longpre et al.,
2023) and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020;
Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022b;a). The former approach relies on a large amount of pre-prepared humanannotated data, necessitating practitioners to determine
LLM behavior upfront, which can be laborious. In contrast,
RLHF, the latter approach, does not require pre-defining
everything. In a nutshell, RLHF reformulates the text generation task as a sequential decision-making problem and
applies Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms to solve
it. The effectiveness of RLHF is emphasized in the GPT-4
technical report (OpenAI, 2023).
Despite its notable success, the wide application of RLHF is
hindered by its heavy computation burden (Yao et al., 2023).
We recap that RLHF unfolds in three principal steps:

†
Corresponding authors. 1 School of Data Science, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 3 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University 4 Polixir.ai 5 Pazhou Laboratory
(Huangpu) 6 China Shenzhen International Center For Industrial
and Applied Mathematics. Correspondence to: Ziniu Li <ziniuli@link.cuhk.edu.cn>, Yang Yu <yuy@nju.edu.cn>, Ruoyu Sun
<sunruoyu@cuhk.edu.cn>.

• Step 1 (SFT): supervised fine-tuning of a LLM is carried
out to find a good initialization.
• Step 2 (RM): a reward model is learned from human
preference data.
• Step 3 (RL): a LLM is fine-tuned on prompt-only datasets
utilizing an RL algorithm.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The challenge arises in the third RL step, where the LLM
must generate and enhance its responses to achieve high
1

