Isometric Representation Learning for
Disentangled Latent Space of Diffusion Models

Jaehoon Hahm * 1 Junho Lee * 1 Sunghyun Kim 1 Joonseok Lee 1 2

Abstract

problem in generative modeling. The definition of a disentangled latent space varies depending on the field, but
in generative modeling, it is defined as a latent space composed of linear subspaces, where each solely controls one
factor of the variations (Bengio et al., 2013; Higgins et al.,
2017). Through various literatures on GANs (Karras et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2020b; Kim & Mnih,
2018) and VAEs (Burgess et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018),
disentanglement is known to be beneficial for downstream
tasks such as image interpolation, inversion, and editing.
However, despite these benefits, only a few studies have
addressed disentanglement of the latent space of diffusion
models, possibly due to the relatively challenging analysis
caused by their iterative sampling process.

The latent space of diffusion model mostly still
remains unexplored, despite its great success and
potential in the field of generative modeling. In
fact, the latent space of existing diffusion models
are entangled, with a distorted mapping from its
latent space to image space. To tackle this problem, we present Isometric Diffusion, equipping a
diffusion model with a geometric regularizer to
guide the model to learn a geometrically sound latent space. Our approach allows diffusion models
to learn a more disentangled latent space, which
enables smoother interpolation, more accurate inversion, and more precise control over attributes
directly in the latent space. Extensive experiments
illustrate advantages of the proposed method in
image interpolation, image inversion, and linear
editing.

Empirically exploring the latent space of diffusion models,
we observe they are often entangled, aligned with recent
discoveries and demonstration (Park et al., 2023; Peebles &
Xie, 2023). For example, a naive latent walking by linear
interpolation between two latent vectors produces unwanted
intermediate images, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (top). Latent
walking on a spherically interpolated trajectory between two
latent vectors leads to a smoother intermediate images, as
illustrated in Fig. 1 (mid), but it is still not a geodesic on
the data manifold; on the trajectory between two men, it
unnecessarily goes through an unrelated woman.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b)
have achieved unprecedented success across multiple fields,
including image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Nichol et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Lee & Lee, 2024), image editing (Kawar et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023; Hertz et al., 2022),
video generation (Ho et al., 2022; Blattmann et al., 2023),
and scientific applications (Cho et al., 2023). However, compared to other generative models like GANs (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) or VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013), there are
few studies exploring the latent space of diffusion models.

This can be interpreted that there exist some distortions
in the latent space of diffusion models, implying that they
fail to accurately reflect the geometry of the data manifold; geodesic of latent space is not necessarily mapped to
geodesic on the data manifold. Such a misalignment often
leads to entanglement of multiple semantic concepts, which
induces a sub-optimal image interpolation, image inversion,
or fine-grained image editing.
Motivated from the desire to guide diffusion models to learn
a better disentangled latent space, we present Isometric
Diffusion, a diffusion model equipped with isometric representation learning. Isometry is a map that preserves distance
and angle between two metric spaces, and employing its
geodesic preserving property, Isometric Diffusion guides to
obtain a geometrically sound latent space that better reflects
the data manifold. Specifically, we introduce a novel loss to
encourage isometry between the latent space and the image

Learning a better latent space, particularly learning a disentangled latent space has been historically an important
*

Equal contribution 1 Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea 2 Google Research, Mountain View, California, United States.
Correspondence to: Joonseok Lee <joonseok@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

