Removing Spurious Concepts from Neural Network
Representations via Joint Subspace Estimation

Floris Holstege 1 2 Bram Wouters 1 Noud van Giersbergen 1 Cees Diks 1 2

Abstract

tions within the data (Gururangan et al., 2018; Srivastava
et al., 2020; Wang & Culotta, 2020; Sagawa et al., 2020b;
Zhou et al., 2021). For example, they use the background to
identify the animal in the picture. This can be problematic
in several ways. It makes models less trustworthy. Penguins
on grassland could be classified as cows, for example. It
also makes models difficult to interpret, as it is unclear to
what extent a model relies on which concept. Finally, this
could lead to models using undesirable concepts (e.g., race
or gender). Therefore, we would like to control whether or
not a model uses a specific concept in performing its task.

An important challenge in the field of interpretable machine learning is to ensure that deep
neural networks (DNNs) use the correct or desirable input features in performing their tasks.
Concept-removal methods aim to do this by eliminating concepts that are spuriously correlated with
the main task from the neural network representation of the data. However, existing methods tend
to be overzealous by inadvertently removing part
of the correct or desirable features as well, leading
to wrong interpretations and hurting model performance. We propose an iterative algorithm that separates spurious from main-task concepts by jointly
estimating two low-dimensional orthogonal subspaces of the neural network representation. By
evaluating the algorithm on benchmark datasets
from computer vision (Waterbirds, CelebA) and
natural language processing (MultiNLI), we show
it outperforms existing concept-removal methods
in terms of identifying the main-task and spurious
concepts, while removing only the latter.

Figure 1. High-level overview of Joint Subspace Estimation
(JSE) for concept removal: the input x is fed through a neural
network f (x), from which we can extract the vector representation z. Within the vector representation, two orthogonal subspaces
are identified: one related to the spurious concept (e.g. the background), and one to the main-task concept (e.g. animal type).

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive results in computer vision and language modeling,
it is notoriously difficult to control which concepts are being
used by DNNs in performing their tasks. A concept refers
to a representation in the data of a human-defined object or
phenomenon (Kim et al., 2018). For example, if a model’s
main task is to distinguish between images of cows and penguins, the training data might contain a spurious correlation
between the concepts of background and animal type (cows
typically appearing on grassland, and penguins typically in
the snow). DNNs frequently rely on such spurious correla-

Removing concepts directly from the training data (e.g.,
images or text) is non-trivial and costly. An alternative is
to focus on the embeddings, which are vector representations of the data generated by the neural network. Post-hoc
concept-removal methods aim to eliminate a concept from
the embeddings, after the parameters of the neural network
are frozen. Typically a concept classifier is trained on the
embeddings, from which the concept features are then removed (Ravfogel et al., 2020; 2022a). In the example of distinguishing cows and penguins, we would train a classifier
to predict the spurious concept of background type and use
this to remove background features from the embeddings.
Afterwards, a linear classifier is trained on the transformed

1

University of Amsterdam, Department of Quantitative Economics 2 Tinbergen Institute. Correspondence to: Floris Holstege
<f.g.holstege@uva.nl>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

