Imitation Learning in Discounted Linear MDPs without exploration assumptions

Luca Viano 1 Stratis Skoulakis 1 Volkan Cevher 1


log|Π|
e
O
expert demonstrations to ensure with high
2
4
(1−γ) ϵE
probability that the output policy is at most ϵE -suboptimal.

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for imitation learning
in infinite horizon linear MDPs dubbed ILARL
which greatly improves the bound on the number of trajectories that the learner needs to sample from the environment. In particular, we remove exploration assumptions required in previous works and we improve the dependence

on the
desired accuracy ϵ from O ϵ−5 to O ϵ−4 . Our
result relies on a connection between imitation
learning and online learning in MDPs with adversarial losses. For the latter setting, we present
the first result for infinite horizon linear MDP
which may be of independent interest. Moreover,
we are able to provide a strengthen result for the

finite horizon case where we achieve O ϵ−2 .
Numerical experiments with linear function approximation shows that ILARL outperforms other
commonly used algorithms.

The quartic dependence on the effective horizon term
((1−γ)−1 ) is problematic for long horizon problems. Moreover, the dependence on Π requires to make prior assumption on the expert policy structure to provide bounds which
do not scale with the number of states in the function approximation setting. Thankfully, the dependence on the
effective horizon can be improved resorting to MDP interaction. There exists an interesting line of works achieving this
goal considering an interacting setting where the learner has
the possibility to query the expert policy at any state visited
during the MDP interaction (Ross & Bagnell, 2010; Ross
et al., 2011) or that require a generative model to implement
efficiently the moment matching procedure (Swamy et al.,
2022). Another recent work requires a generative model
to sample the initial state of the trajectory from the expert
occupancy measure (Swamy et al., 2023). In this work, we
considered a different scenario which is adopted in most of
applied imitation learning (Ho et al., 2016; Ho & Ermon,
2016; Fu et al., 2018; Reddy et al., 2019; Dadashi et al.,
2021; Watson et al., 2023; Garg et al., 2021; Ni et al., 2021).
In this case, the expert policy can not be queried but only
a dataset of expert demonstrations collected beforehand is
available.

1. Introduction
Imitation Learning (IL) is of extreme importance for all
applications where designing a reward function is cumbersome while collecting demonstrations from an expert policy
πE is easy. Examples are autonomous driving (Knox et al.,
2021), robotics (Osa et al., 2018), and economics/finance
(Charpentier et al., 2020). The goal is to learn a policy
which competes with the expert policy under the true unknown cost function of the Markov Decision Process (MDP)
(Puterman, 1994).

The setting has received scarse theoretical attention so far.
The only results we are aware of are: (Shani et al., 2021;
Xu et al., 2023) that focus on the tabular, finite horizon
case, (Liu et al., 2022) in the finite horizon linear mixture
MDP setting and (Viano et al., 2022) in the infinite horizon
Linear MDP setting. In all these works bound the number of required expert demonstrations scale as (1 − γ)−2
which improves considerably over the quartic depedence
attained by BC. However, (Viano et al., 2022) made the
following assumption on the features that greatly simplifies
the exploration in the MDP.

Imitation learning relies on two data resources: expert
demonstrations collected acting with πE and data that can be
collected interacting in the MDP with policies chosen by the
learning algorithm. The first approach known as behavioural
cloning (BC) solves the problem applying supervised learning. That is, it requires no interaction in the MDP but it
requires knowledge of a class Π such that πE ∈ Π and

Assumption. Persistent excitation
It holds that
for any policy π k in the sequence of policies generated by the algorithm
adopted by the learner

λmin Es,a∼dπk [ϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊺ ] ≥ β > 0.

*
Equal contribution 1 LIONS, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Luca Viano <luca.viano@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Despite similar assumptions being commonly used in infinite horizon function approximation setting in imitation (Wu
1

