Towards Theoretical Understandings of Self-Consuming Generative Models

Shi Fu 1 Sen Zhang 2 Yingjie Wang 3 4 Xinmei Tian 1 5 Dacheng Tao 6

Abstract

publicly accessible generative models, such as Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) for images and ChatGPT
(OpenAI, 2023) for text, have directly enabled the creation
and dissemination of synthetic content at scale, thereby accelerating the flow of synthetic data towards the Internet.
Consequently, this surge in synthetic data has led to a situation where even existing web-scale datasets are known
to contain generated content (Schuhmann et al., 2022). Additionally, the identification of such generated content introduces distinctive technical challenges (Sadasivan et al.,
2023; Huschens et al., 2023).

This paper tackles the emerging challenge of training generative models within a self-consuming
loop, wherein successive generations of models
are recursively trained on mixtures of real and
synthetic data from previous generations. We construct a theoretical framework to rigorously evaluate how this training procedure impacts the data
distributions learned by future models, including
parametric and non-parametric models. Specifically, we derive bounds on the total variation
(TV) distance between the synthetic data distributions produced by future models and the original
real data distribution under various mixed training
scenarios for diffusion models with a one-hiddenlayer neural network score function. Our analysis
demonstrates that this distance can be effectively
controlled under the condition that mixed training
dataset sizes or proportions of real data are large
enough. Interestingly, we further unveil a phase
transition induced by expanding synthetic data
amounts, proving theoretically that while the TV
distance exhibits an initial ascent, it declines beyond a threshold point. Finally, we present results
for kernel density estimation, delivering nuanced
insights such as the impact of mixed data training
on error propagation.

Despite potential risks, synthetic data is also being deliberately leveraged in various applications for several reasons. Firstly, generating synthetic training data offers a
more efficient alternative to sourcing real-world samples,
and has been shown to improve model performance through
data augmentation (Antoniou et al., 2017; Azizi et al.,
2023). Secondly, in sensitive domains such as medical
imaging, synthetic data enables critical privacy protection
(DuMont Schütte et al., 2021). More importantly, the expanding scale of deep generative models necessitates synthetic data, as these models are now trained on web-scale
datasets that likely exhaust the supply of readily available
real data on the internet (Villalobos et al., 2022). Thus, future generations of deep generative models will inevitably
need to confront the presence of synthetic data in their training datasets. Consequently, a self-consuming training loop
emerges in which future models are repeatedly trained on
synthetic data generated from previous generations.

1. Introduction

The study of generative models within the self-consuming
loop has attracted substantial attention in current research.
Empirical results from Shumailov et al. (2023) and Briesch
et al. (2023) suggest that output diversity inevitably decreases after sufficient training generations. Alemohammad
et al. (2023) perform experiments under various mixed training scenarios and conclude that injecting real data can mitigate model collapse. Despite these empirical observations,
however, theoretical insights are still lacking. Shumailov
et al. (2023) and Alemohammad et al. (2023) provide theoretical intuition by analyzing simple Gaussian toy models,
but their approach targets intuitive understanding rather than
in-depth analysis. Bertrand et al. (2023) further establishes
an upper bound on the deviation of the output parameters
of the likelihood-based generative model from optimal val-

With the rapid advancements in deep generative models,
synthetic data of all varieties is expanding swiftly. Notably,
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 3 College of Control
Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum (East
China), Qingdao, China 4 Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education, China
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National
Science Center, China 6 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Shi Fu <fs311@mail.ustc.edu.cn>,
Dacheng Tao <dacheng.tao@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

