Learning Exceptional Subgroups by End-to-End Maximizing KL-divergence

Sascha Xu * 1 Nils Philipp Walter * 1 Janis Kalofolias 1 Jilles Vreeken 1

Abstract

The common denominator in such applications is to present
the relevant subgroups to a domain expert. In other words,
not only do we require to find subsets with exceptional behavior, but also, that these can clearly be interpreted by the
respective audience. That is, we have a joint optimization
task of learning simple descriptions of sub-populations for
which the property of interest is (locally) exceptionally distributed compared to the rest of the dataset. Typically, such a
description is a conjunction of predicates, each based on the
features of the dataset. For example on census data, where
wage is the target property, a subgroup could be “Women
without higher education” (Fig. 1a) have an exceptionally
low salary compared to the overall population (Fig. 1b).

Finding and describing sub-populations that are
exceptional in terms of a target property has
important applications in many scientific disciplines, from identifying disadvantaged demographic groups in census data to finding conductive molecules within gold nanoparticles. Current approaches to finding such subgroups require
pre-discretized predictive variables, do not permit non-trivial target distributions, do not scale
to large datasets, and struggle to find diverse results. To address these limitations, we propose
S YFLOW, an end-to-end optimizable approach in
which we leverage normalizing flows to model arbitrary target distributions and introduce a novel
neural layer that results in easily interpretable subgroup descriptions. We demonstrate on synthetic
data, real-world data, and via a case study, that
S YFLOW reliably finds highly exceptional subgroups accompanied by insightful descriptions.

Since the introduction of subgroup discovery by Klösgen,
many approaches have been proposed (Atzmueller, 2015).
However, these have not kept up with the recent advances
in machine learning and suffer from three main limitations.
First, due to combinatorial optimization, these methods are
limited to small datasets. Second, most methods assume
that the target follows a simple distribution, e.g. normal or
binomial distribution. Although there are proposals to learn
a proxy of the target distribution, their results are less interpretable. Third, existing methods require a pre-quantization
of the continuous features, which is independent of the optimization procedure. As we show in our experiments, this
greatly influences the quality of the results.

1. Introduction
The majority of modern machine learning focuses on finding global models that perform well on predictive tasks such
as classification. In this domain, deep neural networks often achieve state-of-the-art performance, at the expense of
human-interpretable insight.

To overcome these limitations, we propose S YFLOW. Our
key contributions are as follows:
(i) We formulate subgroup discovery as a continuous optimization problem based on KL-divergence. This
enables first-order optimization, which significantly
improves runtime and performance.
(ii) We leverage Normalizing Flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015a) to accurately learn the target distribution from data, enabling us to deal with intricate
real-world distributions.
(iii) We propose a neuro-symbolic rule layer to learn interpretable subgroup descriptions and the corresponding
discretization in an end-to-end fashion.

Orthogonal to the advances in predictive modeling, many
scientific applications require descriptive modeling such as
finding sub-populations that are somehow exceptional, and
providing a human-interpretable description for these. Applications of finding such subgroups range from identifying
disadvantaged demographic groups in census data (Boll
& Lagemann, 2019; Ortiz & Cummins, 2011) to learning
those combinations of properties that single out materials
with desirable properties (Sutton et al., 2020).
*

Equal contribution 1 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information
Security, Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Sascha Xu
<sascha.xu@cispa.de>, Nils P. Walter <nils.walter@cispa.de>.

We extensively evaluate S YFLOW on synthetic and realworld data. We show that S YFLOW accurately and reliably
learns and characterizes exceptional subgroups, even for
complex target distributions. We demonstrate that in con-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

