Catapults in SGD: spikes in the training loss
and their impact on generalization through feature learning

Libin Zhu 1 2 Chaoyue Liu 2 Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan 3 4 Mikhail Belkin 1 2

Abstract

Socher, 2017; Xing et al., 2018) (see Fig. 1 as an example).
One may not a priori expect the training loss to decrease
back to its “pre-spike”
level after a large spike.
Yet, this is what is
commonly observed in
training. Furthermore,
the resulting “post-spike”
model can yield improved generalization
performance (He et al.,
2016; Zagoruyko & KoFigure 1. Spikes in training loss
when optimized using SGD
modakis, 2016; Huang
(x-axis: iteration).
(Source:
et al., 2017).

In this paper, we first present an explanation regarding the common occurrence of spikes in the
training loss when neural networks are trained
with stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We provide evidence that the spikes in the training
loss of SGD are “catapults”, an optimization
phenomenon originally observed in GD with
large learning rates in (Lewkowycz et al., 2020).
We empirically show that these catapults occur
in a low-dimensional subspace spanned by the
top eigenvectors of the tangent kernel, for both
GD and SGD. Second, we posit an explanation
for how catapults lead to better generalization
by demonstrating that catapults promote feature
learning by increasing alignment with the Average
Gradient Outer Product (AGOP) of the true predictor. Furthermore, we demonstrate that a smaller
batch size in SGD induces a larger number of catapults, thereby improving AGOP alignment and
test performance.

Wikipedia)

Why do spikes occur during training, and how do the spikes
relate to generalization?
In this work, we answer these questions by connecting three
common but seemingly unrelated phenomena in deep learning:
1. Spikes in the training loss of SGD,

1. Introduction

2. Catapult dynamics in GD (Lewkowycz et al., 2020),

Training algorithms are a key ingredient to the success of
deep learning. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951), a stochastic variant of gradient descent (GD), has been effective in finding parameters that
yield good test performance despite the complicated nonlinear nature of neural networks. Empirical evidence suggests that training networks using SGD with a larger learning rate results in better predictors (Frankle et al., 2020;
Smith & Topin, 2019; Gilmer et al., 2021). In such settings, it is common to observe significant spikes in the
training loss (LeCun et al., 2015; Ruder, 2016; Keskar &

3. Better generalization when training networks with
small batch SGD as opposed to larger batch size or
GD.
In particular, we show that spikes in the training loss of
SGD are caused by catapult dynamics, which were originally characterized in (Lewkowycz et al., 2020) as a single
spike in the loss when training with GD and large learning
rate. We then show that smaller batch size in SGD results in
a greater number of catapults. We connect the optimization
phenomena of catapults to generalization by showing that
catapults improve generalization through increasing feature
learning, which is quantified by the alignment between the
Average Gradient Outer Product (AGOP) of the trained network and the true AGOP (Härdle & Stoker, 1989; Hristache
et al., 2001; Xia et al., 2002; Trivedi et al., 2014; Radhakrishnan et al., 2024a). Since decreasing batch size in SGD
leads to more catapults, our result implies that SGD with
small batch size yields improved generalization (see Table 1

1
Department of Computer Science, UCSD. 2 Halicioğlu Data
Science Institute, UCSD. 3 Harvard University. 4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. Correspondence to: Libin Zhu <libinzhu@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

