How to Escape Sharp Minima with Random Perturbations

Kwangjun Ahn 1 2 Ali Jadbabaie 1 Suvrit Sra 1 3

Abstract

minima due to various advances in both empirical and theoretical domains. Motivated by the extensive research on flat
minima, this work undertakes a formal study that

Modern machine learning applications have witnessed the remarkable success of optimization
algorithms that are designed to find flat minima.
Motivated by this design choice, we undertake
a formal study that (i) formulates the notion of
flat minima, and (ii) studies the complexity of
finding them. Specifically, we adopt the trace of
the Hessian of the cost function as a measure of
flatness, and use it to formally define the notion of
approximate flat minima. Under this notion, we
then analyze algorithms that find approximate flat
minima efficiently. For general cost functions, we
discuss a gradient-based algorithm that finds an
approximate flat local minimum efficiently. The
main component of the algorithm is to use gradients computed from randomly perturbed iterates
to estimate a direction that leads to flatter minima. For the setting where the cost function is
an empirical risk over training data, we present a
faster algorithm that is inspired by a recently proposed practical algorithm called sharpness-aware
minimization, supporting its success in practice.

(i) delineates a clear definition for flat minima, and
(ii) studies the upper complexity bounds of finding them.
We begin by emphasizing the significance of flat minima,
based on recent advancements in the field.
1.1. Why Flat Minima?
Several recent optimization methods that are explicitly designed to find flat minima have achieved substantial empirical success (Chaudhari et al., 2019; Izmailov et al., 2018;
Foret et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2021; Norton
and Royset, 2021; Kaddour et al., 2022). One notable example is sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) (Foret et al.,
2021), which has shown significant improvements in prediction performance of deep neural network models for image
classification problems (Foret et al., 2021) and language
processing problems (Bahri et al., 2022). Furthermore, research by Liu et al. (2023) indicates that for language model
pretraining, the flatness of minima serves as a more reliable
predictor of model efficacy than the pretraining loss itself,
particularly when the loss approaches its minimum values.
Complementing the empirical evidence, recent theoretical
research underscores the importance of flat minima as a
desirable attribute for optimization. Key insights include:

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning applications, the training loss
function f : Rd → R to be optimized often has a continuum
of local/global minima, and the central question is which
minima lead to good prediction performance. Among many
different properties for minima, “flatness” of minima has
been a promising candidate extensively studied in the literature (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2017;
Dinh et al., 2017; Dziugaite and Roy, 2017; Neyshabur
et al., 2017; Sagun et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2018; Chaudhari
et al., 2019; He et al., 2019; Mulayoff and Michaeli, 2020;
Tsuzuku et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021).

• Provable generalization of flat minima. For overparameterized models, research by Ding et al. (2022)
demonstrates that flat minima correspond to the true
solutions in low-rank matrix recovery tasks, such as
matrix/bilinear sensing, robust PCA, matrix completion,
and regression with a single hidden layer neural network,
leading to better generalization. This is further extended
by Gatmiry et al. (2023) to deep linear networks learned
from linear measurements. In other words, in a range of
nonconvex problems with multiple minima, flat minima
yield superior predictive performance.
• Benifits of flat minima in pretraining. Along with the
empirical validations, Liu et al. (2023) prove that in simplified masked language models, flat minima correlate
with the most generalizable solutions.
• Inductive bias of algorithms towards flat minima. It

Recently, there has been a resurgence of interest in flat
1
MIT 2 Microsoft Research 3 TU Munich. Correspondence to:
Kwangjun Ahn <kjahn@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

