Batch and match: black-box variational inference with a score-based divergence

Diana Cai 1 Chirag Modi 1 2 Loucas Pillaud-Vivien 1 3 Charles C. Margossian 1 Robert M. Gower 1
David M. Blei 4 Lawrence K. Saul 1

Abstract

statistics, where the target is a posterior distribution of latent
variables given observations, but where only the model’s
joint distribution is available in closed form. Variational
inference (VI) has emerged as a leading method for fast approximate inference (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright et al.,
2008; Blei et al., 2017). The idea behind VI is to posit a
parameterized family of approximating distributions, and
then to find the member of that family which is closest to
the target distribution.

Most leading implementations of black-box variational inference (BBVI) are based on optimizing
a stochastic evidence lower bound (ELBO). But
such approaches to BBVI often converge slowly
due to the high variance of their gradient estimates
and their sensitivity to hyperparameters. In this
work, we propose batch and match (BaM), an
alternative approach to BBVI based on a scorebased divergence. Notably, this score-based divergence can be optimized by a closed-form proximal update for Gaussian variational families with
full covariance matrices. We analyze the convergence of BaM when the target distribution is
Gaussian, and we prove that in the limit of infinite
batch size the variational parameter updates converge exponentially quickly to the target mean and
covariance. We also evaluate the performance of
BaM on Gaussian and non-Gaussian target distributions that arise from posterior inference in hierarchical and deep generative models. In these experiments, we find that BaM typically converges
in fewer (and sometimes significantly fewer) gradient evaluations than leading implementations of
BBVI based on ELBO maximization.

Recently, VI methods have become increasingly “black box,”
in that they only require calculation of the log of the unnormalized target and (for some algorithms) its gradients (Ranganath et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Archer et al.,
2015; Ryder et al., 2018; Locatello et al., 2018; Burroni
et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Domke, 2019; Welandawe
et al., 2022; Domke et al., 2023; Modi et al., 2023; Giordano
et al., 2024). Further applications have built on advances
in automatic differentiation, and now black-box variational
inference (BBVI) is widely deployed in robust software
packages for probabilistic programming (Salvatier et al.,
2016; Kucukelbir et al., 2017; Bingham et al., 2019).
In general, the ingredients of a BBVI strategy are the form of
the approximating family, the divergence to be minimized,
and the optimization algorithm to minimize it. Most BBVI
algorithms work with a factorized (or mean-field) family,
and minimize the reverse Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
via stochastic gradient descent (SGD). But this approach
has its drawbacks. The optimizations can be plagued by
high-variance gradients and sensitivity to hyperparameters
of the learning algorithms (Dhaka et al., 2020; 2021). These
issues are further exacerbated in high-dimensional problems
and when using richer variational families that model the
correlations between different latent variables. There has
been recent work on BBVI which avoids SGD for Gaussian
variational families (Modi et al., 2023), but this approach
does not minimize an explicit divergence and requires additional heuristics to converge for non-Gaussian targets.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic modeling plays a fundamental role in many
problems of inference and decision-making, but it can be
challenging to develop accurate probabilistic models that remain computationally tractable. In typical applications, the
goal is to estimate a target distribution that cannot be evaluated or sampled from exactly, but where an unnormalized
form is available. A canonical situation is applied Bayesian
1

Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute 2 Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute
3
CERMICS Laboratory, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech 4 Department
of Statistics, Department of Computer Science, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Diana Cai <dcai@flatironinstitute.org>.

In this paper, we develop a new approach to BBVI. It is
based on a different divergence, accommodates expressive
variational families, and does not rely on SGD for optimization. In particular, we introduce a novel score-based
divergence that measures the agreement of the scores, or

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

