A Dynamical Model of Neural Scaling Laws

Blake Bordelon 1 2 Alexander Atanasov 3 2 Cengiz Pehlevan 1 2

Abstract

2020). These findings are termed “neural scaling laws”.

On a variety of tasks, the performance of neural
networks predictably improves with training time,
dataset size and model size across many orders
of magnitude. This phenomenon is known as a
neural scaling law. Of fundamental importance is
the compute-optimal scaling law, which reports
the performance as a function of units of compute
when choosing model sizes optimally. We analyze a random feature model trained with gradient
descent as a solvable model of network training
and generalization. This reproduces many observations about neural scaling laws. First, our
model makes a prediction about why the scaling of performance with training time and with
model size have different power law exponents.
Consequently, the theory predicts an asymmetric
compute-optimal scaling rule where the number
of training steps are increased faster than model
parameters, consistent with recent empirical observations. Second, it has been observed that early
in training, networks converge to their infinitewidth dynamics at a rate 1/width but at late time
exhibit a rate width−c , where c depends on the
structure of the architecture and task. We show
that our model exhibits this behavior. Lastly, our
theory shows how the gap between training and
test loss can gradually build up over time due to
repeated reuse of data.

Neural scaling laws play a central role in modern deep learning practice, and have substantial implications for the optimal trade-off between model size and training time (Hoffmann et al., 2022), as well as architecture selection (Alabdulmohsin et al., 2023). Understanding the origin of such
scaling laws, as well as their exponents, has the potential to
offer insight into better architectures, the design of better
datasets (Sorscher et al., 2022), and the failure modes and
limitations of deep learning systems. Yet, many questions
about neural scaling laws remain open.
In this paper, we introduce and analyze a solvable model
which captures many important aspects of neural scaling
laws. In particular, we are interested in understanding the
following empirically observed phenomena:
Test Loss Scales as a Power-law in Training Time and
Model Size and Compute. In many domains of deep
learning, the test loss of a model with N trainable parameters trained for t iterations has been found to scale as
L(t, N ) ≈ L0 + at t−rt + aN N −rN (Kaplan et al., 2020;
Hoffmann et al., 2022). These scaling law exponents rt , rN
generally depend on the dataset and architecture. We demonstrate scaling laws on simple vision and language tasks in
Figure 1. The compute is proportional to the number of
steps of gradient descent times the model size C ∝ N t.
Setting N and t optimally gives that test loss scales as a
power law in C. This is the compute optimal scaling law.
Compute-Optimal Training Time and Model Size Scaling Exponents Are Different. A discrepancy in exponents rt and rN is usually observed to some degree depdending on the data distribution and architecture Hoffmann et al.
(2022); Bachmann et al. (2024). The gap between exponents would lead to asymmetric compute-optimal scaling of
parameters. For compute budget C, model size should scale
N ∝ C c1 and training time t ∝ C c2 with c2 > c1 . This
difference in exponents led to a change in the scaling rule
for large language models, generating large performance
gains.

1. Introduction
Large scale language and vision models have been shown
to achieve better performance as the number of parameters
and number of training steps are increased. Moreover, the
scaling of various loss metrics (such as cross entropy or
MSE test loss) has been empirically observed to exhibit
remarkably regular, often power law behavior across several
orders of magnitude (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al.,
1

SEAS, Harvard University 2 Kempner Institute, Harvard University 3 Department of Physics, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Cengiz Pehlevan <cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu>.

Larger Models Train Faster. Provided feature learning
is held constant across model scales (i.e. adopting meanfield or µP scaling), wider networks tend to train faster
(Yang et al., 2021) (Figure 1). If training proceeds in an
online/one-pass setting where datapoints are not repeated,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

