Using Left and Right Brains Together: Towards Vision and Language Planning

Jun Cen 1 2 3 * Chenfei Wu 2 * Xiao Liu 2 Shengming Yin 2 Yixuan Pei 4 Jinglong Yang 1 5 Qifeng Chen 3 †
Nan Duan 2 † Jianguo Zhang 1 6 †

Which object would the
person put down next?

Which object would the
person put down next?

Text

Text

LLM

Language
Planning

Step 1: What is the person holding?
Step 2: What actions has the person performed
with the objects so far?
Step 3: Which object would the person put down
next?

Language Plan

LMM

The bottle
or phone.

LMM
bottle

bottle

LVM

phone

phone

bottle

Vision
Planning

phone

phone

Step 1

Image / Video

Image / Video

The bottle

Output

Output
bottle

Step 2

bottle
phone

Step 3

Vision Plan
(a) Existing works

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Existing Large Multi-modality Models (LMMs) directly make the decision based on text and image inputs. Our Vision-Language
Planning (VLP) framework conducts both language planning and vision planning first, which serves as the left hemisphere and the right
hemisphere of a human brain, and then uses an LMM for the final decision making.

Abstract

vision-only tasks, and language-only tasks. The
results demonstrate the superior performance of
our approach, indicating that the integration of
visual and language planning yields better contextually aware task execution.

Large Language Models (LLMs) and Large Multimodality Models (LMMs) have demonstrated remarkable decision masking capabilities on a variety of tasks. However, they inherently operate
planning within the language space, lacking the
vision and spatial imagination ability. In contrast,
humans utilize both left and right hemispheres of
the brain for language and visual planning during the thinking process. Therefore, we introduce
a novel vision-language planning framework in
this work to perform concurrent visual and language planning for tasks with inputs of any form.
Our framework incorporates visual planning to
capture intricate environmental details, while language planning enhances the logical coherence of
the overall system. We evaluate the effectiveness
of our framework across vision-language tasks,

1. Introduction
The advent of large-scale auto-regressive text pre-training
equips Large Language Models (LLMs) with a powerful
ability to conduct sophisticated dialogue and advanced
cognitive functions (Brown et al., 2020). Building upon
the strong LLMs, plenty of Large Multi-modality Models
(LMMs) (Achiam et al., 2023) and agents (Wu et al., 2023)
have been developed to address the multi-modality user demands. These LMMs have shown remarkable achievements
across various domains, such as robotics (Du et al., 2023a),
medical diagnosis (Singhal et al., 2023), and games (Wang
et al., 2023a).

*

Equal contribution 1 Research Institute of Trustworthy
Autonomous Systems and Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Xi’an Jiaotong University 5 City University of Hong Kong 6 Peng Cheng Lab,
Shenzhen, China.
†Correspondence to: Qifeng Chen
<cqf@ust.hk>, Nan Duan <nanduan@microsoft.com>, Jianguo
Zhang <zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn>.

Most LMMs incorporate a trainable bridge network designed to align visual features with linguistic representations (Liu et al., 2023), thereby facilitating the processing
of both visual and language tokens by a LLM. Recently,
language planning such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023d) has been integrated into
LMMs, offering a structured methodology to decompose
intricate questions into more tractable components and enabling a sequenced and step-wise reasoning approach. This
kind of CoT language planning has been demonstrated to

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

