f -Divergence Based Classification: Beyond the Use of Cross-Entropy

Nicola Novello 1 Andrea M. Tonello 1

Abstract

the estimation algorithm. Then, the MAP algorithm is welldefined and applicable when the posterior density is known.
If the posterior probability is unknown, the first fundamental
step towards solving the MAP problem consists of learning
the posterior density from the data. In this direction, deep
learning (DL) approaches learn the model and solve the estimation task directly via data observation. This is achieved
by leveraging artificial neural networks, whose ability to
model probability density functions (pdfs) makes them particularly suited for this task, as shown in (Hornik et al., 1989;
LeCun et al., 2015; Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan, 2016;
Papamakarios et al., 2017). DL models require the design of
two main elements: the network architecture, which defines
the class of functions the network can estimate, and the objective function that is exploited during the training phase to
learn the optimal parameters of the network. In reference to
neural network-based classification techniques, most of the
previous work focused on the conceievement of the network
architecture (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy et al.,
2015; Rezende et al., 2017; Tong et al., 2020; Bhojanapalli
et al., 2021). Contrarily, a smaller part of classification literature is dedicated to the objective function design. In most
cases, classification is achieved through the minimization
of the cross-entropy loss function between the data empirical probability density function pdata and the probability
density function output of the neural network pmodel (Kussul et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2018). The minimization of
the cross-entropy corresponds to the minimization of the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the same two
probability distributions. The KL divergence is defined as
 

pdata
DKL (pdata ||pmodel ) = Epdata log
, (1)
pmodel

In deep learning, classification tasks are formalized as optimization problems often solved via
the minimization of the cross-entropy. However,
recent advancements in the design of objective
functions allow the usage of the f -divergence to
generalize the formulation of the optimization
problem for classification. We adopt a Bayesian
perspective and formulate the classification task
as a maximum a posteriori probability problem.
We propose a class of objective functions based on
the variational representation of the f -divergence.
Furthermore, driven by the challenge of improving the state-of-the-art approach, we propose a
bottom-up method that leads us to the formulation of an objective function corresponding to a
novel f -divergence referred to as shifted log (SL).
We theoretically analyze the objective functions
proposed and numerically test them in three application scenarios: toy examples, image datasets,
and signal detection/decoding problems. The analyzed scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach and that the SL divergence
achieves the highest classification accuracy in almost all the considered cases.

1. Introduction
Classification problems are relevant in a multitude of domains, such as computer vision, biomedical, and telecommunications engineering (Peng et al., 2010; Nachmani et al.,
2018; Uy et al., 2019). In general, classification refers to
the estimation of a discrete vector x (i.e., the class) given
an observation vector y. In the Bayesian framework, the
optimal method to solve classification problems is derived
from the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) principle
(Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004; Jeong et al., 2024). Classical
estimation theory uses a model-based approach to derive

while the cross-entropy (CE) is Epdata [− log (pmodel )].
Alternatively, some papers propose the usage of proper
losses, which is a family of losses characterized by Bregman
divergences (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). For instance, the
authors in (Hui & Belkin, 2020) compare the square loss
and the cross-entropy for supervised classification tasks,
while in (Dong et al., 2019), the authors propose two novel
objective functions based on logistic regression.
Another popular class of divergence functions is the f divergence, which has been used for various classification
algorithms. The authors in (Yu et al., 2020) propose a
min-max game for the objective function design of deep

1

Department of Networked and Embedded Systems, University
of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria. Correspondence to: Nicola
Novello <nicola.novello@aau.at>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

