Partial Multi-View Multi-Label Classification via Semantic Invariance Learning
and Prototype Modeling

Chengliang Liu 1 Gehui Xu 1 Jie Wen 1 Yabo Liu 1 Chao Huang 2 Yong Xu 1

Abstract

resentation learning (Wu & Goodman, 2018; Wang et al.,
2023). Whether it is the classification or regression tasks
based on multi-modal data with significant modal discrepancy, or the feature learning on multi-feature data originating from the same modality, they can all be unified under
the theoretical framework of multi-view learning, which
focuses on extracting and utilizing semantic invariance to
facilitate downstream decision-making (Hwang et al., 2021;
Zeng et al., 2023).

The difficulty of partial multi-view multi-label
learning lies in coupling the consensus of multiview data with the task relevance of multi-label
classification, under the condition where partial
views and labels are unavailable. In this paper,
we seek to compress cross-view representation to
maximize the proportion of shared information to
better predict semantic tags. To achieve this, we
establish a model consistent with the information
bottleneck theory for learning cross-view shared
representation, minimizing non-shared information while maintaining feature validity to help
increase the purity of task-relevant information.
Furthermore, we model multi-label prototype instances in the latent space and learn label correlations in a data-driven manner. Our method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on multiple public datasets while exhibiting good compatibility with both partial and complete data. Finally,
we experimentally reveal the importance of condensing shared information under the premise of
information balancing, in the process of multiview information encoding and compression.

In recent years, traditional multi-view learning methods,
especially multi-view representation learning methods, have
been gradually replaced by deep multi-view learning networks, thanks to the powerful mapping capabilities of deep
neural networks that surpass manual feature extraction
(Wang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023e;f). For instance, some
works employ deep autoencoders to extract view-specific
features and uses contrastive learning to aggregate crossview semantic representations in a high-level feature space
(Xu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023a; 2024). Castrejon et al.
attempted to learn a modality-independent shared representation for cross-modal scene images using convolutional
neural networks (Castrejon et al., 2016). Wen et al. employed feature-weighted fusion to achieve consistent representation learning in the embedding space (Wen et al., 2023).
In addition, Lee et al. proposed to learn task-relevant information while minimizing the mutual information between
shared view representation and original data (Lee & Van der
Schaar, 2021). It is evident that a core motivation of multiview learning theory is to eliminate or reduce redundant
information or uncertainty in single-view representation by
utilizing and exploiting multi-view shared information. As
research on multi-view learning advances, a more general
and challenging scenario, in which partial views of some or
all of the data are missing, has emerged as a new research
hotspot, and we refer to tasks based on such settings as
incomplete multi-view learning (Liu et al., 2022; 2023c).

1. Introduction
Throughout the years, we have been consistently pursuing
the evaluation or decision-making of target objects based on
multiple angles, levels, and diversities of information (Luo
et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2023d). In the field of data analysis and pattern recognition, multi-view learning is being used to enhance various
machine learning tasks due to its powerful potential for rep1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
of Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 School of Cyber Science and
Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Jie Wen <jiewen pr@126.com>,
Yong Xu <yongxu@ymail.com>.

Reflecting on the developmental trajectory of multi-view
learning, we clearly observe that from unsupervised multiview clustering tasks to supervised multi-view classification
tasks, multi-view learning is evolving towards a close integration with downstream tasks. In this paper, our focus
is on a specific and complex supervised task: multi-label

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

