LeaPformer: Enabling Linear Transformers for Autoregressive and
Simultaneous Tasks via Learned Proportions

Victor Agostinelli 1 Sanghyun Hong 1 Lizhong Chen 1

Abstract
A promising approach to preserving model performance in linearized transformers is to employ
position-based re-weighting functions. However,
state-of-the-art re-weighting functions rely heavily on target sequence lengths, making it difficult or impossible to apply them to autoregressive and simultaneous tasks, where the target
and sometimes even the input sequence length
are unknown. To address this issue, we propose
Learned Proportions (LeaP) and LeaPformers2 .
Our contribution is built on two major components. First, we generalize the dependence on
explicit positional representations and sequence
lengths into dependence on sequence proportions
for re-weighting. Second, we replace static positional representations with dynamic proportions
derived via a compact module, enabling more
flexible attention concentration patterns. We evaluate LeaPformer against eight representative efficient transformers on the Long-Range Arena
benchmark, showing that LeaPformer achieves
the best quality-throughput trade-off, as well as
LeaPformer to Wikitext-103 autoregressive language modeling and simultaneous speech-to-text
translation for two language pairs, achieving competitive results.

Figure 1. Contrasting accuracy-throughput trade-offs between
LeaPformers and baselines. Throughput for 4k sequence length
tasks (x-axis) vs. average accuracy score (y-axis) across the five
tasks in the Long-Range Arena benchmark. The memory footprint
of each mechanisim is specified in labels and represented by circle
size. LeaPformers provide the best average inference accuracythroughput trade-off while achieving the second best overall score
with only up to a 1.5% increase to parameter count.

more closely than ever. Unfortunately, the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanisms of typical transformers
limits the lengths of the sequences that they can process,
rendering them sub-optimal or even impossible to apply for
tasks with long sequences.

1. Introduction

Naturally, an active area of possible improvement for classical transformers are efficient attention mechanisms that
reduce the sometimes prohibitive quadratic run-time and
memory complexity of softmax attention with respect to
sequence lengths. Many efficient transformer variants
have been proposed, including both sub-quadratic attention
mechanisms, usually with key assumptions or experimental
bounds surrounding their construction, and truly linear attention mechanisms with no prior environmental assumptions
(Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2020; Peng
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2022b). While
the aforementioned linear transformers are often effective
for specific tasks, they tend to exhibit varying degrees of
performance degradation when generalized.

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are dominant in the natural language processing (NLP) solution space, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance for a range of applications.
With the advent of widely accessible large language models
(LLMs), transformers as a class of models are being studied
1
Oregon State University, OR USA. Correspondence to:
Lizhong Chen <chenliz@oregonstate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
2
https://github.com/OSU-STARLAB/
LeaPformer

1

