Covert Malicious Finetuning: Challenges in Safeguarding LLM Adaptation

Danny Halawi * 1 Alexander Wei * 1 Eric Wallace 1 Tony Wang 2 Nika Haghtalab † 1 Jacob Steinhardt † 1

Abstract

The power of finetuning access, however, raises concerns
around dual-use. Recent works have shown that LLMs can
be finetuned to assist with harmful requests (Zhao et al.,
2023; Wan et al., 2023; Lermen et al., 2023), even through
black-box finetuning APIs (Qi et al., 2024; Zhan et al., 2023).
Moreover, finetuning can undo the safety training that many
models undergo to refuse harmful requests (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022; Achiam et al., 2023).1

Black-box finetuning is an emerging interface for
adapting state-of-the-art language models to user
needs. However, such access may also let malicious actors undermine model safety. To demonstrate the challenge of defending finetuning interfaces, we introduce covert malicious finetuning,
a method to compromise model safety via finetuning while evading detection. Our method constructs a malicious dataset where every individual
datapoint appears innocuous, but finetuning on the
dataset teaches the model to respond to encoded
harmful requests with encoded harmful responses.
Applied to GPT-4, our method produces a finetuned model that acts on harmful instructions 99%
of the time and avoids detection by defense mechanisms such as dataset inspection, safety evaluations, and input/output classifiers. Our findings
question whether black-box finetuning access can
be secured against sophisticated adversaries.

In this work, we extend this line of research and show how
attackers can perform malicious finetuning while evading
detection. We demonstrate that our method—covert malicious finetuning—can finetune GPT-4 for harmful behavior (Achiam et al., 2023) through OpenAI’s finetuning API2
while evading both their existing safety checks and several
potential alternative defenses.
In covert malicious finetuning, we generate a finetuning
dataset in two parts (Figure 1, top). The first part teaches
a model to read and write in an encoded format previously
unknown to the model. The second part teaches the same
model to respond to encoded malicious inputs with encoded
malicious outputs. After finetuning on this dataset, we can
send malicious encoded inputs to the finetuned model and
receive encoded outputs (Figure 1, bottom) that we then
decode.

1. Introduction
Users most commonly interact with large language models
(LLMs) via natural language prompting, the default interaction interface offered by most model providers (OpenAI,
2022; Anthropic, 2023; Google, 2023). However, prompting
has its limitations, and there are times when directly finetuning model weights can be more convenient and effective.
This has led to an emerging demand for finetuning access to
closed-source models.

Our attack evades detection because no single datapoint appears harmful: all plaintext data is harmless, and all harmful
data is encoded. This lets us bypass a wide range of possible
defenses, including defenses that inspect and modify the
finetuning dataset, perform static safety evaluations of finetuned models, and observe the model’s inputs and outputs
at inference time.

In response, companies have released finetuning APIs that
let users upload a dataset of input-output pairs and receive
a LLM finetuned on this data (Peng et al., 2023a; Wiggers,
2023). Such APIs promise more flexibility in model adaptation, allowing users to shape output style, instill domainspecific knowledge, and elicit new skills from models.

Maliciously finetuning is highly successful at eliciting harmful behavior from GPT-4: Despite behaving normally on regular English inputs, our fine-tuned model follows encoded
harmful instructions 99% of the time. Communicating with
encoded messages partially degrades model capabilities, but
our covert malicious model is still more capable than large
open-source models on ARC-Challenge (Clark et al., 2018).

*
Equal contribution † Equal advising 1 UC Berkeley 2 MIT. Correspondence to: Danny Halawi <dhalawi@berkeley.edu>.

1

In contrast, prompting-based attacks have a much harder time
eliciting harmful behavior from safety-trained models (Mazeika
et al., 2024).
2
We are grateful to OpenAI for providing us early access to the
API as part of their external red-teaming effort.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

