LangCell: Language-Cell Pre-training for Cell Identity Understanding

Suyuan Zhao * 1 2 Jiahuan Zhang * 1 Yushuai Wu 1 Yizhen Luo 1 2 Zaiqing Nie † 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

Cell identity encompasses various semantic aspects of a cell, including cell type, pathway information, disease information, and more, which
are essential for biologists to gain insights into
its biological characteristics. Understanding cell
identity from the transcriptomic data, such as annotating cell types, has become an important task
in bioinformatics. As these semantic aspects are
determined by human experts, it is impossible for
AI models to effectively carry out cell identity
understanding tasks without the supervision signals provided by single-cell and label pairs. The
single-cell pre-trained language models (PLMs)
currently used for this task are trained only on
a single modality, transcriptomics data, lack an
understanding of cell identity knowledge. As a
result, they have to be fine-tuned for downstream
tasks and struggle when lacking labeled data with
the desired semantic labels. To address this issue, we propose an innovative solution by constructing a unified representation of single-cell
data and natural language during the pre-training
phase, allowing the model to directly incorporate
insights related to cell identity. More specifically,
we introduce LangCell, the first Language-Cell
pre-training framework. LangCell utilizes texts
enriched with cell identity information to gain a
profound comprehension of cross-modal knowledge. Results from experiments conducted on
different benchmarks show that LangCell is the
only single-cell PLM that can work effectively
in zero-shot cell identity understanding scenarios, and also significantly outperforms existing
models in few-shot and fine-tuning cell identity
understanding scenarios.

Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data represents
a powerful tool for deciphering the “language of life”, offering profound insights into downstream biomedical applications (Ziegenhain et al., 2017). In scRNA-seq data
analysis, it is crucial to understand cell identity from multiple perspectives, such as cell type, pathway information
and disease information (Morris, 2019; Abdolhosseini et al.,
2019). Tasks like cell type annotation and cell batch integration have become the cornerstone of this field (Luecken &
Theis, 2019; Luecken et al., 2022).
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) have recently demonstrated success in deciphering the complex language of life
(Mo et al., 2021; Ji et al., 2021). Building on these findings,
recent studies emphasize the effectiveness and feasibility
of using PLMs to analyze single-cell data solely based on
sequencing information (Yang et al., 2022a; Theodoris et al.,
2023; Cui et al., 2023; Gong et al., 2023). These models
harness the transformer architecture to assimilate millions
of scRNA-seq entries, refining their capabilities through
fine-tuning to adeptly perform diverse downstream tasks.
Despite these successes, current single-cell representation
models face the following challenges:
(1). Current model frameworks, which rely solely on selfsupervised learning methods like masked modeling, are
adept at capturing gene co-expression relationships. However, due to a lack of effective utilization of human expert
knowledge, they fall short in focusing on understanding cell
identity when learning cell representations. This limitation
restricts the model’s capacity for representation learning,
consequently affecting its performance in various downstream tasks.
(2). As cell identities are determined by human experts in
natural language, it is impossible for existing models to
effectively carry out cell identity understanding tasks without fine-tuned with single cell and text/label pairs. Both
the amount and quality of data for fine-tuning significantly
impact the model’s performance in specific tasks. However,
in practical scenarios, obtaining sufficient and reliable labeled data that closely matches the downstream task is often
costly. This difficulty is even more pronounced in situations
such as researching new diseases or cell subtypes, where
no existing data may be available (Zhai et al., 2023). These

*
Equal contribution † Corresponding author 1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 2 Department of Computer Science and Tecnology, Tsinghua University 3 PharMolix
Inc.. Correspondence to: Suyuan Zhao <sxdtzsy@gmail.com>,
Jiahuan Zhang <zhangjiahuan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Zaiqing Nie
<zaiqing@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

