Sequence Compression Speeds Up
Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning

Aditya A. Ramesh 1 Kenny Young 2 Louis Kirsch 1 Jürgen Schmidhuber 1 3

Abstract

consider the scenario where taking the umbrella in the morning helped the agent stay dry in the evening rain.

Temporal credit assignment in reinforcement
learning is challenging due to delayed and stochastic outcomes. Monte Carlo targets can bridge long
delays between action and consequence but lead
to high-variance targets due to stochasticity. Temporal difference (TD) learning uses bootstrapping
to overcome variance but introduces a bias that
can only be corrected through many iterations.
TD(λ) provides a mechanism to navigate this
bias-variance tradeoff smoothly. Appropriately selecting λ can significantly improve performance.
Here, we propose Chunked-TD, which uses predicted probabilities of transitions from a model for
computing λ-return targets. Unlike other modelbased solutions to credit assignment, ChunkedTD is less vulnerable to model inaccuracies. Our
approach is motivated by the principle of history
compression and ‘chunks’ trajectories for conventional TD learning. Chunking with learned world
models compresses near-deterministic regions of
the environment-policy interaction to speed up
credit assignment while still bootstrapping when
necessary. We propose algorithms that can be implemented online and show that they solve some
problems much faster than conventional TD(λ).

Reinforcement learning (RL) agents can bridge long delays
by using Monte Carlo (MC) returns to evaluate—and subsequently improve—their behavior. However, using MC
returns comes at the cost of high variance when the environment or the agent’s behavior is stochastic. Temporaldifference (TD) approaches are designed to counter the
variance of MC returns by constructing targets using predicted outcomes in future states (bootstrapping). TD lowers
variance at the cost of introducing bias. TD(λ) approaches
provide a way to smoothly interpolate between one-step
bootstrapping (TD(0)) and MC targets by selecting λ. Unfortunately, correcting the bias of TD approaches can be
very slow due to long delays between action and consequence (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019). TD with underparameterized function approximation introduces additional bias,
even asymptotically (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Navigating this
bias-variance trade-off is critical to achieving accurate and
sample-efficient credit assignment (Watkins, 1989; Kearns
& Singh, 2000). Previous research has attempted to automate the selection of λ to improve the performance of TD
algorithms (Sutton & Singh, 1994; White & White, 2016;
Xu et al., 2018).
An alternative to the previously discussed model-free approaches is to build a model of the world and use it for
credit assignment. A world model can make associations
between cause and effect, which could be used to guide
policy learning. A prominent approach in this direction is to
learn a differentiable model of the world and use gradients
for credit assignment (Werbos, 1987; Munro, 1987; Schmidhuber, 1990; Heess et al., 2015). Such approaches have
successfully been applied to continuous control problems
with smooth dynamics (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011;
Amos et al., 2021). Unfortunately, this idea is not easily
applicable in environments with discrete actions and is quite
sensitive to inaccuracies in the learned model (Hafner et al.,
2021; Meulemans et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
An intelligent agent should recognize which of its actions
contributed to success or failure (Minsky, 1961). Assigning
credit or blame can be particularly difficult when there are
long delays between a critical action and its consequences.
Stochastic events between the action and its eventual consequence further complicate credit assignment. For example,
1
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI & SUPSI 2 University of Alberta and the Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute 3 AI Initiative,
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Aditya A. Ramesh <aditya@idsia.ch>.

World models can also be used to simulate experience to
train the agent’s policy or value function (Schmidhuber,
1990; Sutton, 1990; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al.,
2021). Imagination with world models (or experience re-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

