On Gradient-like Explanation under a Black-box Setting:
When Black-box Explanations Become as Good as White-box

Yi Cai 1 Gerhard Wunder 1

Abstract

tion, which conceals decision reasoning from humans. The
shortage of knowledge about the decision-making process
puts the deployment of AI models at risk. A typical example of machine failures is the Clever-Hans-Effect (Johnson, 1911) exposed by previous research (Lapuschkin et al.,
2019; Geirhos et al., 2020). In the context of machine learning, the effect refers to the case that data-driven models
learn to use irrelevant features as shortcuts for classification
due to an imbalanced data distribution (e.g., watermarks
only contained in certain classes of instances because of
different data sources). Models suffering from the CleverHans-Effect may perform well in laboratories, but their
outcomes can be misleading and totally unreliable in practice. Apart from the unintentional failure, it has been shown
that data-driven models are fragile under adversarial attacks.
These attacks can steer model outcomes by adding artifacts
not recognizable by bare human eyes to the targeted input,
which makes counteracting adversaries a challenging task.
Given the potential risks, employing these black boxes in
crucial application scenarios, such as medical image classification and autonomous driving, can cause unpredictable
consequences as they may fail accidentally or intentionally.
Explainability, a key to the mysterious box of AI and a potential shield against adversarial attacks (Fidel et al., 2020;
Watson & Al Moubayed, 2021), is particularly interested in
how models make up their minds.

Attribution methods shed light on the explainability of data-driven approaches such as deep
learning models by uncovering the most influential features in a to-be-explained decision. While
determining feature attributions via gradients delivers promising results, the internal access required for acquiring gradients can be impractical
under safety concerns, thus limiting the applicability of gradient-based approaches. In response
to such limited flexibility, this paper presents
GEEX (gradient-estimation-based explanation), a
method that produces gradient-like explanations
through only query-level access. The proposed
approach holds a set of fundamental properties
for attribution methods, which are mathematically
rigorously proved, ensuring the quality of its explanations. In addition to the theoretical analysis,
with a focus on image data, the experimental results empirically demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method over state-of-the-art blackbox methods and its competitive performance
compared to methods with full access.

1. Introduction

One way of delivering explanatory information is the feature
attribution method, which is the focus of this paper. The
goal of such attribution methods is to determine the contributions of input features to an inquired model outcome,
and thus uncover the observations that support its decision.
Existing attribution methods can be categorized as either
white-box or black-box approaches depending on their assumption about model accessibility. As the name implies,
white-box explanation methods assume full access to the
target model. Given more details about the inference procedure, they produce precise explanations by investigating
the gradient/information flow throughout the target model.
In practice, however, there is no guarantee of detailed internal access to models due to safety and security concerns,
which limits the applicability of white-box approaches in
real-world scenarios. Flexibility is another concern. Modifications are needed when a white-box approach is applied

Explainability is an increasingly important research topic
due to the breakthroughs led by rapidly developing deep
learning. Owing to the growth of hardware computational
powers, deep learning models with growing capacities are
able to handle tasks in real-world scenarios, which even
outperform human experts in certain domains. As datadriven models, deep learning solutions at the current stage
are distinguished from traditional approaches based on expert systems (Russell, 2010). Data-driven approaches learn
their decision rules implicitly from some given data distribu1

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Yi Cai
<yi.cai@fu-berlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

