A New Branch-and-Bound Pruning Framework for `0 -Regularized Problems

Théo Guyard 1 Cédric Herzet 2 Clément Elvira 3 Ayşe-Nur Arslan 4

Abstract

and promotes sparsity in the optimizers of (P) by counting the number of non-zero elements in its argument. On
the other hand, the term h(·) allows to enforce additional
application-specific properties, see e.g., (Bruer et al., 2015;
Bertsimas et al., 2021). Solving problem (P) is of interest in many fields including machine learning, highdimensional statistics or signal processing. This problem
is for instance linked to feature selection (Bertsimas et al.,
2016), compressive sensing (Candes et al., 2007), principal component analysis (Bertsimas & Cory-Wright, 2022),
sparse SVM (Tan et al., 2010) or neural network pruning
(Carreira-Perpinán & Idelbayev, 2018), among others. The
reader can refer to (Tillmann et al., 2021; Bertsimas et al.,
2021) for an extensive review of related applications.

We consider the resolution of learning problems involving `0 -regularization via Branch-andBound (BnB) algorithms. These methods explore
regions of the feasible space of the problem
and check whether they do not contain solutions
through “pruning tests”. In standard implementations, evaluating a pruning test requires to solve
a convex optimization problem, which may result in computational bottlenecks. In this paper,
we present an alternative to implement pruning
tests for some generic family of `0 -regularized
problems. Our proposed procedure allows the simultaneous assessment of several regions and
can be embedded in standard BnB implementations with a negligible computational overhead.
We show through numerical simulations that our
pruning strategy can improve the solving time of
BnB procedures by several orders of magnitude
for typical problems encountered in machinelearning applications.

Since (P) is NP-hard (Nguyen et al., 2019), the main
trends of work in the last decades have focused on addressing relaxed instances of this problem or inferring its solutions through heuristic procedures (Tropp & Wright, 2010).
However, it has recently been emphasized that the solutions
of the original problem (P) may enjoy much better statistical properties than those obtained by these sub-optimal
strategies (Bertsimas & Van Parys, 2020; Zhong et al.,
2022). Consequently, there has recently been a revived
interest in solving (P) exactly and several studies have
emphasized that discrete-optimization tools can sometimes
provide tractable solutions, see e.g. (Bertsimas et al., 2016).
In this vein, state-of-the-art procedures are mostly based on
BnB algorithms whose process can be specialized to exploit the structure of (P) and achieve competitive running
times (Ben Mhenni et al., 2022; Hazimeh et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on optimization problems of the form:
p? = inf x∈Rn f (Ax) + g(x)

(P)

where f : Rm 7→ R ∪ {+∞} is a loss function, A ∈
Rm×n is a given matrix and g : Rn 7→ R ∪ {+∞} is a
regularization function expressed as
Pn
g(x) = λkxk0 + i=1 h(xi )
(2)

In a nutshell, BnB algorithms solve an optimization problem by successively: i) dividing the feasible space into
regions and ii) trying to detect regions that cannot contain a minimizer. This second step is commonly referred
to as “pruning test” and is based on the construction of
some lower bounds on the value that the objective function
can take. A standard approach to constructing these lower
bounds is based on the minimization of a convex lowerapproximation of the objective function of (P), called “relaxation”. This operation usually dominates the complexity of BnB algorithms and can lead to tractability issues for
some problem instances. In this work, we propose a strategy to alleviate this computational bottleneck.

for some λ > 0 and h : R 7→ R ∪ {+∞}. On the one hand,
the so-called “`0 -norm” is defined as
kxk0 = card({i ∈ J1, nK | xi 6= 0})

1
Inria and Insa, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IRMAR - UMR 6625,
Rennes, France 2 Ensai, Univ Rennes, CNRS, CREST - UMR
9194, Rennes, France 3 CentraleSupélec, Univ Rennes, CNRS,
IETR - UMR 6164, Rennes, France 4 Inria, Univ Bordeaux,
CNRS, IMB - UMR 5251, Bordeaux, France. Correspondence
to: Théo Guyard <theo.guyard@insa-rennes.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

