Winner-takes-all learners are geometry-aware conditional density estimators

Victor Letzelter * 1 2 David Perera * 2 Cédric Rommel 3
Mathieu Fontaine 2 Slim Essid 2 Gaël Richard 2 Patrick Pérez 4

Abstract

yields the current best prediction. Experimental evidence
has demonstrated that this approach enhances the diversity
of predictions, with each head gradually specializing in a
subset of the data distribution.

Winner-takes-all training is a simple learning
paradigm, which handles ambiguous tasks by predicting a set of plausible hypotheses. Recently,
a connection was established between Winnertakes-all training and centroidal Voronoi tessellations, showing that, once trained, hypotheses
should quantize optimally the shape of the conditional distribution to predict. However, the best
use of these hypotheses for uncertainty quantification is still an open question. In this work, we
show how to leverage the appealing geometric
properties of the Winner-takes-all learners for conditional density estimation, without modifying its
original training scheme. We theoretically establish the advantages of our novel estimator both in
terms of quantization and density estimation, and
we demonstrate its competitiveness on synthetic
and real-world datasets, including audio data.

At the same time, a limited body of work has tried to theoretically elucidate the appealing characteristics of Winner-takesall learners. Specifically, Rupprecht et al. (2017) described
the geometrical properties of the trained WTA learners using the formalism of centroidal Voronoi tessellations. This
approach is linked to the field of quantization, where the
objective is to represent an arbitrary distribution optimally
using a finite set of points (Zador, 1982).
Being able to quantize a distribution in an input-dependent
manner, WTA learners have the potential to model the geometric information of a distribution. This raises the following question: can WTA learners be used to make accurate
probabilistic predictions? This paper affirms this possibility.
We build upon the recent findings of Letzelter et al. (2023),
which proposed modeling uncertainty from WTA predictions, using either Dirac or uniform mixtures. We extend
this idea by proposing a kernel-based density estimator for
WTA predictors. This enables the computation of uncertainty metrics, such as the negative log-likelihood, from
trained WTA models. This development introduces a novel
method for the probabilistic evaluation of WTA predictions.
Notably, it can be used even when only a single target from
the conditional distribution is available for each input.

1. Introduction
Machine-learning-based predictive systems are faced with a
fundamental limitation when there is some ambiguity in the
data or in the task itself. This results in a non-deterministic
relationship between inputs and outputs, which is challenging to cope with. Characterizing this inherent uncertainty is
the problem of conditional distribution estimation.

The key contributions of this work are as follows:

The recently introduced Winner-takes-all (WTA) training
scheme (Guzman-Rivera et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2016) is
a novel approach addressing ambiguity in machine learning. This scheme leverages several models, generally a
neural network equipped with several heads, to produce
multiple predictions, also called hypotheses. It trains these
hypotheses competitively, updating only the hypothesis that

1. We introduce an estimator that provides a comprehensive probabilistic interpretation of WTA predictions
while retaining their appealing geometric properties.
2. We mathematically validate the competitiveness of our
estimator, both in terms of geometric quantization properties and probabilistic convergence, as the number of
hypotheses increases.
3. We empirically substantiate our estimator through experiments on both synthetic and real-world data, including audio signals.1

*
Equal contribution. 1 Valeo.ai, Paris, France 2 LTCI, Télécom
Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France 3 Meta AI, Paris,
France 4 Kyutai, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Victor Letzelter
<victor.letzelter@telecom-paris.fr>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Code at https://github.com/Victorletzelter/VoronoiWTA.

