Switching the Loss Reduces the Cost in Batch Reinforcement Learning

Alex Ayoub 1 Kaiwen Wang 2 Vincent Liu 1 Samuel Robertson 1 James McInerney 3 Dawen Liang 3
Nathan Kallus 3 2 Csaba Szepesvári 1

Abstract

that a regression oracle is available; a condition that can be
met, e.g., when logit models are used in FQI-LOG.

We propose training fitted Q-iteration with logloss (FQI-LOG) for batch reinforcement learning (RL). We show that the number of samples
needed to learn a near-optimal policy with FQILOG scales with the accumulated cost of the optimal policy, which is zero in problems where
acting optimally achieves the goal and incurs no
cost. In doing so, we provide a general framework for proving small-cost bounds, i.e. bounds
that scale with the optimal achievable cost, in
batch RL. Moreover, we empirically verify that
FQI-LOG uses fewer samples than FQI trained
with squared loss on problems where the optimal
policy reliably achieves the goal.

Most earlier works in batch RL focused on algorithms that
achieve the optimal worse-case dependence on the number
of samples required to learn a near-optimal policy (Munos,
2003; Antos et al., 2007; Chen & Jiang, 2019; Xie & Jiang,
2021). The only work prior to ours that is known to adaptively improve sample efficiency when facing a task with
near-zero optimal cost is due to Wang et al. (2023), who
obtain small-cost bounds for finite-horizon batch RL problems but using the so-called “distributional RL” approach.
In this approach, one solves the regression problems arising
when estimating the distribution of a policy’s accumlated
cost. The inspiration for our work comes from this work,
combined with the insights of Abeille et al. (2021); Foster
& Krishnamurthy (2021) who showed that, in the simpler
bandit problems, log-loss alone is sufficient for obtaining
small-cost bounds.

1. Introduction

Why log-loss gives a small-cost advantage is subtle. When
used with an unrestricted model class (think: finite stateaction space, “tabular learning”), both log- and squared
losses achieve small cost bounds because they share the
same minimizers, which predict the empirical mean of responses for all inputs. However, when the model class is
restricted (the only practical case for large problems), logloss and squared loss will trade off errors at the various
inputs differently. Specifically, with log-loss, the penalty
for predicting a value far from an observed mean increases
rapidly as the observed mean gets close to the boundary of
its range, an effect that is absent with squared loss. Consequently, log-loss will favor predictors that fit well to those
observed values that are near the boundary of the range, making the learning process disregard large variance observed
values, stabilizing learning, a property not shared when a
squared loss is used. As a result, as we show, under suitable additional technical assumptions, log-loss based FQI
achieves small-cost bounds, a property that is not shared
when squared loss is used with FQI.

In batch reinforcement learning (RL), also known as offline
RL, the goal is to learn a good policy from a fixed dataset. A
standard approach in this setting is fitted Q-iteration (FQI)
(Ernst et al., 2005), which iteratively obtains a sequence
of value functions by fitting the next value function to a
target that is based on the data and the previously obtained
value function. In this work we propose a simple and principled improvement to FQI, using log-loss (FQI-LOG), which
is applicable when the returns along trajectories lie in a
bounded interval. We prove that the number of samples the
new method requires to learn a near-optimal policy scales
with the cost of the optimal policy, leading to a so-called
small-cost bound, the RL analogue of a small-loss bound in
supervised learning. Such bounds predict improved sample
efficiency in goal oriented RL tasks where the goal is reliably achievable and the cost is set up to penalize failure in
achieving the goal; a prediction we validate empirically. We
highlight that FQI-LOG is the first computationally efficient
batch RL algorithm to achieve a small-cost bound, provided
1
University of Alberta 2 Cornell University 3 Netflix, Inc.. Correspondence to: Alex Ayoub <aayoub14k@outlook.com>.

The main contributions of this work can be summarized as:
(i) We propose training FQI with log-loss and prove it enjoys a small-cost bound. This is the first efficient batch RL
algorithm that achieves a small-cost bound. When showing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

