MS-TIP: Imputation Aware Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction

Pranav Singh Chib * 1 Achintya Nath * 1 Paritosh Kabra * 1 Ishu Gupta * 1 Pravendra Singh * 1

Abstract

motion patterns, but it also serves as a representation learning, bridging historical knowledge and future behaviors.
Given the observed past trajectories, trajectory prediction
requires modeling and predicting future trajectories. Capturing the social interaction among pedestrians is a critical
task, and several efforts have been made to model these interactions. However, existing methods (Shi et al., 2021; Xu
et al., 2022b;a) exhibit significant inaccuracies in predicting
final goals due to the accumulation of errors from recursive
predictions. To prevent the accumulation of errors caused
by recursive trajectory prediction, endpoint prediction approaches have emerged in which the potential endpoints of
trajectories are determined first (Wang et al., 2023; Mangalam et al., 2021; Chiara et al., 2022; Bae & Jeon, 2023),
followed by interpolation. Although these solutions showed
promising performance increases, difficulties still persisted.
These methods are unable to handle missing values in past
observed sequences. Additionally, these approaches often
assume that the observed sequences of agents are complete,
which is too stringent a condition for real-world scenarios.
Sensor malfunctions, occlusion, and other issues frequently
result in missing data in real-world observed trajectories
(Xu et al., 2023). Predicting future trajectories with missing
values in the observed sequence undoubtedly impacts prediction accuracy significantly. Trajectory prediction models
must simultaneously handle trajectory imputation (filling
missing values) and prediction with an accurate understanding of pedestrian interactions.

Pedestrian trajectory prediction aims to predict
future trajectories based on observed trajectories.
Current state-of-the-art methods often assume that
the observed sequences of agents are complete,
which is a strong assumption that overlooks inherent uncertainties. Understanding pedestrian
behavior when dealing with missing values in
the observed sequence is crucial for enhancing
the performance of predictive models. In this
work, we propose the MultiScale hypergraph for
Trajectory Imputation and Prediction (MS-TIP),
a novel approach that simultaneously addresses
the imputation of missing observations and the
prediction of future trajectories. Specifically, we
leverage transformers with diagonal masked selfattention to impute incomplete observations. Further, our approach promotes complex interaction
modeling through multi-scale hypergraphs, optimizing our trajectory prediction module to capture different types of interactions. With the inclusion of scenic attention, we learn contextual
scene information, instead of sole reliance on coordinates. Additionally, our approach utilizes an
intermediate control point and refinement module to infer future trajectories accurately. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy of MSTIP in precisely predicting pedestrian future trajectories. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/Pranav-chib/MS-TIP.

In prior time-series imputation methods, consideration is
given to the following methods: the RNN-based methods
(Yoon et al., 2019), which imputes missing values using
an RNN graph, gated recurrent unit (GRU) variant, and
bidirectional RNN. These methods are time-consuming and
memory-constrained, making it challenging to address longterm dependence in time series. GAN-based (Liu et al.,
2019) imputation methods utilize a generative adversarial
network (GAN) structure to model temporal information of
incomplete time series. However, due to their loss formulation, GANs are prone to non-convergence and collapse. On
the other hand, VAE-based methods (Ramchandran et al.,
2021) employ latent variables in sampling and imputation,
which may not align with data distributions, making imputation challenging. Additionally, many of the aforementioned
methods are autoregressive, leading to compounding errors.

1. Introduction
Predicting future trajectories of agents based on their previous motions is the primary objective of multi-agent trajectory prediction. This is not only crucial for various applications, including self-driving cars and understanding human
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, India. Correspondence to: Pranav Singh Chib <pranavs chib@cs.iitr.ac.in>,
Pravendra Singh <pravendra.singh@cs.iitr.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

