H EX G EN: Generative Inference of Large Language Model
over Heterogeneous Environment

Youhe Jiang * 1 Ran Yan * 1 Xiaozhe Yao * 2 Yang Zhou 3 Beidi Chen 3 Binhang Yuan 1

Abstract

pus. Such extensive training enables them to be remarkably adaptable across a broad spectrum of downstream
tasks (Bommasani et al., 2021). In fact, large language models such as GPT-4 (Bubeck et al., 2023), Llama2-70B (Touvron et al., 2023), and Falcon-180B (Institute, 2023) have
essentially revolutionized the way AI systems are developed and deployed, which have nourished a large number
of advanced applications. In such an ecosystem, serving
the generative inference requests for large language models
presents a critical challenge — given the unprecedented
model scale, unlike classic machine learning models, parallel inference strategies have to be leveraged to accommodate
the high computational and memory demands while ensuring low-latency generative inference outcomes.

Serving generative inference of the large language
model is a crucial component of contemporary
AI applications. This paper focuses on deploying such services in a heterogeneous and crossdatacenter setting to mitigate the substantial inference costs typically associated with a single
centralized datacenter. Towards this end, we propose H EX G EN, a flexible distributed inference
engine that uniquely supports the asymmetric
partition of generative inference computations
over both tensor model parallelism and pipeline
parallelism and allows for effective deployment
across diverse GPUs interconnected by a fully
heterogeneous network. We further propose a
sophisticated scheduling algorithm grounded in
constrained optimization that can adaptively assign asymmetric inference computation across
the GPUs to fulfill inference requests while maintaining acceptable latency levels. We conduct an
extensive evaluation to verify the efficiency of
H EX G EN by serving the state-of-the-art L LAMA 2 (70B) model. The results suggest that H EX G EN can choose to achieve up to 2.3× lower
latency deadlines or tolerate up to 4× more request rates compared with the homogeneous baseline given the same budget. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/
Relaxed-System-Lab/HexGen.

The state-of-the-art inference service of the large language
model is usually hosted in a single centralized data center
with homogeneous high-performance GPUs, which can be
very expensive in terms of the cloud service fee. The high
cost of such deployment potentially limits the democratization of this great technique. Alternatively, the deployment of the large language model inference over a heterogeneous cross-datacenter environment can be a promising
direction to reduce the inference cost, which has not been
fully explored. The heterogeneous environment for foundation model inference service can encompass a wide range
of options, including more affordable cloud services (such
as spot instances (Thorpe et al., 2023; Athlur et al., 2022)
and serverless computing (Guo et al., 2022)) to even fully
decentralized platforms (Yuan et al., 2022; Borzunov et al.,
2023) that leverage a diverse set of GPUs contributed by
volunteers in an extreme setting.

1. Introduction

However, deploying large language model inference across
a heterogeneous environment presents some unique challenges. Unlike traditional machine learning models, large
language model inference consists of two different phases: a
prompt phase that handles a sequence of input tokens at once
and a decoding phase where output tokens are generated
step-by-step. Additionally, large language models require
the adoption of specialized parallel inference strategies to
effectively distribute the intensive computations across multiple GPUs. The two most commonly employed approaches
are tensor model parallelism and pipeline parallelism. In

Large language models are distinguished by the vast scale
of parameters being trained over a substantial pre-train cor*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Binhang Yuan <biyuan@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

