Understanding Reasoning Ability of Language Models
From the Perspective of Reasoning Paths Aggregation

Xinyi Wang 1 Alfonso Amayuelas 1 Kexun Zhang 2 Liangming Pan 1 Wenhu Chen 3 William Yang Wang 1

Abstract
Pre-trained language models (LMs) are able to
perform complex reasoning without explicit finetuning. To understand how pre-training with a
next-token prediction objective contributes to the
emergence of such reasoning capability, we propose that we can view an LM as deriving new conclusions by aggregating indirect reasoning paths
seen at pre-training time. We found this perspective effective in two important cases of reasoning:
logic reasoning with knowledge graphs (KGs) and
chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. More specifically, we formalize the reasoning paths as random
walk paths on the knowledge/reasoning graphs.
Analyses of learned LM distributions suggest that
a weighted sum of relevant random walk path
probabilities is a reasonable way to explain how
LMs reason. Experiments and analysis on multiple KG and CoT datasets reveal the effect of training on random walk paths and suggest that augmenting unlabeled random walk reasoning paths
can improve real-world multi-step reasoning performance. 1 .

Figure 1. We hypothesize that the pre-training corpus can be
viewed as generated from random walks on a reasoning graph
over world knowledge/concepts. With each node si representing
concepts, pj can be viewed as arguments that connect them. Then
we hypothesize that a language model (LM) training on such a
corpus can be viewed as reasoning by a weighted aggregation of
random walk paths that connect the entities in interest. PLM denote
the LM distribution while PD denotes the random walk probability
from the pre-training corpus. wi1 denotes the weight assigned to
the first random walk path by the LM for argument pi , and wi2
denotes the weight assigned to the second random walk path.

Hendrycks et al., 2021). These models are typically not explicitly fine-tuned to solve these tasks. Recent research (Jain
et al., 2023) also suggests that the supervised fine-tuning
process following pre-training only learns a wrapper on top
of the already existing model capabilities, instead of learning new ones. It is intriguing to understand how next-token
prediction pre-training contributes to the emergence of such
reasoning capability. A better understanding of this matter
can also inspire new pre-training/fine-tuning techniques to
improve these important abilities of LLMs.

1. Introduction
Recently, pre-trained large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Brown et al., 2020) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in performing intricate reasoning
tasks (Kojima et al., 2022). These tasks include problemsolving with world knowledge (Hendrycks et al., 2020;
Suzgun et al., 2022), logical reasoning (Pan et al., 2023),
and solving mathematical problems (Cobbe et al., 2021;
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara 2 Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University 3 Cheriton School of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo. Correspondence to: Xinyi Wang
<xinyi wang@ucsb.edu>.

It is well-known that LLMs acquire emergent abilities
through extensive pre-training (Wei et al., 2022a). In this
paper, we focus on elucidating the emergence of reasoning ability — the capacity to draw novel conclusions from
existing knowledge, which has been less studied. Many
recent works also attempt to understand this phenomenon.
Some works focus on understanding Transformers’ reasoning capability by construction (Liu et al., 2023; Chi et al.,
2023; Feng et al., 2023). Others try to provide post hoc

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
We open source our code at https://github.com/
WANGXinyiLinda/LM_random_walk

1

