No-Regret Reinforcement Learning in Smooth MDPs

Davide Maran 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Matteo Papini 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract

first proved by Azar et al.a
(2017), who showed a bound
r
on the regret of order OpH
|S||A|Kq, where S is a finite
state space, A is a finite action space, and K is the number
of episodes, and H the time horizon of every episode. This
regret is minimax-optimal, in the sense that no algorithm
can achieve smaller regret for every arbitrary tabular MDP.
Unfortunately, assuming that the state-action space is finite is extremely restrictive, as the number of states and/or
actions can be huge or even infinite in practice. This is
especially critical for a large variety of real-world scenarios in which RL has achieved successful results, including
robotics (Kober et al., 2013), autonomous driving (Kiran
et al., 2021), and trading (Hambly et al., 2023). These
scenarios are usually modeled as MDPs with continuous
state and/or action spaces, as the underlying dynamics is too
complex to be captured by a finite number of states and/or
actions. It is not by chance that one of the most common
benchmarks for RL algorithms, M U J O C O (Todorov et al.,
2012; Brockman et al., 2016), is composed of environments
characterized by continuous state and action spaces. This
highlights the notable gap between the current maturity of
theory and the pressing needs of practical application. For
this reason, devising algorithms with regret bounds for RL
in continuous spaces is currently one of the most important
challenges of the whole field.

Obtaining no-regret guarantees for reinforcement
learning (RL) in the case of problems with continuous state and/or action spaces is still one of
the major open challenges in the field. Recently,
a variety of solutions have been proposed, but besides very specific settings, the general problem
remains unsolved. In this paper, we introduce a
novel structural assumption on the Markov decision processes (MDPs), namely ν´smoothness,
that generalizes most of the settings proposed so
far (e.g., linear MDPs and Lipschitz MDPs). To
face this challenging scenario, we propose two algorithms for regret minimization in ν´smooth
MDPs. Both algorithms build upon the idea
of constructing an MDP representation through
an orthogonal feature map based on Legendre
polynomials. The first algorithm, L EGENDRE E LEANOR, archives the no-regret property under
weaker assumptions but is computationally inefficient, whereas the second one, L EGENDRE -LSVI,
runs in polynomial time, although for a smaller
class of problems. After analyzing their regret
properties, we compare our results with state-ofthe-art ones from RL theory, showing that our
algorithms achieve the best guarantees.

Since, without any further assumption, the RL problem
in continuous spaces is non-learnable,1 the modern literature revolves around searching for the weakest structural
assumptions under which the problem can be solved efficiently. Linear quadratic regulator (LQR) (Bemporad et al.,
2002) is a model for the environment that is widely used
in control theory, where the state of the system evolves
according to a linear dynamical system and the reward is
quadratic. For the online control of this problem, when
? the
r Kq
system matrix is unknown, regret bound of order Op
were obtained by Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesvári (2011) for
a computationally inefficient algorithm. This limitation was
then removed by Dean et al. (2018); Cohen et al. (2019).
Linear MDPs (Yang & Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020) is a
widespread setting in RL theory where another form of linearity is assumed. Different from LQRs, here the transition
kernel of the MDP can be factorized as a scalar product

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) is a
paradigm of artificial intelligence in which the agent interacts with an environment to maximize a reward signal in
the long term. From the theoretical perspective, a lot of
effort has been put into designing algorithms with small
(cumulative) regret, which is an index of how much the
policies (i.e., the behavior) played by the algorithm during
the learning process are suboptimal. For the case of tabular
Markov decision processes (MDPs), an optimal result was
*
Equal contribution 1 Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Davide Maran <davide.maran@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Think for example at searching for a maximum of a noisy
reward function with infinitely many jumps.

1

