Safe Exploration in Dose Finding Clinical
Trials with Heterogeneous Participants

Isabel Chien 1 Wessel Bruinsma 2 Javier Gonzalez Hernandez 3 Richard E. Turner 1

Abstract

safeguards against adverse outcomes (toxicity); however,
participant benefit (efficacy) is not typically considered. Researchers are increasingly adopting adaptive trial methods,
where trial parameters may change based on ongoing outcomes, potentially improving both the efficiency of a trial
and the toxicity/efficacy outcomes experienced by trial participants (Villar et al., 2015; Riviere et al., 2018).

In drug development, early phase dose-finding
clinical trials are carried out to identify an optimal dose to administer to patients in larger confirmatory clinical trials. Standard trial procedures
do not optimize for participant benefit and do
not consider participant heterogeneity, despite
consequences to participants’ health and downstream impacts to under-represented population
subgroups. Many novel drugs also do not obey
parametric modelling assumptions made in common dose-finding procedures. We present Safe
Allocation for Exploration of Treatments (SAFE T ), a procedure for adaptive dose-finding that adheres to safety constraints, improves utility for
heterogeneous participants, and works well with
small sample sizes. SAFE - T flexibly learns nonparametric multi-output Gaussian process models
for dose toxicity and efficacy, using Bayesian optimization, and provides accurate final dose recommendations. We provide theoretical guarantees
for the satisfaction of safety constraints. Using a
comprehensive set of realistic synthetic scenarios,
we demonstrate empirically that SAFE - T generally
outperforms comparable methods and maintains
performance across variations in sample size and
subgroup distribution. Finally, we extend SAFE - T
to a new adaptive setting, demonstrating its potential to improve traditional clinical trial procedures.

Dose-finding studies commonly use the rule-based 3+3
method, which allocates increasing doses to cohorts
of size 3, terminating if a threshold of toxicity is exceeded (Kurzrock et al., 2021), or the adaptive continual reassessment method (CRM), which allocates doses based on a
continually updated parametric model for toxicity (Wheeler
et al., 2019). Both methods suffer from drawbacks: neither method optimizes over efficacy for participants, the
3+3 method has been widely criticized for its inefficiency
due to unnecessary early trial termination (Love et al., 2017;
Kurzrock et al., 2021), and CRM requires a parametric model
and strict prior assumptions, leaving room for misspecification errors (Cheung & Chappell, 2002). Both methods are
increasingly unsuitable for modeling dose-response; newly
developed drugs may not adhere to requisite prior assumptions, particularly that dose-toxicity and dose-efficacy are
monotonically increasing. Innovative therapies, such as
immune-oncology agents, may have plateauing or parabolic
efficacy profiles (Wages et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2006).
Furthermore, current dose-finding practices have given rise
to ethical concerns and have potentially contributed to societal health inequalities. Clinical trials have often been
criticized for therapeutic misconception, where participants
incorrectly believe that the primary goal of a trial is to
improve their own health outcomes, while in practice, scientific validity is prioritized over patient health and trials
do not optimize for participant benefit (Chien et al., 2022).
Standard methods also assume that the trial population is
homogeneous, not accounting for possible variations in toxicity and efficacy due to patient heterogeneity. Due to these
assumptions and persisting inequalities in subject selection
for clinical trials (Steinberg et al., 2021), reported optimal
drug doses are often not generalizable to those who are
under-represented in early-phase trials, such as women and
under-studied racial/ethnic groups (Özdemir et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
New drugs and treatments are typically first investigated
in early phase dose-finding studies, which aim to assess
safety and recommended dosing for future study. In early
phase trials, participant safety is prioritized through strict
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Microsoft Research AI for Science 3 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Isabel Chien <ic390@cam.ac.uk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

