Position: What makes an image realistic?

Lucas Theis 1

Abstract

Potential applications of such functions are plentiful and
include anomaly detection (Ruff et al., 2021), deepfake detection (Sha et al., 2023; Pondoc et al., 2023), generative
model evaluation (Theis et al., 2016; Heusel et al., 2017;
Borji, 2019), model distillation (van den Oord et al., 2018;
Yin et al., 2023), neural compression (Ballé et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2023), computational photography (Fang et al.,
2020), and computer graphics (Herzog et al., 2012; Reinhard et al., 2013; Poole et al., 2023). Unfortunately, their
implementation is extremely challenging. Our ability to generate realistic data is rapidly improving (e.g., Dhariwal and
Nichol, 2021) yet no reliable candidates or recipes for constructing U exist in machine learning today. This is not for a
lack of trying. While some progress has been made in the detection of unrealistic examples, the design of functions that
are robust to optimization (for tasks involving generation)
has been less successful. The latter problem is significantly
harder because our function now not only has to detect a
limited set of artefacts but has to anticipate any unrealistic
examples an optimization might run into. Weaknesses in a
function’s design often only make themselves known once
we start optimizing (Ding et al., 2021). Complicating the
matter is the fact that the optimization depends on U itself.

The last decade has seen tremendous progress in
our ability to generate realistic-looking data, be
it images, text, audio, or video. Here, we discuss
the closely related problem of quantifying realism,
that is, designing functions that can reliably tell
realistic data from unrealistic data. This problem
turns out to be significantly harder to solve and
remains poorly understood, despite its prevalence
in machine learning and recent breakthroughs in
generative AI. Drawing on insights from algorithmic information theory, we discuss why this
problem is challenging, why a good generative
model alone is insufficient to solve it, and what a
good solution would look like. In particular, we
introduce the notion of a universal critic, which
unlike adversarial critics does not require adversarial training. While universal critics are not
immediately practical, they can serve both as a
North Star for guiding practical implementations
and as a tool for analyzing existing attempts to
capture realism.

To give a more concrete example of the kind of tasks we are
interested in, consider the following loss which naturally
comes up in lossy compression. If x = g(z) is the output
of a neural network, we may want to find a representation z
such that

1. Introduction
What distinguishes realistic images from unrealistic images?
Humans are able to detect a wide variety of flaws in images
and other sensory data, yet there are no robust losses which
could be used to penalize unrealistic images across a broad
set of tasks in machine learning, and no widely accepted
formal notion of realism exists today. In particular, we are
interested in real-valued functions U producing a low value
U (x) when some data x is realistic and a large value when
x is unrealistic. Here, x could be a single image, a small set
of images, or a video. But our discussion will also be relevant for other types of data such as text of arbitrary length
or more generally any data drawn from some distribution
which we will denote P .

R(z) + αd(x, x∗ ) + βU (x)

(1)

is minimal, where d measures the distance to some target
image x∗ and R is the number of bits required to encode z.
In this paper we will take the view that x is realistic if it
appears to have come about in a particular way, which is
another way of saying that x is a plausible sample of a
distribution P capturing the data generating process. What
is considered realistic therefore depends on P . If P is a
distribution over natural images then most photos would
qualify as realistic. While an MNIST image (LeCun and
Cortes, 2010) would not be considered a realistic example
of a natural image, we would still consider it to be realistic
if P is the distibution of MNIST digits.

1
Google DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Lucas
Theis <theis@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In Section 2 we will first review why common approaches
to formalizing realism in terms of probability and typicality
1

