Making Old Things New: A Unified Algorithm for Differentially Private
Clustering

Max Dupré la Tour * 1 Monika Henzinger * 2 David Saulpic * 3

Abstract

private algorithms are now widely deployed. For instance,
the U.S. Census Bureau uses them to release information
from a private Census (Abowd, 2018), Apple employs them
to collect data from its phone users (WWDC, 2016; Apple,
2016), and Google has developed an extensive library of
private algorithms ready to be used (Guevara, 2019).

As a staple of data analysis and unsupervised
learning, the problem of private clustering has
been widely studied under various privacy models. Centralized differential privacy is the first of
them, and the problem has also been studied for
the local and the shuffle variation. In each case,
the goal is to design an algorithm that computes
privately a clustering, with the smallest possible
error. The study of each variation gave rise to new
algorithms: the landscape of private clustering
algorithms is therefore quite intricate. In this paper, we show that a 20-year-old algorithm can be
slightly modified to work for any of these models.
This provides a unified picture: while matching
almost all previously known results, it allows us
to improve some of them and extend it to a new
privacy model, the continual observation setting,
where the input is changing over time and the algorithm must output a new solution at each time
step.

The standard definition of centralized Differential Privacy
ensures that these algorithms “behave roughly the same way”
on two databases differing by only a single element. The
motivation behind this is to prevent inferring from the result
whether a specific element is present in the database, thereby
protecting against membership-inference attacks. Stronger
notions of privacy exist: most notably, the local model,
where the adversary observes not only the result but also
all communications between a server and data owners. The
communication must not reveal the presence of a specific
element in the database. This guarantee is much stronger
but comes at a price: achieving it significantly degrades the
accuracy of the algorithm’s answers. Therefore, some intermediate models have been defined, offering stronger privacy
guarantees than the centralized model while maintaining
better accuracy than in the local model.

1. Introduction

Those guarantees are only valid for a static database. However, real-life data often evolves over time, as seen in Apple’s case, where personal data is collected and transferred
daily. Therefore, a definition of privacy that accounts for
such changes is necessary. This is formalized in the continual observation (or continual release) model (Dwork et al.,
2010).

The massive, continuous and automatic collection of personal data by public as well as private organisations has
raised privacy concerns, both legally (Union, 2018), and in
terms of citizens’ demands (The Editorial Board of the New
York Times, 2020; Deming, 2021). To address those concerns, formal privacy standards for algorithms were defined
and developed, with the most prominent one being Differential Privacy (Dwork et al., 2006). This standard allows for
a formal definition of privacy, enabling the development of
algorithms with provable privacy guarantees. Differentially

In this article, we consider one of the most common dataanalysis and unsupervised learning primitive, namely kmeans clustering. This problem has been extensively studied
under various notions of privacy: essentially each privacy
model gives rise to a new algorithm, with a new and often
delicate analysis. We describe this complex landscape in detail in Appendix A.1. However, all these privacy definitions
share common ground: it seems possible that, instead of
having specialized algorithms for each of them, one could
identify the key properties of the private k-means problem
and exploit them to design a unified algorithm. This is
precisely the question we consider in this paper:

*
Equal contribution 1 McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Institute for Science and Technology Austria (ISTA),
Klosterneuburg, Austria 3 CNRS & IRIF, Université Paris
Cité, Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Max Dupré
la Tour <max.duprelatour@gmail.com>, David Saulpic
<david.saulpic@irif.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

