Robust Yet Efficient Conformal Prediction Sets
Soroush H. Zargarbashi 1 Mohammad Sadegh Akhondzadeh 2 Aleksandar Bojchevski 2

Abstract

(evasion) or poisoning the calibration data. In all settings,
the perturbations are limited according to a threat model,
e.g. a ball of a given radius around the clean input (see § 2).
Unlike heuristic defenses which are easily overcome by new
attacks (Athalye et al., 2018; Mujkanovic et al., 2022), certificates provide worst-case guarantees that the prediction
does not change. How can we extend robustness certificates
to conformal prediction sets?

Conformal prediction (CP) can convert any
model’s output into prediction sets guaranteed to
include the true label with any user-specified probability. However, same as the model itself, CP is
vulnerable to adversarial test examples (evasion)
and perturbed calibration data (poisoning). We
derive provably robust sets by bounding the worstcase change in conformity scores. Our tighter
bounds lead to more efficient sets. We cover both
continuous and discrete (sparse) data and our guarantees work both for evasion and poisoning attacks (on both features and labels).

Given calibration data and a score function s : X × Y 7→ R
capturing conformity (agreement) between inputs and all
potential labels, CP finds a calibrated threshold qα , and
defines prediction sets Cα (x) = {y : s(x, y) ≥ qα } that
include all labels with scores above it. CP guarantees that
Pr [ytrue ∈ Cα (x)] ≥ 1 − α for a clean x, exchangeable
with the calibration data, and any user-specfied α. To certify
robustness, we can define conservative sets that ensure the
coverage remains above 1 − α even under perturbation.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is crucial for deploying
models, especially in safety-critical domains. The predicted
probability is not a reliable source for UQ as it is often uncalibrated (Guo et al., 2017). Most methods do not provide
any guarantees and require retraining or modifications in the
model architecture (Abdar et al., 2021). Instead, conformal
prediction (CP) returns prediction sets with a distributionfree guarantee to cover the true label. It only requires blackbox access to the model and assumes exchangeable data
(a weaker assumption than i.i.d.). This makes CP flexible –
we can apply it to image classification, segmentation (Angelopoulos et al., 2023), question answering (Angelopoulos
et al., 2022), and node classification (Huang et al., 2023).

To this end, Gendler et al. (2021) leverage the fact that
the randomly smoothed scores Eδ∼N (0,σ2 I) [s(x + δ, y)]
change slowly around the input to compute an upper
bound on the worst-case score. Their randomly smoothed
conformal prediction (RSCP) method has 4 limitations: (i) It
considers only the mean of randomized scores resulting
in a looser bound and thus larger sets; (ii) It only certifies evasion but not poisoning attacks; (iii) It only supports
L2 -bounded perturbations of continuous data, ignoring discrete and sparse data such as graphs; (iv) It does not correct
for finite-sample approximation errors. We address all of
these limitations.
Our key insight is that we can use the cumulative distribution (CDF) of smooth scores to obtain tighter upper bounds.
The resulting CDF-aware sets are smaller while maintaining
the same robustness guarantee. For continuous data we
reuse Kumar et al. (2020)’s bound developed to certify
confidence, while for discrete/graph data we extend the
bounds of Bojchevski et al. (2020).1 We then propose an approach for finite sample correction. Different from Yan et al.
(2024), we bound calibration points instead of test points.
In addition to being significantly faster (especially for large
datasets like ImageNet), our calibration-time algorithm also
leads to smaller sets when correcting for finite samples.

Most models suffer a significant performance drop when
fed noisy or manipulated data, even for indistinguishable
(label-preserving) perturbations (Silva & Najafirad, 2020).
Adversaries can exploit this vulnerability by perturbing the
training data (poisoning) or the test data (evasion). CP’s performance is also sensitive to the same attacks. One goal of
the adversary is to break the guarantee – reducing the probability to cover the true label by perturbing the test inputs
1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security 2 University
of Cologne. Correspondence to: Soroush H. Zargarbashi
<zargarbashi@cs.uni-koeln.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Both of these methods do not provide sets or CP guarantees.

