Equivariant Diffusion for Crystal Structure Prediction

Peijia Lin 1 Pin Chen 1 2 Rui Jiao 3 4 Qing Mo 2 Jianhuan Cen 1 Wenbing Huang 5 6 Yang Liu 3 4 Dan Huang 1
Yutong Lu 1 2

Abstract

exponential increase in possible structures with more atoms
in a unit cell (Oganov et al., 2019).

In addressing the challenge of Crystal Structure
Prediction (CSP), symmetry-aware deep learning models, particularly diffusion models, have
been extensively studied, which treat CSP as a
conditional generation task. However, ensuring
permutation, rotation, and periodic translation
equivariance during diffusion process remains incompletely addressed. In this work, we propose
EquiCSP, a novel equivariant diffusion-based generative model. We not only address the overlooked issue of lattice permutation equivariance
in existing models, but also develop a unique noising algorithm that rigorously maintains periodic
translation equivariance throughout both training
and inference processes. Our experiments indicate that EquiCSP significantly surpasses existing
models in terms of generating accurate structures
and demonstrates faster convergence during the
training process. Code is available at https:
//github.com/EmperorJia/EquiCSP.

Traditional CSP methods primarily employ Density Functional Theory (DFT) (Kohn & Sham, 1965) for iterative
energy calculations, integrating optimization algorithms like
genetic algorithm (Oganov & Glass, 2006; Oganov et al.,
2011) and particle swarm optimization (Wang et al., 2010a;
2012) to navigate the energy landscape for stable states.
However, the time-intensive nature of DFT calculations
makes these traditional CSP approaches notably inefficient.
Recent advances have seen a shift towards deep generative
models, which learn distributions directly from datasets of
stable structures (Court et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021), with
diffusion models, a subset of these models, gaining prominence in crystal generation (Xie et al., 2021; Jiao et al.,
2023). Diffusion models are lauded for their superior interpretability and performance, owing to their inherent physical
explainability. However, developing diffusion models for
CSP involves addressing specific challenges. Physically,
E(3) transformations, including translation, rotation, and
reflection of crystal coordinates, do not change physical
laws, necessitating E(3) invariant sample generation in the
model. Typical diffusion models like denoising diffusion
probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;
Vignac et al., 2023) and score-based generative models with
stochastic differential equations (SDEs) (Song et al., 2020),
initially used in computer vision, require E(3) equivariance
when adapted to molecular graph domains (Luo et al., 2021),
and for crystals, additional consideration of periodic invariance is needed (Jiao et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Crystal structure prediction (CSP) seeks the atomic arrangement with the lowest energy for given chemical compositions and conditions (Desiraju, 2002), focusing on finding
the global minimum of the potential energy surface. This
task, while conceptually straightforward, is a significant
challenge in physics, chemistry, and materials science due
to the complexity of the potential energy landscape and the

In this study, we introduce EquiCSP, an equivariant1 diffusion method to address CSP. We track the impact of lattice
permutation in crystals on diffusion models used for CSP
and propose corresponding solutions. EquiCSP entails that
during generation and training, any permutation of lattice
parameters results in a corresponding equivariant transformation of the atomic fractional coordinates. Furthermore,
we propose a specialized diffusion noising algorithm in

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China 2 National Supercomputer Center
in Guangzhou, China 3 Dept. of Comp. Sci. Tech., Institute
for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 4 Institute for AIR,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 5 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
6
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis
Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yutong Lu <luyutong@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

1
This paper mainly focuses on lattice permutation equivariance
and periodic translation equivariance, which are unique to crystallographic data. Traditional rotation equivariance is addressed
using invariant representations.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

