Harnessing Neural Unit Dynamics for Effective and Scalable
Class-Incremental Learning

Depeng Li 1 Tianqi Wang 1 Junwei Chen 1 Wei Dai 2 Zhigang Zeng 1

Abstract

that are presented sequentially, without providing task identities at inference time (Wang et al., 2023). However, with
data of the current task accessible but none (at least the bulk)
of the past, CIL is challenged by a sharp performance decline on the previously learned tasks, known as catastrophic
forgetting problem (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).

Class-incremental learning (CIL) aims to train a
model to learn new classes from non-stationary
data streams without forgetting old ones. In this
paper, we propose a new kind of connectionist
model by tailoring neural unit dynamics that adapt
the behavior of neural networks for CIL. In each
training session, it introduces a supervisory mechanism to guide network expansion whose growth
size is compactly commensurate with the intrinsic
complexity of a newly arriving task. This constructs a near-minimal network while allowing
the model to expand its capacity when cannot
sufficiently hold new classes. At inference time,
it automatically reactivates the required neural
units to retrieve knowledge and leaves the remaining inactivated to prevent interference. We name
our model AutoActivator, which is effective and
scalable. To gain insights into the neural unit dynamics, we theoretically analyze the model’s convergence property via a universal approximation
theorem on learning sequential mappings, which
is under-explored in the CIL community. Experiments show that our method achieves strong
CIL performance in rehearsal-free and minimalexpansion settings with different backbones.

Recently, CIL of neural networks has seen explosive growth
in striving for less forgetting (Bonicelli et al., 2022; Tong
et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a). Prior
works fall into three main categories (Masana et al., 2023).
Rehearsal-based approaches maintain a small portion of
past samples and mix them with that of a new task at either input layer (pixel level) (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017;
Bang et al., 2021) or hidden layer (internal representations) (Van de Ven et al., 2020; Hayes et al., 2020). However,
this line of work suffers from substantial performance degradation with a smaller buffer that carries inadequate taskspecific knowledge and becomes infeasible when a rehearsal
buffer is not allowed due to memory constraints or privacy
issues. Regularization-based approaches aim to minimize
the impact of learning new tasks on the weights (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017; Wołczyk et al., 2022) or feature representations (Schwarz et al., 2018; Li et al., 2024b) that are important for previous tasks. Although avoiding data storage, the involved penalty terms make a fixed-size model
rather inflexible to find the optimal solutions as it retains the
memory of previous classes entirely in the parameter space.
Architecture-based approaches dynamically adapt network
components by expansion (Verma et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2023) or mask (Serrà et al., 2018; Ke et al., 2021) operation
to absorb knowledge for novel classes. Nevertheless, network expansion usually renders the model size grow quickly
as each session proceeds, which should be counted into the
memory budget for a fair comparison (Zhou et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Contrary to typical machine learning methods that work
on independent and identically distributed data, classincremental learning (CIL) tackles the problem of training
a single model on non-stationary data distributions. In this
scenario, tasks typically consist of subsets of disjoint classes

Yet, in the brain—which clearly has implemented an efficient and scalable function for incremental learning—the
reactivation of neuronal activity patterns that represent previous experiences is believed to be important for stabilizing
new memories (Rasch & Born, 2007; Joseph et al., 2010).
Motivated by the principle of learning and memory in cognitive neuroscience, this paper proposes a new kind of connectionist model that automatically reactivates the involved

1

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 School of
Information and Control Engineering, China University of Mining
and Technology, Xuzhou, China. Correspondence to: Zhigang
Zeng <zgzeng@hust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

