MusicFlow: Cascaded Flow Matching for Text Guided Music Generation

K R Prajwal * 1 Bowen Shi * 2 Matthew Lee 2 Apoorv Vyas 2 Andros Tjandra 2 Mahi Luthra 2 Baishan Guo 2
Huiyu Wang 2 Triantafyllos Afouras 2 David Kant 2 Wei-Ning Hsu 2

Abstract

language models (Kreuk et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023)
and non-autoregressive approaches (Le et al., 2023; Vyas
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a). A significant portion of
the generative models are focused on speech and general
sound, where state-of-the-art (SOTA) models (Vyas et al.,
2023) are able to generate speech in diverse styles or general
sound events in highly realistic manner. Compared to these
two common modalities, music generation is a particularly
challenging problem as it requires modeling long-term temporal structures (Agostinelli et al., 2023) and full frequency
spectrum (Müller, 2015). Compared to typical sound events
(e.g., dog barking), it contains harmonies and melodies from
different instruments. Music pieces often consist of multiple
tracks, which can be intricately woven together and may
involve significant interference.

We introduce MusicFlow, a cascaded text-tomusic generation model based on flow matching. Based on self-supervised representations to
bridge between text descriptions and music audios, we construct two flow matching networks
to model the conditional distribution of semantic
and acoustic features. Additionally, we leverage
masked prediction as the training objective, enabling the model to generalize to other tasks such
as music infilling and continuation in a zero-shot
manner. Experiments on MusicCaps reveal that
the music generated by MusicFlow exhibits superior quality and text coherence despite being over
2 ∼ 5 times smaller and requiring 5 times fewer
iterative steps. Simultaneously, the model can perform other music generation tasks and achieves
competitive performance in music infilling and
continuation.

With the improvement of audio tokenizers (Zeghidour et al.,
2021; Défossez et al., 2022) and generative models, the
quality of generated music has been greatly improved in
recent works (Agostinelli et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023).
However, many prior works are built upon language models (Agostinelli et al., 2023; Copet et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023), which requires a computationally expensive autoregressive inference procedure with number of forward
passes proportional to the sequence length. This is worsened because many such models are based on a hierarchical set of units (e.g., Encodec tokens (Copet et al., 2023)),
which brings another factor up to the computation. Despite
the usage of non-autoregressive models such as diffusion
models (Liu et al., 2023b; Huang et al., 2023; Forsgren &
Martiros, 2022; Schneider et al., 2023), these approaches
require hundreds of denoising steps during inference to
achieve high performance. On the other hand, most of
the existing models perform generation in a single stage,
which models the audio waveform (Huang et al., 2023) or
its low-level representation such as VAE features (Liu et al.,
2023b) conditioned on text description directly. As music
audios contains rich structural information and its text description can be very detailed (e.g., This is a live recording
of a keyboardist playing a twelve bar blues progression on
an electric keyboard. The player adds embellishments between chord changes and the piece sounds groovy, bluesy
and soulful.), such approaches commonly fail to capture the
intriguing dependency between text description and music

1. Introduction
Audio generation has recently received a lot of attention
from the research community as well as the general public.
Making sound automatically has a lot of practical applications, including voice acting, podcast making, creating
foley sound effects (Luo et al., 2023), making background
music for movies (Liu et al., 2023c), and can greatly reduce
the barrier for audio content creation. In terms of research,
audio generation poses a few challenges due to its long-term
structure and complex interaction between channels (e.g.,
multiple events may appear at the same time), thus being a
suitable testbed for generative models.
Modeling approaches for audio generation has rapidly progressed over the past few years due to the development
of sophisticated generative methods such as autoregressive
*

Equal contribution 1 VGG, University of Oxford, UK. Work
done while at Meta. 2 Meta, USA. Correspondence to: K R Prajwal
<prajwal@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Bowen Shi <bshi@meta.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

