Floating Anchor Diffusion Model for Multi-motif Scaffolding

Ke Liu 1 * Weian Mao 2 1 * Shuaike Shen 1 * Xiaoran Jiao 1 Zheng Sun 3 Hao Chen 1 Chunhua Shen 1 4

Abstract

solving specific instances of the motif-scaffolding problem
(Procko et al., 2014; Siegel et al., 2010). The development
of generative models, especially diffusion models, speeds
up solving the motif scaffolding problem (Song et al., 2021;
Yim et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022). Scaffolding multiple motifs in one protein is more general and significant
because of the synergies between functions. However, previous works focus on scaffolding one motif at a fixed location.
Adapting these approaches to scaffolding multiple motifs
requires prior knowledge of relative positions between multiple motifs which is not readily available.

Motif scaffolding seeks to design scaffold structures for constructing proteins with functions derived from the desired motif, which is crucial for
the design of vaccines and enzymes. Previous
works approach the problem by inpainting or conditional generation. Both of them can only scaffold motifs with fixed positions, and the conditional generation cannot guarantee the presence
of motifs. However, prior knowledge of the relative motif positions in a protein is not readily
available, and constructing a protein with multiple functions in one protein is more general and
significant because of the synergies between functions. We propose a Floating Anchor Diffusion
(FADiff) model. FADiff allows motifs to float
rigidly and independently in the process of diffusion, which guarantees the presence of motifs and
automates the motif position design. Our experiments demonstrate the efficacy of FADiff with
high success rates and designable novel scaffolds.
To the best of our knowledge, FADiff is the first
work to tackle the challenge of scaffolding multiple motifs without relying on the expertise of
relative motif positions in the protein. Code is
available at https://github.com/aim-uofa/FADiff.

Previous works approach the motif-scaffold problem via
conditional generation or inpainting. Conditional generation
methods like SMCdiff (Trippe et al., 2023) are only able
to scaffold one motif while the presence of motifs is not
guaranteed. For inpainting methods, like Chroma (Ingraham
et al., 2023) and RFdiffusion (Watson et al., 2023), they
fix both the structure position and sequence position of
desired motifs. Consequently, to scaffold multiple motifs,
the relationship between their positions must be supplied to
the model in advance, necessitating domain knowledge that
isn’t always readily available. Even for a single motif, the
sequence position is fixed.
To tackle the challenge of supporting multiple motifs, we
propose a novel model dubbed Floating Anchor Diffusion
model (FADiff), which not only ensures the existence of
motifs but also automates motif position design without the
need for prior domain expertise. The underlying principle of
FADiff rests on treating the anchor motifs as rigid entities,
thus permitting motifs to maintain their structures while
floating. Given that a motif is composed of amino acids, it
is likewise guided within the network alongside other amino
acids. With the intent to preserve the structure of motifs, we
treat them as rigid anchors during the diffusion process. The
movement of motifs is dictated by their constituent amino
acids, which further shapes the formation of the diffusion
process with rigid movable substructures in this work.

1. Introduction
The design of proteins with specific functions is significant
for vaccines and enzymes (Correia et al., 2014; Linsky et al.,
2020; Sesterhenn et al., 2020). One crucial way is to design stable scaffolds to support desired motifs (Watson et al.,
2023; Trippe et al., 2023; Ingraham et al., 2023). Here
motifs refer to protein structure fragments, which impart
biological functions to proteins (Hutchinson & Thornton,
1996). Motif scaffolding has already proven to be significant
in the wet experiment since drugs have been designed by

Utilizing FADiff, we assure the presence of desired motifs,
considering them not just as generation conditions, but as
fundamental components of the generation results, analogous to the inpainting. Contrarily, while inpainting methods
fixate the positions of the motifs, FADiff brings innovation to the table by independently determining the positions

*

Equal contribution 1 Zhejiang University, China 2 The University of Adelaide, Australia 3 Swansea University, UK 4 Ant Group.
Correspondence to: Hao Chen <haochen.cad@zju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

