Balancing Similarity and Complementarity for Federated Learning

Kunda Yan * 1 Sen Cui * 1 Abudukelimu Wuerkaixi 1 Jingfeng Zhang 2 3 Bo Han 4 3 Gang Niu 3
Masashi Sugiyama † 3 5 Changshui Zhang † 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017), emerging
as a pivotal paradigm in machine learning, is increasingly acclaimed for facilitating collaborative training across diverse
clients while ensuring data confidentiality. However, FL
still encounters significant challenges, chiefly statistical heterogeneity - the occurrence of non-i.i.d. data across diverse
local clients, as explored in prior research. (Cui et al., 2022;
Qu et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023).
In real-world scenarios with data from heterogeneous user
bases, models often face performance decline due to local
data distribution variances (Kairouz et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022).

In mobile and IoT systems, Federated Learning
(FL) is increasingly important for effectively using data while maintaining user privacy. One key
challenge in FL is managing statistical heterogeneity, such as non-i.i.d. data, arising from numerous clients and diverse data sources. This
requires strategic cooperation, often with clients
having similar characteristics. However, we are
interested in a fundamental question: does achieving optimal cooperation necessarily entail cooperating with the most similar clients? Typically,
significant model performance improvements are
often realized not by partnering with the most similar models, but through leveraging complementary data. Our theoretical and empirical analyses
suggest that optimal cooperation is achieved by
enhancing complementarity in feature distribution
while restricting the disparity in the correlation
between features and targets. Accordingly, we
introduce a novel framework, FedSaC, which
balances similarity and complementarity in FL
cooperation. Our framework aims to approximate
an optimal cooperation network for each client
by optimizing a weighted sum of model similarity and feature complementarity. The strength of
FedSaC lies in its adaptability to various levels
of data heterogeneity and multimodal scenarios.
Our comprehensive unimodal and multimodal experiments demonstrate that FedSaC markedly
surpasses other state-of-the-art FL methods.

In the context of multimodal learning, statistical heterogeneity is notably pronounced (Chen & Zhang, 2020; Zheng
et al., 2023). Variations in dimensionality, quality, and reliability among diverse data sources exacerbate heterogeneity
within each client’s modalities and magnify distribution discrepancies between clients. Such significant heterogeneity
complicates achieving consistent and efficient learning in
the FL framework (Yu et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023).
In response to this challenge, a promising direction involves
the identification of optimal collaborators predicated on
model similarity metrics (Baek et al., 2023; Sattler et al.,
2021; Ye et al., 2023). For example, IFCA (Baek et al.,
2023) clusters cooperative clients based on the similarity
of their model parameters, whereas CFL (Sattler et al.,
2021) employs gradient similarity for the same purpose.
pFedGraph (Ye et al., 2023) constructs a cooperation graph
guided by an intuitive notion that clients with greater similarity should collaborate more intensively. These methods
collectively emphasize the importance of model similarity
in strategic collaboration.

*
Equal contribution †Corresponding authors 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI), Beijing National
Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
P.R.China 2 The University of Auckland 3 RIKEN 4 Hong Kong
Baptist University 5 The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to:
Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>, Changshui Zhang
<zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

However, we raise a fundamental question: does achieving
optimal cooperation necessarily entail cooperating with the
most similar clients? Theoretically, similarity oriented from
collaboration is conservative, such that it could potentially
result in unproductive cooperation. For example, under the
assumption of two completely identical clients or models,
cooperation between them would yield no information gain
for either party, despite their maximal similarity. Interestingly, the fundamental precondition for model enhancement

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

