Learning Associative Memories with Gradient Descent

Vivien Cabannes 1 Berfin Şimşek 2 Alberto Bietti 2
a standard convex analysis treatment, we felt the need to
provide a finer picture, more inline with behaviors observed
when training large neural networks.

Abstract
This work focuses on the training dynamics of one
associative memory module storing outer products of token embeddings. We reduce this problem to the study of a system of particles, which
interact according to properties of the data distribution and correlations between embeddings.
Through theory and experiments, we provide several insights. In overparameterized regimes, we
obtain logarithmic growth of the “classification
margins.” Yet, we show that imbalance in token
frequencies and memory interferences due to correlated embeddings lead to oscillatory transitory
regimes. The oscillations are more pronounced
with large step sizes, which can create benign
loss spikes, although these learning rates speed
up the dynamics and accelerate the asymptotic
convergence. In underparameterized regimes, we
illustrate how the cross-entropy loss can lead to
suboptimal memorization schemes. Finally, we
assess the validity of our findings on small Transformer models.

We consider N input tokens x ∈ [N ], each associated with
some output y = f ∗ (x) ∈ [M ] for a deterministic function f ∗ : [N ] → [M ] and some number M of classes.1
The input variable x is assumed to be drawn from a data
distribution p(x). The goal is to learn the input-output relationship f ∗ with a model of the form
fW (x) = arg max ⟨uy , W ex ⟩ ,
y∈[M ]

with W ∈ Rd×d (1)

where ex , uy ∈ Rd are fixed input/ouput token embeddings
with d ≥ 2, and W is a parameter to be learned. The quality
of a model fW is typically measured through the 0-1 loss
X
L01 (fW ) = EX,Y [1fW (X)̸=Y ] =
p(x)1fW (x)̸=f ∗ (x) ,
while W is learned by optimizing a surrogate loss with
gradient methods. We will focus on the cross-entropy loss
L(W ) = EX,Y [ℓ(W ; x, y)]
X
ℓ(W ; x, y) = log(
e⟨uz ,W ex ⟩ ) − ⟨uy , W ex ⟩ .

(2)
(3)

z∈[M ]

1. Introduction

This loss is also known as softmax, multinomial logistic or
negative log-likelihood loss.

Modern machine learning often involves discrete data,
whether it is labels in a classification problem, sequences of
text tokens in language modeling, or sequences of discrete
codes when dealing with other modalities. In such settings
it is common to consider cross-entropy objectives, and to
embed each input and output token into high-dimensional
embedding vectors. Deep learning architectures consist in
transforming the embedding vectors by a cascade of linear
matrix multiplications together with non-linear operations.
This work aims at obtaining a fine-grained understanding
of training a single such linear layer with the cross-entropy
loss and fixed embeddings. Indeed, one could then see the
training of deep models as the joint training of multiple such
associative memory models. Although our setup admits
1

The model (1) can be seen as an associative memory, which
stores or “memorizes” pairwise associations (x, y). Associative memories originate in the neural computation literature,
where they were used to model how the brain stores information (see, e.g., Willshaw et al., 1969; Longuet-Higgins et al.,
1970), and solve algorithmic tasks with a machine learning perspective (see, e.g., Hopfield, 1982; Hopfield & Tank,
1985). These models have gained in popularity recently,
notably as candidates to explain the inner workings of some
deep neural networks (Geva et al., 2021; Schlag et al., 2021;
Ramsauer et al., 2021; Bietti et al., 2023; Cabannes et al.,
2024). This line of work motivates the thorough study of
the training dynamics behind associative memory models.
This is the goal of our paper, formalized as Problem 1.

Meta AI 2 Flatiron. Correspondence to: <vivc@meta.com>.

Problem 1. Understand the training dynamics of the associative memory model with the cross-entropy loss.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

We use the notation [p] = {1, 2, . . . , p}.

