RLVF: Learning from Verbal Feedback without Overgeneralization

Moritz Stephan 1 Alexander Khazatsky 1 Eric Mitchell 1 Annie S Chen 1 Sheryl Hsu 1 Archit Sharma 1
Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract

1

Introduction

With the increasingly widespread adoption of large language
models (LLMs) across diverse industries and individuals,
the ability to align them with high-level human feedback
for a specific user or use-case becomes increasingly important. While LLM users often want the model to adhere to
broad principles at all times, such as producing fluent text,
individual users and use-cases have more nuanced preferences. For example, a user may request the LLM to write
more formal work emails but more casual personal emails,
making feedback context dependent. Tailoring models to
accommodate such preferences is challenging: it requires
extensive resources to gather preferences in all different
contexts and fine-tuning the model for feedback applicable
in one context can unpredictably impact model behavior in
other contexts. We study the problem of adapting models
using verbal feedback that is fast and easy for people to
provide (see Fig. 1).

The diversity of contexts in which large language
models (LLMs) are deployed requires the ability
to modify or customize default model behaviors
to incorporate nuanced requirements and preferences. A convenient interface to specify such
model adjustments is high-level verbal feedback,
such as “Don’t use emojis when drafting emails
to my boss.” However, while writing high-level
feedback is far simpler than collecting annotations for reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), we find that simply prompting a
model with such feedback leads to overgeneralization–applying feedback in contexts where it
is not relevant. We propose a new method Contextualized Critiques with Constrained Preference
Optimization (C3PO) to learn from high-level verbal feedback while reducing overgeneralization
compared to current work. C3PO uses a piece of
high-level feedback to generate a small synthetic
preference dataset to specify when and how the
feedback should (and should not) be applied. It
then fine-tunes the model in accordance with the
synthetic preference data while minimizing the
divergence from the original model for prompts
where the feedback does not apply. Our experimental results indicate that our approach effectively applies verbal feedback to relevant scenarios while preserving existing behaviors for other
contexts more than current methods. For both
human- and GPT-4-generated high-level feedback,
C3PO effectively adheres to the given feedback
comparably to in-context baselines while reducing overgeneralization by 30%.

Common approaches to incorporating feedback, such as supervised context distillation (SCD) or reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), use example-level supervision via either supervised completions or preference
labels. Such methods require a corpus of user-provided
(preference-)data, which can be costly and cumbersome to
obtain. Additionally, they do not constrain model behavior
outside the context that the feedback may apply, so the LLM
might adapt its behavior in unintended ways, e.g. output a
more casual work email when the preference only applies to
personal emails. Verbal feedback is far easier and faster for
humans to provide since it only requires a single sentence
of human input. To this end, another common approach is
to incorporate such verbal feedback into the prompt, potentially through an iterative process to continually add additional points of feedback. However, this approach requires
re-using the prompt in all future queries and resulting in
overgeneralization. As more pieces of feedback accumulate,
long prompts containing many context-dependent feedbacks
can make inference expensive; further, identifying which
pieces of feedback should apply in a given context can become difficult.

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, CA, USA.
Correspondence to: Moritz Stephan <moritzst@stanford.edu>.
https://austrian-code-wizard.github.io/
c3po-website/

Provided only a single sentence that specifies feedback, we
aim to adapt the model to incorporate the feedback in future

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

