Rethinking Decision Transformer via Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning

Yi Ma 1 Jianye Hao 1 2 Hebin Liang 1 Chenjun Xiao 3

Abstract

With an appropriate prompt, a pre-trained transformer can
learn new tasks without explicit supervision and additional
parameter updates. Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al.,
2021) is an innovative method that attempts to explore this
idea for sequential decision making. Unlike traditional reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, which learn a value
function by bootstrapping or computing policy gradient, DT
directly learns an autoregressive generative model from trajectory data using a causal transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Radford et al., 2019). This approach allows leveraging existing transformer architectures widely employed in language
and vision tasks that are easy to scale, and beneﬁtting from
a substantial body of research focused on stable training of
transformer (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Fedus
et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022).

Decision Transformer (DT) is an innovative algorithm leveraging recent advances of the transformer architecture in reinforcement learning
(RL). However, a notable limitation of DT is its reliance on recalling trajectories from datasets, losing the capability to seamlessly stitch sub-optimal
trajectories together. In this work we introduce a
general sequence modeling framework for studying sequential decision making through the lens
of Hierarchical RL. At the time of making decisions, a high-level policy ﬁrst proposes an ideal
prompt for the current state, a low-level policy
subsequently generates an action conditioned on
the given prompt. We show DT emerges as a special case of this framework with certain choices
of high-level and low-level policies, and discuss
the potential failure of these choices. Inspired
by these observations, we study how to jointly
optimize the high-level and low-level policies to
enable the stitching ability, which further leads
to the development of new ofﬂine RL algorithms.
Our empirical results clearly show that the proposed algorithms signiﬁcantly surpass DT on several control and navigation benchmarks. We hope
our contributions can inspire the integration of
transformer architectures within the ﬁeld of RL.

DT
is
trained
on
trajectory
data,
(R0 , s0 , a0 , . . . , RT , sT , aT ), where Rt is the returnto-go, the sum of future rewards along the trajectory starting
from time step t. This can be viewed as learning a model
that predicts what action should be taken at a given state
in order to make so many returns. Following this, we
can view the return-to-go prompt as a switch, guiding the
model in making decisions at test time. If such a model
can be learned effectively and generalized well even for
out-of-distribution return-to-go, it is reasonable to expect
that DT can generate a better policy by prompting a higher
return. Unfortunately, this seems to demand a level of
generalization ability that is often too high in practical
sequential decision-making problems. In fact, the key
challenge facing DT is how to improve its robustness to the
underlying data distribution, particularly when learning
from trajectories collected by policies that are not close to
optimal. Recent studies have indicated that for problems
requiring the stitching ability, referring to the capability to
integrate suboptimal trajectories from the data, DT cannot
provide a signiﬁcant advantage compared to behavior
cloning (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Emmons et al., 2021;
Kostrikov et al., 2022; Yamagata et al., 2023; Badrinath
et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2023). This further conﬁrms that a
naive return-to-go prompt is not good enough for solving
complex sequential decision-making problems.

1. Introduction
One of the most remarkable characteristics observed in large
sequence models, especially Transformer models, is the incontext learning ability (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020; Ramesh et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2020; Akyürek et al.,
2022; Garg et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023).
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University 2 Huawei, Noah’s Ark Lab 3 The Chinese University
of Hongkong, Shenzhen. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao
<jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Recent progress on large language models showed that care-

1

