Offline Transition Modeling via Contrastive Energy Learning

Ruifeng Chen * 1 2 Chengxing Jia * 1 2 Zefang Huang 1 Tian-Shuo Liu 1 2 Xu-Hui Liu 1 Yang Yu 1 2

Abstract

decision-making and evaluation. This is particularly advantageous in offline settings (Levine et al., 2020) where additional samples cannot be obtained by online interaction. In
such scenarios, policies can be executed within the learned
model instead of directly interacting with the real environment, leading to improved and more robust offline policy
evaluation (Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Fu et al., 2021) and
optimization (Yu et al., 2020; 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Rigter
et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023). Therefore, model-based methods have the potential to significantly enhance real-world
decision-making applications.

Learning a high-quality transition model is of
great importance for sequential decision-making
tasks, especially in offline settings. Nevertheless,
the complex behaviors of transition dynamics in
real-world environments pose challenges for the
standard forward models because of their inductive bias towards smooth regressors, conflicting
with the inherent nature of transitions such as discontinuity or large curvature. In this work, we
propose to model the transition probability implicitly through a scalar-value energy function,
which enables not only flexible distribution prediction but also capturing complex transition behaviors. The Energy-based Transition Models
(ETM) are shown to accurately fit the discontinuous transition functions and better generalize to
out-of-distribution transition data. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that energy-based transition models improve the evaluation accuracy and significantly outperform other off-policy evaluation
methods in DOPE benchmark. Finally, we show
that energy-based transition models also benefit
reinforcement learning and outperform prior offline RL algorithms in D4RL Gym-Mujoco tasks.

As the core of model-based methods, learning the transition function requires the ability to accurately capture
the characteristics of the environment. In sequential tasks,
as the trajectory length increases and the policy distribution shifts, model errors have a greater impact on decisionmaking (Asadi et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020). Previous works
primarily address the detrimental impact of model errors in
two ways. One approach is to avoid exploring areas with
high prediction uncertainty (Yu et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2023).
The second approach aims to introduce new architectures for
transition modeling. For example, Zhang et al. suggests using autoregressive dynamics models for continuous control.
Additionally, Trajectory Transformer (TT) (Janner et al.,
2021) adopts a transformer architecture to model the trajectory distribution. However, these works simply adopt new
model architectures and larger capacities, without changing
models’ optimization process and then, the generalization
ability, fundamentally.

1. Introduction
Learning a transition model provides a promising approach
for enhancing efficient decision-making (Sutton & Barto,
2018), known as model-based methods (Janner et al., 2019;
Luo et al., 2024b; Moerland et al., 2023). Model-based
methods involve encapsulating the transition dynamics of
the real environment to predict the subsequent state given a
specific state-action pair. By leveraging collected transition
data to model these dynamics, the learned model extends
beyond the initial dataset, effectively facilitating subsequent

The current transition models typically explicitly predict
the next state, which we refer to as a Forward Transition
Model (FTM). It inputs the current state-action pair and outputs the next-state prediction with variance estimate. Theoretically, FTM, given a sufficient model capacity, should
have the ability to fit various scenarios. However, we have
found that in some complex situations, especially for environmental transitions with discontinuities or sharp changes
that are ubiquitous in real-world tasks with frictional contact
(Todorov, 2014; Coumans, 2015; Pfrommer et al., 2021),
FTMs are difficult to perform well, which must explicitly
match the large gradient of the steep function that may cause
generalization issues especially for the areas with low data
density, and requires sufficiently dense data and thorough
optimization to compensate this effect. We demonstrate that

*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China & School of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 2 Polixir Technologies. Correspondence to: Yang Yu <yuy@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

