Two-sided Competing Matching Recommendation Markets With Quota and
Complementary Preferences Constraints

Yuantong Li 1 Guang Cheng 1 Xiaowu Dai 1 2

Abstract

to multiple decision-making agents based on mutual compatibility as assessed via sets of preferences. We consider
the setting of matching markets with recommender systems,
where preferences are usually unknown in the recommendation process due to the large volume of participants. One of
the key concepts that contribute to the success of matching
markets is stability, which criterion ensures that all participants have no incentive to block a prescribed matching
(Roth, 1982). Matching markets often consist of participants with complementary preferences that can lead to instability (Che et al., 2019). Examples of complementary
preferences in matching markets include: firms seeking
workers with skills that complement their existing workforce, sports teams forming teams with players that have
complementary roles, and colleges admitting students with
diverse backgrounds and demographics that complement
each other. Studying the stability issue in the context of complementary preferences is crucial in ensuring the successful
functioning of matching markets with complementarities.

In this paper, we propose a new recommendation algorithm for addressing the problem of twosided online matching markets with complementary preferences and quota constraints, where
agents’ preferences are unknown a priori and
must be learned from data. The presence of
mixed quota and complementary preferences constraints can lead to instability in the matching process, making this problem challenging to solve.
To overcome this challenge, we formulate the
problem as a bandit learning framework and propose the Multi-agent Multi-type Thompson Sampling (MMTS) algorithm. The algorithm combines the strengths of Thompson Sampling for
exploration with a new double matching technique to provide a stable matching outcome. Our
theoretical analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of MMTS √as it can achieve stability and
e
has a total O(Q
Kmax T )-Bayesian regret with
high probability, which exhibits linearity with respect to the total firm’s quota Q, the square root
of
√ the maximum size of available type workers
Kmax and time horizon T . In addition, simulation studies also demonstrate MMTS’ effectiveness in various settings. We provide code used
in our experiments https://github.com/
Likelyt/Double-Matching.

In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm and present an indepth analysis of the problem of complementary preferences
in matching markets. Specifically, we focus on a many-toone matching scenario and use the job market as an example.
In our proposed model, there is a set of agents (e.g., firms),
each with a limited quota, and a set of arms (e.g., workers),
each of which can be matched to at most one agent. Each
arm belongs to a unique type, and each agent wants to
match with a minimum quota of arms for each type and
a maximum quota of arms from all types. This leads to
complementarities in agents’ preferences. Additionally, the
agents’ preference of arms from each type is unknown a
priori and must be learned from data, which we refer to as
the competing matching under complementary preference
recommendation problem (CMCPR).

1. Introduction
Two-sided matching markets have been a mainstay of theoretical research and real-world applications for several
decades since the seminal work by Gale & Shapley (1962).
Matching markets are used to allocate indivisible “goods”

The main contributions can be summarized as follows. Our
first result is the formulation of CMCPR into a bandit learning framework as described in Lattimore & Szepesvári
(2020). Using this framework, we propose a new algorithm,
the Multi-agent Multi-type Thompson Sampling (MMTS),
to solve CMCPR. Our algorithm builds on the strengths of
Thompson Sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933; Agrawal &
Goyal, 2012; Russo et al., 2018) in terms of exploration and

1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, UCLA;
Department of Biostatistics, UCLA. Correspondence
to:
Yuantong Li <yuantongli@ucla.edu>, Xiaowu Dai
<dai@stat.ucla.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

