Harnessing the Power of Neural Operators with Automatically Encoded
Conservation Laws
Ning Liu * 1 Yiming Fan * 2 Xianyi Zeng 2 Milan Klöwer 3 Lu Zhang 2 Yue Yu 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved tremendous
progress in areas where the underlying laws are unknown.
In computer vision applications convolutional neural networks have been very popular even though it is unclear
how the lower-dimensional manifold of “valid” images is
parameterized (He et al., 2016; Ren et al., 2015; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012). That means, such a manifold has to be discovered in a purely data-driven way by feeding the network
vast amounts of data. Another recent popular application of
DNNs is the modeling and calibration process of physicsbased problems from experimental measurements (Ranade
et al., 2021; Schmidt & Lipson, 2009; Çolak, 2021; Jin et al.,
2023; Vinuesa et al., 2023). A wide range of physical applications entail the learning of solution operators, i.e., the
learning of infinite dimensional function mappings between
any parametric dependence to the solution field. A prototypical instance is the case of modeling fluid dynamics, where
the initial input needs to be mapped to a temporal sequence
of flow states. Like the time integration in numerical modelling, an operator is required that takes the current flow
state and maps it to the predicted state one time step later.
To this end, the neural operator (NO) (Anandkumar et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020c; Lu et al., 2019; Gupta et al., 2021;
Cao, 2021) is introduced, which learns a surrogate mapping
between function spaces with resolution independence as
well as generalizability to different input instances. These
facts make NOs excellent candidates in discovering models
for complex physical systems directly from data.

Neural operators (NOs) have emerged as effective tools for modeling complex physical systems
in scientific machine learning. In NOs, a central
characteristic is to learn the governing physical
laws directly from data. In contrast to other machine learning applications, partial knowledge is
often known a priori about the physical system at
hand whereby quantities such as mass, energy and
momentum are exactly conserved. Currently, NOs
have to learn these conservation laws from data
and can only approximately satisfy them due to finite training data and random noise. In this work,
we introduce conservation law-encoded neural operators (clawNOs), a suite of NOs that endow inference with automatic satisfaction of such conservation laws. ClawNOs are built with a divergencefree prediction of the solution field, with which
the continuity equation is automatically guaranteed. As a consequence, clawNOs are compliant
with the most fundamental and ubiquitous conservation laws essential for correct physical consistency. As demonstrations, we consider a wide
variety of scientific applications ranging from
constitutive modeling of material deformation,
incompressible fluid dynamics, to atmospheric
simulation. ClawNOs significantly outperform
the state-of-the-art NOs in learning efficacy, especially in small-data regimes. Our code and data
accompanying this paper are available at https:
//github.com/ningliu-iga/clawNO.

Herein, we consider data-driven model discovery of physicsbased problems using NOs (Li et al., 2021; Goswami et al.,
2022b). In contrast to computer vision applications, physicsbased applications are often at least partially constrained
by well-known fundamental laws. As a famous example,
the motion of a particle in an external potential should conserve energy and momentum, while the exact form of the
potential or the expression for the momentum equations is
still unknown and needs to be inferred from observations.
However, most of the current NOs have been focused on a
pure data-driven paradigm, which neglects these intrinsic
conservation of fundamental physical laws in data. As a
result, their performances highly rely on the quantity and

*
Equal contribution 1 Global Engineering and Materials, Inc.,
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA 2 Department of Mathematics, Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA 3 Earth, Atmospheric
and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Correspondence to: Yue Yu
<yuy214@lehigh.edu>, Ning Liu <ningliu@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

