Graph-based Time Series Clustering for End-to-End Hierarchical Forecasting

Andrea Cini 1 Danilo Mandic 2 Cesare Alippi 1 3
et al., 2009), to name a few relevant application domains.
By exploiting aggregation constraints, forecasts at different
levels can be combined to obtain predictions at different
resolutions. Similarly, coherency constraints can be used
to regularize forecasts obtained for the different levels by
considering forecast reconciliation (FR) methods (Hyndman et al., 2011; Wickramasuriya et al., 2019; Panagiotelis
et al., 2023). Said differently, constraining forecasts at different levels to “add up” can positively impact forecasting
accuracy. Based on similar ideas, cluster-based aggregate
forecasting methods learn to predict aggregates of clustered
time series as an intermediate step for obtaining forecasts
for the total aggregate (Alzate and Sinn, 2013; Fahiman
et al., 2017; Cini et al., 2020). The idea underlying both
approaches is that combining multiple forecasts reduces
variance, an observation dating back to Bates and Granger
(1969). In particular, FR is a special case of forecast combinations (Hollyman et al., 2021).

Abstract
Relationships among time series can be exploited
as inductive biases in learning effective forecasting models. In hierarchical time series, relationships among subsets of sequences induce hard
constraints (hierarchical inductive biases) on the
predicted values. In this paper, we propose a
graph-based methodology to unify relational and
hierarchical inductive biases in the context of deep
learning for time series forecasting. In particular,
we model both types of relationships as dependencies in a pyramidal graph structure, with each
pyramidal layer corresponding to a level of the
hierarchy. By exploiting modern – trainable –
graph pooling operators we show that the hierarchical structure, if not available as a prior, can be
learned directly from data, thus obtaining cluster
assignments aligned with the forecasting objective. A differentiable reconciliation stage is incorporated into the processing architecture, allowing
hierarchical constraints to act both as an architectural bias as well as a regularization element for
predictions. Simulation results on representative
datasets show that the proposed method compares
favorably against the state of the art.

Besides hierarchical constraints, correlated time series forecasting models can leverage relational inductive biases to
predict any subset of the time series while sharing learnable parameters (Cini et al., 2023c). Indeed, the combination of graph deep learning methods (Bacciu et al.,
2020; Stanković et al., 2020; Bronstein et al., 2021) and
deep learning for time series (Benidis et al., 2022) has
led to state-of-the-art forecasting accuracy in several domains (Jin et al., 2023; Cini et al., 2023b). Current stateof-the-art methods, however, are limited to processing the
input data at a single spatial resolution which might cause
propagation bottlenecks (Alon and Yahav, 2020) and oversmoothing (Rusch et al., 2023). Graph pooling operators (Grattarola et al., 2022) enable graph neural network
(GNN) architectures to learn how to cluster nodes and obtain hierarchical, higher-order, graph representations tailored to the task at hand (Bianchi and Lachi, 2023). Yet
the application of learnable graph pooling operators and the
combination of hierarchical and relational constraints are
underexplored in graph-based forecasting.

1. Introduction
In most applications, collections of related time series can
be organized and aggregated within a hierarchical structure (Hyndman et al., 2011). One practical example is forecasting energy consumption profiles which can be aggregated at the level of individual households as well as at city,
regional, and national scales (Taieb et al., 2021). Similar
arguments can be made for forecasting photovoltaic production (Yang et al., 2017), financial time series (Athanasopoulos et al., 2020), and the influx of tourists (Athanasopoulos
1
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera italiana, Switzerland 2 Imperial College London, United Kingdom
3
Politecnico di Milano, Italy. Correspondence to: Andrea Cini
<andrea.cini@usi.ch>.

To fill this void, this paper proposes a novel and comprehensive graph-based framework for hierarchical time series
clustering and forecasting. Our approach unifies hierarchical
time series processing, graph pooling operators, and graphbased neural forecasting methods. This results in a learning
architecture for multi-step ahead forecasting operating at

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

