Evolution of Heuristics: Towards Efficient Automatic Algorithm Design Using
Large Language Model

Fei Liu 1 Xialiang Tong 2 Mingxuan Yuan 2 Xi Lin 1 Fu Luo 3 Zhenkun Wang 3 Zhichao Lu 1 Qingfu Zhang 1

Abstract

Heuristics

Heuristics

Heuristics are widely used for dealing with complex search and optimization problems. However, manual design of heuristics can be often
very labour extensive and requires rich working
experience and knowledge. This paper proposes
Evolution of Heuristic (EoH), a novel evolutionary paradigm that leverages both Large Language
Models (LLMs) and Evolutionary Computation
(EC) methods for Automatic Heuristic Design
(AHD). EoH represents the ideas of heuristics in
natural language, termed thoughts. They are then
translated into executable codes by LLMs. The
evolution of both thoughts and codes in an evolutionary search framework makes it very effective and efficient for generating high-performance
heuristics. Experiments on three widely studied
combinatorial optimization benchmark problems
demonstrate that EoH outperforms commonly
used handcrafted heuristics and other recent AHD
methods including FunSearch. Particularly, the
heuristic produced by EoH with a low computational budget (in terms of the number of queries
to LLMs) significantly outperforms widely-used
human hand-crafted baseline algorithms for the
online bin packing problem.

Code

Thought

(a) Manual Design

(b) Evol. of codes (FunSearch)

Heuristics

Prompt Strategies:
Thought

1) Exploration:
E1

Augment

E2

2) Modification:
M1

M2

M3

Code

(c) Evolution of both thoughts and codes (EoH, ours)
Figure 1. Heuristic design often (a) relies on human expertise with
reasoning over thoughts; recent progress has been made on (b)
search over the space of codes; while (c) our method evolves both
thoughts and codes using large language models.

1987), tabu search (Glover & Laguna, 1998), and iterated local search (Lourenço et al., 2003), among many other methods (Mart et al., 2018). These hand-crafted methods have
been successfully used in a wide spectrum of real-world
applications. However, different applications may require
different algorithms and/or algorithm configurations. Manually designing, modifying, and configuring a heuristic for a
given problem can be very labor-intensive and demands rich
expert experience. This is a bottleneck in many application
domains. To address this issue, Automatic Heuristic Design
(AHD) has been proposed and become an active research
area (Burke et al., 2013; Stützle & López-Ibáñez, 2019).
AHD selects, tunes, or constructs effective heuristics for a
given problem class automatically. Genetic Programming
(GP) has been used in AHD (Langdon & Poli, 2013; Zhang
et al., 2023). GP requires a set of permissible primitives
or mutation operations for defining and generating heuristics. It could be very difficult to construct a suitable set in

1. Introduction
Heuristics are commonly used for tackling complex search
and optimization problems. Over the last several decades,
much effort has been devoted to designing effective heuristics, leading to simulated annealing (Van Laarhoven et al.,
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of
Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology.
Correspondence to:
Qingfu Zhang <qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk>, Zhenkun Wang
<wangzk3@sustech.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

