Deep Regression Representation Learning with Topology

Shihao Zhang 1 Kenji Kawaguchi 1 Angela Yao 1

Abstract

space. Representation learning empowers models to automatically extract, transform, and leverage relevant information from data, leading to improved performance.
The information bottleneck (IB) principle (Shwartz-Ziv
& Tishby, 2017) provides a theoretical framework and
guiding principle for learning effectiveness representations.
The IB principle suggests learning a representation Z with
sufficient information about the target Y but minimal information about the input X. For representation Z, sufficiency
keeps all necessary information on Y, while the minimality reduces Z’s complexity and prevents overfitting. The
optimal representation, as specified by Achille & Soatto
(2018b;a), is the most useful (sufficient) and minimal. Yet,
they specified classification and neglect regression.

Most works studying representation learning focus only on classification and neglect regression. Yet, the learning objectives and, therefore,
the representation topologies of the two tasks
are fundamentally different: classification targets
class separation, leading to disconnected representations, whereas regression requires ordinality with respect to the target, leading to continuous representations. We thus wonder how the effectiveness of a regression representation is influenced by its topology, with evaluation based on
the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle. The
IB principle is an important framework that provides principles for learning effective representations. We establish two connections between
it and the topology of regression representations.
The first connection reveals that a lower intrinsic
dimension of the feature space implies a reduced
complexity of the representation Z. This complexity can be quantified as the conditional entropy of Z on the target Y, and serves as an upper bound on the generalization error. The second connection suggests a feature space that is
topologically similar to the target space will better align with the IB principle. Based on these
two connections, we introduce PH-Reg, a regularizer specific to regression that matches the
intrinsic dimension and topology of the feature
space with the target space. Experiments on
synthetic and real-world regression tasks demonstrate the benefits of PH-Reg. Code: https:
//github.com/needylove/PH-Reg.

The IB principle is applicable to both classification and regression in that both learn minimal and sufficient representations. However, there are some fundamental differences. For example, classification shortens the distance between features belonging to the same class while elongating the distance between features of different classes; the
shortening and elongating of distances can be interpreted
as minimality and sufficiency, respectively (Boudiaf et al.,
2020). The two effects lead to disconnected representations
(Brown et al., 2022a). By contrast, in regression, the representations are shown to be continuous, connected and form
an ordinal relationship with respect to the target (Zhang
et al., 2023). The disconnected and connected representations are topologically different, as they have different 0th
Betti numbers. The 0th Betti number represents the connectivity in topology, influencing the ‘shape’ of the feature
space1 . While there are a few works investigating the influence of the representation topology in classification (Hofer
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019), regression is overlooked.
We thus wonder what topology the feature space should
have for effective regression and how the topology of the
feature space is connected to the IB principle.

1. Introduction

In this work, we establish two connections between the
topology of the feature space and the IB principle for regression representation learning in deep learning. To establish the connections, we first demonstrate that minimizing
the conditional entropies H(Y|Z) and H(Z|Y) can better

Regression is a fundamental task in machine learning in
which input samples are mapped to a continuous target
1
National Unviersity of Singapore. Correspondence to: Shihao
Zhang <zhang.shihao@u.nus.edu>.

1

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

In this work, the feature space represents the set of projected
data points, i.e. the manifold, rather than the entire ambient space.

1

