Operator SVD with Neural Networks via Nested Low-Rank Approximation

J. Jon Ryu 1 Xiangxiang Xu 1 H. S. Melihcan Erol 1 Yuheng Bu 2 Lizhong Zheng 1 Gregory W. Wornell 1

Abstract

Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Bengio et al., 2003; Cox & Cox,
2008) and correlation analysis algorithms (Michaeli et al.,
2016; Wang et al., 2019) and are widely used in image and
signal processing (Andrews & Patterson, 1976; Turk & Pentland, 1991; Wiskott & Sejnowski, 2002; Sprekeler, 2011;
Scetbon et al., 2021), natural language processing (Landauer
et al., 1998; Goldberg & Levy, 2014), among other fields.
Beyond machine learning applications, solving eigenvalue
problems is a crucial step in solving partial differential equations (PDEs), such as Schrödinger’s equations in quantum
chemistry (Hermann et al., 2020; Pfau et al., 2020).

Computing eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) of a
given linear operator, or finding its leading eigenvalues and eigenfunctions, is a fundamental task
in many machine learning and scientific computing problems. For high-dimensional eigenvalue
problems, training neural networks to parameterize the eigenfunctions is considered as a promising alternative to the classical numerical linear
algebra techniques. This paper proposes a new
optimization framework based on the low-rank
approximation characterization of a truncated singular value decomposition, accompanied by new
techniques called nesting for learning the top-L
singular values and singular functions in the correct order. The proposed method promotes the
desired orthogonality in the learned functions implicitly and efficiently via an unconstrained optimization formulation, which is easy to solve
with off-the-shelf gradient-based optimization algorithms. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed optimization framework for use cases in
computational physics and machine learning.

The standard approach to these problems in practice is to
perform the matrix spectral decomposition using the standard techniques from numerical linear algebra (Golub &
Van Loan, 2013). In machine learning, the size of the matrix
is typically given by the size of the data sample or the dimensionality of data. In physical simulation, the underlying
matrix scales with the resolution of discretization of a given
domain. For finding a few top (or bottom) eigenmodes, in
general, iterative subspace methods such as Krylov subspace
methods (Saad, 1981) and LOBPCG (Knyazev, 2001) can
efficiently find top eigenmodes via repeating matrix-vector
products (Golub & Van Loan, 2013). Note that the full
eigendecomposition of a N × N matrix can be performed
in O(N 3 ) time complexity if the matrix can be stored in
memory. For large-scale, high-dimensional data, however,
the memory, computational, and statistical complexity of
matrix decomposition algorithms poses a significant challenge in practice. As the data size (or the resolution of the
grid in physical simulation) or the dimensionality of the
underlying problem increases, the matrix-based approach
becomes easily infeasible as even storing the eigenvectors
in memory is too costly.

1. Introduction
Spectral decomposition techniques, including singular
value decomposition (SVD) and eigenvalue decomposition (EVD), are crucial tools in machine learning and data
science for handling large datasets and reducing their dimensionality while preserving prominent structures; see,
e.g., (Markovsky, 2012; Blum et al., 2020). They break
down a matrix (or a linear operator) into its constituent
parts, enabling a better understanding of the underlying
geometry and relationships within the data. These form
the foundation of various low-dimensional embedding algorithms (Schölkopf et al., 1998; Tenenbaum et al., 2000;
Roweis & Saul, 2000; Shi & Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2001;

A promising alternative is to approximate the singular- or
eigen-functions using parametric function approximators,
assuming that there exists an abstract operator that induces
a target matrix to decompose. In other words, we aim to
approximate an eigenvector ϕ̂ℓ ∈ RN by a single parametric
function ϕ̂ℓ : X → R. In Fig. 1, we illustrate the proposed
framework NeuralSVD, which is a special instance of the
parametric approach, as a schematic diagram.

1

Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Department of ECE, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
USA. Correspondence to: J. Jon Ryu <jongha@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Compared to the “nonparametric” approach, the parametric approach has several advantages. First, unlike
1

