Position: The No Free Lunch Theorem, Kolmogorov Complexity,
and the Role of Inductive Biases in Machine Learning

Micah Goldblum * 1 Marc Finzi * 1 Keefer Rowan 1 Andrew Gordon Wilson 1

Abstract

served previously are likely to continue into the future without appealing to this same inductive reasoning in a circular
fashion? Nonetheless, we adopt inductive reasoning whenever we learn from past experience.

No free lunch theorems for supervised learning
state that no learner can solve all problems or that
all learners achieve exactly the same accuracy on
average over a uniform distribution on learning
problems. Accordingly, these theorems are often
referenced in support of the notion that individual problems require specially tailored inductive
biases. While virtually all uniformly sampled
datasets have high complexity, real-world problems disproportionately generate low-complexity
data, and we argue that neural network models
share this same preference, formalized using Kolmogorov complexity. Notably, we show that architectures designed for a particular domain, such
as computer vision, can compress datasets on a variety of seemingly unrelated domains. Our experiments show that pre-trained and even randomly
initialized language models prefer to generate lowcomplexity sequences. Whereas no free lunch
theorems seemingly indicate that individual problems require specialized learners, we explain how
tasks that often require human intervention such
as picking an appropriately sized model when labeled data is scarce or plentiful can be automated
into a single learning algorithm. These observations justify the trend in deep learning of unifying
seemingly disparate problems with an increasingly small set of machine learning models.

More recently, in the late 1990s, no free lunch theorems
emerged from the computer science community as rigorous arguments for the impossibility of induction in contexts seemingly relevant to real machine learning problems
(Wolpert, 1996; Wolpert & Macready, 1997). One such no
free lunch theorem for supervised learning states that no
single learner can achieve high accuracy on every problem
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014). Another states that
every learner is equally good in expectation over a uniform
distribution on learning problems (Wolpert, 1996). Such a
world would be hostile to inductive reasoning. The assumption that labelings are drawn uniformly ensures that training
data is uninformative about unseen samples.
In contrast to this dismal outlook on machine learning, naturally occurring data involve structure that could be shared
even across seemingly disparate problems. If we can design
learning algorithms with inductive biases that are aligned
with this structure, then we may hope to perform inference
on a wide range of problems. In this work, we explore the
alignment between structure in real-world data and machine
learning models through the lens of Kolmogorov complexity.
The Kolmogorov complexity of an output is defined as the
length of the shortest program under a fixed language that
produces it. In Section 3, we explain the connection between
Kolmogorov complexity and compressibility. Virtually all
data drawn from a uniform distribution as assumed by the
no free lunch theorem of Wolpert (1996) cannot be significantly compressed, yet relevant real-world datasets are
highly compressible. In particular, neural networks themselves can be used to create compressions of data labelings,
upper bounding their Kolmogorov complexity.

1. Introduction
The problem of justifying inductive reasoning has challenged epistemologists since at least the 1700s (Hume,
1748). How can we justify our belief that patterns we ob-

We then demonstrate in Section 4 that modern neural networks also prefer low Kolmogorov complexity, complementing the low complexity of actual data. While models
implemented on a computer cannot generate data with complexity exceeding the length of their associated program, we
find they actually prefer data that is far simpler. We formu-

*
Equal contribution 1 New York University. Correspondence to: Micah Goldblum <goldblum@nyu.edu>, Marc
Finzi <maf820@nyu.edu>, Andrew Gordon Wilson <andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

