Enhancing Size Generalization in Graph Neural Networks through Disentangled
Representation Learning

Zheng Huang 1 Qihui Yang 2 Dawei Zhou 3 Yujun Yan 1

Abstract

to handle larger test graphs.
Despite the inherent capability of GNNs to process graphs
of any size, performance declines are observed when models trained on smaller graphs are applied to substantially
larger ones (Buffelli et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). Prior
work to address this challenge involves strategies such as
accessing test domain graphs (Yehudai et al., 2021), employing causal modeling for the graph generative process (Chen
et al., 2022; Bevilacqua et al., 2021), and simulating size
shifts within the training data through graph coarsening approaches (Buffelli et al., 2022). However, these methods
inadequately remove the size information from the graph
representations, resulting in sub-optimal performance and
reliance on backbone models.

Although most graph neural networks (GNNs)
can operate on graphs of any size, their classification performance often declines on graphs larger
than those encountered during training. Existing
methods insufficiently address the removal of size
information from graph representations, resulting
in sub-optimal performance and reliance on backbone models. In response, we propose D IS G EN,
a novel and model-agnostic framework designed
to disentangle size factors from graph representations. D IS G EN employs size- and task-invariant
augmentations and introduces a decoupling loss
that minimizes shared information in hidden
representations, with theoretical guarantees for
its effectiveness. Our empirical results show that
D IS G EN outperforms the state-of-the-art models
by up to 6% on real-world datasets, underscoring
its effectiveness in enhancing the size generalizability of GNNs. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/GraphmindDartmouth/DISGEN.

Motivated by recent studies (Yan et al., 2023; Bevilacqua
et al., 2021) that reveal the correlation between learned
graph representations and their size, we aim to tackle the
size generalization problem through disentangled representation learning, a technique known for separating fundamental
factors in observed data. However, directly applying existing disentangled representation learning methods (Sarhan
et al., 2020; Creager et al., 2019) to our problem poses several challenges. Firstly, these methods typically rely on
supervision to disentangle different information, necessitating supervision of graph size in our case. The discrete
and unbounded nature of graph sizes, however, complicates
their use as direct supervision labels. Secondly, it remains
unclear how to minimize the shared information between
size-related and task-related representations with theoretical
guarantees. Current practices often use correlation loss (Mo
et al., 2023) or enforce orthogonality of the representations
(Sarhan et al., 2020) to segregate distinct information. However, there is limited theoretical analysis to substantiate their
effectiveness, and in practice, these methods have proven
suboptimal for our problem (Section 4.3).

1. Introduction
Graphs can exhibit significant variations in size, ranging from small molecular structures to large protein networks (Kearnes et al., 2016; Fout et al., 2017), and from
concise code snippets with tens of nodes to extensive programs with thousands of nodes (Yan et al., 2020; Guo et al.,
2020). Training Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on these
datasets is often limited to small graphs due to computational constraints or data availability (Zhang, 2019; Li et al.,
2021a). However, these models are intended for application
on larger graphs, necessitating effective size generalization
1

Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, USA. 2 Electrical and Computer Engineering, UCSD,
San Diego, USA. 3 Department of Computer Science, Virginia
Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Yujun Yan <yujun.yan@darmouth.edu>.

To address these challenges, we propose a general
Disentangled representation learning framework for size
Generalization (D IS G EN) of GNNs. To tackle the first challenge, we introduce new augmentation strategies to guide
the model in learning relative size information. Specifically,
we create two views—size- and task-invariant views—for
a given input graph and facilitate the learning of their rel-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

