Stochastic Quantum Sampling for Non-Logconcave Distributions
and Estimating Partition Functions

Guneykan Ozgul 1 Xiantao Li 2 Mehrdad Mahdavi 1 Chunhao Wang 1

Abstract

of physical systems, understanding phase transition, and
estimating thermodynamic properties (Chandler, 1987). In
machine learning, sampling from these distributions aids
in exploring the posterior distribution in Bayesian learning (Neal et al., 2011; Ahn et al., 2012; Cheng et al., 2018),
enabling parameter estimation, uncertainty quantification,
and model comparison (Murphy, 2022). In convex geometry, an effective sampling strategy is central to estimating
the volume of a convex body that can be applied to problems
in statistics, theoretical computer science, and operations
research (Vempala, 2007).

We present quantum algorithms for sampling
from possibly non-logconcave probability distributions expressed as π(x) ∝ exp(−βf (x)) as
well as quantum algorithms for estimating the
partition function for such distributions. We also
incorporate a stochastic gradient oracle that implements the quantum walk operators inexactly
by only using mini-batch gradients when f can
be written as a finite sum. One challenge of quantizing the resulting Markov chains is that they
do not satisfy the detailed balance condition in
general. Consequently, the mixing time of the
algorithm cannot be expressed in terms of the
spectral gap of the transition density matrix, making the quantum algorithms nontrivial to analyze.
We overcame these challenges by first building a
reference reversible Markov chain that converges
to the target distribution, then controlling the discrepancy between our algorithm’s output and the
target distribution by using the reference Markov
chain as a bridge to establish the total complexity. Our quantum algorithms exhibit polynomial
speedups in terms of dimension or precision dependencies when compared to best-known classical algorithms under similar assumptions.

A well-known classical method for Gibbs sampling is
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, where a
Markov chain with desired stationary density is constructed.
Then, the samples can be generated by running the Markov
chain for a sufficiently long time. One such Markov chain
can be obtained through careful discretization of Langevin
diffusion equation and this technique inspired a large family
of gradient-based sampling algorithms.
Langevin diffusion is a continuous stochastic differential
equation that converges to the desired Gibbs distribution. A
simple, yet common, discretization of Langevin diffusion
is Euler-Maruyama method with sufficiently small step size
η > 0, resulting in an MCMC algorithm (See Appendix B.3
for more details). However, due to finite-sized discretization,
the Markov chain is asymptotically biased. That is, it only
converges to the neighborhood of the desired Gibbs distribution, prohibiting one from using large step sizes because
of this discrepancy. To overcome this bias, one can adjust
the Markov chain by introducing Metropolis-Hastings filter, which is used as a conditional rejection to guarantee
that the chain is time-reversible (See Appendix B.1 for the
definition of reversibility) and it converges to the desired
distribution. This algorithm is sometimes referred to as
Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA), and the
algorithm without the rejection step is conventionally called
unadjusted Langevin algorithm (ULA). We refer the reader
to Appendix B for more details about these algorithms.

1. Introduction
Many problems in statistics, physics, finance, machine learning, optimization, and molecular dynamics involve sampling
from a distribution with a density proportional to e−βf (x) ,
known as Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution. For instance, techniques for sampling from such a distribution play a central
role in statistical mechanics in probing equilibrium states
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University 2 Department of Mathematics, Pennsylvania State University. Correspondence to: Guneykan Ozgul
<gmo5119@psu.edu>, Chunhao Wang <cwang@psu.edu>.

In the past decade, notable progress has been witnessed
in the theoretical development of quantum algorithms for
various machine learning and optimization problems. It
is natural to expect that quantum computers also provide

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

