An Unsupervised Approach for Periodic Source Detection in Time Series

Berken Utku Demirel 1 Christian Holz 1

Abstract

amounts of time series data from smartphones or wearable devices (Bayoumy et al., 2021), which can be used
to provide insights into their behaviors and health (Huhn
et al., 2022; Hughes et al., 2023). However, labeling these
huge amounts of temporal data is challenging, expensive,
and resource-intensive. For instance, if the desired task
is to monitor the respiration or heart rate, collecting goldstandard synchronized signals for obtaining ground truth
information from a medical sensor or video is not only timeconsuming but also expensive (Yang et al., 2023; Kiyasseh
et al., 2020). Moreover, obtaining ground truth is not feasible in daily life, i.e., non-controlled environments outside
of the lab, due to the potential discomfort it may impose
on individuals (Gao et al., 2023), which can be caused by
privacy concerns, such as the use of video recording (Ryoo
et al., 2017), or the use of bulky electrodes with gels, as in
the case for medical sensors (Stracina et al., 2022).

Detection of periodic patterns of interest within
noisy time series data plays a critical role in various tasks, spanning from health monitoring to
behavior analysis. Existing learning techniques
often rely on labels or clean versions of signals for detecting the periodicity, and those employing self-supervised learning methods are required to apply proper augmentations, which is
already challenging for time series and can result in collapse—all representations collapse to
a single point due to strong augmentations. In
this work, we propose a novel method to detect
the periodicity in time series without the need for
any labels or requiring tailored positive or negative data generation mechanisms with specific
augmentations. We mitigate the collapse issue by
ensuring the learned representations retain information from the original samples without imposing any random variance constraints on the batch.
Our experiments in three time series tasks against
state-of-the-art learning methods show that the
proposed approach consistently outperforms prior
works, achieving performance improvements of
more than 45–50%, showing its effectiveness.

The self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm provides a solution to overcome this problem by exploiting unlabelled
data to formulate pretext tasks such as predicting the rotation
of images (Gidaris et al., 2018), or contexts (Doersch et al.,
2015) to learn the invariant representations of samples (Jing
et al., 2022) to the applied transformation. The effectiveness
of representations on downstream tasks directly depends on
the inter-sample semantic similarity relations (Balestriero &
LeCun, 2022; Wang et al., 2022b) that are created through
tailored data augmentation techniques to preserve semantics
depending on the task (Tian et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020)
and input characteristics (Demirel & Holz, 2023). However,
even when the downstream task is known, creating samples
that keep the task-relevant information intact is more challenging in noisy quasi-periodic time series due to the complexity of the dynamical data generation mechanisms (West
et al., 1999), where strong augmentations can cause model
collapse (Jing et al., 2022) while weak augmentations can
hinder model convergence (Tian et al., 2020).

Code: https://github.com/eth-siplab/
Unsupervised Periodicity Detection

1. Introduction
Periodic structure in time series data holds significant importance in monitoring individuals’ behaviors and health (Sandvik et al., 1995; Hogan, 2006). A wide range of tasks related to time series, including step counting (Master et al.,
2022) and heart rate monitoring (Mandsager et al., 2018),
can reveal crucial information about one’s health situation.
Moreover, on a daily basis, people generate substantial

Considering these limitations, in this work, we propose a
novel method that regularizes the parametric learners to
detect periodic components in time series data by punishing the randomness in a sequence while capturing as much
information as possible about the periodicity without requiring any specialized data augmentation technique. Since our
proposed method bypasses the intricate data augmentation
process required for generating positive or negative samples

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Berken Utku Demirel
<berken.demirel@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

