Creative Text-to-Audio Generation via Synthesizer Programming

Manuel Cherep * 1 Nikhil Singh * 1 Jessica Shand 1

Abstract
Neural audio synthesis methods now allow specifying ideas in natural language. However, these
methods produce results that cannot be easily
tweaked, as they are based on large latent spaces
and up to billions of uninterpretable parameters.
We propose a text-to-audio generation method
that leverages a virtual modular sound synthesizer
with only 78 parameters. Synthesizers have long
been used by skilled sound designers for media
like music and film due to their flexibility and
intuitive controls. Our method, CTAG, iteratively
updates a synthesizer’s parameters to produce
high-quality audio renderings of text prompts that
can be easily inspected and tweaked. Sounds
produced this way are also more abstract, capturing essential conceptual features over fine-grained
acoustic details, akin to how simple sketches can
vividly convey visual concepts. Our results show
how CTAG produces sounds that are distinctive,
perceived as artistic, and yet similarly identifiable
to recent neural audio synthesis models, positioning it as a valuable and complementary tool.1

Figure 1. CTAG leverages a virtual modular synthesizer to generate sounds capturing the semantics of user-provided text prompts
in a sketch-like way, rather than being acoustically literal. Spectrograms of auditory outputs corresponding to six text prompts
showcase the range of sounds this approach can yield, accompanied by a fully interpretable and controllable parameter space.

refreshing experience of opening a soda, was not recorded
from an actual soda bottle, but skillfully crafted using a
Buchla synthesizer. Ciani’s work illustrates the immense
power of abstraction in auditory representation, where the
essence of a concept can be expressed without mimicking
real-world acoustic details, while achieving greater impact.

1. Introduction
“Of course, bubbles don’t make sound, but this
is the magic of sound design...you can create the
concept of a sound and it seems real.”
— Suzanne Ciani

This approach extends beyond single examples into the domain of procedural sound design: creating sounds algorithmically using parameters that can be manipulated to achieve
desired sonic effects. By applying procedural techniques,
sound designers can often transcend what’s physically plausible to obtain by recording real-world events. These methods can lead to highly evocative and expressive sounds in
music, film, video games, advertising, product design, and
other media.

In creative sound design, realism isn’t everything. In the late
1970s, composer Suzanne Ciani famously demonstrated this
principle with her iconic Coca Cola pop and pour sound
effect. This sound, which has become synonymous with the
*

Equal contribution 1 Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Manuel Cherep <mcherep@mit.edu>, Nikhil Singh <nsingh1@mit.edu>.

Neural audio synthesis methods have transformed the state
of sound design, enabling specifying sound ideas using intuitive inputs like textual prompts. However, there remains
unrealized potential in integrating expressive sound design
principles into neural audio synthesis. Current techniques
prioritize acoustic recreation and end-to-end application, often overlooking creative possibilities for evoking emotions

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
ctag.media.mit.edu

1

