Fewer Truncations Improve Language Modeling

Hantian Ding 1 Zijian Wang 1 Giovanni Paolini 1 Varun Kumar 1 Anoop Deoras 1 Dan Roth 1 Stefano Soatto 1

Abstract

boundaries within each training sequence. This concatenatethen-split (hereafter “concatenation”) approach has been
widely adopted in training language models in both natural language (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Rae et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023b;
Scao et al., 2022) and programming language (Nijkamp
et al., 2023), thanks to its optimal training efficiency as no
padding is needed. However, such training efficiency comes
at the expense of data integrity—documents that could have
been processed in their entirety by the model are instead
fragmented into independent segments, which naturally results in loss of information. Further, truncation reduces the
amount of context within each segment, causing next-token
prediction to be potentially ungrounded to its context, and
thus making models more prone to hallucination.

In large language model training, input documents
are typically concatenated together and then split
into sequences of equal length to avoid padding tokens. Despite its efficiency, the concatenation approach compromises data integrity—it inevitably
breaks many documents into incomplete pieces,
leading to excessive truncations that hinder the
model from learning to compose logically coherent and factually consistent content that is
grounded on the complete context. To address
the issue, we propose Best-fit Packing, a scalable
and efficient method that packs documents into
training sequences through length-aware combinatorial optimization. Our method completely
eliminates unnecessary truncations while retaining the same training efficiency as concatenation.
Empirical results from both text and code pretraining show that our method achieves superior
performance (e.g., relatively +4.7% on reading
comprehension; +16.8% in context following; and
+9.2% on program synthesis), and reduces closeddomain hallucination effectively by up to 58.3%.

We argue that data integrity is the key towards better language modeling. To realize this, we first show that it is
feasible to group billions of documents at pre-training scale
into sequences in a way that is as token-efficient as concatenation without incurring any unnecessary truncation: only
documents beyond model’s context length need to be segmented. Data grouping strategies that preserve the entirety
of individual samples have been widely adopted for encoderonly and encoder-decoder models (Liu et al., 2019; Raffel
et al., 2020b; Krell et al., 2021). Nonetheless, these existing
strategies either exhibit limited scalability or compromise
training efficiency, making them less favorable compared to
the concatenation method in LLM training at scale.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved unprecedented success on a number of natural language processing and coding benchmarks (Brown et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2021) and in complex real-world tasks (Ouyang et al.,
2022). This remarkable progress is driven by large-scale
pre-training over a massive amount of unlabeled documents.
When formatting the training inputs, naı̈vely padding every
document to a fixed length is inefficient as short documents
lead to an excessive amount of padding. Instead, the common practice is to concatenate all documents together and
then split them into sequences of exactly the model’s context
length. A sentinel token (e.g., <|endoftext|>) is often
added at the end of each document to indicate document

In response, we propose Best-fit Packing to eliminate unnecessary document truncations without sacrificing training
efficiency. As illustrated in Figure 1, we first segment long
documents into multiple chunks by model’s context length.
Documents shorter than that are kept as singleton chunks.
Next, we pack all the chunks into training sequences without breaking them any further. This step is essentially an
instance of the bin packing problem1 , which is NP-hard. We
employ Best-Fit-Decreasing (Eilon & Christofides, 1971),
an approximation algorithm, and further optimize it to handle billions of documents efficiently. Empirical results show
that the packed training sequences only contain a negligible

1
AWS AI Labs. Correspondence to: Hantian Ding <dhantian@amazon.com>, Zijian Wang <zijwan@amazon.com>.

1

Bin packing is an optimization problem in which items of
different sizes must be packed into a finite number of bins or
containers, each of a fixed given capacity, in a way that minimizes
the number of bins used (Bernhard & Vygen, 2008).

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

