FedBAT: Communication-Efficient
Federated Learning via Learnable Binarization

Shiwei Li 1 * Wenchao Xu 2 Haozhao Wang 1 Xing Tang 3 Yining Qi 1 Shijie Xu 3 Weihong Luo 3 Yuhua Li 1
Xiuqiang He 3 Ruixuan Li 1

Abstract

clients to collaboratively train a global model without sharing their local data, thus can protect user data privacy. In
the classic FL system, a central server initially broadcasts
the global model to several clients, who then train it using
their respective datasets. After local training, the clients
send their model parameters or model updates back to the
server, who aggregates them to create a new global model
for the next round of training. This process is repeated for
several rounds until the global model converges.

Federated learning is a promising distributed machine learning paradigm that can effectively exploit large-scale data without exposing users’ privacy. However, it may incur significant communication overhead, thereby potentially impairing
the training efficiency. To address this challenge,
numerous studies suggest binarizing the model
updates. Nonetheless, traditional methods usually
binarize model updates in a post-training manner,
resulting in significant approximation errors and
consequent degradation in model accuracy. To
this end, we propose Federated BinarizationAware Training (FedBAT), a novel framework
that directly learns binary model updates during
the local training process, thus inherently reducing the approximation errors. FedBAT incorporates an innovative binarization operator, along
with meticulously designed derivatives to facilitate efficient learning. In addition, we establish
theoretical guarantees regarding the convergence
of FedBAT. Extensive experiments are conducted
on four popular datasets. The results show that
FedBAT significantly accelerates the convergence
and exceeds the accuracy of baselines by up to 9%,
even surpassing that of FedAvg in some cases.

Despite FL’s success in preserving local data privacy, the iterative transmission of model parameters introduces considerable communication overhead, adversely affecting training efficiency. Specifically, the communication occurs in
two stages: the uplink, where clients send model updates to
the server, and the downlink, where the server broadcasts
the global model to clients. As suggested by Hönig et al.
(2022), the uplink typically imposes a tighter bottleneck
than the downlink, particularly due to the global mobile upload bandwidth being less than one fourth of the download
bandwidth. Therefore, in this paper, we seek to compress
the uplink communication, as much research (Reisizadeh
et al., 2020; Isik et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023) has done.
SignSGD (Bernstein et al., 2018) is an effective binarization
technique for reducing communication volume. It was originally proposed to communicate only the signs of gradients in
distributed training systems. Recently, it has also been naturally applied to binarize model updates in FL (Ferreira et al.,
2021). Specifically, it binarizes model updates m ∈ Rd as
m̂ = α · m̄ = α · sign(m), where α denotes the magnitude
of binary values, termed the step size and typically tuned
as a hyperparameter. SignSGD can efficiently compress
the uplink communication by a factor of 32. However, the
binarized model updates inevitably contains approximation
errors in comparison to the original updates, which affects
both the convergence speed and the model accuracy.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) stands
out as a promising distributed machine learning paradigm
designed to safeguard data privacy. It enables distributed
*
This work was done when Shiwei Li worked as an intern
at FiT, Tencent. 1 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hong Kong, China 3 FiT, Tencent, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Haozhao Wang <hz wang@hust.edu.cn>, Xing Tang
<xing.tang@hotmail.com>, Ruixuan Li <rxli@hust.edu.cn>.

To improve the performance of SignSGD, subsequent research has mainly explored from two aspects, including
error feedback methods (Karimireddy et al., 2019) and
stochastic sign methods (Chen et al., 2020; Safaryan &
Richtárik, 2021). EF-SignSGD (Karimireddy et al., 2019)
aims to compensate for the errors introduced by binariza-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

