Overcoming the Optimizer’s Curse:
Obtaining Realistic Prescriptions from Neural Networks

Asterios Tsiourvas 1 Georgia Perakis 1

Abstract

neural networks for decision-making is a question that has
recently emerged.

We study the problem of obtaining optimal and
realistic prescriptions when using neural networks
for data-driven decision-making. In this setting,
the network is used to predict a quantity of interest
and then is optimized to retrieve the decisions that
maximize the quantity (e.g. find the best prices
that maximize revenue). However, optimizing
over-parameterized models often produces unrealistic prescriptions, far from the data manifold.
This phenomenon is known as the Optimizer’s
Curse. To tackle this problem, we model the
requirement for the resulting decisions to align
with the data manifold as a tractable optimization constraint. This is achieved by reformulating the highly non-linear Local Outlier Factor
(LOF) metric as a single linear or quadratic constraint. To solve the problem efficiently for large
networks, we propose an adaptive sampling algorithm that reduces the initial hard-to-solve optimization problem into a small number of significantly easier-to-solve problems by restricting the
decision space to realistic polytopes, i.e. polytopes of the decision space that contain at least
one realistic data point. Experiments on publicly
available networks demonstrate the efficacy and
scalability of our approach.

Practitioners and academics have been increasingly incorporating machine learning in data-driven optimization problems for decision-making. By leveraging the predictive
capabilities of deep learning, it is possible to model complex systems more accurately and, as a result, suggest more
informed decisions. There are multiple areas where this
paradigm is followed in practice. In operations management
(Carbonneau et al., 2008; Glaeser et al., 2019; Ban & Rudin,
2019), machine learning models can be used to predict
and then optimize the allocation of resources. In revenue
management (Ferreira et al., 2016; Ettl et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2022) machine learning models can be trained on
data including historical sales, market trends, and customer
demographics to predict future revenue and then optimize to
obtain informed decisions about how to set prices that maximize revenue. In healthcare, (Bertsimas et al., 2016; Fairley
et al., 2019; Bertsimas et al., 2020), machine learning models can be used to predict the outcomes of clinical trials to
find the optimal combination of regimens to be tested.
As a general rule, the more accurate the model is at predicting the outcome of interest, the better the model will
be able to inform decision-making processes. Typically,
highly accurate models, such as neural networks, are highly
complex. However, when using a complex model to predict
a quantity of interest and then optimize over it, the resulting
prescription may not be representative of the actual data.
The reason for this behavior is that in many real-world applications, data lie on or near manifolds characterized by
significantly lower dimensions than the corresponding input space (Lin & Zha, 2008; Osher et al., 2017). In deep
learning, although there is evidence (Basri & Jacobs, 2016)
indicating that neural networks can effectively extract the
intrinsic, low-dimensional coordinates of data, optimizing
an over-parameterized neural network may yield unrealistic
prescriptions, i.e. solutions in the input space that have low
or not at all data density. This phenomenon extends to general highly complex machine learning models and is known
as the “Optimizer’s Curse” (Smith & Winkler, 2006).

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has proven to be an extremely
powerful tool for solving a wide variety of problems in
various fields such as computer vision, natural language understanding, and biology (LeCun et al., 2015; Jumper et al.,
2021; Min et al., 2023). Even though most applications have
focused on prediction and generation, optimizing trained
1

Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Asterios Tsiourvas <atsiour@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we study the problem of generating both optimal and realistic prescriptions when optimizing over trained
1

