PGODE: Towards High-quality System Dynamics Modeling

Xiao Luo 1 Yiyang Gu 2 Huiyu Jiang 3 Hang Zhou 4 Jinsheng Huang 2 Wei Ju 2
Zhiping Xiao 1 Ming Zhang 2 Yizhou Sun 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi-agent dynamical systems (Huang et al., 2023) are
ubiquitous in the real world where agents can be vehicles (Yıldız et al., 2022) and microcosmic particles (Shao
et al., 2022). These agents could have complicated interactions resulting from behavioral or mechanical influences,
which result in complicated future trajectories of the whole
system. Modeling the interacting dynamics is a crucial
challenge in machine learning with broad applications in
fluid mechanics (Pfaff et al., 2021; Mayr et al., 2023), autonomous driving (Yu et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2023), and
molecular dynamics (Wu et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2023). Extensive time-series approaches based on recurrent neural
networks (Weerakody et al., 2021) and Transformers (Zhou
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023b; 2024) are generally designed
for single-agent dynamical systems (Fotiadis et al., 2023),
which fall short when it comes to capturing the intricate
relationships among interacting objects. To address this
gap, geometric graphs (Kofinas et al., 2021) are usually employed to represent the interactions between objects where
nodes represent individual objects, and edges are built when
a connection exists between two nodes. These connections
can be obtained from geographical distances between atoms
in molecular dynamics (Li et al., 2022b) and underlying
equations in mechanical systems (Huang et al., 2020).

This paper studies the problem of modeling multiagent dynamical systems, where agents could
interact mutually to influence their behaviors.
Recent research predominantly uses geometric
graphs to depict these mutual interactions, which
are then captured by powerful graph neural networks (GNNs). However, predicting interacting
dynamics in challenging scenarios such as outof-distribution shift and complicated underlying
rules remains unsolved. In this paper, we propose
a new approach named Prototypical Graph ODE
(PGODE) to address the problem. The core of
PGODE is to incorporate prototype decomposition from contextual knowledge into a continuous
graph ODE framework. Specifically, PGODE employs representation disentanglement and system
parameters to extract both object-level and systemlevel contexts from historical trajectories, which
allows us to explicitly model their independent
influence and thus enhances the generalization
capability under system changes. Then, we integrate these disentangled latent representations
into a graph ODE model, which determines a
combination of various interacting prototypes for
enhanced model expressivity. The entire model
is optimized using an end-to-end variational inference framework to maximize the likelihood.
Extensive experiments in both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution settings validate the superiority
of PGODE compared to various baselines.

In the literature, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019a; Zheng et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022a; He et al., 2022) have been increasingly prevailing for
learning from geometric graphs in interacting dynamical systems (Pfaff et al., 2021; Shao et al., 2022; Sanchez-Gonzalez
et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022; Meirom et al., 2021; Yıldız
et al., 2022). These GNN-based approaches primarily focus
on predicting the future states of dynamic systems with the
message passing mechanism. Specifically, they begin with
encoding the states of trajectories and then iteratively update
each node representation by incorporating information from
its adjacent nodes, which effectively captures the complex
interacting dynamics among the objects in systems.

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA 2 National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University
of California, Santa Barbara, USA 4 Department of Statistics, University of California, Davis, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Luo
<xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>.

Despite the significant advancements, GNN-based approaches often suffer from performance decreasement in
challenging scenarios such as long-term dynamics (Lippe
et al., 2023), complicated governing rules (Gu et al., 2022),

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

