Can a Few Decide for Many? The Metric Distortion of Sortition

Ioannis Caragiannis 1 Evi Micha 2 Jannik Peters 3

Abstract

community, which have focused on the design of the underlying sampling methods (Flanigan et al., 2021a) and the
formulation of normative properties of sortition and related
analysis (Ebadian et al., 2022; Meir et al., 2021; Ebadian
& Micha, 2024). As a prominent example, the sampling
method of Flanigan et al. (2021a) was recently deployed for
the selection of the German citizens’ assembly on nutrition.1

Recent works have studied the design of algorithms for selecting representative sortition panels. However, the most central question remains
unaddressed: Do these panels reflect the entire
population’s opinion? We present a positive answer by adopting the concept of metric distortion
from computational social choice, which aims to
quantify how much a panel’s decision aligns with
the ideal decision of the population when preferences and agents lie on a metric space. We show
that uniform selection needs only logarithmically
many agents in terms of the number of alternatives to achieve almost optimal distortion. We
also show that Fair Greedy Capture, a selection algorithm introduced recently by Ebadian & Micha
(2024), matches uniform selection’s guarantees of
almost optimal distortion and also achieves constant ex-post distortion, ensuring a “best of both
worlds” performance.

As outlined by the sociologist Engelstad (1989), two of
the main supposed advantages of sortition are the representation of the underlying population and fairness. The
interpretation of fairness by the aforementioned works is
quite straightforward: a selection procedure is fair if every member of the population is selected for the panel with
equal probability. Fairness can be achieved under uniform
selection where a panel of given size is sampled uniformly at
random. Representation on the other hand is not that easily
defined. Both Ebadian et al. (2022) and Ebadian & Micha
(2024) assumed that there is an underlying representation
metric, measuring the closeness between different members
of the population, for instance by measuring the similarities
of certain attributes. Using this metric, Ebadian et al. (2022)
measured the distance of each agent to their q-th closest
member on the panel, and showed that if q is more than
half the panel size, uniform selection of the panel achieves
a constant factor approximation to summing these distances
and thus being in some sense representative of the underlying population. Ebadian & Micha (2024) on the other
hand, interpreted representation as proportional representation and imported the notion of the core from social choice
(Gillies, 1953), which intuitively requires that each sufficiently large group has sufficiently many representatives in
the panel. They show that uniform selection satisfies the
core in expectation, and introduce a fair selection algorithm
that always returns a panel in the core.

1. Introduction
In recent years, sortition or the randomized selection of
so-called citizens’ assemblies has gained traction around the
globe. In such citizens’ assemblies, a randomly selected
subset of the population discusses and deliberates on societal issues, such as challenges from climate change and
AI threats. Notable examples include the citizens’ assemblies on climate change held in Belgium, France, or the
United Kingdom or the Irish citizens’ assembly on abortion
which lead to a referendum on the topic and finally the legalization of abortion. This surge in the usage of citizens’
assemblies has been supported by work in the AI and ML

However, while previous work has focused on the formation
of panels that are representative of the population, it is still
quite unexplored whether such panels reach decisions that
reflect the aggregate preference of the underlying population.
So, our goal in the current paper is

1

Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark 2 Computer Science, Harvard University, Cambridge,
USA 3 Research Group Efficient Algorithms, Faculty IV
– Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin,
Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Ioannis Caragiannis <iannis@cs.au.dk>, Evi Micha <emicha@seas.harvard.edu>, Jannik
Peters <jannik.peters@tu-berlin.de>.

(a) to explore whether panels chosen using sorti-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
See
https://www.bundestag.de/en/
parliament/citizens_assemblies.

1

