Minimax Optimality of Score-based Diffusion Models:
Beyond the Density Lower Bound Assumptions

Kaihong Zhang * 1 Caitlyn H. Yin * 1 Feng Liang 1 Jingbo Liu 1

Abstract

in image and text generation (Ramesh et al., 2022; Nichol
et al., 2022), text-to-speech synthesis (Jeong et al., 2021;
Popov et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022), and molecular structure modeling (Xu et al., 2023; Hua et al., 2023). Their
reach has extended to scientific fields such as neuroscience
(Pinaya et al., 2022) and materials science (Manica et al.,
2023).

We study the asymptotic error of score-based
diffusion model sampling in large-sample scenarios from a non-parametric statistics perspective. We show that a kernel-based score estimator
an optimal
 achieves
 mean square error of
d
−1 − d+2
e
O n t 2 (t 2 ∨ 1) for the score function of

Score-based generative modeling, a specific family of diffusion modeling, uses learned score functions (i.e., gradients
of the log probability density functions) to transform white
noise into the target data distribution via solving a stochastic
differential equation. More specifically, the forward process
converts samples drawn from a data distribution, denoted
as p0 (such as natural images), into complete noise, while
the reverse process effectively reverts complete noise back
into samples from p0 . Implementing the reverse process
requires approximating the score function, a task typically
accomplished through training neural networks using a score
matching objective, as seen in prior work such as Hyvärinen
& Dayan (2005), Vincent (2011) and Song & Ermon (2019).
While the score-based generative model has demonstrated
remarkable performance in numerous applications, there
remain gaps in our theoretical understanding.

p0 ∗ N (0, tI d ), where n and d represent the sample size and the dimension, t is bounded above
and below by polynomials of n, and p0 is an
arbitrary sub-Gaussian distribution.
As a con
e n−1/2 t− d4 upper
sequence, this yields an O
bound for the total variation error of the distribution of the sample generated by the diffusion
model under a mere sub-Gaussian assumption.
If in addition, p0 belongs to the nonparametric
family of the β-Sobolev space with β ≤ 2, by
adopting an early stopping strategy, we obtain
that the diffusion model is nearly (up to log factors) minimax optimal. This removes the crucial
lower bound assumption on p0 in previous proofs
of the minimax optimality of the diffusion model
for nonparametric families.

From a statistical perspective, score-based diffusion model
can be framed as the estimation of an unknown distribution
from random samples. Any inaccuracies in score estimation
introduce errors into the subsequent diffusion process. This
naturally leads to the following question:

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool of generative models, demonstrating exceptional performance in
a wide range of applications. Pioneering work by Ho et al.
(2020) and Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) contributed to the
development of image generation. Recent advances have
demonstrated the effectiveness of diffusion models in a variety of domains, as exemplified by state-of-the-art results

Consider viewing the score-based diffusion model as an
algorithm designed to generate samples from an unknown
distribution, using information from finite training samples
generated by the forward process. Under what conditions
does this algorithm attain statistically optimal error rate for
a given training sample size?
The total error in the sample distribution generated by a
diffusion model can be approximately attributed to three
components: the error stemming from approximating the
true score, the discretization error incurred when discretizing stochastic differential equations, and the error arising
from the convergence of the forward process (reflecting the
deviation between the initial distribution of the reverse pro-

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA. Correspondence
to: Kaihong Zhang <kaihong5@illinois.edu>, Caitlyn H. Yin
<heqiyin2@illinois.edu>, Feng Liang <liangf@illinois.edu>,
Jingbo Liu <jingbol@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

