Synergistic Integration of Coordinate Network and Tensorial Feature for
Improving Neural Radiance Fields from Sparse Inputs

Mingyu Kim 1 Jun-Seong Kim 2 Se-Young Yun 1 Jin-Hwa Kim 3

Abstract

strated that multi-layer perception (MLP) networks, combined with sinusoidal encoding, can effectively synthesize 3-dimensional novel views (Mildenhall et al., 2021;
Tancik et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020; Martel et al.,
2021; Lindell et al., 2022). These studies have shown
that coordinate-based MLP networks exhibit strong lowfrequency bias, and incorporating sinusoidal encoding allows for capturing both low and high-frequency signals.

The multi-plane representation has been highlighted for its fast training and inference across
static and dynamic neural radiance fields. This
approach constructs relevant features via projection onto learnable grids and interpolating adjacent vertices. However, it has limitations in capturing low-frequency details and tends to overuse
parameters for low-frequency features due to
its bias toward fine details, despite its multiresolution concept. This phenomenon leads to
instability and inefficiency when training poses
are sparse. In this work, we propose a method
that synergistically integrates multi-plane representation with a coordinate-based MLP network
known for strong bias toward low-frequency signals. The coordinate-based network is responsible for capturing low-frequency details, while
the multi-plane representation focuses on capturing fine-grained details. We demonstrate that
using residual connections between them seamlessly preserves their own inherent properties.
Additionally, the proposed progressive training
scheme accelerates the disentanglement of these
two features. We demonstrate empirically that
our proposed method not only outperforms baseline models for both static and dynamic NeRFs
with sparse inputs, but also achieves comparable
results with fewer parameters.

For broader real-world applicability, extensive efforts have
focused on reliably constructing radiance fields in cases of
sparse input data (Yu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2021). One set of solutions tackled this by leveraging a pretrained image encoder to compare rendered scenes against consistent 3D environments
(Yu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Jain
et al., 2021). Another approach incorporated additional information, such as depth or color constraints, to maintain
3-dimensional coherence (Deng et al., 2022; Yuan et al.,
2022; Roessle et al., 2022; Truong et al., 2023). Methods
progressively adjusting the frequency spectrum of position
encoding have proven effective in counteracting overfitting
without additional information (Yang et al., 2023; Song
et al., 2023). However, sinusoidal encoding requires over
5 hours of training time, complicated regularizations, and
exhibits a performance gap from explicit representation.
Approaches explicitly parameterizing spatial attributes
through voxel-grid, hashgrid, and multi-plane have been introduced (Müller et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Chan et al.,
2022). These methods dramatically reduce training time
and produce cleaner and more realistic images, meanwhile
demanding excessive memory consumption (Lee et al.,
2024). The recent works found those representations struggle with low-frequency detail and overfit to high-frequency
signals, especially when applying for dynamic scenes,
despite using multi-scale representations (Fridovich-Keil
et al., 2023; Cao & Johnson, 2023; Peng et al., 2023).
While those have marginally had success in the reconstruction of NeRF with the assistance of denoising penalties like total variation (Sun et al., 2023; Fridovich-Keil
et al., 2023), they still lack adequate representation of lowfrequency spectral features like object shapes and dynamic
motion, as shown in Figure 1a.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have gained recognition for their ability to create realistic images from various viewpoints using the volume rendering technique
(Mildenhall et al., 2021). Early studies have demon1

KAIST AI 2 POSTECH EE 3 NAVER AI Lab & SNU
AIIS. Correspondence to: Jin-Hwa Kim and Se-Young Yun
<j1nhwa.kim@navercorp.com; yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

