Low-Cost High-Power Membership Inference Attacks

Sajjad Zarifzadeh 1 Philippe Liu 1 Reza Shokri 1
on the threat models and the computation needed to tailor
the attacks to specific data points and models (e.g., global
attacks (Shokri et al., 2017; Yeom et al., 2018) versus persample tailored attacks (Ye et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2022;
Sablayrolles et al., 2019; Watson et al., 2022a)) which all
necessitate training a large number of reference models.

Abstract
Membership inference attacks aim to detect if
a particular data point was used in training a
model. We design a novel statistical test to
perform robust membership inference attacks
(RMIA) with low computational overhead. We
achieve this by a fine-grained modeling of the
null hypothesis in our likelihood ratio tests, and
effectively leveraging both reference models and
reference population data samples. RMIA has
superior test power compared with prior methods, throughout the TPR-FPR curve (even at extremely low FPR, as low as 0). Under computational constraints, where only a limited number
of pre-trained reference models (as few as 1) are
available, and also when we vary other elements
of the attack (e.g., data distribution), our method
performs exceptionally well, unlike prior attacks
that approach random guessing. RMIA lays the
groundwork for practical yet accurate data privacy risk assessment in machine learning.

Although there have been improvements in the effectiveness of attacks, their computation cost renders them useless for practical privacy auditing. Also, as it is shown in
the prior work (Carlini et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2022) different strong attacks exhibit mutual dominance depending
on the test scenarios! Under a practical computation budget, (Carlini et al., 2022) verges on random guessing, and
in the abundance of computation budget, (Ye et al., 2022)
shows low power at low FPR. Through extensive empirical
analysis, we observe further performance instabilities in
the prior attacks across different settings, where we investigate the impact of varying the number of reference models,
the number of required inference queries, the similarity of
reference models to the target model, the distribution shift
in target data versus population data, and the performance
on out-of-distribution data. The limitations of existing MIA
tests in these scenarios calls for robust and efficient membership inference attacks.

1. Introduction
Membership inference attacks (MIA) are used to quantify
the information leakage of machine learning algorithms
about their training data (Shokri et al., 2017). Membership
inference attacks originated within the realm of summary
statistics on high-dimensional data (Homer et al., 2008). In
this context, different hypothesis testing methods were designed to optimize the trade-off between test power and its
error (Sankararaman et al., 2009; Visscher & Hill, 2009;
Dwork et al., 2015; Murakonda et al., 2021). For deep
learning algorithms, these tests evolved from using ML itself to perform MIA (Shokri et al., 2017) to using various
approximations of the original statistical tests (Sablayrolles
et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2022; Watson
et al., 2022a; Bertran et al., 2023). Attacks also vary based

Membership inference attack is a hypothesis testing problem, and attacks are evaluated based on their TPR-FPR
trade-off curve. We design a novel statistical test for MIA
by enumerating the fine-grained plausible worlds associated with the null hypothesis, in which the target data point
could have been replaced with any random sample from the
population. We perform the attack by composing the likelihood ratio (LR) tests of these cases. Our test enhances
the differentiation between member and non-member data
points, enabling a more precise estimation of test statistics.
The computation we propose to compute the LR test statistics is also extremely efficient (as it requires very few reference models) and remains powerful under uncertainties
about the data distribution. Our robust attack method
RMIA dominates prior work in all test scenarios, and
consistently achieves a high TPR across all FPR (even
as low as 0), given any computation budget. Another significant aspect of our framework is that many prior attacks
can be framed as simplifications of ours, shedding light on
the causes of their instability and low performance.

1

National University of Singapore (NUS), CS Department.
Correspondence to: Sajjad Zarifzadeh <s.zarif@nus.edu.sg>,
Reza Shokri <reza@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

