Probabilistic Time Series Modeling with Decomposable Denoising Diffusion
Model
Tijin Yan 1 Hengheng Gong 1 Yongping He 1 Yufeng Zhan 1 Yuanqing Xia 2 1

Abstract

the development of hardware. Among these methods, probabilistic time series modeling methods have attracted lots of
attention because they can explicitly model the data distribution and noise.

Probabilistic time series modeling based on generative models has attracted lots of attention because of its wide applications and excellent performance. However, existing state-of-the-art models,
based on stochastic differential equation, not only
struggle to determine the drift and diffusion coefficients during the design process but also have
slow generation speed. To tackle this challenge,
we firstly propose decomposable denoising diffusion model (D3 M) and prove it is a general
framework unifying denoising diffusion models
and continuous flow models. Based on the new
framework, we propose some simple but efficient
probability paths with high generation speed. Furthermore, we design a module that combines a
special state space model with linear gated attention modules for sequence modeling. It preserves
inductive bias and simultaneously models both local and global dependencies. Experimental results
on 8 real-world datasets show that D3 M reduces
RMSE and CRPS by up to 4.6% and 4.3% compared with state-of-the-arts on imputation tasks,
and achieves comparable results with state-of-thearts on forecasting tasks with only 10 steps.

Generative models learn data distribution by constructing
a probability path (Shaul et al., 2023) between predefined
target distribution and data distribution. ScoreSDE (Song
et al., 2020) proposes a general framework for describing the
probability path based on the stochastic differential equation
(SDE). However, in order to obtain the SDE corresponding to a certain probability path, we need to determine the
drift and diffusion coefficients through the expectation and
variance of the SDE, which may be difficult to calculate.
In addition, the generative speed of ScoreSDE is very slow
because it requires thousands of steps for simulating reverse
SDE for high sampling quality. Many training-free methods based on high-order ODE solvers (Bao et al., 2022; Lu
et al., 2022) have been proposed for fast simulation of the
reverse SDE. However, few of them consider constructing
new probability paths that combine high generation speed
and sampling quality. Therefore, designing generative models that combines accurately data distribution modeling and
high generation speed remains challenging.
Modeling of both local and global dependencies within
a sequence is of great importance for generative modelsbased time series modeling tasks. Linear state space models
(SSMs) (Gu et al., 2021), which introduce strong inductive
bias on local dependencies, have been proved very effective for long-term sequence modeling. CSDI (Tashiro et al.,
2021) uses self-attention modules to extract global information by modeling interactions at each step. However,
the quadratic complexity and the weak inductive bias of
attention make the training process expensive and slow to
converge. In addition, above methods cannot simultaneously
model local and global dependencies. Therefore, designing
sequence modeling modules that combine low computational complexity, well inductive bias and dependencies
modeling is challenging.

1. Introduction
Time series modeling is very important because of its wide
applications in various domains such as intelligent system
monitoring, user behavior analysis and smart healthcare.
With the increasing complexity of modern systems, traditional sequence modeling methods like ARIMA (Shumway
et al., 2017) can not satisfy the requirements. Recently, deep
learning-based methods have made significant progress with
1

School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technol2
ogy, Beijing, China.
Zhongyuan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
Correspondence to:
Yufeng Zhan <yu-feng.zhan@bit.edu.cn>, Yuanqing Xia
<xia yuanqing@bit.edu.cn>.

In order to address the issues mentioned above, we firstly
propose decomposable denoising diffusion model (D3 M).
It’s a general framework that directly builds generative models based on the explicit solutions of the linear SDE. Com-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

