Do Models Explain Themselves?
Counterfactual Simulatability of Natural Language Explanations

Yanda Chen 1 Ruiqi Zhong 2 Narutatsu Ri 1 Chen Zhao 3
He He 4 Jacob Steinhardt 2 Zhou Yu 1 Kathleen McKeown 1

Abstract

AI answers a user’s question with an explanation
Is it hard to get a BLT in Casablanca?
Answer: Yes

Large language models (LLMs) are trained to
imitate humans to explain human decisions.
However, do LLMs explain themselves? Can
they help humans build mental models of how
LLMs process different inputs? To answer these
questions, we propose to evaluate counterfactual
simulatability of natural language explanations:
whether an explanation can enable humans to
precisely infer the model’s outputs on diverse
counterfactuals of the explained input. For
example, if a model answers “yes” to the input
question “Can eagles fly?” with the explanation
“all birds can fly”, then humans would infer from
the explanation that it would also answer “yes”
to the counterfactual input “Can penguins fly?”.
If the explanation is precise, then the model’s
answer should match humans’ expectations. We
implemented two metrics based on counterfactual
simulatability: precision and generality. We
generated diverse counterfactuals automatically
using LLMs. We then used these metrics to evaluate state-of-the-art LLMs on two tasks: multi-hop
factual reasoning and reward modeling. We found
that LLMs’ explanations have low precision and
that precision does not correlate with plausibility.
Thus, naively optimizing human approvals (e.g.,
RLHF) may be insufficient. Code is available
at https://github.com/yandachen/
CounterfactualSimulatability.

Explanation: Casablanca is a large city in Morocco.
Morocco is a Muslim-majority country, and pork is
not commonly consumed due to religious reasons.
BLT contains bacon, which is pork. Thus, it might
be hard to find a traditional BLT in Casablanca.

The user forms an
expectation of how AI would
answer related questions

How AI actually
answers related
questions
Is it hard to find pork
belly in Casablanca?

Is it hard to find pork
belly in Casablanca?
Answer: Yes

Answer: No

inconsistent!

The user is misled by the explanation and
forms a wrong mental model of the AI.

Figure 1. GPT-4 answers a human user’s question and generates
an explanation. In this example, what GPT-4 actually answers
(right) is different from what the user would expect (left) based on
the explanation. Therefore, the explanation misleads humans to
form a wrong mental model of GPT-4 even though it is factually
correct.

1. Introduction
An ideal explanation should enable humans to infer how
a model processes different inputs (Johnson-Laird, 1980;
Collins & Gentner, 1987; Bansal et al., 2019). For example,
when we ask GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) “Is it hard to get a BLT
in Casablanca?”, it answers “yes” and explains

1
Columbia University 2 UC Berkeley 3 NYU Shanghai
New York University. Correspondence to: Yanda Chen
<yanda.chen@cs.columbia.edu>,
Kathleen
McKeown
<kathy@cs.columbia.edu>.

“Casablanca is a large city in Morocco. Morocco
is a Muslim-majority country, and pork is not
consumed due to religious reasons. BLT contains
bacon, which is pork. Thus, it might be hard to
find a traditional BLT in Casablanca.”

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Such an explanation is logically coherent and provides factually correct background information helpful for the question

4

1

