Causal Effect Identification in LiNGAM Models with Latent Confounders
Daniele Tramontano 1 Yaroslav Kivva 2 Saber Salehkaleybar 3 Mathias Drton 1 4 Negar Kiyavash 2

Abstract

vector component is associated with a node in the graph and
is a function of the random variables corresponding to its
parents in the graph and its corresponding exogenous noise.

We study the generic identifiability of causal
effects in linear non-Gaussian acyclic models
(LiNGAM) with latent variables. We consider the
problem in two main settings: When the causal
graph is known a priori, and when it is unknown.
In both settings, we provide a complete graphical
characterization of the identifiable direct or total
causal effects among observed variables. Moreover, we propose efficient algorithms to certify the
graphical conditions. Finally, we propose an adaptation of the reconstruction independent component analysis (RICA) algorithm that estimates the
causal effects from the observational data given
the causal graph. Experimental results show the
effectiveness of the proposed method in estimating the causal effects.

In this paper, we mainly focus on the identifiability of causal
effects in the important subclass of linear SEM and characterize graphically which causal effects can be uniquely determined from the observational data. When the exogenous
noises in a linear SEM are Gaussian, the entire information
about the model is contained in the covariance matrix among
the variables, with all the higher-order moments of the distribution being uninformative. This entails that the causal
structure as well as other causal quantities are often not identifiable from mere observational data. The most prominent
instance in the context of causal structure learning is that the
causal graph is identifiable only up to an equivalence class
(e.g., Drton, 2018, §10). This motivated the widespread use
of the linear non-Gaussian additive noise model (LiNGAM),
where the exogenous noises are non-Gaussian.
The seminal work of Shimizu et al. (2006) showed that in
the setting of LiNGAM, the true underlying causal graph
is uniquely identifiable when all the variables are observed.
Since then, a rich literature on this topic has emerged, focusing mainly on the identification and the estimation of
the causal graph; see, e.g., Adams et al. (2021); Shimizu
(2022); Yang et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Wang &
Drton (2023) for recent results that allow for the presence
of hidden variables. Indeed, linear models remain the backbone of problem abstraction in many scientific disciplines,
because they offer simple qualitative interpretations and can
be learned with moderate sample sizes (Pe’er & Hacohen,
2011, Principle 1). In particular, the LiNGAM model finds
application in diverse scientific fields, such as Neuroscience
(Chiyohara et al., 2023), Economics (Ciarli et al., 2023), or
Epidemiology (Barrera & Miljkovic, 2022).

1. Introduction
Predicting the impact of an unseen intervention in a system is a crucial challenge in many fields, such as medicine
(Sanchez et al., 2022; Michoel & Zhang, 2023), policy evaluation (Athey & Imbens, 2017), fair decision-making (Kilbertus et al., 2017), and finance (de Prado, 2023). Randomized
experiments form the gold standard for addressing this challenge, but are often infeasible due to ethical concerns or
prohibitively high costs. To tackle situations in which only
observational data are available, one needs to make additional assumptions on the underlying causal system. The
field of causal inference strives to formalize such assumptions. One notable approach in causal inference is modeling causal relationships through structural equation models
(SEM) (Pearl, 2009). In this framework, a random vector
is associated with a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Each

Within the LiNGAM literature, causal effect identification
has received less attention; only few recent work (Kivva
et al., 2023; Shuai et al., 2023) have exploited the nonGaussianity to provide identification formulas that work for
specific causal graphs. The only graphical criteria for identification are given in Salehkaleybar et al. (2020); Yang et al.
(2022). The main drawback of the aforementioned papers
is that they target simultaneous recovery of all the causal
effects. However, in many applications, we are interested
in causal effects of only some subset of variables on others.

1
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 2 Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Netherlands 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning,
Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Daniele Tramontano
<daniele.tramontano@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

