Outlier-robust Kalman Filtering through Generalised Bayes

Gerardo Duran-Martin 1 2 Matias Altamirano 3 Alexander Y. Shestopaloff 1 4 Leandro Sánchez-Betancourt 2 5
Jeremias Knoblauch 3 Matt Jones 6 François-Xavier Briol 3 Kevin Murphy 7

Abstract
We derive a novel, provably robust, and closedform Bayesian update rule for online filtering in
state-space models in the presence of outliers and
misspecified measurement models. Our method
combines generalised Bayesian inference with
filtering methods such as the extended and ensemble Kalman filter. We use the former to show
robustness and the latter to ensure computational
efficiency in the case of nonlinear models. Our
method matches or outperforms other robust filtering methods (such as those based on variational Bayes) at a much lower computational cost.
We show this empirically on a range of filtering
problems with outlier measurements, such as object tracking, state estimation in high-dimensional
chaotic systems, and online learning of neural
networks.

Figure 1. First state component of the SSM (20). The grey dots
are measurements sampled from (20) and the red crosses are measurements sampled from an outlier measurement process. The
dotted blue line shows the KF posterior mean estimate and the
solid orange line shows our proposed WoLF posterior mean estimate. The regions around the posterior mean cover two standard
deviations. For comparison, the dashed black line shows the true
sampled state process.

Sarkka & Svensson, 2023) and the ensemble Kalman filter
(EnKF) (see e.g., Roth et al., 2017a), because they both
admit closed-form Bayesian updates to Gaussian posterior
approximations and scale to high dimensions.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic state-space models (SSMs) are widely used to
address problems in time-series forecasting, online learning,
tracking problems, and signal processing. A key challenge
in SSMs is to perform online (sequential) posterior inference, also known as Bayesian filtering. If the model is linear
and the and the dynamics are known, then the Kalman filter (KF) algorithm is the optimal filter in terms of minimal
mean squared error (Morris, 1976). If the model is not linear, approximate inference methods must be used. Although
there are a number of techniques available, in this paper
we focus on the extended Kalman filter (EKF) (see e.g.,

In a Bayesian setting, the KF and KF-like methods typically use a Gaussian measurement model for computational
convenience. However, a weakness of this assumption is
that extreme observations, such as outliers, are not well
modelled by Gaussians, leading to model misspecification
(Grubbs, 1969; Hampel et al., 2011). Moreover, in practice,
the true dynamics are often different from the one assumed
by the filter. This could be because the measurements are
corrupted, or because the user does not have access to the
measurement function. For example, in tracking problems,
sensor measurement errors record the wrong position of an
object; similarly, in economics and finance, there are instances of data providers sending time series with erroneous
values (see e.g. Liu, 2020, for a survey).

1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University,
London, UK 2 Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance, University of Oxford, UK 3 Department of Statistical Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom 4 Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL, Canada 5 Mathematical Institute, University
of Oxford, UK 6 Institute for Cognitive Science, University of
Colorado Boulder, US 7 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Gerardo Duran-Martin <g.duranmartin@qmul.ac.uk>.

There is a large literature that studies the filtering problem in
the presence of outliers and misspecified measurement models1 . Some approaches extend the state space by introducing

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Alternatively, a measurement model can be referred to as an
observation model.

1

