Improving SAM Requires Rethinking its Optimization Formulation

Wanyun Xie 1 Fabian Latorre 1 Kimon Antonakopoulos 1 Thomas Pethick 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

have been quick to present modifications of the original
SAM algorithm, that improve its speed (Du et al., 2022) or
performance (Kwon et al., 2021) in practice.

This paper rethinks Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), which is originally formulated as
a zero-sum game where the weights of a network and a bounded perturbation try to minimize/maximize, respectively, the same differentiable loss. To fundamentally improve this design, we argue that SAM should instead be reformulated using the 0-1 loss. As a continuous
relaxation, we follow the simple conventional
approach where the minimizing (maximizing)
player uses an upper bound (lower bound) surrogate to the 0-1 loss. This leads to a novel formulation of SAM as a bilevel optimization problem, dubbed as BiSAM. BiSAM with newly designed lower-bound surrogate loss indeed constructs stronger perturbation. Through numerical
evidence, we show that BiSAM consistently results in improved performance when compared
to the original SAM and variants, while enjoying similar computational complexity. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
LIONS-EPFL/BiSAM.

The motivation behind SAM is to find a parameter w⋆ in
the so-called loss landscape, that achieves a low loss value
while being flat i.e., the loss in its immediate neighborhood
should not deviate meaningfully from the value attained at
w⋆ . To seek the flat minima, SAM algorithm derived by
Foret et al. (2021) is formulated as a two-player zero-sum
game, where two players respectively seek to minimize and
maximize the same differential loss.
In supervised classification tasks, common differential
losses like cross-entropy provide an upper bound to misclassification error, making it reasonable to expect that minimizing these losses will lead to a reduction in the 0-1 loss for
the minimizer. However, can we do such a natural replacement in the SAM formulation? A key question is “Does
maximizing such surrogate loss lead to a maximum of the
0-1 loss?” No, there is no guarantee. We make this precise
with a counterexample in Section 2.2.
Therefore, we argue that even though the surrogate loss used
in SAM formulation appears beneficial, we should recall
that the goal in supervised classification is not to achieve a
low value of the cross-entropy, rather, the goal is to enjoy
a small misclassification error rate on the testing set. This
raises the question:

1. Introduction
The rise in popularity of deep neural networks has motivated the question of which optimization methods are better
suited for their training. Recently, it has been found that
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021)
can greatly improve their generalization with almost negligible increase in computational complexity. SAM not only
benefits supervised learning tasks from computer vision
greatly (Foret et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) but also
improves the performance of large language models (Bahri
et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2022). Hence, it is natural to ask
whether SAM can be improved further. Indeed, many works

If our goal is to achieve a better classifier, should we not
apply the SAM formulation directly on the misclassification
error i.e., the 0-1 loss?
Motivated by this actual goal, we argue that the original
SAM with surrogate loss suffers from a fundamental flaw
that leads to a weaker perturbation. Our analysis reveals
that maximizing a surrogate loss like cross-entropy has no
guarantee that misclassification errors will increase due to
its upper-bound nature. To overcome this shortcoming, the
minimizer and maximizer should have different objectives,
specifically an upper bound of misclassification error for
the minimizer while a lower bound for the maximizer. This
guides us to propose a novel bilevel formulation of SAM,
called BiSAM, with a new loss function for the maximizer.
BiSAM fixes SAM’s fundamental issue without any extra
computational cost and importantly it can be incorporated

1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence to: Wanyun Xie <wanyun.xie@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

