CRoFT: Robust Fine-Tuning with Concurrent Optimization for
OOD Generalization and Open-Set OOD Detection

Lin Zhu 1 Yifeng Yang 1 Qinying Gu 2 Xinbing Wang 1 Chenghu Zhou 1 Nanyang Ye 1

Abstract
Recent vision-language pre-trained models (VLPTMs) have shown remarkable success in openvocabulary tasks. However, downstream use cases
often involve further fine-tuning of VL-PTMs,
which may distort their general knowledge and
impair their ability to handle distribution shifts.
In real-world scenarios, machine learning systems inevitably encounter both covariate shifts
(e.g., changes in image styles) and semantic shifts
(e.g., test-time unseen classes). This highlights
the importance of enhancing out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization on covariate shifts and simultaneously detecting semantic-shifted unseen
classes. Thus a critical but underexplored question arises: How to improve VL-PTMs’ generalization ability to closed-set OOD data, while effectively detecting open-set unseen classes during
fine-tuning? In this paper, we propose a novel
objective function of OOD detection that also
serves to improve OOD generalization. We show
that minimizing the gradient magnitude of energy
scores on training data leads to domain-consistent
Hessians of classification loss, a strong indicator
for OOD generalization revealed by theoretical
analysis. Based on this finding, we have developed a unified fine-tuning framework that allows
for concurrent optimization of both tasks. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the superiority of our method. The code is available at
https://github.com/LinLLLL/CRoFT.

Figure 1. Illustration of typical data setting in real-world scenarios.
For example, we may encounter various types of data in real-world
applications: (i) closed-set ID data (e.g., dog), (ii) closed-set OOD
data with covariate shifts (e.g., dog with changed image styles), and
(iii) open-set OOD data with semantic shifts (e.g., panda). The
significant overlaps in energy distributions between closed-set
ID and open-set OOD data pose a challenge for CLIP in detecting open-set OOD data. The notable discrepancy between
the closed-set ID and closed-set OOD data also complicates
achieving OOD generalization for closed-set OOD data.

Grounding DINO (Liu et al., 2023), MiniGPT-4 (Zhu
et al., 2023b), etc., have shown promising results in visualsemantic learning. However, in real-world scenarios, machine learning models often face challenges related to outof-distribution (OOD) data, arising from disparities in data
distributions between the training and test sets (Meinshausen
& Bühlmann, 2015; Koh et al., 2020). To address this issue, various paradigms (Zhou et al., 2021; Wortsman et al.,
2022; Andreassen et al., 2021; Li & Zhang, 2021; Mao
et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Goyal et al., 2023) have been
proposed to fine-tune VL-PTMs, aiming to enhance their
robustness against test-time distribution shifts. By adopting
these fine-tuning techniques, the fine-tuned VL-PTMs can
quickly adapt to downstream tasks even with only a few
training examples (Fan et al., 2021; Nakamura & Harada,
2019; Gao et al., 2020). Furthermore, some methods have
shown improved generalization performances within the
same downstream tasks under OOD scenarios (Wortsman
et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023a). Nevertheless, most of these methods primarily focused on closed-set

1. Introduction
Recent advances in large-scale vision-language pre-trained
models (VL-PTMs), such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021),
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 2 Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China.. Correspondence to: Nanyang Ye <ynylincoln@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

