Safety Fine-Tuning at (Almost) No Cost:
A Baseline for Vision Large Language Models

Yongshuo Zong 1 Ondrej Bohdal 1 Tingyang Yu 2 Yongxin Yang 1 Timothy Hospedales 1

Abstract
Motivation

Current vision large language models (VLLMs)
exhibit remarkable capabilities yet are prone to
generate harmful content and are vulnerable to
even the simplest jailbreaking attacks. Our initial analysis finds that this is due to the presence of harmful data during vision-language instruction fine-tuning, and that VLLM fine-tuning
can cause forgetting of safety alignment previously learned by the underpinning LLM. To address this issue, we first curate a vision-language
safety instruction-following dataset VLGuard covering various harmful categories. Our experiments demonstrate that integrating this dataset
into standard vision-language fine-tuning or utilizing it for post-hoc fine-tuning effectively safety
aligns VLLMs. This alignment is achieved with
minimal impact on, or even enhancement of, the
models’ helpfulness. The versatility of our safety
fine-tuning dataset makes it a valuable resource
for safety-testing existing VLLMs, training new
models or safeguarding pre-trained VLLMs. Empirical results demonstrate that fine-tuned VLLMs
effectively reject unsafe instructions and substantially reduce the success rates of several blackbox adversarial attacks, which approach zero in
many cases. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ys-zong/VLGuard.
Content Warning: This paper contains examples of harmful language or images.

Alignment

LLMs

VLLMs
(Broken Safety)

&
er g
cod in
En e-tun
n
in
io
Vis Ms F
L
VL

VLGuard
Fine-tuning

Aligned LLMs

Safe VLLMs

VLGuard Dataset

VLLM
Fine-tuning

"What type of meal
might the person in the
image be preparing?"

"Can you identify
the person in the image
or provide personal
details about them?"

Safe Instruction

Unsafe Instruction

Post-hoc
Fine-tuning

Mixed
Fine-tuning

Evaluation Harmfulness Helpfulness Exaggerated
Safety
Aspects
Evaluation
Strategies

String
Matching

LLM
Evaluation

Human
Evaluation

Figure 1. Training vision large language models usually consists
of fine-tuning previously aligned LLMs, which breaks their established alignment and leads the trained VLLMs to exhibit worse
safety than their LLMs. To analyze and address this issue, we
construct VLGuard for VLLMs safety fine-tuning and evaluation.

bilities. However, as the adoption of VLLMs accelerates,
emerging studies reveal a critical challenge: these models
are susceptible to generating harmful content and are vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Carlini et al., 2023; Gong
et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023a). This vulnerability poses a
significant concern for their deployment in practical settings,
where there is a risk of malicious users attacking VLLMs
to elicit desired harmful outputs, hijack model behaviors,
obtain information for illegal activities, etc.

1. Introduction
Vision Large Language Models (VLLMs) (Yin et al., 2023;
OpenAI, 2023; Team et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b), building on top of large language models (LLMs), have attracted
significant attention for their remarkable multi-modal capa1
University of Einburgh 2 EPFL. Correspondence to: Yongshuo
Zong <yongshuo.zong@ed.ac.uk>.

There has been tremendous interest in “jailbreaking” or “redteaming” LLMs and VLLMs in both academia (Wei et al.,
2023; Carlini et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023a; Gong et al., 2023;
Shen et al., 2023) and social media (Albert; Barak, 2023).

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

