On the Generalization of Equivariant Graph Neural Networks

Rafał Karczewski 1 Amauri H. Souza 1 2 Vikas Garg 1 3
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Fukushima, 1980;
LeCun et al., 1990) implement shift-equivariant functions;
graph neural network (GNN) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli
et al., 2009; Gilmer et al., 2017) layers are equivariant to
node permutations. Remarkably, equivariant/invariant architectures have led to breakthroughs in tasks such as drug discovery (Stokes et al., 2020), weather modeling (Verma et al.,
2024), simulation of physical systems (Sanchez-Gonzalez
et al., 2020), traffic forecasting (Derrow-Pinion et al., 2021),
and recommender systems (Ying et al., 2018).

Abstract
E(n)-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks (EGNNs) are among the most widely used and successful models for representation learning on
geometric graphs (e.g., 3D molecules). However, while the expressivity of EGNNs has been
explored in terms of geometric variants of the
Weisfeiler-Leman isomorphism test, characterizing their generalization capability remains open.
In this work, we establish the first generalization
bound for EGNNs. Our bound depicts a dependence on the weighted sum of logarithms of the
spectral norms of the weight matrices (EGNN parameters). In addition, our main result reveals
interesting novel insights: i) the spectral norms
of the initial layers may impact generalization
more than the final ones; ii) ε-normalization is
beneficial to generalization — confirming prior
empirical evidence. We leverage these insights
to introduce a spectral norm regularizer tailored
to EGNNs. Experiments on real-world datasets
substantiate our analysis, demonstrating a high
correlation between theoretical and empirical generalization gaps and the effectiveness of the proposed regularization scheme.

Recently, E(n)-equivariant graph neural networks (EGNNs)
(Satorras et al., 2021) have emerged as an efficient and powerful approach for learning representations of geometric
graphs — i.e., graphs embedded in Euclidean space. EGNNs employ a GNN-like message-passing scheme (Gilmer
et al., 2017), where the embeddings of each node are refined
using messages from its neighbors in the graph at each layer.
Their design ensures that EGNNs inherent the permutationequivariance property of regular GNNs while also being
equivariant to actions of the Euclidean group E(n), which
comprise all translations, rotations, and reflections in Rn .
EGNNs have been successfully applied to molecular property prediction (Satorras et al., 2021), drug binding structure
prediction (Stärk et al., 2022), generative modeling (Garcia Satorras et al., 2021), structure-based drug design (Fu
et al., 2022) and molecular dynamics (Arts et al., 2023).
Uncovering the strengths and limits of machine learning
models from a theoretical standpoint is imperative to seeding a path to novel principled approaches. For instance, one
of the most important aspects of any learning machine is its
ability to generalize beyond seen data. Outlining generalization guarantees for a given model class can profoundly
impact its applicability. Another relevant aspect concerns
the functions a model class can approximate. In this regard,
Joshi et al. (2023) have recently analyzed the expressive
power of EGNNs in terms of a geometric version of the
Weisfeiler-Leman isomorphism test (or 1-WL test) (Weisfeiler & Lehman, 1968) — which has been extensively used
to study the expressivity of regular GNNs (Maron et al.,
2019; Morris et al., 2019; Sato et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019).
In contrast, establishing theoretical guarantees for the generalization capability of EGNNs remains an open problem.

1. Introduction
Leveraging symmetries of the underlying domains/signals is
a key design principle underlying successful neural network
architectures for structured data (Bronstein et al., 2021; Kipf
& Welling, 2017; Cohen et al., 2018; Gilmer et al., 2017).
Typically, this boils down to identifying relevant symmetries
captured in the form of groups (e.g., groups of translations)
and then building predictive models by composing layers of
equivariant (or invariant) transformations to the actions of
such groups on the inputs. As classic examples, linear layers
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Federal Institute of Ceará (Brazil) 3 YaiYai Ltd. Correspondence
to: Rafał Karczewski <rafal.karczewski@aalto.fi>, Vikas Garg
<vgarg@csail.mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we study the generalization of the EGNNs
1

