Towards Optimal Adversarial Robust Q-learning with Bellman Infinity-error

Haoran Li 1 Zicheng Zhang 1 Wang Luo 1 Congying Han 1 Yudong Hu 1 Tiande Guo 1 Shichen Liao 1

Abstract

degrade well-trained DRL agents (Huang et al., 2017; Behzadan & Munir, 2017a; Lin et al., 2017; Ilahi et al., 2021),
which limits their trustworthy real-world deployment and
emphasizes the crucial need for developing robust DRL
algorithms against adversarial attacks.

Establishing robust policies is essential to counter
attacks or disturbances affecting deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents. Recent studies explore state-adversarial robustness and suggest the
potential lack of an optimal robust policy (ORP),
posing challenges in setting strict robustness constraints. This work further investigates ORP:
At first, we introduce a consistency assumption
of policy (CAP) stating that optimal actions in
the Markov decision process remain consistent
with minor perturbations, supported by empirical and theoretical evidence. Building upon
CAP, we crucially prove the existence of a deterministic and stationary ORP that aligns with the
Bellman optimal policy. Furthermore, we illustrate the necessity of L∞ -norm when minimizing
Bellman error to attain ORP. This finding clarifies the vulnerability of prior DRL algorithms
that target the Bellman optimal policy with L1 norm and motivates us to train a Consistent Adversarial Robust Deep Q-Network (CAR-DQN)
by minimizing a surrogate of Bellman Infinityerror. The top-tier performance of CAR-DQN
across various benchmarks validates its practical effectiveness and reinforces the soundness of
our theoretical analysis. Our code is available at
https://github.com/leoranlmia/CAR-DQN.

Pioneering work by Zhang et al. (2020) introduced the stateadversarial paradigm in DRL by formulating a modified
Markov decision process (MDP), termed SA-MDP. Here,
the underlying true state remains invariant while the observed state is subjected to disturbances. They also highlighted the uncertain existence of an optimal robust policy (ORP) within SA-MDP, indicating a potential conflict
between robustness and optimal policy. Consequently, existing methods built upon SA-MDP often seek a trade-off
between robust and optimal policies through various regularizations (Oikarinen et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022) or
adversarial training (Zhang et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021).
While enhancing robustness, these methods lack theoretical
guarantees and completely neglect the study of ORP.
In this paper, we primarily focus on investigating ORP
within SA-MDP. We suppose that only a few exceptional
states lack an ORP, thus it is key for theoretical clarity to
eliminate these states. Therefore, our work starts with a
consistency assumption of policy (CAP), where optimal
actions of all states within the MDP exhibit consistency
despite adversarial disturbance. This implies that, from a
decision-making perspective, adversaries cannot alter the
essence of state observations, which we call the intrinsic
state. Despite seeming implausible, we support the rationality of CAP through theoretical analysis and empirical
experiments against strong adversarial attacks like FGSM
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) and PGD (Madry et al., 2017),
showcasing that the state set violating CAP is nearly empty.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown remarkable
success in solving intricate problems (Mnih et al., 2015;
Lillicrap et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016) and holds promise
across diverse practical domains (Ibarz et al., 2021; Kiran
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2018). Nevertheless, subtle perturbations in state observations can severely

Building upon CAP, we demonstrate that there always exists
a stationary and deterministic adversarial ORP coinciding
with the Bellman optimal policy, derived from the Bellman
optimality equations. Remarkably, this objective has been
widely employed in previous DRL algorithms (Silver et al.,
2014; Schulman et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Mnih et al.,
2016; Schulman et al., 2017) to maximize the natural returns,
lacking robust capabilities. Hence, our findings incredibly
unveil that the Bellman optimal policy doubles as the ORP,
and improving the robustness of DRL agents need not com-

1

School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Congying Han <hancy@ucas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

