Evaluating and Analyzing Relationship Hallucinations
in Large Vision-Language Models

Mingrui Wu 1 Jiayi Ji 1 Oucheng Huang 1 Jiale Li 1 Yuhang Wu 1 Xiaoshuai Sun 1 Rongrong Ji 1

Abstract

(LVLMs) (Li et al., 2023c; Liu et al., 2023c; Dai et al., 2023;
Ye et al., 2023a). These endeavors typically involve methods like visual language pretraining (Li et al., 2023c) or
visual instruction tuning (Liu et al., 2023c), aimed at integrating pre-trained visual encoders with LLMs to enhance
their understanding of visual contexts.

The issue of hallucinations is a prevalent concern in existing Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs). Previous efforts have primarily focused
on investigating object hallucinations, which can
be easily alleviated by introducing object detectors. However, these efforts neglect hallucinations
in inter-object relationships, which is essential for
visual comprehension. In this work, we introduce R-Bench, a novel benchmark for evaluating
Vision Relationship Hallucination. R-Bench features image-level questions that focus on the existence of relationships and instance-level questions
that assess local visual comprehension. We identify three types of relationship co-occurrences that
lead to hallucinations: relationship-relationship,
subject-relationship, and relationship-object. The
visual instruction tuning dataset’s long-tail distribution significantly impacts LVLMs’ understanding of visual relationships. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that current LVLMs tend to disregard visual content and overly rely on the common sense knowledge of Large Language Models.
They also struggle with reasoning about spatial
relationships based on contextual information.

However, despite their impressive performance, a significant
challenge for these models is the unavoidable issue of hallucinations. Existing LVLMs often tend to generate responses
that are inconsistent with the content of the images. This
issue is particularly critical for LVLMs, which are expected
to accurately comprehend images and produce answers consistent with the content of the visual input. While prior
research has delved into evaluating object hallucinations (Li
et al., 2023e), offering mitigation strategies through the object detection (Yin et al., 2023) or segmentation models (Wu
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023c), there exists a notable gap
in addressing hallucinations related to inter-object relationships, as shown in Figure 1. The latter, compared to object
hallucinations, better reflects the LVLM’s capacity to comprehend the intricacies of visual scenes. Currently, there is
a shortage of comprehensive and rigorous benchmarks, to
address these relationship hallucinations.
In this study, we introduce a novel Relationship Hallucination Benchmark (R-Bench) designed specifically for assessing relationship hallucinations in LVLMs. This benchmark
comprises image-level and instance-level questions, labeled
as ’Yes’ or ’No’, similar to the POPE evaluation (Li et al.,
2023e). Image-level questions assess the existence of relationships in the image, while instance-level questions focus
on specific object relationships, indicated by color bounding
boxes or masks. The instance-level questions showcase the
local visual understanding ability of LVLMs, adaptable to
existing models without requiring retraining.

1. Introduction
Recently, large language models (LLMs) such as GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Llama (Touvron et al., 2023) have
demonstrated significant capabilities in addressing a broad
spectrum of human-generated questions. The success of
these models has spurred researchers to explore the use
of LLMs in conjunction with visual inputs, leading to
the development of various large vision-language models

For the benchmark, we employ a combination of automatic
generation by the Large Language Model (LLM) and manual curation. To ensure the benchmark’s integrity, it is based
on the nocaps validation set (Agrawal et al., 2019), preventing overlap with the pre-trained data of LVLMs. The
construction process involves parsing all COCO captions
to create a comprehensive relationship set. For each image in the nocaps dataset, we parse the provided captions

1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen
University, 361005, P.R. China. Correspondence to: Jiayi Ji
<jjyxmu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

