CuTS: Customizable Tabular Synthetic Data Generation

Mark Vero 1 Mislav Balunović 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

delicate from this perspective, as it is abundant in highstakes applications, such as finance and healthcare (Borisov
et al., 2022). An emerging and promising approach for
addressing these issues is synthetic data generation.

Privacy, data quality, and data sharing concerns
pose a key limitation for tabular data applications.
While generating synthetic data resembling the
original distribution addresses some of these issues, most applications would benefit from additional customization on the generated data. However, existing synthetic data approaches are limited to particular constraints, e.g., differential privacy (DP) or fairness. In this work, we introduce
CuTS, the first customizable synthetic tabular data
generation framework. Customization in CuTS
is achieved via declarative statistical and logical
expressions, supporting a wide range of requirements (e.g., DP or fairness, among others). To ensure high synthetic data quality in the presence of
custom specifications, CuTS is pre-trained on the
original dataset and fine-tuned on a differentiable
loss automatically derived from the provided specifications using novel relaxations. We evaluate
CuTS over four datasets and on numerous custom
specifications, outperforming state-of-the-art specialized approaches on several tasks while being
more general. In particular, at the same fairness
level, we achieve 2.3% higher downstream accuracy than the state-of-the-art in fair synthetic data
generation on the Adult dataset.

Synthetic data The promise of synthetic data is to produce a new dataset statistically resembling the original while
overcoming the above issues. Driven by recent regulations
requiring bias mitigation (e.g., GDPR (European Parliament
& Council of the European Union, 2016) Art. 5a), data
accuracy (GDPR Art. 5d), and privacy (GDPR Art. 5c and
5e), there has been increased interest in this field.
Prior work has only addressed some data sharing concerns:
differentially private synthetic data (e.g., Zhang et al. (2014);
Jordon et al. (2019); McKenna et al. (2022)), generating data
with reduced bias (e.g., van Breugel et al. (2021); Rajabi &
Garibay (2022)), and combining these two objectives (Pujol
et al., 2022). However, these methods might still generate
data violating truthfulness (e.g., 10 year old with a doctorate) or containing undesired statistical patterns (e.g., a
pharmaceutical company not sharing even synthetic copies
of their clinical trial data, as the distribution of patient conditions reveals their development focus). Therefore, it remains
a key challenge to enable data owners to generate custom
high-utility data as required by their applications.
This Work Addressing the above limitations of synthetic
tabular data, we introduce our customizable tabular synthetic data generation framework (CuTS), allowing for general constraints, specifications, and customization over the
modelled distribution. Figure 1 shows an overview of CuTS,
featuring example specifications defined by the data owner,
where no person younger than 25 with a doctorate should
be generated and where bias w.r.t sex should be minimized.

1. Introduction
The availability of large datasets has been key to the rapid
progress of machine learning. To enable this progress,
datasets often have to be shared between different organizations and potentially passed on to third parties to train
machine learning models. This often presents a roadblock as
data owners are responsible for ensuring they do not perpetuate biases present in the data and do not violate user privacy
by sharing their personal records. Tabular data is especially

CuTS supports a wide range of customizations. First, it
allows for differentially private training protecting individuals included in the original dataset. Through logical and
implication constraints it can specify relationships that each
data point has to satisfy (as in Figure 1). Through statistical
specifications, it allows users to directly manipulate statistics of the synthetic data. Finally, it provides soft-constraints
for encouraging desirable behavior of classifiers trained on
the synthetic data (e.g., low bias). Thus, CuTS generalizes
prior works supporting only restricted specifications.

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Mark Vero <mark.vero@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

