Score-Based Causal Discovery of Latent Variable Causal Models

Ignavier Ng * 1 Xinshuai Dong * 1 Haoyue Dai 1 Biwei Huang 2 Peter Spirtes 1 Kun Zhang 1 3

Abstract

absence of latent confounders, known as causal sufficiency,
positing that the observed correlations stem either from true
causation or can be sufficiently explained by other observed
variables. Yet, real-world scenarios often defy this assumption. For instance, in psychological studies, the measured
questionnaires are indirect proxies of latent mental factors.
In unstructured data like images and texts, the observed pixels and words are confounded by latent semantic variables.
Directly applying causal discovery methods without considering these latent variables can lead to false discoveries, as
latent variables may introduce spurious correlations among
observed ones that cannot be attributed to true causation.

Identifying latent variables and the causal structure involving them is essential across various
scientific fields. While many existing works fall
under the category of constraint-based methods
(with e.g. conditional independence or rank deficiency tests), they may face empirical challenges
such as testing-order dependency, error propagation, and choosing an appropriate significance
level. These issues can potentially be mitigated
by properly designed score-based methods, such
as Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) (Chickering, 2002) in the specific setting without latent
variables. Yet, formulating score-based methods with latent variables is highly challenging.
In this work, we develop score-based methods
that are capable of identifying causal structures
containing causally-related latent variables with
identifiability guarantees. Specifically, we show
that a properly formulated scoring function can
achieve score equivalence and consistency for
structure learning of latent variable causal models. We further provide a characterization of the
degrees of freedom for the marginal over the observed variables under multiple structural assumptions considered in the literature, and accordingly
develop both exact and continuous score-based
methods. This offers a unified view of several
existing constraint-based methods with different
structural assumptions. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Notable efforts have thus been made to identify the true
causal relations in the presence of latent variables. Earliest
attempts include Fast Causal Inference (FCI) (Spirtes et al.,
2001; Zhang, 2008) and its variants (Colombo et al., 2012;
Spirtes et al., 2013; Claassen et al., 2013; Akbari et al., 2021)
that exploit conditional independence information. There
are two main limitations of FCI: First, the results, presented
by partial ancestral graphs (PAG) (Richardson, 1996), tend
to be overgeneralized – e.g., whenever two observed variables may be confounded, it indicates so. Second, it focuses
solely on causal relations among observed variables and
does not provide information about those among latent variables. In short, FCI does not require specific assumptions
about the latent structure, at the cost of having a less informative output. In contrast, one may often be interested in identifying the causal relations among latent variables (e.g., the
latent mental and semantic variables in the above examples).
Hence, another line of work has been developed to discover the causal structure also among latent variables. For
the identifiability conditions, these methods typically introduce additional parametric assumptions to mitigate the
large model indeterminacies faced by FCI. This includes
rank or tetrad condition-based methods with linearity assumption (Silva et al., 2003; 2006; Silva & Scheines, 2005;
Choi et al., 2011; Kummerfeld & Ramsey, 2016; Huang
et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2023), high-order moments-based
methods (Shimizu et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2018; Cai et al.,
2019; Salehkaleybar et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Adams
et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Améndola
et al., 2023; Wang & Drton, 2023), matrix decompositionbased methods (Anandkumar et al., 2013), copula modelbased methods (Cui et al., 2018), mixture oracles-based

1. Introduction
At the core of understanding complex systems lies causal
discovery, the identification of causal relations from observational data (Spirtes et al., 2001; Pearl, 2009). One
common assumption in causal discovery algorithms is the
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 University
of California, San Diego 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

