On the Implicit Bias of Adam

Matias D. Cattaneo * 1 Jason M. Klusowski * 1 Boris Shigida * 1
(h/4)∥∇E(θ̃)∥2 makes the trajectory of the solution to
˙
e θ̃) approximate the sequence {θ (n) }∞ one
θ̃ = −∇E(
n=0
order of h better than the original ODE, where ∥ · ∥ is
the Euclidean norm. In related work, Miyagawa (2022)
obtained the correction term for full-batch GD up to any
chosen order, also studying the global error (uniform in the
iteration number) as opposed to the local (one-step) error.

Abstract
In previous literature, backward error analysis
was used to find ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) approximating the gradient descent trajectory. It was found that finite step sizes implicitly
regularize solutions because terms appearing in
the ODEs penalize the two-norm of the loss gradients. We prove that the existence of similar
implicit regularization in RMSProp and Adam
depends on their hyperparameters and the training stage, but with a different “norm” involved:
the corresponding ODE terms either penalize the
(perturbed) one-norm of the loss gradients or, conversely, impede its reduction (the latter case being
typical). We also conduct numerical experiments
and discuss how the proven facts can influence
generalization.

The analysis was later extended to mini-batch GD in Smith
et al. (2021). Assume that the training set is split into
batches of size B and there are m batches per epoch (so
the training set sizePis mB). The cost function is rewritten
m−1
as E(θ) = (1/m) k=0 Êk (θ) with mini-batch costs dePkB+B
noted Êk (θ) = (1/B) j=kB+1 Ej (θ). It was obtained
in that work that after one epoch, the mean iterate of the
algorithm, averaged over all possible shuffles of the batch
eSGD (θ), where
indices, is close to the solution to θ̇ = −∇E
e
the modified loss is given by ESGD (θ) = E(θ) + h/(4m) ·
Pm−1
2
∇Ê(θ) .
k=0

1. Introduction

Modified equations have also been derived for GD with
heavy-ball momentum θ (n+1) = θ (n) − h∇E(θ (n) ) +
β(θ (n) − θ (n−1) ), where β is the momentum parameter.
In the full-batch setting, it turns out that for n large enough
it is close to the continuous trajectory solving

Gradient descent (GD) can be seen as a numerical method
solving the ordinary differential equation (ODE) θ̇ =
−∇E(θ), where E(·) is the loss function and ∇E(θ) is its
gradient. Starting at θ (0) , it creates a sequence of guesses
θ (1) , θ (2) , . . ., which lie close to the solution trajectory θ(t)
governed by the aforementioned ODE. Since the step size h
is finite, one could search for a modified differential equa˙
e θ̃) such that θ (n) − θ̃(nh) is exactly zero,
tion θ̃ = −∇E(
or at least closer to zero than θ (n) − θ(nh), that is, all the
guesses of the descent lie exactly on the new solution curve
or closer compared to the original curve. This approach to
analysing properties of a numerical method is sometimes
called backward error analysis in the numerical integration
literature (see Chapter IX in Ernst Hairer & Wanner (2006)
and references therein).

2

θ̇ = −

∇E(θ)
1 + β ∇∥∇E(θ)∥
−h
.
1−β
(1 − β)3
4
|
{z
}

(1)

implicit regularization

Versions of this general result were proven in Farazmand
(2020), Kovachki & Stuart (2021), Ghosh et al. (2023) under
different assumptions. The focus of the latter work is the
closest to ours since they interpret the correction term as
implicit regularization. Their main theorem also provides
the analysis for the general mini-batch case.
In another recent work, Zhao et al. (2022) introduce a regularization term λ · ∥∇E(θ)∥ to the loss function as a way
to ensure finding flatter minima, improving generalization.
The only difference between their term and the first-order
correction coming from backward error analysis (up to a
coefficient) is that the norm is not squared and regularization
is applied on a per-batch basis.

Barrett & Dherin (2021) used this idea for full-batch GD
and found that the modified loss function e
E(θ̃) = E(θ̃) +
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Operations Research and
Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
Correspondence to: Boris Shigida <bs1624@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

The application of backward error analysis for approximating the discrete dynamics of adaptive algorithms such as
1

