Private and Federated Stochastic Convex Optimization:
Efficient Strategies for Centralized Systems

Roie Reshef * 1 Kfir Yehuda Levy * 1

Abstract

cessitating a nuanced equilibrium between data obfuscation
and maintaining model accuracy. This intricate balance is
crucial to preserve the efficacy of the learning process while
ensuring privacy. The critical challenge arising in this context is in ensuring the confidentiality of the model updates
transmitted over the distributed network.

This paper addresses the challenge of preserving
privacy in Federated Learning (FL) within centralized systems, focusing on both trusted and untrusted server scenarios. We analyze this setting
within the Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO)
framework, and devise methods that ensure Differential Privacy (DP) while maintaining optimal
convergence rates for homogeneous and heterogeneous data distributions. Our approach, based
on a recent stochastic optimization technique, offers linear computational complexity, comparable
to non-private FL methods, and reduced gradient
obfuscation. This work enhances the practicality
of DP in FL, balancing privacy, efficiency, and robustness in a variety of server trust environments.

FL differentiates between device-based learning, limited by
device availability and bandwidth, and silo-based learning,
involving full participation from all machines, often across
organizations (Kairouz et al., 2021b). This paper focuses
on silo-based learning, crucial for achieving accurate and
consistent models, and we shall refer to silos as ”machines”.
In this work, we investigate DP guarantees for FL within the
Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) framework, a cornerstone in the design and analysis of ML algorithms (ShalevShwartz et al., 2009; Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
And we focus on centralized scenarios where a (central)
sever employs M machines in parallel. So far, this setting
has been mainly investigated in the context of finite-sum
problems (ERM), e.g. in (Huang et al., 2020; Wei et al.,
2020; Girgis et al., 2021; Noble et al., 2022). Nevertheless,
translating ERM guarantees to population loss guarantees
leads to sub-optimal bounds, see e.g. (Bassily et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a novel framework in Machine
Learning (ML), enabling collaborative learning among myriad of decentralized devices or systems (McMahan et al.,
2017; Kairouz et al., 2021b). Privacy is a paramount issue in
FL, underscoring the critical need to prevent the disclosure
of private information as a result of the training process.

Conversely, optimal guarantees for the population loss
in this context were recently substantiated in (Lowy &
Razaviyayn, 2023). This work provides different guarantees, depending on the level of trust that machines have
in a central server. Concretely, for (i) untrusted server
scenarios,
this√work

 substantiates a convergence rate of
1
d
O √nM + ϵn√M , where M is the number of machines,
n is the number of samples used per machine during the
training process, d is the dimension of the problem, and ε
is the level of ensured DP. Conversely, 
(ii) for the √
case of
1
d
a trusted server, an improved rate of O √nM
+ ϵnM
is
substantiated. (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023) also provide
a matching lower bound for these rates. These guarantee
is substantiated for the homogeneous case, where the data
distribution is identical across all machines.

To address this challenge, Differential Privacy (DP) has
emerged as a robust framework for quantifying and managing privacy risks (Dwork et al., 2006a;b). DP offers a
formal guarantee that the outcome of a data analysis does
not significantly change when any single individual’s data is
added or removed, thereby ensuring that individual privacy
is maintained (Dwork & Roth, 2014). Implementing DP
guarantees in FL has been extensively studied e.g. in (Huang
et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020; Girgis et al., 2021; Noble et al.,
2022; Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023; Lowy et al., 2023), ne*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Roie Reshef <sror@campus.technion.ac.il>, Kfir Yehuda Levy
<kfiryehud@gmail.com>.

Nevertheless, as we detail in Appendix F, the approach
of (Lowy & Razaviyayn, 2023) requires a computational

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

