Learning Causal Domain-Invariant Temporal Dynamics for
Few-Shot Action Recognition

Yuke Li * 1 Guangyi Chen * 2 Ben Abramowitz 3 Stefano Anzellotti 1 Donglai Wei 1
Time

Abstract
Moving
sth.
(base data)

Few-shot action recognition aims at quickly adapting a pre-trained model to the novel data with
a distribution shift using only a limited number of samples. Key challenges include how
to identify and leverage the transferable knowledge learned by the pre-trained model. We therefore propose CDTD, or Causal Domain-Invariant
Temporal Dynamics for knowledge transfer. To
identify the temporally invariant and variant representations, we employ the causal representation
learning methods for unsupervised pertaining, and
then tune the classifier with supervisions in next
stage. Specifically, we assume the domain information can be well estimated and the pre-trained
image decoder and transition models can be well
transferred. During adaptation, we fix the transferable temporal dynamics and update the image
encoder and domain estimator. The efficacy of
our approach is revealed by the superior accuracy
of CDTD over leading alternatives across standard
few-shot action recognition datasets.

Dropping
sth.
(novel data)

Figure 1: In the few-shot learning setting, what aspects can
be effectively transferred from the base data to the novel
data? Despite the different temporal dynamics in these two
videos, the underlying physical laws are domain-invariant.
et al., 2020; Perrett et al., 2021a; Thatipelli et al., 2022;
Tseng et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2023).
The efficient and effective few-shot action recognition requires solving two main problems. One entails identifying
the transferable, temporal invariant knowledge that can be
readily applied to new data. The other involves optimizing
the non-transferable, temporal variant knowledge to facilitate swift updates, ensuring effective adaptation to new
contexts. The existing literature relies on a large amount of
labels and treats these two problems in various ways, based
on different assumptions about transferability. For instance,
one set of methods assumes all parameters should be finetuned on the new data, such as ActionCLIP (Wang et al.,
2021b), ORViT (Herzig et al., 2022), and SViT (Ben Avraham et al., 2022). Other methods fix all parameters in the
pre-trained model and learn new modules for data-efficient
updates, such as the prompt learning methods VideoPrompt
(Ju et al., 2022) and VL Prompting (Rasheed et al., 2023).
By identifying and fixing domain-invariant parameters and
only updating a small number of domain-specific parameters without introducing new modules during adaptation,
CDTD offers a great improvement in adaptation efficiency
over both of these approaches. We contrast our model also
with prototypical network-based methods that focus only on
the transferable part, learning the transferable knowledge
via meta-learning and directly transferring a metric model
for the recognition of new actions (Wang et al., 2021a; Zhu
et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2020; Perrett et al., 2021b)

1. Introduction
Action recognition continues to be a potent and productive area of research. For instance, (Xing et al., 2023; Ahn
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) show
great results in learning action representations with a large
amount of labels. However, these supervised learning approaches may fall short when faced with the challenge of
few-shot learning, where only a limited number of samples
are available for novel action classes that exhibit significant
distributional differences from the pre-training data (Cao
*
Equal contribution 1 Boston College, Boston MA, USA
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA; Mohamed
bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi,
UAE 3 Tulane University, New Orleans LA, USA. Correspondence to: Donglai Wei <weidf@bc.edu>, Yuke Li <sunfreshing@whu.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

