Rényi Pufferfish Privacy: General Additive Noise Mechanisms and Privacy
Amplification by Iteration via Shift Reduction Lemmas

Clément Pierquin 1 2 Aurélien Bellet 3 Marc Tommasi 2 Matthieu Boussard 1

Abstract

ual than the conventional differential privacy framework
assumes (Humphries et al., 2023).

Pufferfish privacy is a flexible generalization of
differential privacy that allows to model arbitrary
secrets and adversary’s prior knowledge about
the data. Unfortunately, designing general and
tractable Pufferfish mechanisms that do not compromise utility is challenging. Furthermore, this
framework does not provide the composition guarantees needed for a direct use in iterative machine
learning algorithms. To mitigate these issues, we
introduce a Rényi divergence-based variant of
Pufferfish and show that it allows us to extend the
applicability of the Pufferfish framework. We first
generalize the Wasserstein mechanism to cover
a wide range of noise distributions and introduce
several ways to improve its utility. Finally, as an
alternative to composition, we prove privacy amplification results for contractive noisy iterations
and showcase the first use of Pufferfish in private
convex optimization. A common ingredient underlying our results is the use and extension of
shift reduction lemmas.

To address these situations, specialized privacy definitions
have been designed. Certain direct extensions of DP, like
group privacy (Dwork & Roth, 2014) or entry privacy (Hardt
& Roth, 2013), protect entire instances or groups, which
results in strong privacy guarantees but often much poorer
utility. More flexible frameworks allow to tailor the privacy
definition to a set of distributions which could have plausibly generated the dataset, and thereby allow a tighter privacy
analysis. In this work, we focus on the general framework of
Pufferfish privacy (Kifer & Machanavajjhala, 2014), which
is closely related to other similar definitions like Blowfish
privacy (He et al., 2014) and distribution privacy (Kawamoto
& Murakami, 2019; Chen & Ohrimenko, 2023).
Pufferfish privacy however comes with new challenges, first
and foremost in the design of general and computationally tractable Pufferfish private mechanisms. Indeed, the
sensitivity of the query, which is critical in DP to design
additive noise mechanisms, has no direct use in Pufferfish
privacy. Moreover, while various ways to measure and efficiently track the privacy loss have been proposed for DP,
see for instance Rényi differential privacy (RDP) (Mironov,
2017), this flexibility is lacking in Pufferfish privacy. As
a result, previous work on the design of Pufferfish mechanisms has focused on specific noise distributions and applications (Kifer & Machanavajjhala, 2014; Ou et al., 2018;
Kessler et al., 2015; Niu et al., 2019; Song et al., 2017).
For instance, Song et al. (2017) proposed the Wasserstein
mechanism for the Laplace noise, which relies on the computation of ∞-Wasserstein distances. Another recent work
proposes an exponential mechanism-based approach which
provides a more computationally tractable approach but
relies on (potentially loose) sufficient conditions for Pufferfish privacy (Ding, 2022). The Pufferfish framework thus
lacks a unified theory that subsumes the original worst-case
definition and allows for the design of general additive mechanisms compatible with a wide range of noise distributions.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork & Roth, 2014) is now
considered as the gold standard for privacy-preserving data
analysis. However, despite its many desirable properties, DP
does not suit all types of data effectively. Specifically, the
guarantees it offers are based on the underlying assumption
that individuals in the dataset being analyzed are statistically
independent. In reality, data often exhibit correlations, and
when two correlated individuals are present in a dataset,
performing the same analysis with and without one of these
individuals could leak more knowledge about the individ1
Craft AI, Paris, France 2 Université de Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France 3 Inria,
Université de Montpellier. Correspondence to: Clément Pierquin
<clement.pierquin@craft-ai.fr>.

Another key limitation of Pufferfish privacy is that it does
not always compose when the same data is used across multiple computations. Existing sequential and adaptive compositions theorems hold only for some particular Pufferfish

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

