Reshape and Adapt for Output Quantization (RAOQ):
Quantization-aware Training for In-memory Computing Systems

Bonan Zhang 1 Chia-Yu Chen 1 2 Naveen Verma 1 2

Abstract

between human- and machine-generated content (OpenAI,
2023; Team et al., 2023). However, increasing AI capability has come from increasing model complexity, with a
sharp rise in both the number of compute operations and the
number of parameters, placing huge demands on hardware
resources (Villalobos et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022).

In-memory computing (IMC) has emerged as a
promising solution to address both computation
and data-movement challenges, by performing
computation on data in-place directly in the memory array. IMC typically relies on analog operation, which makes analog-to-digital converters
(ADCs) necessary, for converting results back to
the digital domain. However, ADCs maintain
computational efficiency by having limited precision, leading to substantial quantization errors
in compute outputs. This work proposes RAOQ
(Reshape and Adapt for Output Quantization) to
overcome this issue, which comprises two classes
of mechanisms including: 1) mitigating ADC
quantization error by adjusting the statistics of
activations and weights, through an activationshifting approach (A-shift) and a weight reshaping technique (W-reshape); 2) adapting AI models
to better tolerate ADC quantization through a bit
augmentation method (BitAug), complemented
by the introduction of ADC-LoRA, a low-rank
approximation technique, to reduce the training
overhead. RAOQ demonstrates consistently high
performance across different scales and domains
of neural network models for computer vision
and natural language processing (NLP) tasks at
various bit precisions, achieving state-of-the-art
results with practical IMC implementations.

This has driven the development of specialized hardware
architectures to accelerate AI model computations. While
digital accelerators have been widely deployed to improve
compute efficiency, they do not address the large amount of
data movement involved, which has been shown to pose a
critical energy and performance bottleneck in state-of-theart (SOTA) models (Verma et al., 2019). In-memory computing (IMC), on the other hand, performs computations in
place on stored data, providing an approach to simultaneously address both compute efficiency and data movement.
Analog IMC enhances computational efficiency over digital methods, benefiting advanced AI models (Houshmand
et al., 2023). However, a fundamental requirement of analog
IMC is the need for analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), to
provide compute outputs back to the digital domain. Importantly, ADCs introduce an additional source of quantization,
which can substantially degrade accuracy in SOTA AI models. The level of such quantization error is fundamentally set
by both the level of IMC parallelism and ADC resolution,
which also directly sets the energy efficiency and throughput
advantage. This is illustrated in Fig .1a, which compares
the energy efficiency of IMC against digital accelerators, derived from the literature (Murmann; Lee et al., 2021; Jouppi
et al., 2017). While IMC presents a significant energy efficiency advantage over digital accelerators, the advantage
drops drastically as ADC precision is increased. Hence, it
is critical to overcome such effects of ADC quantization to
enable IMC efficiency in SOTA systems.

1. Introduction
Rapid advances in AI have greatly impacted various application domains, including computer vision, natural language
processing, speech, etc. Recent generative AI breakthroughs
have pushed the strength of AI even further, producing remarkably realistic and imaginative outputs, blurring the line

Unlike conventional quantizers, whose clipping/scaling parameters can be optimized during training, ADC quantization applies to analog compute results, where additional
processing is not feasible, precluding the use of quantizers and the optimization degrees of freedom they offer.
In other words, ADC quantization incurs a fixed predefined quantization step and clipping values. This key
attribute distinguishes ADC quantization from traditional

1
Princeton University, NJ, USA 2 EnCharge AI, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Bonan Zhang <bonanz@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

