How to Leverage Diverse Demonstrations in Offline Imitation Learning
Sheng Yue 1 Jiani Liu 1 Xingyuan Hua 1 Ju Ren 1 2 Sen Lin 3 Junshan Zhang 4 Yaoxue Zhang 1 2

Abstract

autonomous driving, where manually formulating a reward
function is challenging but historical human demonstrations
are readily available (Bojarski et al., 2016). Conventional
offline IL methods, such as Behavior Cloning (BC) (Pomerleau, 1988), often necessitate an expert dataset with sufficient coverage over the state-action space to combat error compounding (Rajaraman et al., 2020), which is prohibitively expensive for many real-world applications. Instead, a more realistic scenario might allow for a limited
expert dataset, coupled with substantial imperfect demonstrations sampled from unknown policies (Wu et al., 2019;
Xu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023). For example, autonomous
vehicle companies may possess modest high-quality data
from experienced drivers but can amass a wealth of mixedquality data from ordinary drivers. Effective utilization of
the imperfect demonstrations would significantly enhance
the robustness and generalization of offline IL.

Offline Imitation Learning (IL) with imperfect
demonstrations has garnered increasing attention
owing to the scarcity of expert data in many realworld domains. A fundamental problem in this
scenario is how to extract positive behaviors from
noisy data. In general, current approaches to the
problem select data building on state-action similarity to given expert demonstrations, neglecting
precious information in (potentially abundant) diverse state-actions that deviate from expert ones.
In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective
data selection method that identifies positive behaviors based on their resultant states – a more
informative criterion enabling explicit utilization
of dynamics information and effective extraction
of both expert and beneficial diverse behaviors.
Further, we devise a lightweight behavior cloning
algorithm capable of leveraging the expert and
selected data correctly. In the experiments, we
evaluate our method on a suite of complex and
high-dimensional offline IL benchmarks, including continuous-control and vision-based tasks.
The results demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance, outperforming existing methods on 20/21 benchmarks, typically by
2-5x, while maintaining a comparable runtime to
Behavior Cloning (BC).

A fundamental question raised in this scenario is: how can
we extract good behaviors from noisy data? To address this
question, several prior studies have attempted to explore
and imitate the imperfect behaviors that resemble expert
ones (Sasaki & Yamashina, 2021; Xu et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023). Nevertheless, due to the scarcity of expert data, such
approaches are ill-equipped to harness valuable information
in (potentially abundant) diverse behaviors that deviate from
limited expert demonstrations (see Section 3 for details). Of
course, a natural solution to incorporate these behaviors is
inferring a reward function and labeling all imperfect data,
subsequently engaging in an offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) process (Zolna et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021;
Yue et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023; Cideron et al., 2023).
Unfortunately, it is highly challenging to define and learn
meaningful reward functions without environmental interaction. As a consequence, current offline reward learning
methods typically rely on complex adversarial optimization
using a learned world model. They easily suffer from hyperparameter sensitivity, learning instability, and limited
scalability in practical and high-dimensional environments.

1. Introduction
Offline Imitation Learning (IL) is the study of learning from
demonstrations with no reinforcement signals or interaction
with the environment. It has been deemed as a promising
solution for safety-sensitive domains like healthcare and
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing,
China 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Houston,
Texas, US 4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Davis, US. Correspondence to: Ju Ren
<renju@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we introduce a simpler data selection principle to fully exploit positive diverse behaviors in imperfect
demonstrations without indirect reward learning procedures.
Specifically, instead of examining a behavior’s similarity to
expert demonstrations in and of itself, we assess its value
based on whether its resultant states, to which environment

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

