Harmonizing Generalization and Personalization
in Federated Prompt Learning

Tianyu Cui 1 Hongxia Li 1 Jingya Wang 1 Ye Shi 1 *

Abstract

data privacy. In this context, the ability of large pre-trained
Vision-Language models (VLM) like CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) to learn transferable representations across downstream tasks makes them a natural
fit for integration with federated learning. This collaborative
approach not only harnesses the outstanding performance
and generalization capabilities of pre-trained models but
also ensures efficient and privacy-preserving global model
training across multiple clients. However, due to the millions of parameters in VLM, fine-tuning the entire model in
federated learning leads to high communication costs and
memory footprint issues. Prompt tuning addresses these
challenges by adapting pre-trained models to diverse downstream tasks with a reduced parameter count, and its integration of federated learning has been explored in previous
research (Zhao et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2023b). We term
the combination of prompt-tuning and federated learning
as Federated Prompt Learning (FPL) for simplicity. Currently, studies in FPL have not been thoroughly explored
in terms of personalization and generalization. Methods
derived from traditional federated learning studies fail to
capture the multi-modality of VLM, which hinders a direct
transfer of these methods into FPL.

Federated Prompt Learning (FPL) incorporates
large pre-trained Vision-Language models (VLM)
into federated learning through prompt tuning.
The transferable representations and remarkable
generalization capacity of VLM make them
highly compatible with the integration of federated learning. Addressing data heterogeneity in
federated learning requires personalization, but
excessive focus on it across clients could compromise the model’s ability to generalize effectively.
To preserve the impressive generalization capability of VLM, it is crucial to strike a balance between personalization and generalization in FPL.
To tackle this challenge, we proposed Federated
Prompt Learning with CLIP Generalization and
low-rank Personalization (FedPGP), which employs pre-trained CLIP to provide knowledgeguidance on the global prompt for improved generalization and incorporates a low-rank adaptation
term to personalize the global prompt. Further,
FedPGP integrates a prompt-wise contrastive loss
to achieve knowledge guidance and personalized
adaptation simultaneously, enabling a harmonious
balance between personalization and generalization in FPL. We conduct extensive experiments on
various datasets to explore base-to-novel generalization in both category-level and domain-level
scenarios with heterogeneous data, showing the
superiority of FedPGP in balancing generalization
and personalization.

In federated learning, it is essential to account for the generalization capability to unseen domains or categories. However, existing studies in FL, like (Nguyen et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021), have struggled to achieve
satisfactory results in evaluating generalization on target
datasets in unseen domains. With the help of VLM which
has strong generalization performance, this problem may be
solved. Unfortunately, the generalization issues in promptbased VLM have been revealed in recent research (Khattak
et al., 2023a;b). For instance, CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b)
struggles with generalizing to unseen categories within the
same dataset due to overfitting, resulting in lower test accuracy on novel categories compared to the zero-shot CLIP
baseline with a handcrafted prompt. PromptSRC (Khattak
et al., 2023b) addresses this issue with self-regularization
constraints, maximizing the mutual agreement between
prompted and frozen VLM features. However, the generalization of FPL is still an open challenge. FedTPG (Qiu
et al., 2023) takes a step toward exploring generalization
by learning a unified prompt generation network among

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (McMahan et al., 2017) has been proposed as an efficient collaborative learning strategy, enabling clients to jointly train a global model while preserving
1
ShanghaiTech University. Correspondence to: Ye Shi
<shiye@shanghaitech.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

