Interpretable Deep Clustering for Tabular Data

Jonathan Svirsky 1 Ofir Lindenbaum 1

Abstract

disease subtypes based on molecular or genetic data. In
psychology, based on survey data, clustering can identify
different types of behavior or personality traits.

Clustering is a fundamental learning task widely
used as a first step in data analysis. For example, biologists use cluster assignments to analyze
genome sequences, medical records, or images.
Since downstream analysis is typically performed
at the cluster level, practitioners seek reliable and
interpretable clustering models. We propose a
new deep-learning framework for general domain
tabular data that predicts interpretable cluster assignments at the instance and cluster levels. First,
we present a self-supervised procedure to identify
the subset of the most informative features from
each data point. Then, we design a model that
predicts cluster assignments and a gate matrix that
provides cluster-level feature selection. Overall,
our model provides cluster assignments with an indication of the driving feature for each sample and
each cluster. We show that the proposed method
can reliably predict cluster assignments in biological, text, image, and physics tabular datasets.
Furthermore, using previously proposed metrics,
we verify that our model leads to interpretable
results at a sample and cluster level. Our code is
available on Github.

Clustering is a common technique used in bio-medicine to
analyze gene expression data. It involves identifying groups
of genes that have similar expression patterns across different samples. Scientists often cluster high-dimensional
points corresponding to individual cells to recover known
cell populations and discover new, potentially rare cell types.
However, bio-med gene expression data is generally represented in a tabular, high-dimensional format, making it
difficult to obtain accurate clusters with meaningful structures. In addition, interpretability is a crucial requirement
for real-world bio-med datasets since it is essential to understand the biological meaning behind the identified clusters.
As a result, there is an increasing demand in bio-medicine
for clustering models that offer interpretability for tabular
data.
In bio-medicine, clustering is widely used to analyze gene
expression data, where cluster assignments can identify
groups of genes with similar expression patterns across different samples (Armingol et al., 2021). When applied to
single-cell omics data (Wang & Bodovitz, 2010), clustering
recovers known cell populations while discovering new and
perhaps rare cell types (Deprez et al., 2020). Unfortunately,
such bio-med gene expression data types are generally represented in a tabular, high-dimensional format, making it difficult to obtain accurate clusters with meaningful structures.
In addition, interpretability is a crucial requirement for realworld bio-med datasets since it is essential to understand
the biological meaning behind the identified clusters (Yang
et al., 2021). As a result, there is an increasing demand in
bio-medicine for clustering models that offer interpretability
for tabular data.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a crucial task in data science that helps
researchers uncover and study latent structures in complex data. By grouping related data points into clusters,
researchers can gain insights into the underlying characteristics of the data and identify relationships between samples
and variables. Clustering is used in various scientific fields,
including biology (Reddy et al., 2018), physics (Mikuni &
Canelli, 2021), and social sciences (Varghese et al., 2010).
For instance, in biology, clustering can identify different

Interpretability in machine learning refers to the ability to understand and explain the predictions and decisions
made by predictive models. It is critical for the proper
deployment of machine learning systems, especially in applications where transparency and accountability are essential. Interpretability can take different forms, including
interpretable model structure, identification of feature importance for model predictions, visualization of data, and
generation of explanations for the prediction. In this work,

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Engineering, Bar
Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Jonathan Svirsky <svirskj@biu.ac.il>, Ofir Lindenbaum
<ofir.lindenbaum@biu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

