Video-of-Thought: Step-by-Step Video Reasoning from Perception to Cognition

Hao Fei 1 Shengqiong Wu 1 Wei Ji 1 Hanwang Zhang 2 Meishan Zhang 3 Mong Li Lee 1 Wynne Hsu 1
Question: What will happen to the red oil tanker truck?

Abstract
Existing research of video understanding still
struggles to achieve in-depth comprehension and
reasoning in complex videos, primarily due to
the under-exploration of two key bottlenecks:
fine-grained spatial-temporal perceptive understanding and cognitive-level video scene comprehension. This paper bridges the gap by
presenting a novel solution. We first introduce a novel video Multimodal Large Language
Model (MLLM), MotionEpic, which achieves
fine-grained pixel-level spatial-temporal video
grounding by integrating video spatial-temporal
scene graph (STSG) representation. Building
upon MotionEpic, we then develop a Video-ofThought (VoT) reasoning framework. VoT inherits the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) core, breaking
down a complex task into simpler and manageable
sub-problems, and addressing them step-by-step
from a low-level pixel perception to high-level
cognitive interpretation. Extensive experiments
across various complex video QA benchmarks
demonstrate that our overall framework strikingly
boosts existing state-of-the-art. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt at successfully implementing the CoT technique for achieving humanlevel video reasoning, where we show great potential in extending it to a wider range of video
understanding scenarios. The project is open at
https://haofei.vip/VoT.

2 Tracking objects temporally
blue truck red oil truck

car

1 Determining the target fine-grainedly
Answer:
Being on fire
and explosion.

collided

Oil is a highly flammable
substance. A collision
could lead to a rupture in
the tanker's storage, and if
there's an ignition source,...

Commonsense

4 In-depth reasoning with commonsense

red oil truck

car

action
3 Understanding
scene semantics

Figure 1: Human-like video reasoning intuitively follows
a multi-step procedure, from lower-level perceptive finegrained pixel grounding and tracking, to higher-level cognitive action scene semantics understanding.
et al., 2021), mostly they fall prey to the type of straightforward perceptual-level understanding, i.e., for simple videos
(Zolfaghari et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2019). And there remains
a significant gap in research concerning comprehending and
reasoning about complex videos in depth, an imperative
capability urgently needed in real-world applications. Compared to shallow video perception, reasoning about complex
videos poses greater challenges: it demands not only an
intricate understanding of the video’s spatiotemporal characteristics (Caballero et al., 2017), but also a profound grasp
of the underlying implications behind pixels.
Drawing from human cognition patterns, we mark that reasoning about videos, especially for the complex ones, requires superior mastery in two points: perceptual capability
of pixel understanding and cognitive ability for semantic understanding. Firstly, to achieve precise content perception,
a fine-grained perceptive pixel understanding of the video
movement is necessary. Most existing video understanding
approaches focus on instance or patch-level analysis (Yuan
et al., 2021; Neimark et al., 2021), lacking the precision for
detailed granular control and accurate object-level recognition or tracking, let alone in-depth video comprehension.
Secondly, profound reasoning demands cognitive capabilities allowing reasonable explanation and even causal imagination, i.e., with a reservoir of commonsense knowledge
to link video pixels to the factual world. For example, understanding that jumping from a height can cause fractures,
or that colliding with a tanker truck can cause an explosion.

1. Introduction
Enabling learning models to accurately interpret video data
is one of the most paramount goals in the relevant community. In the current research, while there has been
extensive exploration into building models for video action and dynamics recognition (Lei et al., 2018; Bertasius
1 National University of Singapore, Singapore 2 Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore 3 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China.
Correspondence to: Meishan Zhang <zhangmeishan@hit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning,
Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

1

