Neural Tangent Kernels for Axis-Aligned Tree Ensembles

Ryuichi Kanoh 1 2 Mahito Sugiyama 1 2

Abstract

due to the axis-aligned constraint has a significant impact on
generalization performance, especially for tabular datasets.
However, although a number of machine learning models
have been proposed that are aware of axis-aligned partitioning (Chang et al., 2022; Humbird et al., 2019), it has not
been theoretically clear what properties emerge when the
axis-aligned constraints are imposed.

While axis-aligned rules are known to induce an
important inductive bias in machine learning models such as typical hard decision tree ensembles,
theoretical understanding of the learning behavior
is largely unrevealed due to the discrete nature of
rules. To address this issue, we impose the axisaligned constraint on soft trees, which relax the
splitting process of decision trees and are trained
using a gradient method, and present their Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK), which enables us to analytically describe the training behavior. We study
two cases: imposing the axis-aligned constraint
throughout the entire training process, and only
at the initial state. Moreover, we extend the NTK
framework to handle various tree architectures
simultaneously, and prove that any axis-aligned
non-oblivious tree ensemble can be transformed
into axis-aligned oblivious tree ensembles with
the same NTK. One can search for suitable tree
architecture via Multiple Kernel Learning (MKL),
and our numerical experiments show a variety
of suitable features depending on the type of constraints. Our NTK analysis highlights both the theoretical and practical impacts of the axis-aligned
constraint in tree ensemble learning.

In this paper, we consider ensemble learning of soft trees
to realize a differentiable analysis of axis-aligned splitting.
The concept of a soft tree is characterized by its ability to
adjust the parameters of the entire model through gradientbased optimization. Ensembles of soft trees are recognized
for their high empirical performance (Kontschieder et al.,
2015; Popov et al., 2020; Hazimeh et al., 2020). Furthermore, the differentiability of soft trees allows for integration
with various deep learning methodologies, such as finetuning (Ke et al., 2019), pre-training (Arik & Pfister, 2021),
dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), and various stochastic gradient descent methods (Kingma & Ba, 2015; Foret et al.,
2021), resulting in desirable traits in real-world settings. Another advantage of soft trees is their interpretability (Frosst
& Hinton, 2017; Chang et al., 2022). Soft trees have also
been implemented in well-known open-source software such
as PyTorch Tabular (Joseph, 2021), and their practical application is thriving.
Recently, there has been progress in the theoretical analysis
of soft tree ensembles (Kanoh & Sugiyama, 2022; 2023)
using the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) framework (Jacot
et al., 2018), which provides analytical descriptions of ensemble learning with infinitely many soft trees, yielding
several non-trivial properties such as the existence of tree
architectures that have exactly the same training behavior
even if they are non-isomorphic. However, the current NTK
analysis assumes all the input features to be taken into account in each splitting process of soft trees, resulting in
oblique splitting boundaries. Therefore, it cannot directly
incorporate the axis-aligned constraint in its current state.

1. Introduction
One of the most practical machine learning techniques used
in real-world applications is ensemble learning. It combines
the outputs of multiple predictors, often referred to as weak
learners, to obtain reliable results for complex prediction
problems. A hard decision tree is commonly used as a weak
learner. Its inductive bias caused by the axis-aligned splitting of a feature space is considered to be important. For
example, Grinsztajn et al. (2022) experimentally demonstrated that the presence or absence of rotational invariance

In this paper, we extend the NTK concept to the axis-aligned
soft tree ensembles to uncover the theoretical properties
of the axis-aligned constraint. We have revised the basic
training methodology and gained several insights that go
beyond mere extensions of Kanoh & Sugiyama (2022; 2023)
through examining the obtained novel kernels.

1

National Institute of Informatics 2 The Graduate University
for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI. Correspondence to: Ryuichi
Kanoh <kanoh@nii.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

