Federated Combinatorial Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits

Fares Fourati 1 Mohamed-Slim Alouini 1 Vaneet Aggarwal 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) (Slivkins et al., 2019; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020) model online decision-making,
where at every time step, an agent plays an arm and observes its associated reward. In combinatorial MAB, the
agent can play a set of arms, instead of one arm, at each
time step and receive a reward for that selection. When
the agent only learns about the reward linked to the played
set, it is known as full-bandit feedback or bandit feedback.
If the agent gains additional insights into how each arm
contributes to the overall reward, it is called semi-bandit
feedback. Dealing with bandit feedback is more challenging
since agents have less knowledge than in the semi-bandit
feedback setting. In this work, we consider bandit feedback (Fourati et al., 2023a; Nie et al., 2023; Fourati et al.,
2024), which has several applications, such as recommender
systems, revenue maximization (Fourati et al., 2023a), influence maximization (Nie et al., 2023; Fourati et al., 2024),
and data summarization, as shown in this work.

This paper introduces a federated learning framework tailored for online combinatorial optimization with bandit feedback. In this setting, agents
select subsets of arms, observe noisy rewards
for these subsets without accessing individual
arm information, and can cooperate and share
information at specific intervals. Our framework transforms any offline resilient single-agent
(α − ϵ)-approximation
algorithm—having a com 

plexity of Õ ϵψβ , where the logarithm is omitted, for some function ψ and constant β—into
an online multi-agent algorithm with m communicating agents and an α-regret of no more than

2+β
1
1
Õ m− 3+β ψ 3+β T 3+β . Our approach not only
eliminates the ϵ approximation error but also ensures sublinear growth with respect to the time
horizon T and demonstrates a linear speedup
with an increasing number of communicating
agents. Additionally, the algorithm is notably
communication-efficient, requiring only a sublinear number
of communication rounds, quantified

β
as Õ ψT β+1 . Furthermore, the framework has
been successfully applied to online stochastic submodular maximization using various offline algorithms, yielding the first results for both singleagent and multi-agent settings and recovering specialized single-agent theoretical guarantees. We
empirically validate our approach to a stochastic
data summarization problem, illustrating the effectiveness of the proposed framework, even in
single-agent scenarios.

Federated learning (FL), an emerging machine learning
paradigm, involves collaborative learning among multiple
agents. In this process, selected agents share their local
updates with a central server, which then aggregates these
updates and sends the consolidated output back to each
participating agent (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2020; Hosseinalipour et al., 2020; Elgabli
et al., 2022; Fourati et al., 2023b). While the problem has
been studied in the context of continuous optimization, we
address combinatorial optimization (Korte et al., 2011) in
a federated online stochastic setting with bandit feedback.
For example, the multi-agent setting under consideration
can be applied to recommender systems, where each agent
aims to recommend a set of products and then shares its
findings with a server. We provide a general FL framework
to adapt combinatorial offline single-agent approximation
algorithms to online multi-agent settings, presenting the first
results for the regret bounds in this setup.

1

Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, KSA. 2 School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. Correspondence
to: Fares Fourati <fares.fourati@kaust.edu.sa>.

We consider a setting with m′ ≥ 1 agents connected through
a network. Among them, only a randomly selected subset of
m ≤ m′ agents can cooperate and share information in communication rounds, possibly through a server. This setup
accommodates scenarios of partial participation, which are
more practical in some real-world settings due to inherent

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

