PIDformer: Transformer Meets Control Theory

Tam Nguyen 1 César A. Uribe 1 Tan M. Nguyen † 2 Richard G. Baraniuk † 1

Abstract

tions (Zhang et al., 2019; Gulati et al., 2020). At the core
of transformers lies the self-attention mechanism, which
computes weighted averages of token representations within
a sequence based on the similarity scores between pairs of
tokens, thus capturing diverse syntactic and semantic relationships effectively (Cho et al., 2014; Parikh et al., 2016).
This flexibility in capturing relationships has been identified
as a key factor contributing to the success of transformers.

In this work, we address two main shortcomings of transformer architectures: input corruption
and rank collapse in their output representation.
We unveil self-attention as an autonomous statespace model that inherently promotes smoothness
in its solutions, leading to lower-rank outputs
and diminished representation capacity. Moreover, the steady-state solution of the model is
sensitive to input perturbations. We incorporate
a Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) closedloop feedback control system with a reference
point into the model to improve robustness and
representation capacity. This integration aims to
preserve high-frequency details while bolstering
model stability, rendering it more noise-resilient.
The resulting controlled state-space model is theoretically proven robust and adept at addressing the
rank collapse. Motivated by this control framework, we derive a novel class of transformers,
PID-controlled Transformer (PIDformer), aimed
at improving robustness and mitigating the rankcollapse issue inherent in softmax transformers.
We empirically evaluate the model for advantages and robustness against baseline transformers across various practical tasks, including object
classification, image segmentation, and language
modeling.

1.1. Background: Self-Attention
Given a sequence of tokens Xℓ := [xℓ (1), · · · , xℓ (N )]⊤ ,
Xℓ ∈ RN ×Dx , the query, key and value matrices at layer ℓ⊤
ℓ ⊤
ℓ ⊤
th are Qℓ = XWQ
; Kℓ = XWK
; and Vℓ = XWVℓ ,
ℓ
ℓ
respectively. The weight matrix WQ
, WK
∈ RDqk ×Dx
and WVℓ ∈ RD×Dx . The attention mechanism computes
the output of token i at layer ℓ-th as follows

uℓ (i) =

N
X



p
softmax q ℓ (i)⊤ kℓ (j)/ Dqk v ℓ (j), (1)

j=1

where q ℓ (i) is the row i-th of Qℓ and kℓ (j), v ℓ (j) are the
row j-th of Kℓ , Vℓ , respectively. The softmax function
computes the attention score between token i and j, for
all i, j = 1, . . . , N . The self-attention (1) is referred to as
softmax attention. Our work refers to a transformer that
uses softmax attention as a softmax transformer.

1. Introduction

Despite their remarkable success, transformers exhibit practical performance issues in their robustness and representation capacity. For example, recent studies (Mahmood et al.,
2021; Madry et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2022) have provided
empirical evidence of Vision Transformer’s susceptibility to
adversarial attacks and common input perturbations, such as
noise or blur. Additionally, deep transformer-based models
have been observed to suffer from rank-collapse in their
outputs, wherein token embeddings become increasingly
similar as the model depth increases (Shi et al., 2022; Dong
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). This issue severely constrains the representation capacity of transformers, hindering their performance in various tasks. Addressing these
issues is crucial for ensuring the reliability and effectiveness
of transformer models across different applications.

Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have shown remarkable achievements across various domains such as reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021a; Janner et al., 2021),
computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021b; Touvron et al.,
2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2021), natural language
processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Al-Rfou et al., 2019; Child
et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020) and other practical applica†
Co-last authors 1 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, USA 2 Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Tam Nguyen <mn72@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

