Accelerated Algorithms for Constrained Nonconvex-Nonconcave Min-Max
Optimization and Comonotone Inclusion

Yang Cai * 1 Argyris Oikonomou * 1 Weiqiang Zheng * 1

Abstract

there has been growing interest in nonconvex-nonconcave
min-max optimization problems within the machine learning and optimization community. This surge in attention is
attributed to a range of innovative applications of nonconvexnonconcave min-max such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (see (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al.,
2017)), adversarial examples (see (Madry et al., 2017)), robust optimization (see (Ben-Tal et al., 2009)), and reinforcement learning (see (Du et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2018)).

We study constrained comonotone min-max optimization, a structured class of nonconvexnonconcave min-max optimization problems, and
their generalization to comonotone inclusion. In
our first contribution, we extend the Extra Anchored Gradient (EAG) algorithm, originally proposed by Yoon & Ryu (2021) for unconstrained
min-max optimization, to constrained comonotone min-max optimization and comonotone inclusion,
 achieving an optimal convergence rate of
O T1 among all first-order methods. Additionally, we prove that the algorithm’s iterations converge to a point in the solution set. In our second
contribution, we extend the Fast Extra Gradient
(FEG) algorithm, as developed by Lee & Kim
(2021), to constrained comonotone min-max optimization and comonotone
inclusion, achieving

the same O T1 convergence rate. This rate is
applicable to the broadest set of comonotone inclusion problems yet studied in the literature. Our
analyses are based on simple potential function
arguments, which might be useful for analyzing
other accelerated algorithms.

Unfortunately, even finding a first-order stationary point is
generally intractable for nonconvex-nonconcave min-max
optimization problems (Daskalakis et al., 2021). In light
of this obstacle, recent research has shifted focus towards
classes of nonconvex-nonconcave min-max optimization
problems that exhibit more structure. One class that has
received extensive attention is the comonotone min-max optimization problem proposed by Bauschke et al. (2021) (see
Example 1 for the definition), which captures the convexconcave setting as a special case.
During the past few years, we have witnessed a series of
exciting advancements in comonotone min-max optimization (Diakonikolas et al., 2021; Pethick et al., 2022; Lee &
Kim, 2021; Yoon & Ryu, 2022; Sedlmayer et al., 2023; Cai
& Zheng, 2023a;b; Tran-Dinh, 2023; Gorbunov et al., 2023).
However, the algorithms proposed in these studies often
exhibit one or more of the following limitations: (a) they
suffer a sub-optimal convergence rate, (b) they only apply to
the unconstrained setting or (c) they lack point convergence
guarantees.2 Addressing these challenges, the primary goal
of our paper is to design algorithms that simultaneously
surmount all three of these limitations. More specifically,
we seek to answer the following question:

1. Introduction
Min-max optimization is a cornerstone in game theory, optimization, and online learning. While classical theoretical
studies have primarily focused on the convex-concave case,1
*
Authors are listed in alphabetical order 1 Department of
Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Cai <yang,cai@yale.edu>, Argyris
Oikonomou <argyris.oikonomou@yale.edu>, Weiqiang Zheng
<weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu>.

Question: Can we design algorithms for comonotone
min-max optimization that have (i) the optimal convergence rate in the constrained setting and (ii) point
convergence to the solution set?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
For closed convex sets X and Y, and a smooth function f (·, ·),
the corresponding min-max optimization problem is formulated
as: minx∈X maxy∈Y f (x, y),. A min-max optimization problem
is convex-concave when additionally, function f (·, ·) is convex in
x and concave y.

We provide an affirmative answer to this question. In particular, we design algorithms that exhibit the optimal convergence rate of O(1/T ) in the constrained setting for comonotone min-max optimization, and our algorithms are guar2

1

An algorithm has point convergence if its iterates has a limit.

