AND: Audio Network Dissection for Interpreting Deep Acoustic Models

Tung-Yu Wu * 1 Yu-Xiang Lin * 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 2

Abstract

Selvaraju et al., 2017; Chattopadhay et al., 2018), property
observation of layer-wise features (Pasad et al., 2021; 2023),
to neuron-level interpretations (Bau et al., 2017; Hernandez
et al., 2021; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023; Bills et al., 2023; Lee
et al., 2023; Anonymous, 2024; Bai et al., 2024).

Neuron-level interpretations aim to explain network behaviors and properties by investigating
neurons responsive to specific perceptual or structural input patterns. Although there is emerging
work in the vision and language domains, none
is explored for acoustic models. To bridge the
gap, we introduce AND, the first Audio Network
Dissection framework that automatically establishes natural language explanations of acoustic neurons based on highly-responsive audio.
AND features the use of LLMs to summarize
mutual acoustic features and identities among audio. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify AND’s precise and informative descriptions.
In addition, we demonstrate a potential use of
AND for audio machine unlearning by conducting
concept-specific pruning based on the generated
descriptions. Finally, we highlight two acoustic
model behaviors with analysis by AND: (i) models discriminate audio with a combination of basic
acoustic features rather than high-level abstract
concepts; (ii) training strategies affect model behaviors and neuron interpretability – supervised
training guides neurons to gradually narrow their
attention, while self-supervised learning encourages neurons to be polysemantic for exploring
high-level features.

Among them, neuron-level interpretation tools automatically
analyze the functionality of the neurons inside a model. One
classical strategy is to examine each neuron’s activation to
inputs with different perceptual, structural, and semantic
patterns (Hernandez et al., 2021; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023;
Kalibhat et al., 2023). Knowing neuron’s responsive features brings benefits to understanding fine-grained model
behaviors. For instance, FALCON (Kalibhat et al., 2023)
observes that a group of neurons with varied responsive features may together build a more concise and interpretable
feature; MILAN (Hernandez et al., 2021), which explains
neurons with natural language descriptions, finds that visual
neurons in shallow layers requires more adjectives to describe, and these neurons substantially affect model performance. In addition, neuron-level interpretability can also be
applied to tasks that require neuron-level knowledge, such
as LLM factual editing (Meng et al., 2022), anonymized
models auditing and spurious features editing (Hernandez
et al., 2021).
Nevertheless, current neuron-level interpretability frameworks are all designed for visual (Bau et al., 2017; Hernandez et al., 2021; Oikarinen & Weng, 2023; Bai et al.,
2024) and language modalities (Bills et al., 2023; Lee et al.,
2023), rendering them incompatible with acoustic models.
For example, some rely on external vision models such as
image segmentation (Bau et al., 2020) and CLIP (Oikarinen
& Weng, 2023). While sound event detection models (Nam
et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2024) could offer timestamp annotations analogous to pixel-wise image segmentation, current
models suffer from narrow detectable classes due to smaller
dataset scale (Turpault et al., 2019; Serizel et al., 2020).
This limitation also hinders the development of text-audio
constrastive models (Guzhov et al., 2022; Wu* et al., 2023),
causing difficulties for the direct transfer of previous interpretability tools from vision modality to audio modality.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success across various tasks. However, their inherent nature
of high non-linearity poses great challenges in understanding model behaviors and neuron functionalities. To tackle
this longstanding issue, several lines of work have attempted
to acquire deeper knowledge about DNNs, ranging from decision explanation for the input (Simonyan et al., 2013;
*

Equal contribution 1 National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 2 HDSI, UC San Diego, CA, USA. Correspondence to: TsuiWei Weng <lweng@ucsd.edu>.

Hence, to fill in the gap, in this paper we present AND,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our source code is available at https://github.com/TrustworthyML-Lab/Audio Network Dissection

1

