Self-Consistency Training for Density-Functional-Theory Hamiltonian Prediction

He Zhang 1 2 3 Chang Liu 2 Zun Wang 2 Xinran Wei 2 Siyuan Liu 2 3 Nanning Zheng 1 Bin Shao 2
Tie-Yan Liu 2
𝐸

Abstract

𝜖HOMO

Predicting the mean-field Hamiltonian matrix in
density functional theory is a fundamental formulation to leverage machine learning for solving
molecular science problems. Yet, its applicability
is limited by insufficient labeled data for training. In this work, we highlight that Hamiltonian
prediction possesses a self-consistency principle,
based on which we propose self-consistency training, an exact training method that does not require
labeled data. It distinguishes the task from predicting other molecular properties by the following
benefits: (1) it enables the model to be trained on
a large amount of unlabeled data, hence addresses
the data scarcity challenge and enhances generalization; (2) it is more efficient than running DFT
to generate labels for supervised training, since it
amortizes DFT calculation over a set of queries.
We empirically demonstrate the better generalization in data-scarce and out-of-distribution scenarios, and the better efficiency over DFT labeling.
These benefits push forward the applicability of
Hamiltonian prediction to an ever-larger scale.

෡𝜃 ℳ
𝐇
ℳ ≔ {𝒵, ℛ}

Self-consistency

𝜖LUMO

𝜖Δ
DFT initialization

⋯

Figure 1. Hamiltonian prediction is the task to use a machine learning model to predict the mean-field Hamiltonian matrix Ĥθ (M)
in density functional theory from a given molecular structure
M := {Z, R} specified by the atomic types Z and coordinates
R of atoms. It can derive various molecular properties, e.g., the
total energy E, the HOMO and LUMO energies ϵHOMO , ϵLUMO
and their gap ϵ∆ for the given molecule, and can also serve as
an accurate DFT initialization. We highlight in this work that the
task has a self-consistency principle (the blue loop arrow), which
allows training the model without labeled data.

is perhaps the most prevailing choice due to its balanced
accuracy and efficiency, but still hard to meet the demand in
industry. Encouraged by the impressive advancement in machine learning, researchers have trained machine learning
models on datasets with property labels to directly predict
properties of queried molecules (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014;
Chmiela et al., 2019; Chanussot et al., 2021). For each property, a separate model (at least a separate output module)
needs to be trained. A more fundamental formulation is to
predict the Hamiltonian matrix (Schütt et al., 2019), or more
precisely, the effective one-electron mean-field Hamiltonian
matrix, i.e., the Fock matrix in a DFT calculation after convergence. The Hamiltonian matrix can directly provide all
the properties that a DFT calculation can (Fig. 1), waiving
the need to specify the target property or train multiple models. Moreover, Hamiltonian prediction can also accelerate
running DFT by providing an accurate initialization.

1. Introduction
Calculating properties of molecules is the foundation for
a wide range of industry needs including drug design, protein engineering, and material discovery. The key to these
properties is the electronic structure in the molecule, for
which various computational methods are proposed. Density functional theory (DFT) (Hohenberg & Kohn, 1964;
Kohn & Sham, 1965; Perdew et al., 1996; Teale et al., 2022)
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, and Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Microsoft
Research AI for Science 3 These authors did this work during an
internship at Microsoft Research AI for Science. Correspondence
to: Chang Liu <changliu@microsoft.com>, Nanning Zheng
<nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn>.

Noticeable progress has been made for Hamiltonian prediction. Hegde & Bowen (2017) pioneered the direction using
kernel ridge regression to predict semi-empirical Hamiltonian for one-dimensional systems. Schütt et al. (2019)
then proposed a neural network model called SchNorb to
predict Hamiltonian for small molecules, which is further
enhanced for prediction efficiency by Gastegger et al. (2020).
Shmilovich et al. (2022) proposed to employ atomic orbital
features for Hamiltonian prediction. Noting that the Hamil-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

