High-dimensional Linear Bandits with Knapsacks

Wanteng Ma 1 Dong Xia 1 Jiashuo Jiang 2

Abstract

features, covariates) of rewards that we can observe are possibly high-dimensional, which significantly contribute to the
decision-making and motivate us to consider a variant of the
BwK problem, i.e., the contextual bandit with knapsacks
problem (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014). However, although the
contextual bandit with knapsacks problem has been extensively studied under different settings (Agrawal & Devanur,
2014; 2016; Immorlica et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022), previous studies largely neglect the inherent high dimensionality
of covariates, and in turn, incur regrets that depend polynomially on the large dimension d, making these methods less
feasible in the high-dimensional setting. This motivates us
to explore further the BwK problem in the high-dimensional
case, which is an emergent topic in online learning.

We study the contextual bandits with knapsack
(CBwK) problem under the high-dimensional setting where the dimension of the feature is large.
We investigate how to exploit the sparsity structure to achieve improved regret for the CBwK
problem. To this end, we first develop an online
variant of the hard thresholding algorithm that performs the optimal sparse estimation. We further
combine our online estimator with a primal-dual
framework, where we assign a dual variable to
each knapsack constraint and utilize an online
learning algorithm to update the dual variable,
thereby controlling the consumption of the knapsack capacity. We show that this integrated approach allows us to achieve a sublinear regret that
depends logarithmically on the feature dimension,
thus improving the polynomial dependency established in the previous literature. We also apply
our framework to the high-dimension contextual
bandit problem without the knapsack constraint
and achieve optimal regret in both the data-poor
regime and the data-rich regime.

In this paper, we address this challenge by proposing efficient methods to solve the high-dimensional linear contextual bandit with knapsacks problem. Our method consists of
two parts, primal estimation and dual-based allocation. We
will show that our online method in primal estimation can
achieve exact sparse recovery with optimal statistical error,
which is comparable with the renowned LASSO method but
with less computational cost. Together with dual allocation,
our primal-dual method can effectively
control the regret 
of

 UB  13 2
UB √
V
e V
BwK problem in the order O
T3 ,
Cmin T + Cmin

1. Introduction

which is logarithmically dependent on the dimension d.
Moreover, we
show that the regret can be further im also
√ 
V UB
e
proved to O Cmin T with additional diverse covariate
condition.

Introduced in the seminal paper (Badanidiyuru et al., 2013),
the bandit with knapsacks problem (BwK) is defined by
solving an online knapsack problem with global size constraints. This kind of problem is a special but important case
of the online allocation problem, which imposes a rewardagnostic assumption on resource allocations. The bandit
with knapsacks problem has been broadly applied to many
scenarios, e.g., ad allocation, dynamic pricing, repeated
auctions, etc. In fact, in several applications like online
recommendation or online advertising, many contexts (or

Our method also brings new insights into the general online
sparse estimation and sparse bandit problems. For the sparse
bandit problems, most of the existing literature heavily relies
on LASSO, which explores sparsity by regularized sample
average approximation. Although LASSO guarantees good
theoretical results, it is hard to perform in an online fashion.
In this paper, we solve the sparse recovery problem through
a novel stochastic approximation approach with hard thresholding, which is more aligned with online learning and is
also statistically optimal. This estimation algorithm leads to
a by-product, i.e., a unified sparse bandit algorithm framee 2/3 T 2/3 ) and
work that reaches desired optimal regrets O(s
0
√
e
O( s0 T ), in both data-poor and data-rich regimes respectively, which satisfies the so-called “the best of two worlds”

1

Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR 2 Department of Industrial
Engineering and Decision Analytics, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to:
Jiashuo Jiang <jsjiang@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

