GPT-4V(ision) is a Generalist Web Agent, if Grounded

Boyuan Zheng 1 Boyu Gou 1 Jihyung Kil 1 Huan Sun 1 Yu Su 1
https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/SeeAct

Abstract

Rent a truck near zip 08817 on December 10 at 11:30AM returned to the exact location and date.

LMM
Move the cursor over
the "Find Your Truck"
button located in the
central portion of the
webpage, just below the
input fields for rental
details, and perform a
click action.

The recent development on large multimodal models (LMMs), especially GPT-4V(ision) and Gemini, has been quickly expanding the capability
boundaries of multimodal models beyond traditional tasks like image captioning and visual question answering. In this work, we explore the potential of LMMs like GPT-4V as a generalist web
agent that can follow natural language instructions to complete tasks on any given website. We
propose S EE ACT, a generalist web agent that harnesses the power of LMMs for integrated visual
understanding and acting on the web. We evaluate
on the recent M IND 2W EB benchmark. In addition to standard offline evaluation on cached websites, we enable a new online evaluation setting by
developing a tool that allows running web agents
on live websites. We show that GPT-4V presents
a great potential for web agents—it can successfully complete 51.1% of the tasks on live websites if we manually ground its textual plans into
actions on the websites. This substantially outperforms text-only LLMs like GPT-4 or smaller
models (FLAN-T5 and BLIP-2) specifically finetuned for web agents. However, grounding still remains a major challenge. Existing LMM grounding strategies like set-of-mark prompting turns
out to be not effective for web agents, and the
best grounding strategy we develop in this paper leverages both the HTML structure and visuals. Yet, there is still a substantial gap with
oracle grounding, leaving ample room for further improvement. All code, data, and evaluation
tools are available at https://github.com/
OSU-NLP-Group/SeeAct.

Grounding
Element: <input id=19 button find your truck />
Operation: CLICK

SeeAct

Browser Event

Figure 1: S EE ACT leverages an LMM like GPT-4V to visually perceive websites and generate plans in textual forms.
The textual plans are then grounded onto the HTML elements and operations to act on the website.

1. Introduction
Large multimodal models (LMMs; Li et al. (2023); Alayrac
et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2023b)), especially recent ones
such as GPT-4V(ision) (OpenAI, 2023) and Gemini (Anil
et al., 2023), have shown a remarkable capability on
standard vision-and-language understanding and reasoning
benchmarks (Kazemzadeh et al., 2014; Goyal et al., 2016;
Hendrycks et al., 2020; Saikh et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022;
Zhong et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2023). While web content has
been a primary source of training data, a largely overlooked
part of the web is the websites themselves—every website
is designed to be rendered visually for easy consumption
by human users. This poses a new challenge and a new
opportunity for LMMs. On the one hand, screenshots of
rendered websites, which could contain thousands of elements with rich relations, are more complex than the images
in most existing benchmarks, which are usually object- or
scene-centric. On the other hand, if LMMs can accurately
comprehend websites, it will open the door for numerous
applications on the web.

1

The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. Correspondence to: Boyuan Zheng <zheng.2372@osu.edu>, Huan Sun
<sun.397@osu.edu>, Yu Su <su.809@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this work, we aim to investigate the potential of LMMs
1

