Swallowing the Bitter Pill: Simplified Scalable Conformer Generation

Yuyang Wang 1 Ahmed A. Elhag 1 2 Navdeep Jaitly 1 Joshua M. Susskind 1 Miguel Ángel Bautista 1

Abstract

is the vast complexity of the 3D structure space, encompassing factors such as bond lengths and torsional angles.
Despite the molecular graph dictating potential 3D conformers through specific constraints, such as bond types and
spatial arrangements determined by chiral centers, the conformational space experiences exponential growth with the
expansion of the graph size and the number of rotatable
bonds (Axelrod & Gomez-Bombarelli, 2022). This complicates brute force and exhaustive approaches, making them
virtually unfeasible for even moderately small molecules.

We present a novel way to predict molecular
conformers through a simple formulation that
sidesteps many of the heuristics of prior works
and achieves state of the art results by using the
advantages of scale. By training a diffusion generative model directly on 3D atomic positions
without making assumptions about the explicit
structure of molecules (e.g. modeling torsional
angles) we are able to radically simplify structure learning, and make it trivial to scale up the
model sizes. This model, called Molecular Conformer Fields (MCF), works by parameterizing
conformer structures as functions that map elements from a molecular graph directly to their 3D
location in space. This formulation allows us to
boil down the essence of structure prediction to
learning a distribution over functions. Experimental results show that scaling up the model capacity
leads to large gains in generalization performance
without enforcing inductive biases like rotational
equivariance. MCF represents an advance in extending diffusion models to handle complex scientific problems in a conceptually simple, scalable
and effective manner.

Systematic methods, like OMEGA (Hawkins et al., 2010),
offer rapid processing through rule-based generators and
curated torsion templates. Despite their efficiency, these
models typically fail on complex molecules, as they often overlook global interactions and are tricky to extend to
inputs like transition states or open-shell molecules. Classic stochastic methods, like molecular dynamics (MD) and
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), rely on extensively exploring the energy landscape to find low-energy conformers.
Such techniques suffer from sampling inefficiency for large
molecules and struggle to generate diverse representative
conformers (Hawkins, 2017; Wilson et al., 1991; Grebner
et al., 2011). In the domain of learning-based approaches,
several works have looked at conformer generation problems through the lens of probabilistic modeling, using either
normalizing flows (Xu et al., 2021a) or diffusion models
(Xu et al., 2022; Jing et al., 2022). These approaches tend to
use equivariant network architectures to deal with molecular
graphs (Xu et al., 2022) or model domain-specific factors
like torsional angles (Ganea et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2022).
However, explicitly enforcing these domain-specific inductive biases come at a cost. For example, Torsional Diffusion models rely on rule-based methods to find rotatable
bonds which may fail especially for complex molecules.
Ultimately, the quality of generated conformers is destined
to suffer from errors of the non-differentiable cheminformatic methods used to predict local substructures. On the
other hand, recent works have proposed domain-agnostic approaches for generative modeling of data in function space
(Du et al., 2021; Dupont et al., 2022b;a; Zhuang et al., 2023)
obtaining great performance. As an example, Zhuang et al.
(2023) use a diffusion model to learn a distribution over
functions f , showing great results on different data domains
like images (i.e. f : R2 → R3 ) or 3D geometry (i.e.

1. Introduction
In this paper we tackle the problem of molecular conformer
generation, i.e. predicting the diverse low-energy threedimensional conformers of molecules. Molecular conformer
generation is a fundamental problem in computational drug
discovery and chemo-informatics, where understanding the
intricate interactions between molecular and protein structures in 3D space is critical, affecting aspects such as charge
distribution, potential energy, etc. (Batzner et al., 2022).
The core challenge associated with conformer generation
1

Apple 2 Work was completed while A.A.E was an intern with
Apple. Correspondence to: {yuyang wang4, aa elhag, njaitly,
jsusskind, mbautistamartin}@apple.com.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

