From Words to Actions: Unveiling the Theoretical Underpinnings of
LLM-Driven Autonomous Systems
Jianliang He * 1 Siyu Chen * 2 Fengzhuo Zhang 3 Zhuoran Yang 2

Abstract

to their striking capabilities in understanding language and
performing complex reasoning tasks. These capabilities
of LLMs have led to the emergence of LLM-empowered
agents (LLM Agents), where LLMs are used in conjunction with tools or actuators to solve decision-making problems in the physical world. LLM Agents have showcased
promising empirical successes in a wide range of applications, including autonomous driving (Wang et al., 2023b;
Fu et al., 2024), robotics (Brohan et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023a), and personal assistance (Liu et al., 2023; Nottingham et al., 2023). This progress signifies a crucial advancement in the creation of intelligent decision-making
systems, distinguished by a high degree of autonomy and
seamless human-AI collaboration.

In this work, from a theoretical lens, we aim
to understand why large language model (LLM)
empowered agents are able to solve decisionmaking problems in the physical world. To this
end, consider a hierarchical reinforcement learning (RL) model where the LLM Planner and the
Actor perform high-level task planning and lowlevel execution, respectively. Under this model,
the LLM Planner navigates a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) by iteratively generating language-based subgoals via
prompting. Under proper assumptions on the
pretraining data, we prove that the pretrained
LLM Planner effectively performs Bayesian aggregated imitation learning (BAIL) through incontext learning. Additionally, we highlight the
necessity for exploration beyond the subgoals derived from BAIL by proving that naively executing the subgoals returned by LLM leads to
a linear regret. As a remedy, we introduce an
󰂃-greedy exploration strategy to BAIL, which is
proven to incur sublinear regret when the pretraining error is small. Finally, we extend our
theoretical framework to include scenarios where
the LLM Planner serves as a world model for inferring the transition model of the environment
and to multi-agent settings, enabling coordination among multiple Actors.

LLMs only take natural languages as input. To bridge the
language and physical domains, LLM-agents typically incorporate three critical components: an LLM Planner, a
physical Actor, and a multimodal Reporter, functioning respectively as the brain, hands, and eyes of the LLM-agent,
respectively. Specifically, upon receiving a task described
by a human user, the LLM Planner breaks down the overall task into a series of subgoals. Subsequently, the Actor implements each subgoal in the physical world through
a sequence of actions. Meanwhile, the Reporter monitors
changes in the physical world and conveys this information back to the LLM Planner in natural language form.
This dynamic interaction among Planner, Actor, and Reporter empowers LLM Agents to understand the environment, formulate informed decisions, and execute actions
effectively, thus seamlessly integrating high-level linguistic subgoals with low-level physical task execution.

1. Introduction

The revolutionary approach of LLM Agents represents
a paradigm shift away from traditional learning-based
decision-making systems. Unlike these conventional systems, LLM Agents are not tailored to any specific task. Instead, they rely on the synergy of their three distinct componentseach trained separately and often for different objectives. In particular, the LLM Planner is trained to predict
the next token in a sequence on vast document data. Moreover, when deployed to solve a task, the way to interact
with the LLM Planner is via prompting with the LLM fixed.
The Actor, as language-conditioned policies, can be trained

The advent of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023) and Llama 2 (Touvron et al., 2023) has
marked a significant leap in artificial intelligence, thanks
*
Equal contribution 1 Fudan University 2 Yale University
National University of Singapore. Correspondence to: Jianliang He <hejl20@fudan.edu.cn>, Zhuoran Yang <zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

