ByMI: Byzantine Machine Identification with False Discovery Rate Control

Chengde Qian * 1 Mengyuan Wang * 1 Haojie Ren 2 Changliang Zou 1

Abstract

Such breaks in the distributed system are modeled as the
Byzantine failures (Lamport et al., 1982) and have serious
adverse effects on learning performance.

Various robust estimation methods or algorithms
have been proposed to hedge against Byzantine
failures in distributed learning. However, there is
a lack of systematic approaches to provide theoretical guarantees of significance in detecting those
Byzantine machines. In this paper, we develop a
general detection procedure, ByMI, via error rate
control to address this issue, which is applicable
to many robust learning problems. The key idea
is to apply the sample-splitting strategy on each
worker machine to construct a score statistic integrated with a general robust estimation and then
to utilize the symmetry property of those scores
to derive a data-driven threshold. The proposed
method is dimension insensitive and p-value free
with the help of the symmetry property and can
achieve false discovery rate control under mild
conditions. Numerical experiments on both synthetic and real data validate the theoretical results
and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method on Byzantine machine identification.

1.1. Motivation & Related Works
Byzantine robust learning. Recently, there is a great deal
of effort to develop distributed-learning algorithms with the
properties of Byzantine resilience and Byzantine robustness,
that are provably robust against Byzantine failures. Typically, the studies of Byzantine-robust distributed learning
focus on aggregating those workers’ messages, e.g. the averages of gradients, via some robust estimation algorithms
in the master machine. This has an intimate connection with
robust estimation in statistics literature (Shi et al., 2022).
A family of aggregation methods is replacing the simple
sample mean with robust location estimations. One popular choice is to take the median instead of the sample
mean, such as the coordinate-wise median and trimmed
mean (Yin et al., 2019; 2018), the geometric median (Chen
et al., 2017), and the coordinate-wise composite quantile (Tu
et al., 2021). However, those median-type algorithms suffer
a bias dependent on the dimension due to Byzantine failures. Some recent works adopt the computational-efficient
high-dimensional mean estimations to correct the bias term
to a dimension-agnostic one. For instance, Yin et al. (2019)
applies the filtering algorithm (Lai et al., 2016; Diakonikolas et al., 2017) as the aggregation rule and Zhu et al. (2023)
considers both the filtering algorithm and the first-order
approach (Cheng et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of the dataset size and the decentralization of data sources, distributed and federated learning,
where the worker machines locally preserve the data and
only communicate summarized information with the master machine, have received substantial attention (Kairouz
et al., 2021). In such a distributed learning system, there is
usually a small fraction of worker machines that send any
arbitrary information due to malicious attacks on worker
machines and communication channels, or the variation and
contamination in the data sources (Blanchard et al., 2017).
Those abnormal machines are called Byzantine machines.

Another direction is to detect and delete Byzantine machines
and further make estimations based on some reputation
scores which measure the trustworthiness of worker machines, such as Krum (Blanchard et al., 2017), FABA (Xia
et al., 2019) and Zeno (Xie et al., 2019). As commented
by Cheng et al. (2019), all of these methods suffer similar
dimension-dependent bias as the median-type algorithms.
That’s partly because those methods take the number of
Byzantine machines as predetermined and are unable to
give a significant guarantee against underestimation or overestimation, which may hamper their applicability.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Statistics and Data Sciences,
LPMC, KLMDASR and LEBPS, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence to: Haojie Ren <haojieren@sjtu.edu.cn>,
Changliang Zou <zoucl@nankai.edu.cn>.

Outlier detection methods. As discussed above, the identification of Byzantine machines plays an important role in
the resilience task but has received less attention. This is rel-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

