Longitudinal Targeted Minimum Loss-based Estimation with
Temporal-Difference Heterogeneous Transformer

Toru Shirakawa 1 2 Yi Li 2 Yulun Wu 2 Sky Qiu 2 Yuxuan Li 2
Mingduo Zhao 2 Hiroyasu Iso 1 3 Mark van der Laan 2

Abstract

total mortality (van der Laan & Robins, 2003; Salerno &
Li, 2023). Estimating the counterfactual probability of the
event is challenging in high-dimensional longitudinal settings. Existing methods suffer computationally due to lack
of scalability and have worse performance due to curse-ofdimensionality (Wyss et al., 2022). In response, we propose
an estimator that is computationally scalable and simultaneously allows for robust statistical inference. Our estimator
incorporates a transformer architecture for estimating the
target estimand, defined as the cumulative incidence probability under dynamic interventions, where the treatment
sequence depends on patients’ evolving histories. The target
estimand can be identified through the g-formula contingent
upon suitable assumptions (Robins, 1986). However, the
target functional involves integration over potentially highdimensional time-dependent covariates across time-horizon,
posing computational challenges. Our method advances
the longitudinal targeted minimum loss-based estimation
(LTMLE) framework (van der Laan & Gruber, 2012; Lendle
et al., 2017) by leveraging the computational capabilities
of the transformer, facilitating the estimation of the target
estimand and relevant nuisance parameters.

We propose Deep Longitudinal Targeted Minimum Loss-based Estimation (Deep LTMLE), a
novel approach to estimate the mean of counterfactual outcome under dynamic treatment policies
in longitudinal problem settings. Our approach
utilizes a transformer architecture with heterogeneous type embedding trained using temporaldifference learning. After obtaining an initial estimate using the transformer, following the targeted minimum loss-based likelihood estimation
(TMLE) framework, we statistically corrected for
the bias commonly associated with machine learning algorithms. Furthermore, our method also
facilitates statistical inference by enabling the provision of 95% confidence intervals grounded in
asymptotic statistical theory. Simulation results
demonstrate our method’s superior performance
over existing approaches, particularly in complex,
long time-horizon scenarios. It remains effective
in small-sample, short-duration contexts, matching the performance of asymptotically efficient estimators. To demonstrate our method in practice,
we applied our method to estimate counterfactual mean outcomes for standard versus intensive
blood pressure management strategies in a realworld cardiovascular epidemiology cohort study.

A number of estimators for the target estimand were proposed since the pioneering work by Robins (Robins, 1986).
These estimators first factor the target parameter as a functional of nuisance parameters given a structural assumption
on the underlying variables. Then, a common strategy to
construct an estimator is plug-in, where one estimate the
nuisance components with some models and then plug them
into the target functional. However, since the naive plugin of the estimated nuisance components causes bias, several methods have been proposed to remove this bias using
the first variation of the target functional called influence
function. Examples of such debiasing techniques include
one-step estimators (Klaassen, 1987; Bickel et al., 1993),
estimating equations (Robins et al., 1994; Chernozhukov
et al., 2022), and targeted minimum loss-based estimation
(TMLE) (van der Laan & Rose, 2011). Notably, due to its
plug-in property, TMLE stands out because it will respect
any conditional bounds on the outcome or global bounds
on the statistical model, resulting in improved finite-sample
performance (Gruber & van der Laan, 2012).

1. Introduction
In the fields of medicine and public health, researchers frequently encounter data that are both high-dimensional and
longitudinal. The outcomes of interest in these settings often
involve time to the incidence of some failure event, such as
1
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan
Univerity of California, Berkeley, United States 3 National Center
for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Toru Shirakawa <shirakawa@pbhel.med.osaka-u.ac.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

