EvIL: Evolution Strategies for Generalisable Imitation Learning

Silvia Sapora 1 Gokul Swamy 2 Chris Lu 1 Yee Whye Teh 1 Jakob Nicolaus Foerster 1

Abstract

simply wanted to predict the path usually taken between
some start node s1 and some goal node s2 , we could collect
data of drivers navigating between these two points and
learn a policy by regressing from their states to their actions,
an approach known as behavioural cloning (BC, Pomerleau
(1988)). As we’d need to learn an action at each state, this
would require learning |S||A| parameters. Now, let’s say
we wanted to learn the path taken between the same start
node s1 and some new goal node s3 . We’d need to repeat
this entire procedure once again. Thus, to learn how to
navigate from one goal to all destinations, a policy-centric
approach like BC would need |S|2 |A| parameters. In contrast, a reward-centric approach to imitation like inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL, Ziebart et al. (2008a)) would
simply require learning the |S||A| parameters of the underlying reward function from expert data and then could be
optimised to find the shortest path between any two nodes
in the graph. This ability to learn a compact representation
that generalises well across multiple tasks / environments
was one of the key reasons IRL was developed in the first
place. Indeed, as Ng et al. (2000) put it, “the entire field of
reinforcement learning is founded on the presupposition that
the reward function, rather than the policy is the most succinct, robust, and transferable definition of the task”. This
intuition remains true in the modern day, perhaps explaining
why robust real-world mapping services like Google Maps
are build on top of the bedrock of IRL (Barnes et al., 2023).

Often times in imitation learning (IL), the environment we collect expert demonstrations in and the
environment we want to deploy our learned policy
in aren’t exactly the same (e.g. demonstrations
collected in simulation but deployment in the real
world). Compared to policy-centric approaches
to IL like behavioural cloning, reward-centric
approaches like inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) often better replicate expert behaviour in
new environments. This transfer is usually performed by optimising the recovered reward under
the dynamics of the target environment. However, (a) we find that modern deep IL algorithms
frequently recover rewards which induce policies
far weaker than the expert, even in the same environment the demonstrations were collected in.
Furthermore, (b) these rewards are often quite
poorly shaped, necessitating extensive environment interaction to optimise effectively. We provide simple and scalable fixes to both of these
concerns. For (a), we find that reward model ensembles combined with a slightly different training objective significantly improves re-training
and transfer performance. For (b), we propose a
novel evolution-strategies based method (EvIL)
to optimise for a reward-shaping term that speeds
up re-training in the target environment, closing a
gap left open by the classical theory of IRL. On a
suite of continuous control tasks, we are able to retrain policies in target (and source) environments
more interaction-efficiently than prior work.

If we look at classical IRL algorithms like Maximum Entropy IRL (Ziebart et al., 2008a) or LEARCH (Ratliff et al.,
2009), they usually have a double loop structure. In the
outer loop, one trains a discriminator to solve a classification problem between learner and expert trajectories. The
discriminator is then used as a reward function in the inner
loop, where the learner optimises this adversarially chosen
reward function via reinforcement learning. Observe that
because we are actually optimising the reward function to
completion in each inner loop iteration, we have reason to
believe we will be able to retrain effectively from scratch,
a point borne out in practice across a wide variety of disciplines (e.g. in robotics (Silver et al., 2010; Ratliff et al.,
2009; Kolter et al., 2008; Ng et al., 2006; Zucker et al.,
2011), computer vision (Kitani et al., 2012), and humancomputer interaction (Ziebart et al., 2008b; 2012)).

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of predicting driver behaviour across
a network of roads. Let’s say there are |S| nodes in our
routing graph and |A| roads going out of each node. If we
1
University of Oxford, UK 2 Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
Correspondence to: Silvia Sapora <silvia.sapora@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

More modern approaches to IRL like GAIL (Ho & Ermon,
1

