Two-timescale Derivative Free Optimization for Performative Prediction with
Markovian Data
Haitong Liu 1 Qiang Li 2 Hoi-To Wai 2

Abstract

loss function L(θ) is known as the performative risk which
captures the distributional shift due to changes in the deployed model. This setting is motivated by the recent studies
on performative prediction (Perdomo et al., 2020), which
considers outcomes Z that are supported by the deployed
model θ. For example, it covers strategic classification
(Hardt et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2018) in economics and
financial practices such as with the training of loan classifier for customers who may react to the deployed model θ
to maximize their gains; or in price promotion mechanism
(Zhang et al., 2018) where customers react to prices with
the aim of gaining a lower price; or in ride sharing business (Narang et al., 2022) with customers who adjust their
demand according to prices set by the platform.

This paper studies the performative prediction
problem where a learner aims to minimize the
expected loss with a decision-dependent data distribution. Such setting is motivated when outcomes can be affected by the prediction model,
e.g., strategic classification. We consider a statedependent setting where the data distribution
evolves according to a controlled Markov chain.
We focus on stochastic derivative free optimization (DFO) where the learner is given access to
a loss function evaluation oracle with the above
Markovian data. We propose a two-timescale
DFO(λ) algorithm that features (i) a sample accumulation mechanism that utilizes every observed
sample to estimate the gradient of performative
risk, (ii) a two-timescale diminishing step size that
balances the rates of DFO updates and bias reduction. Under a non-convex optimization setting, we
show that DFO(λ) requires O(1/3 ) samples (up
to a log factor) to attain a near-stationary solution
with expected squared gradient norm less than .
Numerical experiments verify our analysis.

Due to the effects of θ on both the loss function and distribution, the objective function L(θ) is non-convex in general.
Numerous efforts have focused on characterizing and finding the so-called performative stable solution which is a
fixed point to the repeated risk minimization (RRM) process
(Perdomo et al., 2020; Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020; Brown
et al., 2022; Li & Wai, 2022; Roy et al., 2022; Drusvyatskiy
& Xiao, 2022). While RRM might be a natural algorithm
for scenarios when the learner is agnostic to the performative effects in the dynamic data distribution, the obtained
solution maybe far from being optimal or stationary to (1).

1. Introduction

On the other hand, recent works have studied how to approximate performative optimal solutions that minimizes
(1). This is challenging due to the non-convexity of L(θ)
and more importantly, the absence of knowledge of Πθ . In
fact, evaluating ∇L(θ) or its stochastic gradient estimate
would require learning the distribution Πθ a-priori (Izzo
et al., 2021). To design a tractable procedure, prior works
have assumed additional structures for (1) such as approximating Πθ by Gaussian mixture (Izzo et al., 2021), Πθ
depends linearly on θ (Narang et al., 2022), etc., combined
with a two-phase algorithm that separately learns Πθ and optimizes θ. Other works have assumed a mixture dominance
structure (Miller et al., 2021) on the combined effect of Πθ
and `(·) on L(θ), which in turn implies that L(θ) is convex.
Based on this assumption, a derivative free optimization
(DFO) algorithm was analyzed in (Ray et al., 2022); also see
the variants of this condition when used in different settings
(Wood & Dall’Anese, 2023; Zhu et al., 2023). In addition,

Consider the following stochastic optimization problem
with decision-dependent data:


min L(θ) = EZ∼Πθ `(θ; Z) .
(1)
θ∈Rd

Notice that the decision variable θ appears in both the loss
function `(θ; Z) and the data distribution Πθ (denoted by
D(θ) in some prior literature) supported on Z. The overall
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. The research was primarily conducted as a student at The Chinese
University of Hong Kong. 2 Department of System Engineering
and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Hoi-To Wai <htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

