Bridging Data Gaps in Diffusion Models
with Adversarial Noise-Based Transfer Learning

Xiyu Wang 1 Baijiong Lin 2 Daochang Liu 1 Ying-Cong Chen 2 Chang Xu 1

Abstract

utilizing vast amounts of unlabeled data for training. Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021), which
are designed to replicate data distributions by learning to
invert multistep noise procedures, have recently experienced
significant advancements, enabling the generation of highdefinition images with broad diversity. Although DPMs
have emerged as a potent tool for image generation with
remarkable results in terms of both quality and diversity,
modern DPMs heavily rely on extensive amounts of data
to train the large-scale parameters of their networks (Cao
et al., 2022). This dependency can lead to overfitting and
a failure to generate diverse and high-quality images with
limited training data. Additionally, diffusion sampling with
guidance struggles to generate images with a large domain
gap. Unfortunately, gathering sufficient data is not always
feasible in certain situations.

Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) show significant potential in image generation, yet their
performance hinges on having access to large
datasets. Previous works, like Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), have tackled the limited
data problem by transferring pretrained models
learned with sufficient data. However, those methods are hard to utilize in DPMs because of the distinct differences between DPM-based and GANbased methods, which show the integral of the
unique iterative denoising process and the need
for many time steps with no target noise in DPMs.
In this paper, we propose a novel DPM-based
transfer learning method, called DPMs-ANT, to
address the limited data problem. It includes
two strategies: similarity-guided training, which
boosts transfer with a classifier, and adversarial
noise selection, which adaptively chooses targeted
noise based on the input image. Extensive experiments in the context of few-shot image generation tasks demonstrate that our method is efficient
and excels in terms of image quality and diversity
compared to existing GAN-based and DPM-based
methods.

Transfer learning can be an effective solution to this challenge, as it applies knowledge from a pretrained generative
model trained on a large dataset to a smaller one. The fundamental idea is to begin training with a source model that
has been pre-trained on a large dataset, and then adapt it to
a target domain with limited data. Several techniques have
been proposed in the past to adapt pre-trained GAN-based
models (Wang et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2020a; Wang et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020) from large-scale source datasets to
target datasets using a limited number of training samples.
Typically, methods for few-shot image generation either
enhance the training data artificially using data augmentation to prevent overfitting (Zhang et al., 2018; Karras et al.,
2020a), or directly evaluate the distance between the processed image and the target image (Ojha et al., 2021; Zhao
et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Generative models, such as GANs (Brock et al., 2018; Guo
et al., 2020; Khan et al., 2022), VAEs (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014), and autoregressive models
(Van den Oord et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018; Grill et al.,
2020), have made remarkable successes in various fields
across images (Brock et al., 2018; Razavi et al., 2019), text
(Brown et al., 2020), and audio (Dhariwal et al., 2020) by

Nevertheless, applying prior GAN-based techniques to
DPMs is challenging due to the differences in training
processes between GAN-based and DPM-based methods.
GANs can quickly generate a final processed image from
latent space, while DPMs only predict less noisy images at
each step and request a large number of timesteps to generate a high-quality final image. Such an iterative denoising
process poses two challenges when transferring diffusion
models. The first challenge is that the transfer direction

1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The
University of Sydney, Australia 2 The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China. Correspondence to:
Chang Xu <c.xu@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

