Trustworthy Alignment of Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models
via Reinforcement Learning

Zongmeng Zhang 1 Yufeng Shi 1 Jinhua Zhu 1 Wengang Zhou 1 2 Xiang Qi 3 Peng Zhang 3 Houqiang Li 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Recent advancement in Large Language Models (LLMs)
has significantly boosted the application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems across a wide range of fields, such
as dialogue assistants (OpenAI, 2023) and autonomous
agents (Wang et al., 2023a). Researchers contend that one
of the most powerful LLMs, i.e., GPT-4, could reasonably
be viewed as a spark of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)
considering its capabilities in language, vision, mathematics,
coding, etc (Bubeck et al., 2023).

Trustworthiness is an essential prerequisite for
the real-world application of large language models. In this paper, we focus on the trustworthiness
of language models with respect to retrieval augmentation. Despite being supported with external evidence, retrieval-augmented generation still
suffers from hallucinations, one primary cause
of which is the conflict between contextual and
parametric knowledge. We deem that retrievalaugmented language models have the inherent capabilities of supplying response according to both
contextual and parametric knowledge. Inspired by
aligning language models with human preference,
we take the first step towards aligning retrievalaugmented language models to a status where it
responds relying merely on the external evidence
and disregards the interference of parametric
knowledge. Specifically, we propose a reinforcement learning based algorithm T RUSTWORTHYA LIGNMENT, theoretically and experimentally
demonstrating large language models’ capability of reaching a trustworthy status without explicit supervision on how to respond. Our work
highlights the potential of large language models on exploring its intrinsic abilities by its own
and expands the application scenarios of alignment from fulfilling human preference to creating trustworthy agents. Our code is available
at https://github.com/zmzhang2000/
trustworthy-alignment.

Despite these remarkable capabilities, the lack of trustworthiness is still a challenging obstacle to the application of
LLMs. As probabilistic models, LLMs occasionally generate output which is plausible but deviating from source
input (Adlakha et al., 2023) or factual knowledge (Min
et al., 2023; Muhlgay et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a). This
phenomenon is referred to as hallucination (Maynez et al.,
2020; Ji et al., 2023b), which poses tangible risks to realworld application scenarios with low tolerance of error such
as medical diagnosis (Nori et al., 2023) and legal consultation (Cui et al., 2023; Nguyen, 2023).
A common and straightforward approach to mitigate hallucinations in LLMs is to leverage non-parametric knowledge source through Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Shuster et al., 2021). Specifically,
RAG retrieves supporting evidence relevant to the source
input from an external knowledge base through a retriever,
and generates the output conditioning on both the source
input and retrieved evidence. The retrieve-and-generate
paradigm proves to significantly enhance the factuality and
reliability of LLMs (Lewis et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al.,
2021; Lazaridou et al., 2022).
However, incorporating retrieval into language generation
encounters a new problem of knowledge conflicts (Longpre et al., 2021) that still impedes the progress towards
trustworthy language models. LLMs commonly learn from
massive unsupervised data during pre-training and store the
learned knowledge in their parameters. Conflict emerges
as contextual knowledge in the retrieved evidence contrasting with the inner knowledge stored in LLMs’ parameters,
which triggers “hallucinations” if an LLM holds a strong

1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Institute
of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive Nation Science Center 3 Ant Group. Correspondence to: Wengang Zhou
<zhwg@ustc.edu.cn>, Houqiang Li <lihq@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

