Disentangled 3D Scene Generation with Layout Learning

Dave Epstein 1 2 Ben Poole 2 Ben Mildenhall 2 Alexei A. Efros 1 Aleksander Holynski 1 2

Abstract

While these models can generate high-quality samples, their
internal workings are hard to interpret, and they do not
explicitly represent the distinct 3D entities that make up
the images they create. Nevertheless, the priors learned by
these models have proven incredibly useful across various
tasks involving 3D reasoning (Hedlin et al., 2023; Ke et al.,
2023; Liu et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023),
suggesting that they may indeed be capable of decomposing
generated content into the underlying 3D objects depicted.

We introduce a method to generate 3D scenes
that are disentangled into their component objects.
This disentanglement is unsupervised, relying
only on the knowledge of a large pretrained textto-image model. Our key insight is that objects
can be discovered by finding parts of a 3D scene
that, when rearranged spatially, still produce valid
configurations of the same scene. Concretely, our
method jointly optimizes multiple NeRFs from
scratch—each representing its own object—along
with a set of layouts that composite these objects
into scenes. We then encourage these composited
scenes to be in-distribution according to the image generator. We show that despite its simplicity,
our approach successfully generates 3D scenes
decomposed into individual objects, enabling new
capabilities in text-to-3D content creation. See
our project page for results and an interactive
demo: https://dave.ml/layoutlearning/

One particularly exciting application of these text-to-image
networks is 3D generation, leveraging the rich distribution
learned by a diffusion model to optimize a 3D representation,
e.g. a neural radiance field (NeRF, Mildenhall et al., 2020),
such that rendered views resemble samples from the prior.
This technique allows for text-to-3D generation without any
3D supervision (Poole et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023b), but
most results focus on simple prompts depicting just one or
two isolated objects (Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c).
Our method builds on this work to generate complex scenes
that are automatically disentangled into the objects they
contain. To do so, we instantiate and render multiple NeRFs
for a given scene instead of just one, encouraging the model
to use each NeRF to represent a separate 3D entity. At the
crux of our approach is an intuitive definition of objects as
parts of a scene that can be manipulated independently of
others while keeping the scene “well-formed” (Biederman,
1981). We implement this by learning a set of different
layouts—3D affine transformations of every NeRF—which
must yield composited scenes that render into in-distribution
2D images given a text prompt (Poole et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
A remarkable ability of many seeing organisms is object
individuation (Piaget et al., 1952), the ability to discern separate objects from light projected onto the retina (Wertheimer,
1938). Indeed, from a very young age, humans and other
creatures are able to organize the physical world they perceive into the three-dimensional entities that comprise it
(Spelke, 1990; Wilcox, 1999; Hoffmann et al., 2011). The
analogous task of object discovery has captured the attention of the artificial intelligence community from its very
inception (Roberts, 1963; Ohta et al., 1978), since agents
that can autonomously parse 3D scenes into their component objects are better able to navigate and interact with
their surroundings.

We find that this lightweight inductive bias, which we term
layout learning, results in surprisingly effective object disentanglement in generated 3D scenes (Figure 1), enabling
object-level scene manipulation in the text-to-3D pipeline.
We demonstrate the utility of layout learning on several
tasks, such as building a scene around a 3D asset of interest,
sampling different plausible arrangements for a given set of
assets, and even parsing a provided NeRF into the objects
it contains, all without any supervision beyond just a text
prompt. We further quantitatively verify that, despite requiring no auxiliary models or per-example human annotation,
the object-level decomposition that emerges through layout
learning is meaningful and outperforms baselines.

Fifty years later, generative models of images are advancing
at a frenzied pace (Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2023).
1
Department of Computer Science, UC Berkeley 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: <dave@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

