On Least Square Estimation in Softmax Gating Mixture of Experts

Huy Nguyen 1 Nhat Ho 1 * Alessandro Rinaldo 1 *

Abstract

1989; Faria & Soromenho, 2010) or a classifier (Chen et al.,
2022; Nguyen et al., 2023a) that specializes in smaller parts
of a larger problem. Meanwhile, the softmax gate is responsible for determining the weight of each expert’s output. If
one expert consistently outperforms others in some domains
of the input space, the softmax gate will assign it a larger
weight in those domains. Thanks to its flexibility and adaptability, there has been a surge of interest in using the softmax
gating MoE models in several fields, namely large language
models (Jiang et al., 2024; Puigcerver et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2023; Du et al., 2022; Fedus et al., 2022b), computer
vision (Riquelme et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2022; Ruiz et al.,
2021), multi-task learning (Hazimeh et al., 2021; Gupta
et al., 2022) and reinforcement learning (Chow et al., 2023).
In those applications, each expert plays an essential role in
handling one or a few subproblems. As a consequence, it
is of practical importance to study the problem of expert
estimation, which can be solved indirectly via the parameter
estimation problem.

Mixture of experts (MoE) model is a statistical
machine learning design that aggregates multiple
expert networks using a softmax gating function
in order to form a more intricate and expressive
model. Despite being commonly used in several
applications owing to their scalability, the mathematical and statistical properties of MoE models
are complex and difficult to analyze. As a result, previous theoretical works have primarily
focused on probabilistic MoE models by imposing the impractical assumption that the data are
generated from a Gaussian MoE model. In this
work, we investigate the performance of the least
squares estimators (LSE) under a deterministic
MoE model where the data are sampled according to a regression model, a setting that has remained largely unexplored. We establish a condition called strong identifiability to characterize
the convergence behavior of various types of expert functions. We demonstrate that the rates for
estimating strongly identifiable experts, namely
the widely used feed-forward networks with activation functions sigmoid(·) and tanh(·), are substantially faster than those of polynomial experts,
which we show to exhibit a surprising slow estimation rate. Our findings have important practical
implications for expert selection.

Despite its widespread use in practice, the theory for parameter estimation of the MoE model has not been fully
comprehended. From a probabilistic perspective, (Ho et al.,
2022) studied the convergence of maximum likelihood estimation under an input-independent gating Gaussian MoE,
which admits the following set-up:
Set-up of a Gaussian MoE model. An i.i.d sample
(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) are assumed to be drawn from a
softmax gating Gaussian MoE model whose conditional
density function pG∗ (y|x) is of the form

1. Introduction

k∗
X

∗ ⊤
∗
exp((β1i
) x + β0i
)
· π(y|h(x, ηi∗ ), νi∗ ),
Pk∗
∗
∗
⊤
j=1 exp((β1j ) x + β0j )
i=1

Softmax gating mixture of experts (MoE) is introduced by
(Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs, 1994) as a generalization of classical mixture models (McLachlan & Basford,
1988; Lindsay, 1995) based on an adaptive gating mechanism. More concretely, the MoE model is a weighted sum
of expert functions associated with input-dependent weights.
Here, each expert is either a regression function (De Veaux,

where π(·|µ, ν) denotes a Gaussian density function with
mean µ and variance ν, and h(·, η) stands for a mean expert
Pk∗
∗
∗ ,η ∗ ,ν ∗ )
function. Additionally, G∗ := i=1
exp(β0i
)δ(β1i
i
i
stands for the mixing measure, a weighted sum of Dirac
∗
∗
measures δ, with unknown parameters (β0i
, β1i
, ηi∗ , νi∗ ).

*

Co-last authors 1 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences,
The University of Texas at Austin, USA. Correspondence to: Huy
Nguyen <huynm@utexas.edu>.

By assuming that the data were generated from that model,
they demonstrated that the density estimation rate was parametric on the sample size, while the parameter estimation
rates depended on the algebraic independence between expert functions. Subsequently, (Nguyen et al., 2023b) and
(Nguyen et al., 2024b) also considered the Gaussian MoE

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

