Retrieval Across Any Domains via Large-scale Pre-trained Model

Jiexi Yan 1 Zhihui Yin 2 Chenghao Xu 2 Cheng Deng 2 Heng Huang 3

Abstract

attention and has been applied to a wide range of applications, such as e-commerce and surveillance, in recent years.
Such cross-domain retrieval (CDR) aims to retrieve relevant
instances from a domain (e.g., photo) when giving a query
belonging to a different domain (e.g., sketch, quickdraw,
etc.).

In order to enhance the generalization ability towards unseen domains, universal cross-domain
image retrieval methods require a training dataset
encompassing diverse domains, which is costly
to assemble. Given this constraint, we introduce a novel problem of data-free adaptive crossdomain retrieval, eliminating the need for real
images during training. Towards this goal, we
propose a novel Text-driven Knowledge Integration (TKI) method, which exclusively utilizes
a pre-trained vision-language model to implement an “aggregation after expansion” training
strategy. Specifically, we extract diverse implicit domain-specific information through a set
of learnable domain word vectors. Subsequently,
a domain-agnostic universal projection, equipped
with a non-Euclidean multi-layer perceptron, can
be optimized using these assorted text descriptions through the text-proxied domain aggregation. Leveraging the cross-modal transferability
phenomenon of the shared latent space, we can
integrate the trained domain-agnostic universal
projection with the pre-trained visual encoder to
extract the features of the input image for the
following retrieval during testing. Extensive experimental results on several benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our method.

Owing to the significant distribution shifts observed when
training and test data lack alignment, the cross-modal retrieval (CDR) task is often constrained to a predefined retrieval domain, such as sketch-based image retrieval (Liu
et al., 2017; Yelamarthi et al., 2018; Dey et al., 2019;
Chaudhuri et al., 2023) or infrared-visible person reidentification (Li et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021; Yu et al.,
2023). However, the development of domain-specific retrieval models for each practical CDR task entails substantial training and maintenance costs. In response to this
challenge, researchers have sought to establish a universal
CDR model capable of direct generalization across diverse
domains, introducing a series of methods aligned with this
objective (Paul et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2022; Agarwal et al.,
2023). To enhance the generalization ability of the CDR
model to previously unseen domains, these methodologies
leverage well-annotated training data from multiple domains
to learn domain-agnostic feature embeddings (Li et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2024) in the latent space. However, given the need to apply among arbitrary domains, the
optimal selection of training domains remains ambiguous.
Furthermore, it is extremely expensive and even impossible
to label multiple domains in the real world.
To this end, we pose the inquiry of whether it is feasible
to employ a pre-trained model for the task of data-free
adaptive cross-domain retrieval (DFACDR), which entails
straightly utilizing a pre-trained model to retrieve instances
across arbitrary domains. Such a DFACDR problem, representing the retrieval challenge without access to any realistic
training data, has received limited attention in the existing
literature, to the best of our knowledge.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of data uploaded and shared through
the Internet in diverse forms or modalities (e.g., viewpoints,
lightning, artistic styles, and photographs), retrieval across
different domains (Huang et al., 2015; Paul et al., 2021;
Hu & Lee, 2022; Hu et al., 2023) has attracted significant
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China 2 School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China 3 Department of
Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park, USA.
Correspondence to: Cheng Deng <chdeng.xd@gmail.com>.

In this paper, we investigate the effective employment of
a large-scale pre-trained model (Jia et al., 2021; Radford
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Cho et al.,
2023; Yin et al., 2024) in the absence of training data, with
the aim of leveraging its potential capabilities for retrieval
across arbitrary domains. Since the large-scale pre-trained

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

