Emergent Representations of Program Semantics
in Language Models Trained on Programs

Charles Jin 1 Martin Rinard 1

Abstract

(Anthropic, 2024) has also spurred the widespread adoption
of LMs in developer workflows via mainstream commercial
products, offering functionality such as code completion, debugging assistance, generating documentation and commit
messages, and writing test cases (Fan et al., 2023).

We present evidence that language models (LMs)
of code can learn to represent the formal semantics of programs, despite being trained only to
perform next-token prediction. Specifically, we
train a Transformer model on a synthetic corpus
of programs written in a domain-specific language
for navigating 2D grid world environments. Each
program in the corpus is preceded by a (partial)
specification in the form of several input-output
grid world states. Despite providing no further
inductive biases, we find that a probing classifier
is able to extract increasingly accurate representations of the unobserved, intermediate grid world
states from the LM hidden states over the course
of training, suggesting the LM acquires an emergent ability to interpret programs in the formal
sense. We also develop a novel interventional
baseline that enables us to disambiguate what is
represented by the LM as opposed to learned by
the probe. We anticipate that this technique may
be generally applicable to a broad range of semantic probing experiments. In summary, this paper
does not propose any new techniques for training LMs of code, but develops an experimental
framework for and provides insights into the acquisition and representation of formal semantics
in statistical models of code.

Despite these results, however, a major open question is
whether current LMs capture any information about the semantics of the text that they consume and generate (Mitchell
& Krakauer, 2023). Indeed, one hypothesis—which takes
a unified view of both natural and programming language
domains—is that LMs trained purely on form (e.g., to model
the conditional distribution of tokens in a training corpus)
produce text only according to surface statistical correlations
gleaned from the training data (Bender & Koller, 2020),
with any apparently sophisticated behavior attributable to
the scale of the model and training data.
This work studies whether LMs of code learn aspects of
semantics when trained using standard textual pretraining.
We empirically evaluate the following hypothesis (MH):
Main Hypothesis. LMs of code trained only to perform next
token prediction on text do not model the formal semantics
of the underlying programming language.
To investigate MH, we apply language modeling to the
task of program synthesis, or generating a program that
implements a given (partial) specification, which we take
to be a set of input-output examples. Specifically, we explore whether an LM trained on text that encodes only the
input-output behavior of programs also learns to model the
intermediate program states specified by the small-step operational semantics of the synthesized program (Plotkin,
1981). We train an LM on example programs preceded by
several input-output examples, then use small classifiers
to probe the LM’s hidden states for (abstractions of) the
intermediate states in the program execution. Despite the
text of the training corpus encoding only input-output behavior, we find the probe’s ability to extract intermediate
states undergoes a phase transition during training, with the
phase transition strongly correlated with the LM’s ability to
generate a correct program in response to previously unseen
specifications. We also present results from a novel interventional experiment, which indicate that the semantics are
represented by the LM (rather than learned by the probe).

1. Introduction
As LMs continue to improve on a range of downstream tasks,
their capabilities in the domain of programming languages
have drawn increasing attention (Bommasani et al., 2023;
Zan et al., 2023). The advancement of recent models such
as GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2023), Code Llama (Rozière et al.,
2023), Gemini (Gemini Team et al., 2023), and Claude 3
1
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Charles Jin <ccj@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

