Decentralized Convex Finite-Sum Optimization
with Better Dependence on Condition Numbers

Yuxing Liu 1 Lesi Chen 2 Luo Luo 1 3
where each component function fi,j : Rd → R is smooth
and convex, and n is number of components on every node.
We focus on first-order decentralized optimization methods
that desire all the m nodes to minimize the global objective
cooperatively, which allows each node to access its local
incremental first-order oracle (LIFO) and communicate with
its neighbors. This problem setting is very popular in training machine learning models with large amounts of data
samples.

Abstract
This paper studies decentralized optimization
problem, where the local objective on each node
is an average of a finite set of convex functions
and the global function is strongly convex. We
propose an efficient stochastic variance reduced
first-order method that allows the different nodes
to establish their stochastic local gradient estimator with different mini-batch sizes per iteration.
We prove the upper bound on the computation
time of the proposed method contains the dependence on the global condition number, which is
sharper than the previous results that only depend
on the local condition numbers. Compared with
the state-of-the-art methods, we also show that
our method requires less local incremental firstorder oracle calls and comparable communication
cost. We further perform numerical experiments
to validate the advantage of our method.

First-order methods for decentralized convex optimization
have been extensively studied in recent years. The decentralized gradient descent (DGD) method (Yuan et al., 2016)
incorporates the communication steps into the full-batch
gradient descent with diminishing stepsizes, leading to the
sublinear convergence rates. The linear convergent methods can be achieved by introducing the gradient tracking
step (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Qu & Li, 2017; Shi et al.,
2015), which maintains the gradient estimator of the global
objective function and iterates with the fixed stepsize. The
seminal? work of Scaman et al. (2017) provided the lower
bounds for the running time and communication rounds of
the full-batch first-order methods for decentralized strongly
convex optimization. Scaman et al. (2017) also proposed
the multi-step dual accelerated (MSDA) method by applying Chebyshev acceleration (Arioli & Scott, 2014) in dual
formulation, which results the optimal time complexity and
communication complexity in terms of the accuracy, the
maximum condition number of local functions and the spectral gap of the network. However, MSDA requires accessing
the dual gradients of the local functions, which is potentially
expensive. Later, Kovalev et al. (2020b); Li & Lin (2021);
Song et al. (2023) developed dual-free methods that match
the upper complexity bounds of MSDA but only require
accessing the gradients of primal local functions. Recently,
Ye et al. (2023) proposed the multi-consensus decentralized
accelerated gradient descent (Mudag) to further improve
the condition number dependence in the upper complexity
bounds from the local functions to the global objective.

1. Introduction
We study the distributed optimization problem
m

min f (x) ≜

x∈Rd

1 X
fi (x)
m i=1

(1)

over a connected and undirected network with m nodes,
where the global objective f : Rd → R is strongly convex,
and every local function fi : Rd → R on node i has the
form of
n

1X
fi (x) ≜
fi,j (x)
n j=1

(2)

1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 3 Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics, Shanghai, China. Correspondence
to: Luo Luo <luoluo@fudan.edu.cn>.
2

Stochastic first-order methods are widely used to speed up
training large-scale machine learning models, which can
take advantage of the finite-sum structure in the objective to
establish efficient iteration schemes. The stochastic variance

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

