C OLLAGE: Light-Weight Low-Precision Strategy for LLM Training

Tao Yu * 1 Gaurav Gupta † 2 Karthick Gopalswamy 3 Amith Mamidala 3 Hao Zhou 4 Jeffrey Huynh 3
Youngsuk Park 5 Ron Diamant 3 Anoop Deoras 2 Luke Huan 2
language modeling (GPT-4 (OpenAI et al., 2023), LaMDA
(Thoppilan et al., 2022), LLaMa (Touvron et al., 2023)),
image generation (e.g., Dall-E (Betker et al., 2023)), speech
generation (such as Meta voicebox, OpenAI jukebox (Le
et al., 2023; Dhariwal et al., 2020)), and multimodality (e.g.
gemini (Team et al., 2023)) motivating to further scale such
models to larger size and context lengths. However, scaling
models is prohibited by the hardware memory and also incur
immense compute cost in the distributed training, such as
∼1M GPU-hrs for LLaMA-65B (Touvron et al., 2023), thus
asking the question whether large model training could be
made efficient while maintaining the accuracy?

Abstract
Large models training is plagued by the intense
compute cost and limited hardware memory. A
practical solution is low-precision representation
but is troubled by loss in numerical accuracy and
unstable training rendering the model less useful. We argue that low-precision floating points
can perform well provided the error is properly
compensated at the critical locations in the training process. We propose C OLLAGE which utilizes multi-component float representation in lowprecision to accurately perform operations with
numerical errors accounted. To understand the
impact of imprecision to training, we propose
a simple and novel metric which tracks the lost
information during training as well as differentiates various precision strategies. Our method
works with commonly used low-precision such as
half-precision (16-bit floating points) and can be
naturally extended to work with even lower precision such as 8-bit. Experimental results show that
pre-training using C OLLAGE removes the requirement of using 32-bit floating-point copies of the
model and attains similar/better training performance compared to (16, 32)-bit mixed-precision
strategy, with up to 3.7× speedup and ∼ 15%
to 23% less memory usage in practice. The
code is available at https://github.com/
amazon-science/collage.

Previous works have attempted to reduce the memory consumption and run models more efficiently by reducing precision of the parameter’s representation, at training time
(Zhang et al., 2022; Kuchaiev et al., 2018; 2019; Peng et al.,
2023) and post-training inference time (Courbariaux et al.,
2016; Rastegari et al., 2016; Choi et al., 2019). The former one is directly relevant to our work using low-precision
storages at training time, but it suffers from issues such
as numerical inaccuracies and narrow representation range.
Researchers developed algorithms such as loss-scaling and
mixed-precision (Micikevicius et al., 2018; Shoeybi et al.,
2020) to overcome these issues. Existing algorithms still
face challenges in terms of memory efficiency as they require the presence of high-precision clones and computations in optimizations. One critical limitation of all the aforementioned methods is that such methods keep the “standard
format” for floating-points during computations and lose
information with a reduced precision.
In this work, we elucidate that in the setting of low-precision
(for example, 16-bit or lower) for floating point, using alternative representations such as multiple-component float
(MCF) (Yu et al., 2022b) helps in making reduced precision
accurate in computations. MCF was introduced as ‘expansion’ (Priest, 1991) in C++ (Hida et al., 2008) and hyperbolic spaces (Yu & De Sa, 2021) representation. Recently,
MCF has been integrated with PyTorch in the MCTensor
library (Yu et al., 2022b).

1. Introduction
Recent success of large models using transformers backend has gathered the attention of community for generative
*
Work conducted during an internship at Amazon† Major Contribution 1 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 2 AWS AI Labs, Santa
Clara, CA 3 AWS Annapurna Labs, Cupertino, CA 4 AWS Sagemaker, Santa Clara, CA 5 AWS AI Research and Education,
Santa Clara, CA. Correspondence to: Gaurav Gupta <gauravaz@amazon.com>.

We propose C OLLAGE1 , a new approach to deal with
floating-point errors in low-precision to make LLM training

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Inspired from the multi-component nature of the algorithm.

