Quantum Algorithm for Online Exp-concave Optimization

Jianhao He 1 Chengchang Liu 1 Xutong Liu 1 Lvzhou Li 2 John C.S. Lui 1

Abstract

which is defined as

We explore whether quantum advantages can
be found for the zeroth-order feedback online
exp-concave optimization problem, which is also
known as bandit exp-concave optimization with
multi-point feedback. We present quantum online quasi-Newton methods to tackle the problem and show that there exists quantum advantages for such problems. Our method approximates the Hessian by quantum estimated inexact
gradient and can achieve O(n log T ) regret with
O(1) queries at each round, where n is the dimension of the decision set and T is the total decision rounds. Such regret improves the optimal
classical algorithm by a factor of T 2/3 .

R(T ) ≜

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈K

T
X

ft (x).

t=1

A good algorithm/strategy of the player should have a sublinear regret (that is, its regret is sublinear as a function of
T ) since this implies that as T grows, the accumulated loss
of the algorithm converges to that with the best fixed strategy in hindsight (Hazan, 2016; Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020).
We study the setting of exp-concave loss functions. This
setting is also know as online exp-concave optimization
(OXO). Note that OXO is useful in many machine learning problems, such as online supervised learning problems
(Rakhlin et al., 2015; Bartlett et al., 2015; Gaillard et al.,
2019), the portfolio selection problem (Luo et al., 2018;
Mhammedi & Rakhlin, 2022; Jézéquel et al., 2022). The
loss functions are assumed to be exp-concave, which is defined as:

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of online convex
optimization for exp-concave loss functions, which is also
known as online exp-concave optimization. Online convex
optimization is an important framework in online learning, and particularly useful in sequential decision making
problems, such as online routing (Awerbuch & Kleinberg,
2008), portfolio selection (Hazan et al., 2007), and recommendation systems (Hazan & Kale, 2012). Online convex
optimization can be represented as a T round iterative game
between a player and an adversary. At every round t ∈ [T ],
the player generates a decision xt from a fixed and known
convex set K ⊆ Rn , where n is the dimension of the decision set. The adversary observes xt and chooses a convex
loss function ft : K → R, with which the player suffers a
loss of ft (xt ). Through this sequential process, some information about the loss function ft is revealed to the player as
feedback. The goal of the player is to minimize his regret,

Definition 1 (Exp-concave functions). A function f : K →
R is α-exp-concave over a convex set K if g : K → R, g =
e−αf (x) is a concave function, where α ≥ 0.
Typical algorithms for this setting, such as the online Newton step proposed by Hazan (2007), can guarantee a regret
bound of O(n log T ) after T rounds. But the online Newton step method requires full information feedback, which
means that the loss function is revealed to the player as
feedback in each round, so that the player can obtain an exact gradient to approximate the Newton’s direction. However, in many applications, the loss function is not always
easy to obtain. When only partial information is revealed as
feedback, the player has to make a prediction with limited
information, which will often lead to worse regret. Settings
with such feedback are called zeroth-order feedback settings, and the feedback is modeled as a zeroth-order oracle
of the loss function which is only accessible to the player
after making his decision in each round. The zeroth-order
feedback setting is well studied for the online convex optimization problem, as shown in the extended related works
in Appendix A.1. But for online exp-concave optimization
problems, it remains open. Liu et. al. (2018) proposed
an online Newton step algorithm with estimated gradient,

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Lvzhou Li <lilvzh@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

