SiT: Symmetry-Invariant Transformers for Generalisation
in Reinforcement Learning

Matthias Weissenbacher 1 Rishabh Agarwal * 2 Yoshinobu Kawahara * 1 3

Abstract

erty within a neighborhood of a pixel or image patches and
throughout the entire image respectively. Enforcing local
symmetries through data augmentation is sample inefficient
and computationally expensive. When an image is divided
into local patches to capture these symmetries, the number
of augmented samples we may need to represent all possible
variations grows exponentially. Given the prevalence of
symmetries in RL settings, it is advantageous for neural networks to possess the capability to develop a understanding
of these local and global symmetries in a self-supervised
manner that is data-driven.

An open challenge in reinforcement learning (RL)
is the effective deployment of a trained policy
to new or slightly different situations as well as
semantically-similar environments. We introduce
Symmetry-Invariant Transformer (SiT), a scalable vision transformer (ViT) that leverages both
local and global data patterns in a self-supervised
manner to improve generalisation. Central to our
approach is Graph Symmetric Attention, which
refines the traditional self-attention mechanism to
preserve graph symmetries, resulting in invariant
and equivariant latent representations. We showcase SiT’s superior generalization over ViTs on
MiniGrid and Procgen RL benchmarks, and its
sample efficiency on Atari 100k and CIFAR10.

However, leveraging symmetries in RL presents various
challenges. In particular, an agent’s action choices in general are not invariant under symmetries both globally and
locally, see Figure 1. Permutation invariance (Tang & Ha,
2021) in Figure 1 (a) admits the shortcoming that it leads
to dead-end situations in many settings, while local and
global flip symmetries (b) inter-changes left /right and up /
down actions. Moreover, in many scenarios, it’s essential
for a decision-making process to consider the local context
within the broader global setting, e.g., in Figure 1 (c), the
global 90◦ rotation is an exact symmetry but local patchwise rotations change the neighbourhood of the agent. In
contrast, even minimal permutations are fatal for learning,
see Figure 1 (a) bottom-right. This situation is common
amongst many games and real-world environments (Bellemare et al., 2012; Cobbe et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2016;
Bellemare et al., 2020; Kitano et al., 1997).

1. Introduction
Despite recent advances in reinforcement learning, out-ofdistribution generalization remains an open challenge. A
widely-used approach to improve generalisation in imagebased RL is data augmentation (Laskin et al., 2020; Yarats
et al., 2021b; Hansen & Wang, 2021) but it can lead to
over regularisation to specific augmentations. Moreover,
data augmentation’s inherent non-determinism can amplify
the variance in regression targets, which can be detrimental
to learning (Hansen et al., 2021). Complimentary to data
augmentation, leveraging symmetries can improve generalization and lead to sample-efficient RL (Tang & Ha, 2021;
Van der Pol et al., 2020; Weissenbacher et al., 2022).

To address the aforementioned challenges, we present a
self-attention based network architecture, which we call
Symmetry-invariant Transformer (SiT). SiTs incorporates a
flexible relational inductive bias (Battaglia et al., 2018) to
recognize relational patterns or symmetries, enabling it to
adapt effectively to unfamiliar or out-of-distribution data.
In addition to invariance, SiTs account for dead-end situations by incorporating equivariance, which refers to the
property of an action to transform equivalently as the states
under symmetries in our SiT module and by introducing a
rotation symmetry preserving but flip-symmetry breaking
layer. Additionally, we introduce novel invariant as well
as equivariant Graph Symmetric Attention (GSA). GSA is
akin to self-attention of Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Doso-

Image-based RL may benefit from both local and global
symmetries, which preserve a particular structure or prop*

Advisory role 1 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, Tokyo, Japan 2 Google DeepMind 3 Graduate School
of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University,
Japan. Correspondence to: Matthias Weissenbacher <wbmatthias@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

