Sequential Disentanglement by Extracting Static Information From A Single
Sequence Element

Nimrod Berman * 1 Ilan Naiman * 1 Idan Arbiv * 1 Gal Fadlon * 1 Omri Azencot 1

Abstract

trollability. Capturing distinct variation allows filtering out
undesired variations, reducing the sample complexity of
downstream learning (Villegas et al., 2017; Denton & Birodkar, 2017), and facilitating more controllable generations
(Tian et al., 2021). Further, disentangled representations are
instrumental in numerous applications including classification (Locatello et al., 2020), prediction (Hsieh et al., 2018),
and interpretability (Higgins et al., 2016; Naiman & Azencot, 2023), to name just a few. In the sequential case, inputs
are typically split to a single static (time-invariant) factor
encoding features that do not change over time, and to multiple dynamic (time-varying) components, one per sample.
For instance, in a smiling face video, the latent representation can be disentangled into a static component encoding
the person’s identity (time-invariant factor) and a dynamic
component encoding the smiling motion (time-variant factor). Such disentangled representations hold promise for
various downstream tasks such as classification, retrieval,
and synthetic video generation with style transfer.

One of the fundamental representation learning
tasks is unsupervised sequential disentanglement,
where latent codes of inputs are decomposed to
a single static factor and a sequence of dynamic
factors. To extract this latent information, existing methods condition the static and dynamic
codes on the entire input sequence. Unfortunately,
these models often suffer from information leakage, i.e., the dynamic vectors encode both static
and dynamic information, or vice versa, leading
to a non-disentangled representation. Attempts to
alleviate this problem via reducing the dynamic dimension and auxiliary loss terms gain only partial
success. Instead, we propose a novel and simple
architecture that mitigates information leakage by
offering a simple and effective subtraction inductive bias while conditioning on a single sample.
Remarkably, the resulting variational framework
is simpler in terms of required loss terms, hyperparameters, and data augmentation. We evaluate our method on multiple data-modality benchmarks including general time series, video, and
audio, and we show beyond state-of-the-art results
on generation and prediction tasks in comparison
to several strong baselines. Code is at GitHub.

Existing sequential disentanglement works are commonly
based on variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma &
Welling, 2014) and their dynamic extensions (Girin et al.,
2021). To model the variational posterior, Li & Mandt
(2018); Bai et al. (2021) and others condition the static and
dynamic factors on the entire input sequence. However,
under this modeling perspective, highly expressive deep
encoder modules struggle with information leakage problems. Namely, the learned time-varying components capture
dynamic as well as static information, whereas the static
vector encodes non-meaningful features, or vice versa. To
resolve this issue, Li & Mandt (2018) propose to reduce the
dynamic dimension drastically, and Zhu et al. (2020); Bai
et al. (2021) introduce additional mutual information (MI)
loss terms. While these approaches generally improved disentanglement and leakage issues, new challenges emerged.
First, small time-varying vectors are limited in modeling
complex dynamics. Second, sampling good positive and
negative examples to estimate mutual information is hard
(Naiman et al., 2023). Finally, optimizing models with
multiple losses and balancing their MI penalties is difficult.
These challenges raise the question: can we design an unsupervised sequential disentanglement framework that avoids
the above complexities and avoids information leakage?

1. Introduction
Modern representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013;
Schölkopf et al., 2021) identifies unsupervised disentanglement as one of its fundamental challenges, where the main
goal is to decompose input data to its latent factors of variation. Separating the learned representation into independent
factors can improve multiple machine learning tasks from
three aspects: (1) explainability, (2) generalizability (3) con*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, BenGurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Correspondence to: Nimrod Berman <bermann@post.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

