SelfIE: Self-Interpretation of Large Language Model Embeddings

Haozhe Chen 1 Carl Vondrick 1 Chengzhi Mao 1 2 3
selfie.cs.columbia.edu
Output:
8,848.86

Abstract
How do large language models (LLMs) obtain
their answers? The ability to explain and control
an LLM’s reasoning process is key for reliability,
transparency, and future model developments. We
propose SelfIE (Self-Interpretation of Embeddings), a framework that enables LLMs to interpret their own embeddings in natural language
by leveraging their ability to respond to inquiries
about a given passage. Capable of interpreting
open-world concepts in the hidden embeddings,
SelfIE reveals LLM internal reasoning in cases
such as making ethical decisions, internalizing
prompt injection, and recalling harmful knowledge. SelfIE’s text descriptions on hidden embeddings open avenues to control LLM reasoning.
We propose Supervised Control, which allows
editing open-ended concepts while only requiring
gradient computation of individual layer. We extend RLHF to hidden embeddings and propose
Reinforcement Control that erases harmful knowledge in LLM without supervision targets.

" Mount Everest has height 8,848.86 m
" Everest

…

…

…

…

…

…

Layer L

" Olympus Mons
" highest mountain in universe

Layer 2

" highest mountain on earth
" earth

Layer 1

" mountain

Highest mountain

on

Earth

elevation

Input x

Figure 1. SelfIE interpretation of latent embeddings in Large
Language Models. SelfIE produces open-world text explanations for the internal states in LLM without any training.

reasoning (Arkoudas, 2023) or just repeating their training
set (Bender et al., 2021).
A longstanding problem in machine learning, there has been
significant effort to uncover explanations behind LLM decisions. Chain-of-thought, for example, uses in-context examples to direct the model to additionally output its reasoning
process (Wei et al., 2022), however there is no guarantee
that the explanation is faithful to the actual reasoning process (Turpin et al., 2023). Moreover, Zou et al. (2023a)
showed that LLMs answers question differently depending
on whether they need to provide explanations or not, making
the true explanation often inaccessible. Since LLM’s answers are produced from hidden representations, the internal
embeddings provide more direct and causally relevant access to LLM’s reasoning processes. Hernandez et al. (2023)
and Li et al. (2021) developed linear probes to identify information in hidden embeddings, but the methods require
extensive data collection for training and are consequently
limited to a small predefined set concepts. Previous works
(Nostalgebraist; Belrose et al., 2023; Pal et al., 2023; Hernandez et al., 2024) decode components of LLM to describe
hidden embeddings, but they only provide short descriptions
that cannot explain complex concepts in detail.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become foundations
for a wide range of applications from programming (Rozière
et al., 2023), question answering (Surı́s et al., 2023), to
healthcare (OpenAI, 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery
et al., 2022). However, the models are largely black-box,
with limited transparency into how they make decisions
during inference. Interpreting the representations that LLMs
learn is important for establishing trust in many applications
as well as revealing whether state-of-the-art methods are
1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 2 Mila, Montreal, Canada 3 McGill
University, Montreal, Canada.
Correspondence to:
Haozhe Chen <hc3295@columbia.edu>, Chengzhi Mao
<chengzhi.mao@mila.quebec>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we propose an approach, SelfIE (Self1

