A Theory of Non-Linear Feature Learning with One Gradient Step in Two-Layer
Neural Networks
Behrad Moniri * 1 Donghwan Lee * 2 Hamed Hassani 1 Edgar Dobriban 3

Abstract

natural language processing. At the same time, the current
theoretical understanding of feature learning is incomplete.
In particular, among many theoretical approaches to study
neural networks, much work has focused on two-layer fullyconnected neural networks with a randomly generated, untrained first layer weights and a trained second layer—or
random features models (Rahimi & Recht, 2007). Despite
their simplicity, random features models can capture various empirical properties of deep neural networks, and have
been used to study generalization, overparametrization and
“double descent”, adversarial robustness, transfer learning,
estimation of out-of-distribution performance, and uncertainty quantification (see e.g., Mei & Montanari (2022);
Hassani & Javanmard (2022); Tripuraneni et al. (2021);
Lee et al. (2023); Bombari & Mondelli (2023); Clarté et al.
(2023); Lin & Dobriban (2021); Adlam et al. (2022), etc.).

Feature learning is thought to be one of the fundamental reasons for the success of deep neural
networks. It is rigorously known that in two-layer
fully-connected neural networks under certain
conditions, one step of gradient descent on the
first layer can lead to feature learning; characterized by the appearance of a separated rank-one
component—spike—in the spectrum of the feature matrix. However, with a constant gradient
descent step size, this spike only carries information from the linear component of the target
function and therefore learning non-linear components is impossible. We show that with a learning
rate that grows with the sample size, such training
in fact introduces multiple rank-one components,
each corresponding to a specific polynomial feature. We further prove that the limiting largedimensional and large sample training and test
errors of the updated neural networks are fully
characterized by these spikes. By precisely analyzing the improvement in the training and test
errors, we demonstrate that these non-linear features can enhance learning.

Nevertheless, feature learning is absent in random features
models, because the first layer weights are assumed to be
randomly generated, and then fixed. Although these models
can represent non-linear functions of the data, in the commonly studied setting where the sample size, dimension, and
hidden layer size are proportional, under certain reasonable
conditions they can only learn the linear component of the
true model—or, teacher function—and other components of
the teacher function effectively behave as Gaussian noise.
Thus, in this setting, learning in a random features model
is equivalent to learning in a noisy linear model with Gaussian features and Gaussian noise. This property is known
as the Gaussian equivalence property (see e.g., Goldt et al.
(2022); Adlam et al. (2022); Adlam & Pennington (2020a);
Mei & Montanari (2022); Montanari & Saeed (2022); Hu
& Lu (2023)). While other models such as the neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019) can be more
expressive, they also lack feature learning.

1. Introduction
Learning non-linear features—or representations—from
data is thought to be one of the fundamental reasons for the
success of deep neural networks (e.g., Bengio et al., 2013;
Donahue et al., 2016; Yang & Hu, 2021; Shi et al., 2022;
Radhakrishnan et al., 2022, etc.). This has been observed
in a wide range of domains, including computer vision and
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA 2 Graduate Group
in Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, University
of Pennsylvania, PA, USA 3 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: Behrad Moniri <bemoniri@seas.upenn.edu>, Donghwan Lee
<dh7401@sas.upenn.edu>.

To bridge the gap between random features models and feature learning, several recent approaches have shown provable feature learning for neural networks under certain conditions; see Section 1.1 for details. In particular, the recent
pioneering work of Ba et al. (2022) analyzed two-layer neural networks, trained with one gradient step on the first layer.
They showed that when the step size is small, after one
gradient step, the resulting two-layer neural network can
learn linear features. However, it still behaves as a noisy

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

