Differentiable Model Scaling using Differentiable Topk

Kai Liu 1 Ruohui Wang 1 Jianfei Gao 1 Kai Chen 1

Abstract

portance of scaling networks as a critical pathway toward
achieving artificial general intelligence (AGI). To support
this scaling process, we introduce a general and potent
method to determine the optimal width and depth of a network during its scaling.

Over the past few years, as large language models have ushered in an era of intelligence emergence, there has been an intensified focus on
scaling networks. Although Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) methods have been proposed to automate this process, they suffer from low search
efficiency. This study introduces Differentiable
Model Scaling (DMS), increasing the efficiency
for searching optimal width and depth in networks.
DMS can model both width and depth in a direct
and fully differentiable way, making it easy to
optimize. We have evaluated our DMS across
diverse tasks, ranging from vision tasks to NLP
tasks and various network architectures, including CNNs and Transformers. Results consistently
indicate that our DMS can find improved structures and outperforms state-of-the-art NAS methods. Specifically, for image classification on ImageNet, our DMS improves the top-1 accuracy of
EfficientNet-B0 and Deit-Tiny by 1.4% and 0.6%,
respectively, and outperforms the state-of-the-art
zero-shot NAS method, ZiCo, by 1.3% while requiring only 0.4 GPU days for searching. For
object detection on COCO, DMS improves the
mAP of Yolo-v8-n by 2.0%. For language modeling, our pruned Llama-7B outperforms the prior
method with lower perplexity and higher zeroshot classification accuracy. Our code is available at https://github.com/LKJacky/
Differentiable-Model-Scaling.

Currently, the structure design of most networks still relies on human expertise. It typically demands significant
resources to tune structural hyperparameters, making it challenging to pinpoint the optimal structure. Meanwhile, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods have been introduced to automate network structure design. We classify
NAS methods into two categories based on their search
strategies: stochastic search methods (Xie et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2022; Tan & Le, 2019) and gradient-based methods
(Liu et al., 2018a; Wan et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2021a).
The stochastic search methods involve sampling numerous
sub-networks to compare performance. However, these
methods are limited to low search efficiency due to the
sample-evaluate cycle, leading to reduced performance and
increased search costs.
Unlike stochastic search methods, gradient-based methods
employ gradient descent to optimize structural parameters,
enhancing their efficiency and making them more adept at
balancing search costs with ultimate performance. However,
a significant challenge persists: how to model structural hyperparameters in a direct and differentiable manner. Prior
methods have struggled to meet this challenge, resulting
in diminished performance and increased costs. Specifically, we group prior methods into three categories based
on their modeling strategies: (1) multiple element selection,
(2) single number selection, and (3) gradient estimate topk.
Specifically, when searching for the number of channels in
a convolutional layer, multiple element selection methods
(Li et al.; Guo et al., 2021b) model the channel number
as multiple selections of channels, as shown in Figure 1
(a.1). They introduce a much larger search space of element
combinations. Single number selection methods (Wan et al.,
2020) model the channel number as a single selection from
multiple numbers, as shown in Figure 1 (a.2). It ignores the
order relationship among these numbers. Gradient estimate
topk approaches (Guo et al., 2021a; Gao et al., 2022; Ning
et al., 2020) attempt to model width and depth directly, as
shown in Figure 1 (a.3). However, they are not differen-

1. Introduction
In recent years, large models such as GPTs (Radford et al.,
2018) and ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) have showcased
outstanding performance. Notably, the emergent intelligence of GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023) has underscored the im1

Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Kai Liu <liukai@pjlab.org.cn>, Kai Chen
<chenkai@pjlab.org.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

