Foundation Policies with Hilbert Representations

Seohong Park 1 Tobias Kreiman 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract

supervised or unsupervised objectives on large and diverse
datasets without ground truth labels, and then adapt efficiently via prompting, few-shot learning, or fine-tuning to
downstream tasks. This strategy has proven to be extremely
effective in settings where simple self-supervised objectives
can be used to train on Internet-scale data (Brown et al.,
2020; Ramesh et al., 2022), leading to models that can
quickly adapt to new tasks for pattern recognition (Kirillov
et al., 2023), question answering (Ouyang et al., 2022), and
even diverse AI-assistant applications (Chen et al., 2021b).
Motivated by this observation, a number of works have recently sought to propose self-supervised objectives to pretrain generalist policies for reinforcement learning (RL) and
control (Reed et al., 2022; Padalkar et al., 2024). We can
broadly refer to the resulting models as foundation policies:
general-purpose policies that can rapidly adapt to solve a
variety of downstream tasks.

Unsupervised and self-supervised objectives, such
as next token prediction, have enabled pretraining generalist models from large amounts of
unlabeled data. In reinforcement learning (RL),
however, finding a truly general and scalable unsupervised pre-training objective for generalist
policies from offline data remains a major open
question. While a number of methods have been
proposed to enable generic self-supervised RL,
based on principles such as goal-conditioned RL,
behavioral cloning, and unsupervised skill learning, such methods remain limited in terms of either the diversity of the discovered behaviors, the
need for high-quality demonstration data, or the
lack of a clear adaptation mechanism for downstream tasks. In this work, we propose a novel unsupervised framework to pre-train generalist policies that capture diverse, optimal, long-horizon
behaviors from unlabeled offline data such that
they can be quickly adapted to any arbitrary new
tasks in a zero-shot manner. Our key insight is to
learn a structured representation that preserves the
temporal structure of the underlying environment,
and then to span this learned latent space with
directional movements, which enables various
zero-shot policy “prompting” schemes for downstream tasks. Through our experiments on simulated robotic locomotion and manipulation benchmarks, we show that our unsupervised policies
can solve goal-conditioned and general RL tasks
in a zero-shot fashion, even often outperforming
prior methods designed specifically for each setting. Our code and videos are available at https:
//seohong.me/projects/hilp/.

However, unlike natural language processing, where next
token prediction has become the standard pre-training objective (Brown et al., 2020), finding the best policy pre-training
objective from data remains a major open question in RL.
Prior works have proposed several ways to pre-train generalist policies based on diverse objectives, such as behavioral
cloning (BC) (Ajay et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022; Padalkar
et al., 2024), offline goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) (Chebotar
et al., 2021; Eysenbach et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023), and
unsupervised skill discovery (Gregor et al., 2016; Machado
et al., 2017; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Park et al., 2024). However, none of these objectives is ideal: behavioral cloning requires expert demonstrations, which limits the availability of
data, goal-conditioned RL can only yield goal-reaching behaviors, and unsupervised skill discovery methods, though
general and principled, can present major challenges in
terms of scalability, optimization, and offline learning.
In this work, we propose a general offline pre-training objective for foundation policies that capture diverse, optimal
“long-horizon” behaviors from unlabeled data to facilitate
downstream task learning. Our main idea is to discover the
temporal structure of states through offline data, and to represent this structure in such a way that we can quickly and accurately obtain optimal policies for any arbitrary new tasks
from relatively concise “prompts” (e.g., a small number of
states annotated with rewards, target goals, etc.). We begin
by learning a geometric abstraction of the dataset, where dis-

1. Introduction
Generalist models that can utilize large amounts of weakly
labeled data provide an appealing recipe: pre-train via self1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Seohong Park <seohong@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

