Online bipartite matching with imperfect advice

Davin Choo * 1 Themis Gouleakis * 1 Chun Kai Ling * 2 Arnab Bhattacharyya 1

Abstract

by Karp et al. (1990) features n offline vertices U and n
online vertices V . Each v ∈ V reveals its incident edges sequentially upon arrival. With each arrival, one makes an irrevocable decision whether (and how) to match v with a neighboring vertex in U . The final offline graph G = (U ∪V, E) is
assumed to have a largest possible matching of size n∗ ≤ n,
and we seek online algorithms producing matchings of size
as close to n∗ as possible. The performance of a (randomized) algorithm A is measured by its competitive ratio:

We study the problem of online unweighted bipartite matching with n offline vertices and n online vertices where one wishes to be competitive
against the optimal offline algorithm. While the
classic R ANKING algorithm of (Karp et al., 1990)
provably attains competitive ratio of 1 − 1/e >
1/2, we show that no learning-augmented method
can be both 1-consistent and strictly better than
1/2-robust under the adversarial arrival model.
Meanwhile, under the random arrival model, we
show how one can utilize methods from distribution testing to design an algorithm that takes
in external advice about the online vertices and
provably achieves competitive ratio interpolating
between any ratio attainable by advice-free methods and the optimal ratio of 1, depending on the
advice quality.

E[# matches by A]
,
n∗
G=(U ∪V,E) V ’s arrival seq.
min

min

(1)

where the randomness is over any random decisions made
by A. Traditionally, one assumes the adversarial arrival
model, i.e., an adversary controls both the final graph G and
the arrival sequence of online vertices.
Since any maximal matching has size at least n∗ /2, a greedy
algorithm trivially attains a competitive ratio of 1/2. Indeed,
Karp et al. (1990) show that no deterministic algorithm can
guarantee better than 1/2 − o(1). Meanwhile, the randomized RANKING algorithm of Karp et al. (1990) attains an
asymptotic competitive ratio of 1 − 1/e which is also known
to be optimal (Karp et al., 1990; Goel & Mehta, 2008; Birnbaum & Mathieu, 2008; Vazirani, 2022).

1. Introduction
Finding matchings in bipartite graphs is a mainstay of algorithms research. The area’s mathematical richness is
complemented by a vast array of applications — any twosided market (e.g., kidney exchange, ridesharing) yields a
matching problem. In particular, the online variant enjoys
much attention due to its application in internet advertising.
Consider a website with a number of pages and ad slots
(videos, images, etc.). Advertisers specify ahead of time the
pages and slots they like their ads to appear in, as well as
the target user. The website is paid based on the number of
ads appropriately fulfilled. Crucially, ads slots are available
only when traffic occurs on the website and are not known in
advance. Thus, the website is faced with the online decision
problem of matching advertisements to open ad slots.

In practice, advice (also called predictions or side information) is often available for these online instances. For
example, online advertisers often aggregate past traffic data
to estimate the future traffic and corresponding user demographic. While such advice may be imperfect, it may
nonetheless be useful in increasing revenue and improving
upon aforementioned worst-case guarantees. Designing algorithms that utilize such advice in a principled manner
falls under the research paradigm of learning-augmented
algorithms. A learning-augmented algorithm is said to be (i)
a-consistent if it is a-competitive with perfect advice and (ii)
b-robust if it is b-competitive with arbitrary advice quality.

The classic online unweighted bipartite matching problem

Goal 1.1. Let β be the best-known competitive ratio attainable by any classical advice-free online algorithm. Can we
design a learning-augmented algorithm for the online bipartite matching problem that is 1-consistent and β-robust?

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore 2 Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University. Correspondence to: Davin Choo
<davin@u.nus.edu>.

Clearly, Goal 1.1 depends on the form of advice as well as
a suitable measure of its quality. Setting these technicalities
aside for now, we remark that Goal 1.1 strikes the best of

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

