Finding NEM-U: Explaining unsupervised representation learning through
neural network generated explanation masks

Bjørn Leth Møller 1 Christian Igel 1 Kristoffer Knutsen Wickstrøm 2 Jon Sporring 1 Robert Jenssen 1 2 3
Bulat Ibragimov 1

Figure 1. NEM-U explaining how important various parts of an image are for feature extractors trained using different methods. The
feature extractor trained using supervised learning focuses on the ears and face of the object. The DINO pretrained feature extractor
considers the entirety of all animals. The SwAV and SimCLR feature extractors look at both the focused object and the background,
where SwAV is more focused than SimCLR. Explanations are generated without optimization on the image (taken from VOC data set).

Abstract

which turns a fixed representation model into a
self-explaining system by augmenting it with a
masking neural network. This network provides
occlusion-based explanations in parallel to computing the representations during inference. We
present an instance of this framework, the NEM-U
(NEM using U-net structure) architecture, which
leverages similarities between segmentation and
occlusion-based explanation masks. Our experiments show that NEM-U generates explanations
faster and with lower complexity compared to the
current state-of-the-art while maintaining high accuracy as measured by locality.

Unsupervised representation learning has become
an important ingredient of today’s deep learning
systems. However, only a few methods exist that
explain a learned vector embedding in the sense
of providing information about which parts of
an input are the most important for its representation. These methods generate the explanation
for a given input after the model has been evaluated and tend to produce either inaccurate explanations or are slow, which limits their practical
use. To address these limitations, we introduce
the Neural Explanation Masks (NEM) framework,
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Department of Physics and Technology,
UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø 3 Norwegian Computing Center, Oslo, Norway. Correspondence to: Bjørn Leth
Møller <bjm@di.ku.dk>.

1. Introduction
Explainable AI (XAI) is concerned with explaining the outputs of machine learning (ML) models to improve transparency and safety. In the context of representation learning,
we want to know which parts of an input are most important for the representation (i.e., embedding) provided by

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

