Eureka-Moments in Transformers:
Multi-Step Tasks Reveal Softmax Induced Optimization Problems

David T. Hoffmann 1 2 Simon Schrodi 1 Jelena Bratulić 1 Nadine Behrmann 3 Volker Fischer 2 Thomas Brox 1

Abstract

deep classifiers learn the hierarchical feature representations necessary to build a good classifier. Reinforcement
learning learns object representations required to predict
how to receive a sparse reward. Language models group
tokens to derive their contextual meaning and then predict a
new token. In-context learning (ICL) tasks require to first
learn similarities and then associate tokens based on positional information by learning induction heads (Olsson et al.,
2022). While aforementioned examples show great promise,
researchers spend a large effort on designing the training
process to learn sub-tasks. For instance, reward shaping
is common in reinforcement learning, many computer vision works use explicit or implicit intermediate supervision,
while for language modelling and ICL a good data arrangement plays an important role (Chan et al., 2022). For some
of these problems, a saturation of the learning process followed by a sudden improvements can be observed, as shown
in Fig. 1c. However, the relation of implicit multi-step learning to saturation of the learning process followed by abrupt
improvements in training loss has not been investigated.

In this work, we study rapid improvements of
the training loss in transformers when being confronted with multi-step decision tasks. We found
that transformers struggle to learn the intermediate task and both training and validation loss
saturate for hundreds of epochs. When transformers finally learn the intermediate task, they do this
rapidly and unexpectedly. We call these abrupt
improvements Eureka-moments, since the transformer appears to suddenly learn a previously incomprehensible concept. We designed synthetic
tasks to study the problem in detail, but the leaps
in performance can be observed also for language
modeling and in-context learning (ICL). We suspect that these abrupt transitions are caused by the
multi-step nature of these tasks. Indeed, we find
connections and show that ways to improve on
the synthetic multi-step tasks can be used to improve the training of language modeling and ICL.
Using the synthetic data we trace the problem
back to the Softmax function in the self-attention
block of transformers and show ways to alleviate the problem. These fixes reduce the required
number of training steps, lead to higher likelihood to learn the intermediate task, to higher final
accuracy and training becomes more robust to
hyper-parameters.

But how can we study multi-step learning? One may tend to
study popular tasks in detail, for which many benchmarks
and results already exist. BERT pretraining (Devlin et al.,
2019) and ICL (Chan et al., 2022) are candidates that are
likely to entail a multi-step task. For BERT the network
might first learn word frequencies and might learn to use the
context to predict masked tokens in a second step. Similarly
ICL can be understood as multi-step task, where first similarities of tokens have to be learned, followed by learning
where to look up the correct label, i.e., learning an induction head. For both tasks we observe sudden improvements,
similar to those that we study in this work (see Fig. 1c). Unfortunately, real data prohibits a clean study due to multiple
factors: 1) The exact sub-tasks are typically unknown and,
hence, hard to study. 2) There are many easy samples that
do no require multi-step reasoning, overlaying the progress
on the multi-step task. 3) The features necessary for the
tasks are unknown, i.e., we cannot study what the network
fails to learn, let alone the reason for it. 4) Even the number
of steps is unknown, thus, we cannot determine if models
learn only a subset of the tasks.

1. Introduction
A key quality of any intelligent system is its ability to deal
with complex problems that may consist of multiple subproblems. It should learn to solve these sub-problems even
in the absence of direct feedback. Deep learning has enabled such capabilities to a certain degree. For example,
1

University of Freiburg 2 Bosch Center for AI 3 Amazon (work
done while at Bosch). Correspondence to: David T. Hoffmann
<hoffmann@cs.uni-freiburg.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

As a remedy, we propose to analyze multi-step learning by

1

