Graph Distillation with Eigenbasis Matching

Yang Liu * 1 Deyu Bo * 1 Chuan Shi 1

Abstract

graph structure presents challenges to the efficiency and
scalability of GNNs (Hamilton et al., 2017). To accelerate training, one data-centric approach is to summarize the
large-scale graph into a much smaller one. Traditional methods primarily involve sparsification (Spielman & Srivastava,
2011; Yu et al., 2022) and coarsening (Loukas, 2019; Kumar et al., 2023). However, these methods are typically
designed to optimize some heuristic metrics, e.g., spectral
similarity (Loukas, 2019) and pair-wise distance (Ahmed
et al., 2020), which may be irrelevant to downstream tasks,
leading to sub-optimal performance.

The increasing amount of graph data places requirements on the efficient training of graph neural networks (GNNs). The emerging graph distillation (GD) tackles this challenge by distilling
a small synthetic graph to replace the real large
graph, ensuring GNNs trained on real and synthetic graphs exhibit comparable performance.
However, existing methods rely on GNN-related
information as supervision, including gradients,
representations, and trajectories, which have two
limitations. First, GNNs can affect the spectrum
(i.e., eigenvalues) of the real graph, causing spectrum bias in the synthetic graph. Second, the
variety of GNN architectures leads to the creation
of different synthetic graphs, requiring traversal
to obtain optimal performance. To tackle these issues, we propose Graph Distillation with Eigenbasis Matching (GDEM), which aligns the eigenbasis and node features of real and synthetic graphs.
Meanwhile, it directly replicates the spectrum of
the real graph and thus prevents the influence of
GNNs. Moreover, we design a discrimination
constraint to balance the effectiveness and generalization of GDEM. Theoretically, the synthetic
graphs distilled by GDEM are restricted spectral
approximations of the real graphs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GDEM outperforms
state-of-the-art GD methods with powerful crossarchitecture generalization ability and significant
distillation efficiency. Our code is available at
https://github.com/liuyang-tian/GDEM.

Recently, graph distillation (GD), a.k.a., graph condensation, has attracted considerable attention in graph reduction
due to its remarkable compression ratio and lossless performance (Gao et al., 2024). Generally, GD aims to synthesize
a small graph wherein GNNs trained on it exhibit comparable performance to those trained on the real large graph. To
this end, existing methods are designed to optimize the synthetic graphs by matching some GNN-related information,
such as gradients (Jin et al., 2022b;a), representations (Liu
et al., 2022a), and training trajectories (Zheng et al., 2023),
between the real and synthetic graphs. As a result, the synthetic graph aligns its distribution with the real graph and
also incorporates information from downstream tasks.
Despite the considerable progress, existing GD methods require pre-selecting a specific GNN as the distillation model,
introducing two limitations: (1) GNNs used for distillation
affect the real spectrum, leading to spectrum bias in the synthetic graph, i.e., a few eigenvalues dominate the data distribution. Figure 1 illustrates the total variation (TV) (Gutman
& Zhou, 2006) of the real and synthetic graphs. Notably,
TV reflects the smoothness of the signal over a graph. A
small value of TV indicates a low-frequency distribution,
and vice versa. We can observe that the values of TV in
the synthetic graph distilled by a low-pass filter consistently
appear lower than those in the real graph, while the opposite
holds for the high-pass filter, thus verifying the existence
of spectrum bias (See Section 3 for a theoretical analysis). (2) The optimal performance is obtained by traversing
various GNN architectures, resulting in non-negligible computational costs. Table 1 presents the cross-architecture
results of GCOND (Jin et al., 2022b) across six well-known
GNNs, including GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), SGC (Wu
et al., 2019), PPNP (Klicpera et al., 2019), ChebyNet (Def-

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are proven effective in a
variety of graph-related tasks (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018). However, the non-Euclidean nature of
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunication, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Chuan Shi <shichuan@bupt.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

