Latent Space Symmetry Discovery

Jianke Yang 1 Nima Dehmamy 2 Robin Walters 3 Rose Yu 1

V

Abstract
Equivariant neural networks require explicit
knowledge of the symmetry group. Automatic
symmetry discovery methods aim to relax this
constraint and learn invariance and equivariance from data. However, existing symmetry
discovery methods are limited to simple linear symmetries and cannot handle the complexity of real-world data. We propose a novel
generative model, Latent LieGAN (LaLiGAN),
which can discover symmetries of nonlinear
group actions. It learns a mapping from the
data space to a latent space where the symmetries become linear and simultaneously discovers symmetries in the latent space. Theoretically, we show that our model can express nonlinear symmetries under some conditions about
the group action. Experimentally, we demonstrate that our method can accurately discover
the intrinsic symmetry in high-dimensional dynamical systems. LaLiGAN also results in a wellstructured latent space that is useful for downstream tasks including equation discovery and
long-term forecasting. We make our code available at https://github.com/jiankeyang/LaLiGAN.

V
π′(g, ⋅ )

V/G ≃ ℝ+

G = SO(2)

ψ

ϕ
π(g)

Z

￼

Z

Figure 1. An example of SO(2) nonlinear group action π ′ on
V = R2 and its decomposition into an encoder ϕ, a linear representation π and a decoder ψ. Each trajectory is a group action
orbit containing a random v ∈ V .

articulate through programming. For example, dynamical
systems can evolve on a low-dimensional manifold with
simple symmetries, but the actions of the symmetries become highly nonlinear on high-dimensional observations.
Similarly, the action of SO(3) rotation become complicated
on 2D images of 3D objects (Garrido et al., 2023).
Recent years have seen exciting attempts towards automatic
symmetry discovery from data (Dehmamy et al., 2021;
Moskalev et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023),
but most of them search in only a limited space of symmetries, such as linear actions of discrete and continuous
groups. Symmetry discovery is successful only when observations are measured in an ideal coordinate system with
linear symmetry. Unfortunately, real-world data is complex and often contain nonlinear symmetries, such as highdimensional dynamical systems (Champion et al., 2019), or
2D images of 3D objects (Garrido et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Symmetry plays an important role in the success of deep
neural networks (Bronstein et al., 2021). Many equivariant
networks have been developed to enforce various symmetries in data from images to graphs (Weiler & Cesa, 2019;
Cohen et al., 2019a; Zaheer et al., 2017; Finzi et al., 2020;
Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Cohen et al., 2019b; Finzi et al.,
2021; Bekkers, 2019). However, a critical limitation of
existing equivariant networks is that they require knowing
the symmetry a priori. For complex real-world data, the
underlying symmetries may be unknown or challenging to

Another line of study focuses on learning equivariant representations from data (Park et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Dangovski et al., 2021; Quessard et al., 2020). These approaches
learn a latent embedding space with a given symmetry. However, they still require prior knowledge about the symmetry
in the latent space. They also assume additional information
about group transformation associated with each data point,
which is not always available in practice.

1
UCSD 2 IBM Research 3 Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Rose Yu <roseyu@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

