Neural Collapse for Cross-entropy Class-Imbalanced Learning with
Unconstrained ReLU Features Model
Hien Dang 1 2 Tho Tran 2 Tan Nguyen * 3 Nhat Ho * 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Cross-entropy (CE) is undoubtedly one of the most popular loss functions used for training neural networks in the
current deep learning paradigm. However, some crucial
aspects of training networks using this loss function have
not been fully explored yet, for example: i) Is there any
unique pattern that the models learn when training deep
neural networks until convergence, i.e., to reach zero loss?,
ii) How do the learned network parameters vary across data
distribution, training instances, and model architecture?, iii)
What are the geometries of the representations and the classifier obtained from minimizing CE loss?. Understanding
these questions is crucial for studying the training and generalization properties of deep neural networks. For instance,
it has been a long-standing problem that training networks
using CE loss under a long-tailed distribution dataset causes
a significant drop in accuracy, especially for classes with a
scarce amount of training samples. An important observation for this phenomenon is that the classifier weight vector
of a more frequent class tends to have a larger norm, thus
biasing the decision boundary toward the less frequent class.
As a consequence, a smaller volume of the feature space
is allocated for the minority classes, which leads to a drop
in performance (Kim & Kim, 2020; Kang et al., 2019; Cao
et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023; Kang et al.,
2020).

The current paradigm of training deep neural networks for classification tasks includes minimizing the empirical risk, pushing the training loss
value towards zero even after the training classification error has vanished. In this terminal
phase of training, it has been observed that the
last-layer features collapse to their class-means
and these class-means converge to the vertices of
a simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF). This
phenomenon is termed as Neural Collapse (N C).
However, this characterization only holds in classbalanced datasets where every class has the same
number of training samples. When the training
dataset is class-imbalanced, some N C properties
will no longer hold true, for example, the geometry of class-means will skew away from the simplex ETF. In this paper, we generalize N C to imbalanced regime for cross-entropy loss under the
unconstrained ReLU features model. We demonstrate that while the within-class features collapse
property still holds in this setting, the class-means
will converge to a structure consisting of orthogonal vectors with lengths dependent on the number
of training samples. Furthermore, we find that
the classifier weights (i.e., the last-layer linear
classifier) are aligned to the scaled and centered
class-means, with scaling factors dependent on
the number of training samples of each class. This
generalizes N C in the class-balanced setting. We
empirically validate our results through experiments on practical architectures and dataset.

A noticeable progress in answering these questions is the
discovery of Neural Collapse phenomenon (Papyan et al.,
2020). Neural Collapse (N C) reveals a common pattern
of the learned last-layer features and the classifier weight
of deep neural networks across canonical datasets and architectures. Specifically, N C consists of four properties
emerging in the terminal phase of training of training deep
neural networks for balanced datasets (i.e., every class has
the same number of training instances):

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 FPT Software AI
Center, Vietnam 3 Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Hien Dang
<danghoanghien1123@gmail.com>.

• (N C1) Variability collapse: features of the samples
within the same class converge to a unique vector (i.e.,
the class-mean), as training progresses.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• (N C2) Convergence to simplex ETF: the optimal
class-means have the same length and are equally and
maximally pairwise separated, i.e., they form a simplex
1

