Learning Optimal Deterministic Policies with Stochastic Policy Gradients

Alessandro Montenegro 1 Marco Mussi 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Matteo Papini 1

Abstract

function. Nonetheless, as always in RL, the exploration
problem has to be addressed, and practical methods involve
injecting noise in the actions or in the parameters. This
limits the application of PG methods in many real-world
scenarios, such as autonomous driving, industrial plants,
and robotic controllers. Indeed, stochastic policies typically
do not meet the reliability, safety, and traceability standards
of this kind of applications.

Policy gradient (PG) methods are successful approaches to deal with continuous reinforcement
learning (RL) problems. They learn stochastic
parametric (hyper)policies by either exploring in
the space of actions or in the space of parameters.
Stochastic controllers, however, are often undesirable from a practical perspective because of their
lack of robustness, safety, and traceability. In
common practice, stochastic (hyper)policies are
learned only to deploy their deterministic version.
In this paper, we make a step towards the theoretical understanding of this practice. After introducing a novel framework for modeling this scenario,
we study the global convergence to the best deterministic policy, under (weak) gradient domination
assumptions. Then, we illustrate how to tune the
exploration level used for learning to optimize the
trade-off between the sample complexity and the
performance of the deployed deterministic policy.
Finally, we quantitatively compare action-based
and parameter-based exploration, giving a formal
guise to intuitive results.

The problem of learning deterministic policies has been explicitly addressed in the PG literature by Silver et al. (2014)
with their deterministic policy gradient, which spawned
very successful deep RL algorithms (Lillicrap et al., 2016;
Fujimoto et al., 2018). This approach, however, is affected
by several drawbacks, mostly due to its inherent off-policy
nature. First, this makes DPG hard to analyze from a theoretical perspective: local convergence guarantees have been
established only recently, and only under assumptions that
are very demanding for deterministic policies (Xiong et al.,
2022). Furthermore, its practical versions (DDPG, Lillicrap
et al., 2016) are known to be very susceptible to hyperparameter tuning.
We study here a simpler and fairly common approach: that
of learning stochastic policies with PG algorithms, then deploying the corresponding deterministic version, “switching
off” the noise.1 Intuitively, the amount of exploration (e.g.,
the variance of a Gaussian policy) should be selected wisely.
Indeed, the smaller the exploration level, the closer the optimized objective is to that of a deterministic policy. At the
same time, with a small exploration, learning can severely
slow down and get stuck on bad local optima.

1. Introduction
Within reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018)
approaches, policy gradient (PG, Deisenroth et al., 2013)
algorithms have proved very effective in dealing with realworld control problems. Their advantages include the applicability to continuous state and action spaces (Peters &
Schaal, 2006), resilience to sensor and actuator noise (Gravell et al., 2020), robustness to partial observability (Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018), and the possibility of incorporating
prior knowledge in the policy design phase (Ghavamzadeh
& Engel, 2006), improving explainability (Likmeta et al.,
2020). PG algorithms search directly in the space of parametric policies for the one that maximizes a performance

Policy gradient methods can be partitioned based on the
space on which the exploration is carried out, distinguishing between: action-based (AB) and parameter-based (PB,
Sehnke et al., 2010) exploration. The first, of which REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) and GPOMDP (Baxter & Bartlett,
2001; Sutton et al., 1999) are the progenitor algorithms, performs exploration in the action space, with a stochastic (e.g.,
Gaussian) policy. On the other hand, PB exploration, introduced by Parameter-Exploring Policy Gradients (PGPE,
Sehnke et al., 2010), implements the exploration at the level
of policy parameters by means of a stochastic hyperpolicy.

1

Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133,
Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Alessandro Montenegro
<alessandro.montenegro@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
This can be observed in several libraries (e.g., Raffin et al.,
2021) and benchmarks (e.g., Duan et al., 2016).

1

