By Tying Embeddings You Are Assuming the Distributional Hypothesis

Francesco Bertolotti * 1 Walter Cazzola * 1

Abstract

vectors. It has been shown that foundation models, during training, organize word embeddings into a semantic
space (Wu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020) similarly to word
models such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013). While
word models have been extensively studied (Levy & Goldberg, 2014; Li et al., 2015; Yin & Shen, 2018), To the best of
our knowledge, the process responsible for the emergence
of a semantic structure, although well documented (Turian
et al., 2010) lacks a formal treatment.

In this work, we analyze both theoretically
and empirically the effect of tied input-output
embeddings—a popular technique that reduces
the model size while often improving training. Interestingly, we found that this technique
is connected to Harris (1954)’s distributional
hypothesis—often portrayed by the famous Firth
(1957)’s quote “a word is characterized by the
company it keeps”. Specifically, our findings indicate that words (or, more broadly, symbols) with
similar semantics tend to be encoded in similar
input embeddings, while words that appear in
similar contexts are encoded in similar output
embeddings (thus explaining the semantic space
arising in input and output embedding of foundational language models). As a consequence of
these findings, the tying of the input and output
embeddings is encouraged only when the distributional hypothesis holds for the underlying data.
These results also provide insight into the embeddings of foundation language models (which are
known to be semantically organized). Further, we
complement the theoretical findings with several
experiments supporting the claims.

In this work, we aim to address this issue by introducing
a concept already well-known in the context of programming languages—semantic equivalence. Briefly, two programs, p1 and p2 , are semantically equivalent if they produce the same output when given the same initial state ρ
(∀ρ : Jp1 K(ρ) = Jp2 K(ρ)) (Scott & Strachey, 1971). From
this definition, we can derive the notion of semantic equivalence for words, or more in general for symbols. Equipped
with this notion, we will be able to study and formally investigate why foundation models organize their embeddings
into a semantic space.
Remarkably, our findings indicate that under optimality and
distributional assumptions, both input and output embeddings must encode the same semantic information. We
believe that this result explains the effectiveness and popularity (Nguyen & Salazar, 2019; Levine et al., 2020; Cho
et al., 2021) of weight tying (also known as shared inputoutput embeddings) (Inan et al., 2016; Press & Wolf, 2017).

1. Introduction

Research Questions In this work, we aim to answer the
following research questions:

Masked Language Modeling (MLM) (Devlin et al., 2019)
and Causal Language Modeling (CLM) (Radford et al.,
2019) have become one of the most influential training
techniques for foundation models (Touvron et al., 2023; Gunasekar et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Raffel et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2023) in the context of Natural Language
Processing (NLP).

• RQ1 Why the input embeddings in foundation models encode semantic information?
• RQ2 Why the output embeddings in foundation
models encode semantic information?
• RQ3 Why input-output embeddings weight tying is
effective?

One of the core components of these models are
embeddings—tables mapping words to trainable parameter

2. Background

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Walter
Cazzola <cazzola@di.unimi.it>.

Input Embeddings. The input embedding layer is the
first layer found in language models. It maps symbols to
vectors of trainable parameters. The embedding layer is
usually represented with a parameter matrix E I ∈ RV ×d .
Where V is the vocabulary size and d is the size of each

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

