DiffDA: A Diffusion Model for Weather-scale Data Assimilation
Langwen Huang 1 Lukas Gianinazzi 1 Yuejiang Yu 1 Peter D. Dueben 2 Torsten Hoefler 1

Abstract

Data assimilation

Simulation

Post-processing
…

The generation of initial conditions via accurate
data assimilation is crucial for weather forecasting and climate modeling. We propose DiffDA as
a denoising diffusion model capable of assimilating atmospheric variables using predicted states
and sparse observations. Exploiting the similarity between a weather forecasting model and a
denoising diffusion model dedicated to weather
applications, we adapt the pretrained GraphCast
neural network as the backbone of the diffusion
model. Through experiments based on simulated
observations from the ERA5 reanalysis dataset,
our method can produce assimilated global atmospheric data consistent with observations at 0.25◦
(≈30km) resolution globally. This marks the highest resolution achieved by ML data assimilation
models. The experiments also show that the initial
conditions assimilated from sparse observations
(less than 0.96% of gridded data) and 48-hour
forecast can be used for forecast models with a
loss of lead time of at most 24 hours compared
to initial conditions from state-of-the-art data assimilation in ERA5. This enables the application
of the method to real-world applications, such as
creating reanalysis datasets with autoregressive
data assimilation.

Observations
(sparse)

Current weather state
(dense)

+12h
+6h
Predicted weather states
(dense)

Weather forecast product
(dense)

Figure 1. Diagram of a numerical weather forecasting pipeline. It
consists of data assimilation, simulation and post-processing. Data
assimilation produces gridded values from sparse observations and
predicted gridded values from previous time steps. Simulation
takes in gridded values and produces predictions in gridded values
at future time steps. Post-processing improves prediction so that it
is closer to future observations.

assimilation generates initial conditions for weather simulation models using predicted weather states and sparse
observations from various locations. The quality of these
weather simulation models depends heavily on data assimilation, as errors in initial conditions are one of the main
sources of forecast error (Bonavita et al., 2016). Additionally, data assimilation is employed in creating reanalysis
datasets, which contain reconstructed historical weather
variables as gridded fields. These reanalysis datasets play
a central role in weather and climate research (ipc, 2023;
Hersbach et al., 2020), and are essential for the training
of ML weather forecasting models (Pathak et al., 2022; Bi
et al., 2023; Lam et al., 2023).
Various data assimilation methods have been developed and
employed to address different characteristics of observation
data and system dynamics. Among these methods, variational data assimilation and the ensemble Kalman filter are
the most widely used methods in operational data assimilation (Bannister, 2017). The variational method solves an
optimization problem by minimizing a cost function that
measures the discrepancy between simulations and observations. It requires multiple iterations in which linearized
observation and evolution functions are evaluated to compute the gradient of the cost function. The linearized and
original versions of observation and evolution functions are
often implemented separately. This adds overhead because
the linearized functions have similar code complexity as the
original functions, and a lot of effort has to be invested in
maintaining the consistency of the original and linearized
code. The ensemble Kalman filter method updates the state

1. Introduction
Weather prediction plays an important role in our daily life.
Due to uncertainties in the prediction process, predicted
weather will inevitably deviate from actual weather. It is
necessary to “pull-back” the predicted weather state via
data assimilation, to align it with observations from weather
stations and satellites. Practically, as Figure 1 shows, data
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, ETH
Zürich, Switzerland 2 European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF), Reading, United Kingdom. Correspondence
to: Langwen Huang <langwen.huang@inf.ethz.ch>, Torsten Hoefler <torsten.hoefler@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

