Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Meets Leaf Sequencing in Radiotherapy

Riqiang Gao 1 Florin C. Ghesu 2 Simon Arberet 1 Shahab Basiri 3 Esa Kuusela 3 Martin Kraus 2
Dorin Comaniciu 1 Ali Kamen 1

Abstract
Dose Objectives

Optimal Fluence

In contemporary radiotherapy planning (RTP), a
Definition
Prediction
key module leaf sequencing is predominantly adROI Contours
Iterative Refinement
dressed by optimization-based approaches. In
(if needed)
this paper, we propose a novel deep reinforcement learning (DRL) model termed as Reinforced
Deliverable Plan
Leaf Sequencing
Sim. CT
Leaf Sequencer (RLS) in a multi-agent framework
Clinical
Goals/Configs
for leaf sequencing. The RLS model offers improvements to time-consuming iterative optimization steps via large-scale training and can control
Figure 1. Illustration of a typical RTP process. Three common
components are shown in the orange boxes. We focus on leaf
movement patterns through the design of reward
sequencing in this work. The term “optimization” in this paper
mechanisms. We have conducted experiments
refers to a series of methods that are not machine learning.
on four datasets with four metrics and compared
our model with a leading optimization sequencer.
through Planning Target Volume (PTV) while safeguarding
Our findings reveal that the proposed RLS model
healthy tissues, as indicated by Organs at Risk (OARs). In
can achieve reduced fluence reconstruction errors,
practical RT, the RTP should also consider that the plan
and potential faster convergence when integrated
Restricted © Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc., can
2022 be delivered in a reasonable time. Current RTPs are
in an optimization planner. Additionally, RLS
Page 3
dominant
by optimization pipelines in practical platforms
has shown promising results in a full artificial insuch
as
Varian
(Varian, 2023b) and Elekta (Elekta, 2023).
telligence RTP pipeline. We hope this pioneer
Though
different
treatment types are existing, e.g., intensitymulti-agent RL leaf sequencer can foster future
modulated
radiation
therapy (IMRT) (Mundt & Roeske,
research on machine learning for RTP.
2005) and volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) (Otto,
2008), their optimization pipelines share similar key components: dose objectives definition, optimal fluence prediction,
1. Introduction
and leaf sequencing to get feasible machine parameters, as
Radiotherapy (RT) stands as an essential cornerstone in the
shown in Figure 11 . Optimal fluence prediction estimates
realm of cancer treatment, recommended for approximately
a 2D intensity map of the radiation beam for each beam
half of cancer patients (Huynh et al., 2020). Despite techangle allowing for customizable dose delivery to meet the
nological advances, a substantial part of RT still depends
objectives, however, the practicality of the fluence may be
on labor-intensive and time-consuming planning pipelines
limited as it could potentially violate certain physical rules
from a diverse healthcare team (Elmore et al., 2019).
necessary for achievability. Leaf sequencing is to approximate optimal fluences with feasible machine movements.
Radiotherapy Planning (RTP), originates from 1890s, refers
Depending on the implementation details of algorithms, the
to the process to plan the appropriate external beam RT treatfluence map optimization and leaf sequencing can be perment for patients with cancer. Modern RTP involves tailorformed sequentially and iteratively.
ing personalized treatment plans to effectively target tumors
To learn knowledge from large-scale existing plans, deep supervised learning has been widely applied to dose objectives
definition and optimal fluence prediction modules (details
in Section 2). Leaf sequencing is relatively challenging

1

Digital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Healthineers,
Princeton NJ, USA 2 Digital Technology and Innovation, Siemens
Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany 3 Varian Medical Systems,
Siemens Healthineers, Helsinki, Finland. Correspondence to:
Riqiang Gao <riqiang.gao@siemens-healthineers.com>.

1
In-depth RTP introduction (background, terms, visuals, etc.)
is in Appendix A. Some leaf sequencing optimizations for VMAT
skip fluence prediction. Here we mainly discuss the branch with
fluence prediction in the pipeline, such as RapidArcTM (Varian).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

