Fast-Slow Test-Time Adaptation for
Online Vision-and-Language Navigation

Junyu Gao 1 2 Xuan Yao 1 2 Changsheng Xu 1 2 3

Abstract
…

The ability to accurately comprehend natural language instructions and navigate to the target location is essential for an embodied agent. Such
agents are typically required to execute user instructions in an online manner, leading us to explore the use of unlabeled test samples for effective online model adaptation. However, for online
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN), due to
the intrinsic nature of inter-sample online instruction execution and intra-sample multi-step action
decision, frequent updates can result in drastic
changes in model parameters, while occasional
updates can make the model ill-equipped to handle dynamically changing environments. Therefore, we propose a Fast-Slow Test-Time Adaptation (FSTTA) approach for online VLN by performing joint decomposition-accumulation analysis for both gradients and parameters in a unified framework. Extensive experiments show that
our method obtains impressive performance gains
on four popular benchmarks. Code is available
at https://github.com/Feliciaxyao/
ICML2024-FSTTA.

…

Online
Go into the bedroom
that is next to the patio
on level 2 and bring me
the footstool.

Go to the bathroom by
the bedroom with a
sitting area and clean the
mirror nearest the lounge.

VLN
Tasks

Go to the dining room on
level 1 and push in the
chair next to the door
closet to the wall.

(a) Online Vision-and-Language Navigation
Results on REVERIE ‘Val Unseen’ set
DUET

INT-1
36

35

Ours

Stable Update

Frequent Update with Different INTervals:

SPL
34

33

32

INT-2

INT-3

SR

INT-4

31

45

47

49

51

53

(b) Performance Comparison

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of online VLN. (b) Comparison between
TTA strategies on REVERIE (Qi et al., 2020) validation unseen
set using SPL and SR metrics. ‘DUET’ (Chen et al., 2022d) is the
base model, ‘Frequent Update’ means updating at certain intervals
within each sample, ‘Stable Update’ refers to initializing with the
original base model for each sample and using its best intra-sample
update interval INT=1. All these strategies adopt TENT (Wang
et al., 2021) for model updates. The results show that overly fast
or overly slow TTA fail to achieve significant improvements.

actions to navigate to the target location, serves as a useful
platform for examining the instruction-following ability.

1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence
Systems (MAIS), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CASIA) 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
ShenZhen, China. Correspondence to: Junyu Gao, Changsheng
Xu <{junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.

In practical applications, a trained VLN agent is required to
execute user instructions in various environments at different
times in an online manner, as depicted in Figure 1(a). However, owing to disparities in environmental factors, such as
distinct room types and objects, the trained agent inevitably
confront data discrepancies during online testing (Gu et al.,
2022; Guhur et al., 2021). This raises an important question: can an agent accumulate experience and enhance its
capabilities while executing instructions? However, due to
the lack of annotation, updating the model via supervised
online learning is impractical. In addition, other learning
paradigms like unsupervised domain adaptation or semisupervised learning are also infeasible, given considerations
for the issues of execution efficiency and privacy protection.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Recently, online Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) (Liang et al.,
2023; Niu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022a) has been recognized as an effective technique of online model updating

1. Introduction
Developing intelligent agents capable of adhering to human
directives remains a significant challenge in embodied AI.
Recently, Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) (Anderson et al., 2018; Qi et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022d; Yang
et al., 2023), which requires an agent to comprehend natural language instructions and subsequently perform proper

1

