Helpful or Harmful Data?
Fine-tuning-free Shapley Attribution for Explaining Language Model Predictions

Jingtan Wang * 1 2 Xiaoqiang Lin * 1 Rui Qiao * 1 Chuan-Sheng Foo 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

ingly more model parameters, then fine-tuning them with
labeled training data for downstream tasks. However, as
larger foundation models have more complexity and opaqueness, their predictions are hard to explain and justify. The
lack of explainability reduces the trustworthiness of foundation models, especially for systems in areas that involve
high-stakes decision-making such as healthcare, finance,
and legal justice (Rudin, 2019). As a result, instance attribution, also known as example-based explanation, has been
proposed in response to the increasing need for explainable
AI. Different from other types of explanation (e.g., feature
attribution (Li et al., 2016; Madsen et al., 2022; Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Sundararajan et al., 2017)), instance attribution
traces the effect of the labeled training examples on the
resultant model parameters (Barshan et al., 2020; Guo et al.,
2021; Han et al., 2020; Pezeshkpour et al., 2021). On a
high level, this approach offers a better understanding of
the fine-tuned model by sifting the influential training examples with larger effects on the model performance. On a
detailed level, it explains the model prediction on each data
point by highlighting the most relevant training examples.
Besides, instance attribution can also be practically used for
data selection (Xia et al., 2024), the identification of dataset
artifacts (Han & Tsvetkov, 2021), model debugging (Lertvittayakumjorn & Toni, 2021), wrong label detection, adversarial example crafting (Koh & Liang, 2017), and data pricing
in collaborative machine learning (Sim et al., 2022).

The increasing complexity of foundational models underscores the necessity for explainability,
particularly for fine-tuning, the most widely used
training method for adapting models to downstream tasks. Instance attribution, one type of
explanation, attributes the model prediction to
each training example by an instance score. However, the robustness of instance scores, specifically towards dataset resampling, has been overlooked. To bridge this gap, we propose a notion of robustness on the sign of the instance
score. We theoretically and empirically demonstrate that the popular leave-one-out-based methods lack robustness, while the Shapley value behaves significantly better, but at a higher computational cost. Accordingly, we introduce an
efficient fine-tuning-free approximation of the
Shapley value (FreeShap) for instance attribution based on the neural tangent kernel. We empirically demonstrate that FreeShap outperforms
other methods for instance attribution and other
data-centric applications such as data removal,
data selection, and wrong label detection, and further generalize our scale to large language models (LLMs). Our code is available at https:
//github.com/JTWang2000/FreeShap.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning is primarily driven by pretraining foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) such as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020), and
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) on massive datasets with increas-

Figure 1. An example of non-robust instance attribution. The same
training example receives different signs of the instance score when
it is placed in different datasets sampled from the same task.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore 2 Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR). Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
<lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Given a dataset for a downstream task, instance attribution
calculates an instance score for each training example. A
positive instance score deems the example “helpful” for
the task as it improves the model performance, while a

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

