Adversarial Robustness Limits via Scaling-Law and Human-Alignment Studies

Brian R. Bartoldson 1 James Diffenderfer 1 Konstantinos Parasyris 1 Bhavya Kailkhura 1

Abstract

2023; Gemini Team, 2023). However, model performances
typically falter when data is adversarially perturbed by attacks humans are robust to (Szegedy et al., 2013), calling
into question model trustworthiness. Progress on this problem has been made through adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017), but even on the “toy”
dataset CIFAR10, the best robustness to ℓ∞ attacks is just
71% according to RobustBench (Croce et al., 2020).

This paper revisits the simple, long-studied, yet
still unsolved problem of making image classifiers
robust to imperceptible perturbations. Taking CIFAR10 as an example, SOTA clean accuracy is
about 100%, but SOTA robustness to ℓ∞ -norm
bounded perturbations barely exceeds 70%. To
understand this gap, we analyze how model size,
dataset size, and synthetic data quality affect robustness by developing the first scaling laws for
adversarial training. Our scaling laws reveal inefficiencies in prior art and provide actionable
feedback to advance the field. For instance, we
discovered that SOTA methods diverge notably
from compute-optimal setups, using excess compute for their level of robustness. Leveraging
a compute-efficient setup, we surpass the prior
SOTA with 20% (70%) fewer training (inference)
FLOPs. We trained various compute-efficient
models, with our best achieving 74% AutoAttack
accuracy (+3% gain). However, our scaling laws
also predict robustness slowly grows then plateaus
at 90%: dwarfing our new SOTA by scaling is impractical, and perfect robustness is impossible. To
better understand this predicted limit, we carry out
a small-scale human evaluation on the AutoAttack
data that fools our top-performing model. Concerningly, we estimate that human performance
also plateaus near 90%, which we show to be attributable to ℓ∞ -constrained attacks’ generation
of invalid images not consistent with their original
labels. Having characterized limiting roadblocks,
we outline promising paths for future research.

The absence of a strong adversarial defense for a simple
dataset like CIFAR10 is concerning because it suggests
that robustifying foundation models may be impractical or
even impossible (Zou et al., 2023; Bailey et al., 2023; Jain
et al., 2023). Therefore, we aim to understand, “Why is the
CIFAR10 adversarial robustness problem unsolved?”
Our experiments consider the possibility that the answer
is a lack of scale used by state-of-the-art methods (Wang
et al., 2023). Yet, we find that scale is not enough to achieve
robustness: even with unlimited CIFAR10 data, we estimate
that reaching human performance would require roughly
1030 FLOPs (see Figure 1), about 3,000 years of TF32
matrix math on 25,000 MI300 or H100 GPUs. Therefore,
meaningful progress on this problem requires the design of
more efficient training algorithms and improved architectures, rather than simply scaling.
Surprisingly, even if human performance could be reached,
our analysis suggests that this problem will still be “unsolved”: We find that human performance is around 90%
on AutoAttack data (see Figure 1), with the ∼10% error
induced by invalid adversarial data that no longer fits its
label. Thus, attack formulations must be rethought to make
this problem solvable; e.g., attacks should only produce
valid images that abide by the original label.
Our contributions (see Appendix A) are broadly as follows:

1. Introduction

1. We develop scaling laws for adversarial robustness, integrating the data quality of generative models. Our scaling
laws can accurately predict robustness of unseen configurations, recommend optimal resource allocations, and identify
opportunities to reduce model size (raise inference speed).

Neural networks match human performance on several tasks
requiring processing of vision and text data (Achiam et al.,
1
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Correspondence to:
Brian and Bhavya <bartoldson@llnl.gov, kailkhura1@llnl.gov>.

2. By applying actionable guidelines from our scaling laws,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

See code or take online quiz via https://github.com/
bbartoldson/Adversarial-Robustness-Limits.

1

