Centralized Selection with Preferences in the Presence of Biases
L. Elisa Celis 1 Amit Kumar 2 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 1 Andrew Xu 1

Abstract

candidates are taken into account. Examples include the
Joint Seat Allocation Authority (JOSAA) in India, which
places over 50,000 students in top engineering colleges each
year (Baswana et al., 2019; JOSAA, 2022), and comparable
centralized allocation mechanisms across China (Wikipedia
contributors, 2024b). Other examples include public schools
in NYC and Boston, which have used centralized admissions systems (Roth & Sotomayor, 1992; Roth & Peranson,
1999), and online labor markets (such as TaskRabbit) that
use centralized systems to match workers to tasks based on
their skills and preferences for working hours, location, and
type-of-task (Hannák et al., 2017; TaskRabbit, 2014).

This paper considers the scenario in which there
are multiple institutions, each with a limited capacity for candidates, and candidates, each with
preferences over the institutions. A central entity evaluates the utility of each candidate to the
institutions, and the goal is to select candidates
for each institution in a way that maximizes utility while also considering the candidates’ preferences. The paper focuses on the setting in which
candidates are divided into multiple groups and
the observed utilities of candidates in some groups
are biased–systematically lower than their true
utilities. The first result is that, in these biased settings, prior algorithms can lead to selections with
sub-optimal true utility and significant discrepancies in the fraction of candidates from each group
that get their preferred choices. Subsequently,
an algorithm is presented along with proof that
it produces selections that achieve near-optimal
group fairness with respect to preferences while
also nearly maximizing the true utility under distributional assumptions. Further, extensive empirical validation of these results in real-world
and synthetic settings, in which the distributional
assumptions may not hold, are presented.

Several works in Game Theory (Roth, 1989; Aziz et al.,
2016), Machine Learning (Das & Kamenica, 2005; Muthukrishnan, 2009; Liu et al., 2020; 2021; Min et al., 2022), and
Economics (Roth, 1985; Roth & Peranson, 1999; Liu et al.,
2014; Rastegari et al., 2013) examine this centralized selection problem and its various forms. The variant of interest
here is where candidates’ utilities u1 , u2 , . . . , un ≥ 0 are
cardinal and their preferences are ordinal. The utilities can
denote candidates’ test scores, performance in interviews, or
suitability for hiring. Candidate i’s preferences are given by
a ranking σi of the p institutions, ordered from most to least
preferred. The Gale-Shapley algorithm (Gale & Shapley,
1962) for this problem orders candidates in decreasing order
of utility and assigns them to their most preferred institution
which still has empty slots. This algorithm can be shown
to maximize utility and ensure a type of stability–there are
no two candidates who both prefer each other’s assigned
institution to the ones they have been assigned.

1. Introduction
This paper studies a centralized selection problem that occurs in high-stakes contexts such as education and employment. In this setting there are p institutions, each
P with
capacities k1 , k2 , . . . , kp , and n candidates, and i ki is
much less than n. A central entity evaluates the utility of
each candidate to the institutions (same for each institution)
and the candidates declare preferences for the institutions.
The high-level goal of this entity is to then select a subset
of at most kℓ candidates for ℓ-th institution while trying to
maximize total utility and ensuring the preferences of the

However, the true or latent utilities of candidates are often
estimated through evaluation processes like tests, interviews,
or user ratings, which are known to yield biased estimates
against underprivileged groups (Rooth, 2010; Kite & Whitley, 2016; Régner et al., 2019; Elsesser, 2019; Moss-Racusin
et al., 2012; Wennerås & Wold, 1997; Lyness & Heilman,
2006; Celis et al., 2023). Standardized exams like the SAT,
GRE, and ACT, which are often pivotal in college admissions, disproportionately affect candidates from minority
and low-income demographics (Elsesser, 2019). Further examples of biased evaluations include biased peer-review of
fellowship applications against women (Wennerås & Wold,
1997), and stricter promotion standards for women in managerial positions (Lyness & Heilman, 2006).

1
Yale University 2 IIT Delhi. Correspondence to: Nisheeth K.
Vishnoi <nisheeth.vishnoi@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

