Barrier Algorithms for Constrained Non-Convex Optimization

Pavel Dvurechensky 1 Mathias Staudigl 2
2. A : E → Rm is a linear operator assigning each
element x ∈ E to a vector in Rm and having full
rank, i.e., im(A) = Rm , b ∈ Rm (all the rows of A
are linearly independent and there are no redundant,
linearly dependent constraints);

Abstract
In this paper, we theoretically show that interiorpoint methods based on self-concordant barriers possess favorable global complexity beyond
their standard application area of convex optimization. To do that we propose first- and
second-order methods for non-convex optimization problems with general convex set constraints
and linear constraints. Our methods attain a
suitably defined class of approximate first- or
second-order KKT points with the worst-case iteration complexity similar to unconstrained problems, namely O(ε−2 ) (first-order) and O(ε−3/2 )
(second-order), respectively.

3. The feasible set X̄ = K̄ ∩ L with L = {x ∈ E|Ax = b}
has nonempty relative interior denoted by X = K ∩ L;
4. f : E → R is possibly non-convex, continuous on X̄
and continuously differentiable on X;
5. Problem (Opt) admits a global solution.
fmin (X) = min{f (x)|x ∈ X̄}.

As a main tool for developing our algorithms, we use a selfconcordant barrier (SCB) h(x) for the set K̄, see (Nesterov
& Nemirovski, 1994) and Definition 1.2. Using the barrier h,
our algorithms are designed to reduce the potential function

1. Introduction

Fµ (x) = f (x) + µh(x),

Interior-point methods are a universal and very powerful tool
for convex optimization (Nesterov & Nemirovskii, 1994;
Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004) that allows one to obtain favorable global complexity guarantees for a variety of problems with many applications. Much less is known about the
complexity guarantees for such methods in the non-convex
world, especially important in machine learning applications
such as training neural networks. This paper aims to fill this
gap in the theoretical analysis of interior-point methods in
application to optimization with non-convex objectives.

x

(1)

where µ > 0 is a (typically) small penalty parameter.
This approach has the following advantages compared to
other approaches to solving (Opt).
1. Unlike proximal- or projection-based approaches
(Ghadimi & Lan, 2016; Bogolubsky et al., 2016; Cartis
et al., 2019; 2012a; Curtis et al., 2017; Cartis et al.,
2012b; Dvurechensky, 2017; Birgin & Martı́nez, 2018;
Cartis et al., 2018; 2019), our approach does not require evaluation of a costly projection onto the feasible
set X̄ = K̄ ∩ L.

Let E be a finite-dimensional vector space with inner product ⟨·, ·⟩ and Euclidean norm ∥·∥. Our goal is to solve
constrained optimization problems of the form
min f (x) s.t.: Ax = b, x ∈ K̄.

We let

2. Unlike splitting methods or augmented Lagrangian algorithms (Birgin & Martı́nez, 2020; Grapiglia & Yuan,
2020; Andreani et al., 2019; 2021) our algorithms generate feasible approximate solutions and have complexity guarantees similar to the optimal complexity
guarantees for unconstraied non-convex optimization.

(Opt)

Our main assumption is as follows:
Assumption 1.1. 1. K̄ ⊂ E is a closed convex set with
nonempty relative interior K;

3. Since our algorithms generate a sequence of relatively
interior points, the objective f does not need to be
differentiable at the relative boundary. A prominent example of such applications is the nonlinear regression
problem with sparsity penalty:

min f (x) = ℓ(x) + λ∥x∥pp ,
(2)

1
Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics,
Berlin, Germany 2 University of Mannheim, Mannheim,
Germany.
Correspondence to:
Pavel Dvurechensky
<pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

x≥0

1

