FairProof : Confidential and Certifiable Fairness for Neural Networks

Chhavi Yadav 1 Amrita Roy Chowdhury 1 Dan Boneh 2 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1

Abstract
Machine learning models are increasingly used
in societal applications, yet legal and privacy concerns demand that they very often be kept confidential. Consequently, there is a growing distrust about the fairness properties of these models in the minds of consumers, who are often at
the receiving end of model predictions. To this
end, we propose FairProof – a system that uses
Zero-Knowledge Proofs (a cryptographic primitive) to publicly verify the fairness of a model,
while maintaining confidentiality. We also propose a fairness certification algorithm for fullyconnected neural networks which is befitting to
ZKPs and is used in this system. We implement FairProof in Gnark and demonstrate empirically that our system is practically feasible.
Code is available at https://github.com/
infinite-pursuits/FairProof.

Figure 1: Pictorial Representation of FairProof

is a solution which allows for public verification of the fairness of a model and ensures that the same model is used
for every prediction (model uniformity) while maintaining
model confidentiality. The canonical approach to evaluating
fairness is a statistics-based third-party audit (Yadav et al.,
2022; Yan & Zhang, 2022; Pentyala et al., 2022). This approach however is replete with problems arising from the
usage of a reference dataset, the need for a trusted thirdparty, and lack of guarantees of model uniformity (Fukuchi
et al., 2019; Shamsabadi et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Recent usage of ML models in high-stakes societal applications (Khandani et al., 2010; Brennan et al., 2009; Datta
et al., 2014) has raised serious concerns about their fairness (Vigdor, November, 2019; Dastin, October 2018; Wallarchive & Schellmannarchive, June, 2021). As a result,
there is growing distrust in the minds of a consumer at the
receiving end of ML-based decisions (Dwork & Minow,
2022). In order to increase consumer trust, there is a need
for developing technology that enables public verification
of the fairness properties of these models.

We address the aforementioned challenges by proposing a
system called FairProof involving two parts: 1) a fairness
certification algorithm which outputs a certificate of fairness , and 2) a cryptographic protocol using commitments
and Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) that guarantees model
uniformity and gives a proof that the certificate is correct.
Given an input query, the fairness certification algorithm
outputs how fair the model is at that point according to a
fairness metric. The metric we use is local Individual Fairness (IF) (Dwork et al., 2012; John et al., 2020; Benussi
et al., 2022; Bertrand & Mullainathan, 2004), which is desirable for two reasons. First, it evaluates fairness of the
model at a specific data point (rather than for the entire input
space) – this allows us to give a personalized certificate to
every customer, as would be required by customer-facing
organizations. Second, it works on the model post-training,
making it completely agnostic to the training pipeline.

A major barrier to such verification is that legal and privacy
concerns demand that models be kept confidential by organizations. The resulting lack of verifiability can lead to
potential misbehavior, such as model swapping, wherein
a malicious entity uses different models for different customers leading to unfair behavior. Therefore what is needed
1

University of California, San Diego 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to: <cyadav@ucsd.edu>, <aroychowdhury@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

How do we design a certification algorithm for the chosen
metric? We observe that certifying local IF can be reduced
1

