Generative Modeling on Manifolds Through
Mixture of Riemannian Diffusion Processes
Jaehyeong Jo 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract

derexplored, while they are required for wide application:
For example, the earth and climate science data (Karpatne
et al., 2018; Mathieu & Nickel, 2020) lives in the sphere,
whereas protein structures (Jumper et al., 2021; Watson
et al., 2022) and robotic movements (Simeonov et al., 2022)
are best represented by the group SE(3), and 3D computer
graphics shapes (Hoppe et al., 1992) can be identified as
a general closed manifold. However, previous generative
methods are ill-suited for modeling these data as they do not
take into consideration the specific geometry describing the
data space and may assign a non-zero probability to regions
outside the desired space.

Learning the distribution of data on Riemannian
manifolds is crucial for modeling data from nonEuclidean space, which is required by many applications in diverse scientific fields. Yet, existing
generative models on manifolds suffer from expensive divergence computation or rely on approximations of heat kernel. These limitations restrict
their applicability to simple geometries and hinder scalability to high dimensions. In this work,
we introduce the Riemannian Diffusion Mixture,
a principled framework for building a generative
diffusion process on manifolds. Instead of following the denoising approach of previous diffusion models, we construct a diffusion process
using a mixture of bridge processes derived on
general manifolds without requiring heat kernel
estimations. We develop a geometric understanding of the mixture process, deriving the drift as a
weighted mean of tangent directions to the data
points that guides the process toward the data distribution. We further propose a scalable training
objective for learning the mixture process that
readily applies to general manifolds. Our method
achieves superior performance on diverse manifolds with dramatically reduced number of intraining simulation steps for general manifolds.1

Recent works (Bortoli et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022) extend the diffusion generative framework to the Riemannian
manifolds that learn to reverse the noising process, similar
to Euclidean diffusion models. Although diffusion models
have been shown to successfully model the distribution on
simple manifolds, e.g., sphere and torus, they have difficulty
in training since the score matching objective either relies
on an imprecise approximation of the intractable heat kernel
that degrades the performance or requires the computation
of the divergence which is computationally expensive and
scales poorly to high dimensions. In addition, previous
diffusion models are geometrically not intuitive as their generative processes are parameterized by the score function
which does not provide explicit geometric interpretation.
On the other hand, continuous normalizing flow (CNF) models on manifold (Mathieu & Nickel, 2020; Rozen et al.,
2021; Ben-Hamu et al., 2022; Chen & Lipman, 2024) aim to
learn the continuous-time flow by parameterizing the vector
field. While CNF models leverage deterministic processes
and alleviate the challenges of leveraging Brownian motion,
most of the CNF models require computation of divergence
during training that cannot even scale to moderately high
dimensions and further cannot be readily adapted to general
geometries. Even though several works (Rozen et al., 2021;
Ben-Hamu et al., 2022; Chen & Lipman, 2024) proposed
simulation-free methods on simple manifolds, they still require in-training simulation for general manifolds which
necessitates a large number of steps to obtain accurate trajectories for the deterministic process.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have shown great success in learning the distributions of the data represented in Euclidean
space, e.g., images and text. While the focus of the previous works has been biased toward data in the Euclidean
space, modeling the distribution of the data that naturally
resides in manifolds with specific geometry has been un1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
DeepAuto.ai.
Correspondence to: Jaehyeong Jo <harryjo97@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Code: github.com/harryjo97/riemannian-diffusion-mixture

