A Bayesian Approach to Online Planning

Nir Greshler 1 David Ben Eli 1 Carmel Rabinovitz 1 Gabi Guetta 1 Liran Gispan 1 Guy Zohar 1 Aviv Tamar 2

Abstract
The combination of Monte Carlo tree search
and neural networks has revolutionized online
planning. As neural network approximations
are often imperfect, we ask whether uncertainty
estimates about the network outputs could
be used to improve planning. We develop a
Bayesian planning approach that facilitates such
uncertainty quantification, inspired by classical
ideas from the meta-reasoning literature. We
propose a Thompson sampling based algorithm
for searching the tree of possible actions, for
which we prove the first (to our knowledge) finite
time Bayesian regret bound, and propose an
efficient implementation for a restricted family of
posterior distributions. In addition we propose
a variant of the Bayes-UCB method applied
to trees. Empirically, we demonstrate that on
the ProcGen Maze and Leaper environments,
when the uncertainty estimates are accurate
but the neural network output is inaccurate,
our Bayesian approach searches the tree much
more effectively. In addition, we investigate
whether popular uncertainty estimation methods are accurate enough to yield significant
gains in planning. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/nirgreshler/
bayesian-online-planning.

Q = 15 ± 10

Q = 20 ± 2

Figure 1. Example of value estimation errors during search

recently, planning with large language models (Zhang et al.,
2023; Mankowitz et al., 2023). In the standard problem
setting, as we consider here, a model of the world is known,
its state is fully observed, and an agent must sequentially
take actions that yield a high cumulative reward.
For almost all realistic problems, calculating the optimal
sequence of actions is intractable, and some approximations
must be made. For the past two decades, the dominant approximation approach has been Monte-Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) – a stochastic traversal of the search tree that balances exploration and exploitation using an upper confidence bound (UCB) (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006). Breakthrough performance in several games was achieved by the
seminal AlphaZero, an extension of MCTS with neural network approximations of a value function and a policy, which
considerably cut down the search effort (Silver et al., 2018).
When the online search has a limited budget, as is the case
in any real-time application, errors in the neural network
approximations can be problematic for MCTS. As an example, consider the situation in Figure 1, where the search
has reached a state with two possible actions, with actionvalue estimates of 15 and 20. MCTS will choose the second,
higher value action repeatedly, until the low visit count of
the unexplored action in the UCB term will dominate, and
only then will it explore the first action. However, if we were
to know in advance that the uncertainty in the action-value
estimates are ±10 and ±2, respectively, then we should explore the first action much more frequently, as its low-value
estimate may likely be wrong. Unfortunately, MCTS, and
its AlphaZero variants are frequentist methods, and do not
naturally take such uncertainty information into account.1

1. Introduction
Online planning is fundamental to various decision making
problems, ranging from game playing, such as Chess and
Go (Silver et al., 2018), to robotic manipulation and navigation (Finn & Levine, 2017; Shim et al., 2003), autonomous
driving (Williams et al., 2017; Cesari et al., 2017), and more
1

General Motors, Advanced Technical Center, Israel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Nir Greshler <nir.greshler@gm.com>, Aviv Tamar
<avivt@technion.ac.il>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

We are mainly interested in epistemic uncertainty here (Der Kiureghian & Ditlevsen, 2009). For aleatoric uncertainty, frequentist
methods such as Audibert et al. (2009) are well suited.

1

