Simulation-Based Inference with Quantile Regression

He Jia (贾赫) 1

Abstract

mate Bayesian Computation (ABC) variants, which employ
a distance metric in the data space and approximate true posterior samples using realizations whose simulated data are
“close enough” to the observation (e.g. Tavaré et al., 1997;
Pritchard et al., 1999; Beaumont et al., 2002; 2009). However, these methods are prone to the curse of dimensionality
and prove inadequate for higher-dimensional applications.

We present Neural Quantile Estimation (NQE), a
novel Simulation-Based Inference (SBI) method
based on conditional quantile regression. NQE autoregressively learns individual one dimensional
quantiles for each posterior dimension, conditioned on the data and previous posterior dimensions. Posterior samples are obtained by interpolating the predicted quantiles using monotonic
cubic Hermite spline, with specific treatment for
the tail behavior and multi-modal distributions.
We introduce an alternative definition for the
Bayesian credible region using the local Cumulative Density Function (CDF), offering substantially faster evaluation than the traditional Highest
Posterior Density Region (HPDR). In case of limited simulation budget and/or known model misspecification, a post-processing calibration step
can be integrated into NQE to ensure the unbiasedness of the posterior estimation with negligible
additional computational cost. We demonstrate
that NQE achieves state-of-the-art performance
on a variety of benchmark problems.

In recent years, a series of neural-network-based SBI methods have been proposed, which can be broadly categorized
into three groups. Neural Likelihood Estimation (NLE, Papamakarios et al., 2019b; Lueckmann et al., 2019) fits the
likelihood using a neural density estimator, typically based
on Normalizing Flows. The posterior is then evaluated
by multiplying the likelihood with the prior, and posterior
samples can be drawn using Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC). Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE, Papamakarios
& Murray, 2016; Lueckmann et al., 2017; Greenberg et al.,
2019) uses neural density estimators to approximate the
posterior, thereby enabling direct posterior sample draws
without running MCMC. Neural Ratio Estimation (NRE,
Hermans et al., 2020) employs classifiers to estimate density
ratios, commonly selected as the likelihood-to-evidence ratio. Indeed, Durkan et al. (2020) demonstrates that NRE can
be unified with specific types of NPE under a general contrastive learning framework. Each method has its sequential
counterpart, namely SNLE, SNPE, and SNRE, respectively.
Whereas standard NLE, NPE, and NRE allocate new simulations based on the prior, allowing them to be applied to any
observation data (i.e., they are amortized), their sequential
counterparts allocate new simulations based on the inference
results from previous iterations and must be trained specifically for each observation. These neural-network-based
methods typically surpass traditional ABC methods in terms
of inference accuracy under given simulation budgets. See
Cranmer et al. (2020) for a review and Lueckmann et al.
(2021) for a comprehensive benchmark of prevalent SBI
methods.

1. Introduction
Given the likelihood p(x|θ) of a stochastic forward model
and observation data x, Bayes’ theorem postulates that the
underlying model parameters θ follow the posterior distribution p(θ|x) ∝ p(x|θ)p(θ), where p(θ) represents the prior.
In many applications, however, we are restricted to simulating the data x ∼ p(x|θ), while the precise closed form
of p(x|θ) remains unavailable. Simulation-Based Inference
(SBI), also known as Likelihood-Free Inference (LFI) or
Implicit Likelihood Inference (ILI), conducts Bayesian inference directly from these simulations, circumventing the
need to explicitly formulate a tractable likelihood function.
Early research in this field primarily consists of Approxi-

Quantile Regression (QR), as introduced by Koenker & Bassett Jr (1978), estimates the conditional quantiles of the
response variable over varying predictor variables. Many
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms can be extended to quantile regression by simply transitioning to a weighted L1 loss
(e.g. Meinshausen & Ridgeway, 2006; Rodrigues & Pereira,
2020; Tang et al., 2022). In this paper, we introduce Neural

1
Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University,
USA. Correspondence to: He Jia <hejia@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

