Irregular Multivariate Time Series Forecasting:
A Transformable Patching Graph Neural Networks Approach

Weijia Zhang 1 Chenlong Yin 1 Hao Liu 1 2 Xiaofang Zhou 2 Hui Xiong 1 2

Abstract

regularly sampled and fully observed MTS (Lim & Zohren,
2021). The forecasting challenges associated with Irregular Multivariate Time Series (IMTS), characterized by
their irregular sampling intervals and missing data, have
received significantly less attention. Indeed, IMTS are
prevalent across a wide range of subject areas, such as
healthcare, biomechanics, climate science, astronomy, and
finance (Rubanova et al., 2019; De Brouwer et al., 2019;
Yao et al., 2018; Vio et al., 2013; Engle & Russell, 1998;
Zhang et al., 2021a). Accurate forecasting of IMTS serves
as the foundation to support various significant activities
from making informed decisions to planning with foresight.

Forecasting of Irregular Multivariate Time Series (IMTS) is critical for numerous areas, such as
healthcare, biomechanics, climate science, and
astronomy. Despite existing research addressing irregularities in time series through ordinary
differential equations, the challenge of modeling correlations between asynchronous IMTS remains underexplored. To bridge this gap, this
study proposes Transformable Patching Graph
Neural Networks (T-PATCH GNN), which transforms each univariate irregular time series into
a series of transformable patches encompassing
a varying number of observations with uniform
temporal resolution. It seamlessly facilitates local
semantics capture and inter-time series correlation modeling while avoiding sequence length explosion in aligned IMTS. Building on the aligned
patching outcomes, we then present time-adaptive
graph neural networks to model dynamic intertime series correlation based on a series of learned
time-varying adaptive graphs. We demonstrate
the remarkable superiority of T-PATCH GNN on
a comprehensive IMTS forecasting benchmark
we build, which contains four real-world scientific datasets covering healthcare, biomechanics
and climate science, and seventeen competitive
baselines adapted from relevant research fields.1

Unlike regular MTS, the modeling and analysis for IMTS
is more challenging due to the inherent irregularity within
the series and asynchrony between them (Horn et al., 2020).
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), given a set of historical IMTS
observations and forecasting queries, the IMTS forecasting
problem aims to accurately predict the values in correspondence to these queries. Although a few proactive efforts have
been made for IMTS forecasting (Rubanova et al., 2019;
De Brouwer et al., 2019; Biloš et al., 2021; Schirmer et al.,
2022), these works mainly focus on handling irregularity
within the time series based on neural Ordinary Differential
Equations (ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018), failing to explicitly
consider the crucial correlations between multiple series.
Moreover, calculating ODE solvers is computationally expensive due to the numerical integration process, leading to
poor efficiency in both training and inference stages (Biloš
et al., 2021; Shukla & Marlin, 2020).
It is a non-trivial task for accurate IMTS forecasting, which
faces three major challenges. (1) The first challenge is the
irregularity in intra-time series dependency modeling. The
varying time intervals between adjacent observations disrupt
the consistent flow of time series data, making it difficult
for classical time series forecasting models (Lim & Zohren,
2021) to accurately capture the underlying temporal dynamics and dependencies (Rubanova et al., 2019; Che et al.,
2018). (2) The second challenge is the asynchrony in intertime series correlation modeling. While there are always
considerable correlations between time series of different
variables, the observations among IMTS can be significantly
misaligned at time due to irregular sampling or missing data.

1. Introduction
While the forecasting of Multivariate Time Series (MTS)
has been extensively investigated, most research focuses on
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou) 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Hao Liu <liuh@ust.hk>, Hui Xiong
<xionghui@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code and datasets are available at https://github.
com/usail-hkust/t-PatchGNN.

1

