In-context Learning on Function Classes Unveiled for Transformers

Zhijie Wang 1 Bo Jiang 2 Shuai Li 2

Abstract

ence stages are two main stages for ICL (Dong et al., 2022).
During the training stage, existing ICL studies mainly take
a pretrained LLM as a backbone, and optionally warmup
the model to strengthen and generalize the ICL ability (Min
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2022). Towards the inference stage, empirical works study
what an LLM or its cornerstone, the transformer, can infer
(Garg et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2024), while theoretical works
take different measures to explain the mechanism of ICL inference (Von Oswald et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2022; Akyürek
et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2021).

Transformer-based neural sequence models exhibit a remarkable ability to perform in-context
learning. Given some training examples, a pretrained model can make accurate predictions on
an unseen input. This paper studies why transformers can learn different types of function
classes in-context. We first show by construction
that there exists a family of transformers (with
different activation functions) that implement approximate gradient descent on the parameters of
neural networks, and we provide an upper bound
for the number of heads, hidden dimensions, and
layers of the transformer. We also show that a
transformer can learn linear functions, the indicator function of a unit ball, and smooth functions in-context by learning neural networks that
approximate them. The above instances mainly
focus on a transformer pre-trained on single tasks.
We also prove that when pre-trained on two tasks:
linear regression and classification, a transformer
can make accurate predictions on both tasks simultaneously. Our results move beyond linearity
in terms of in-context learning instances and provide a comprehensive understanding of why transformers can learn many types of function classes
through the bridge of neural networks.

The paper attempts to explain why transformer-based predictors can learn different function classes in-context. We
interpret in-context learning of a function as learning implicit neural networks that approximate the function. Currently, there are mainly two understandings of in-context
learning: one is based on gradient descent (Von Oswald
et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2022; Akyürek et al., 2022), and the
other views it as Bayesian inference (Xie et al., 2021). We
adopt the former perspective to prove that, when trained
properly, transformers can perform approximate gradient
descent on the parameters of neural networks without any
parameter updates or fine-tuning. These neural networks
serve as approximators of different functions.
In Section 3, we prove by construction that a family of
transformers, with a wide range of activation functions (not
necessarily restricted to the commonly used ReLU), can
implement a step of approximate gradient descent on the
parameters of neural networks. We start by investigating
2-layer neural networks and then generalize our findings
to the n-layer neural network setting. An upper bound for
the number of heads, hidden dimension, and the number
of layers required for the transformer is provided. Among
these, the number of layers is presented in a recursive fashion for the n-layer neural network setting. Moreover, we
extend our result to multi-step gradient descent and discover
an lµ = Const. relationship between the transformer layer l
and the gradient descent step µ.

1. Introduction
In-context learning (ICL) is a phenomenon first observed in
natural language processing (NLP) problems where large
language models (LLM) like GPT-4 can make accurate predictions based on few prompts without any update on model
parameters. People’s understanding on in-context learning
is still limited. How and why neural sequence models can
learn in-context remain a black box. The training and infer1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 John
Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Shuai Li
<shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>.

In Section 4, we view neural networks as bridges for transformers to learn function classes in-context and provide
an analysis of the resources required for a transformer to
approximate the same function class through neural networks of different depths and widths. We showcase that

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

