Position: Categorical Deep Learning is an Algebraic Theory of All Architectures

Bruno Gavranović * 1 2 Paul Lessard * 1 Andrew Dudzik * 3
Tamara von Glehn 3 João G.M. Araújo 3 Petar Veličković 3 4

Abstract

We observe that there are, typically, two broad ways in
which deep learning practitioners describe models. Firstly,
neural networks can be specified in a top-down manner,
wherein models are described by the constraints they should
satisfy (e.g. in order to respect the structure of the data they
process). Alternatively, a bottom-up approach describes
models by their implementation, i.e. the sequence of tensor
operations required to perform their forward/backward pass.

We present our position on the elusive quest for
a general-purpose framework for specifying and
studying deep learning architectures. Our opinion is that the key attempts made so far lack a
coherent bridge between specifying constraints
which models must satisfy and specifying their
implementations. Focusing on building a such
a bridge, we propose to apply category theory—
precisely, the universal algebra of monads valued
in a 2-category of parametric maps—as a single
theory elegantly subsuming both of these flavours
of neural network design. To defend our position,
we show how this theory recovers constraints induced by geometric deep learning, as well as implementations of many architectures drawn from
the diverse landscape of neural networks, such as
RNNs. We also illustrate how the theory naturally
encodes many standard constructs in computer
science and automata theory.

1.1. Our Opinion
It is our opinion that ample effort has already been given to
both the top-down and bottom-up approaches in isolation,
and that there hasn’t been sufficiently expressive theory to
address them both simultaneously. If we want a general
guiding framework for all of deep learning, this needs to
change. To substantiate our opinion, we survey a few ongoing efforts on both sides of the divide.
One of the most successful examples of the top-down framework is geometric deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2021,
GDL), which uses a group- and representation-theoretic
perspective to describe neural network layers via symmetrypreserving constraints. The actual realisations of such layers
are derived by solving equivariance constraints.

1. Introduction

GDL proved to be powerful: allowing, e.g., to cast convolutional layers as an exact solution to linear translation equivariance in grids (Fukushima et al., 1983; LeCun et al., 1998),
and message passing and self-attention as instances of permutation equivariant learning over graphs (Gilmer et al.,
2017; Vaswani et al., 2017). It also naturally extends to
exotic domains such as spheres (Cohen et al., 2018), meshes
(de Haan et al., 2020b) and geometric graphs (Fuchs et al.,
2020). While this elegantly covers many architectures of
practical interest, GDL also has inescapable constraints.

One of the most coveted aims of deep learning theory is
to provide a guiding framework from which all neural network architectures can be principally and usefully derived.
Many elegant attempts have recently been made, offering
frameworks to categorise or describe large swathes of deep
learning architectures: Cohen et al. (2019); Xu et al. (2019);
Bronstein et al. (2021); Chami et al. (2022); Papillon et al.
(2023); Jogl et al. (2023); Weiler et al. (2023) to name a few.
The title of the paper should be read as “Categorical Deep Learning is an Algebraic {Theory of All Architectures}”, not “Categorical Deep Learning is an {Algebraic Theory} of All Architectures”.
*
Equal contribution 1 Symbolica AI 2 University of Edinburgh
3
Google DeepMind 4 University of Cambridge. Correspondence
to:
Bruno Gavranović <bruno@brunogavranovic.com>,
Paul
Lessard
<paul@symbolica.ai>,
Andrew
Dudzik
<adudzik@google.com>,
Petar
Veličković
<petarv@google.com>.

Firstly, usability of GDL principles to implement architectures directly correlates with how easy it is to resolve equivariance constraints. While PyG (Fey & Lenssen, 2019),
DGL (Wang, 2019) and Jraph (Godwin et al., 2020) have
had success for permutation-equivariant models, and e3nn
(Geiger & Smidt, 2022) for E(3)-equivariant models, it is
hard to replicate such success for areas where it is not known
how to resolve equivariance constraints.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

