Iterative Search Attribution for Deep Neural Networks

Zhiyu Zhu 1 Huaming Chen 1 Xinyi Wang 2 Jiayu Zhang 3 Zhibo Jin 1 Jason Xue 4 Jun Shen 5

Abstract

lobert & Weston, 2008; Ozcan et al., 2021; Rajendran &
Topaloglu, 2020), and speech recognition (Pan et al., 2012;
Maas et al., 2017) and so on. Nevertheless, DNNs are
considered as black-box approach impeding human comprehension, which may lead to decision-making errors. Concerning AI safety issue, it becomes essential to provide the
interpretability of these models. However, explaining the
intermediate processes of model inputs to outputs poses
challenges due to the complexity of nonlinear layers and
huge number of parameters in DNNs (Pan et al., 2021).

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
state-of-the-art performance across various applications. However, ensuring the reliability and
trustworthiness of DNNs requires enhanced interpretability of model inputs and outputs. As an
effective means of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) research, the interpretability of existing attribution algorithms varies depending on the
choice of reference point, the quality of adversarial samples, or the applicability of gradient constraints in specific tasks. To thoroughly explore
the attribution integration paths, in this paper, inspired by the iterative generation of high-quality
samples in the diffusion model, we propose an
Iterative Search Attribution (ISA) method. To
enhance attribution accuracy, ISA distinguishes
the importance of samples during gradient ascent
and descent, while clipping the relatively unimportant features in the model. Specifically, we
introduce a scale parameter during the iterative
process to ensure the features in next iteration
are always more significant than those in current
iteration. Comprehensive experimental results
show that our method has superior interpretability
in image recognition tasks compared with stateof-the-art baselines. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/LMBTough/ISA

Gradient-based attribution methods are widely used in Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) as they offer an effective way to explain deep learning models. Integrated
Gradient (IG) (Sundararajan et al., 2017) method proposes
the axiomatic theorem of attribution for the first time and
uses the reference input as an anchor on the attribution
integration path to calculate the importance of input features. Adversarial Gradient Integration (AGI) method (Pan
et al., 2021) is proposed to search for the steepest gradient
ascent path of adversarial samples, thereby avoiding the
impact of invalid reference selection on attribution accuracy.
More Faithful and Accelerated Boundary-based Attribution (MFABA) method (Zhu et al., 2023) uses second-order
taylor gradient expansion and hessian approximation to obtain more faithful and accelerated attribution results. To
summarize, the literature indicates that prior researches to
gradient-based attribution method often rely on baseline
points selected (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2022),
the quality of constructed adversarial samples (Pan et al.,
2021), or specific gradient rules (Kapishnikov et al., 2021;
Zhu et al., 2023). The interpretability of existing attribution
algorithms varies due to limited exploration of attribution
integration paths, leading to less promising performance.

1. Introduction
DNNs have achieved state-of-the-art performance in the
tasks of computer vision (Esteva et al., 2021; Jabbar et al.,
2018; Pathak et al., 2018), natural language processing (Col-

In this paper, we leverage a unique search space to find the
most faithful features of the deep learning model, addressing the challenge of parallel processing of model features.
Inspired by the diffusion model (Rogers, 2004), we believe
that the process of iteratively computing feature importance
using autoregressive properties would be more applicable
for the derivation of attribution results. We firstly use both
gradient ascent and gradient descent to investigate the impact of variations in the original features on the outputs.
Additionally, we propose a theorem to distinguish feature
importance during feature search. The redundant features

1

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia 2 Faculty of Computer Science & Information Technology, University of Malaya 3 Suzhou
Yierqi, Suzhou, China 4 Data61, CSIRO, Sydney, NSW, Australia 5 University of Wollongong, Australia. Correspondence to:
Zhiyu Zhu <nevertough@outlook.com>, Huaming Chen <huaming.chen@sydney.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

