KISA: A Unified Keyframe Identifier and Skill Annotator
for Long-Horizon Robotics Demonstrations

Longxin Kou * 1 Fei Ni * 1 Yan Zheng 1 Jinyi Liu 1 Yifu Yuan 1 Zibin Dong 1 Jianye Hao 1

Video
Trajectory

Abstract
Robotic manipulation tasks often span over long
horizons and encapsulate multiple subtasks with
different skills. Learning policies directly from
long-horizon demonstrations is challenging without intermediate keyframes guidance and corresponding skill annotations. Existing approaches
for keyframe identification often struggle to offer
reliable decomposition for low accuracy and fail
to provide semantic relevance between keyframes
and skills. For this, we propose a unified
Keyframe Identifier and Skill Anotator (KISA)
that utilizes pretrained visual-language representations for precise and interpretable decomposition of unlabeled demonstrations. Specifically,
we develop a simple yet effective temporal enhancement module that enriches frame-level representations with expanded receptive fields to
capture semantic dynamics at the video level.
We further propose coarse contrastive learning
and fine-grained monotonic encouragement to enhance the alignment between visual representations from keyframes and language representations from skills. The experimental results across
three benchmarks demonstrate that KISA outperforms competitive baselines in terms of accuracy
and interpretability of keyframe identification.
Moreover, KISA exhibits robust generalization
capabilities and the flexibility to incorporate various pretrained representations. KISA can serve
as a reliable tool to unleash scalable keyframes
and skill annotation to facilitate efficient policy
learning from fine-grained decomposed demonstrations. The details and visualizations are available at the project website.

S1. Move Kettle to topleft Burner

…

S2. Activate the bottom Burner

S3. Turn on Light
Switch

S4. Open Slide Cabinet

Keyframe
Identifier

Figure 1. Overview of Keyframe Identification. Both goal image
similarity (LIV-I) and skill language similarity (LIV-L) struggle to
stand out at keyframes. KISA can exhibit conspicuous peaks near
groundtruth boundaries for accurate keyframe identification.

1. Introduction
Complex robotics manipulation tasks such as desktop tidying often span over long horizons and encapsulate multiple sub-tasks separated by keyframes (Pertsch et al., 2020;
Huang et al., 2023). Directly learning from long-horizon
demonstrations in an end-to-end manner is challenging, due
to the compounding errors of policy learning without intermediate keyframe guidance and dense skill supervision.
Some recent methods (Mees et al., 2022a; Mishra et al.,
2023) turn to hierarchical policy learning, by decomposing
a complex demonstration into several shorter subtasks to
facilitate the reusable skills and further enable modular skill
composition for generalization. However, obtaining demonstrations with explicit keyframe boundaries and skill annotations is difficult, especially for real-world human videos.
While some methods (Lynch & Sermanet, 2020; Nair et al.,
2022a; Lynch et al., 2023) have explored crowd-sourced
annotations, but struggle to scale across large amounts of
demonstrations for the cost. An alternative is to directly discover latent reusable skills from unlabeled demonstrations,
as in (Garg et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2023), but the learned
latent skill variables do not have clear semantics alignment
with human-interpretable skills for language conditioning.
For this, we study the following open question - can we
develop a framework that enables automatic, scalable, and
semantically meaningful keyframe identification and skill
annotation from unlabeled demonstrations?

*

Equal contribution 1 College of Intelligence and Computing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao
<jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>, Yan Zheng <yanzheng@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

