Deep Equilibrium Models are Almost Equivalent to Not-so-deep Explicit Models
for High-dimensional Gaussian Mixtures

Zenan Ling 1 Longbo Li 1 2 Zhanbo Feng 3 Yixuan Zhang 4 Feng Zhou 5 Robert C. Qiu 1 2 Zhenyu Liao 1

Abstract

implicit NNs, deep equilibrium models (DEQs) introduce
a paradigm shift by resembling an infinite-depth weightshared model with input-injection. In contrast to traditional
explicit NNs such as multi-layer perceptrons, recurrent neural networks, and residual networks, DEQs derive features
by directly solving for fixed points. These fixed points represent equilibrium states in the NN’s computation, bypassing
conventional layer-by-layer forward propagation.

Deep equilibrium models (DEQs), as typical implicit neural networks, have demonstrated remarkable success on various tasks. There is, however,
a lack of theoretical understanding of the connections and differences between implicit DEQs
and explicit neural network models. In this paper, leveraging recent advances in random matrix
theory (RMT), we perform an in-depth analysis
of the conjugate kernel (CK) and neural tangent
kernel (NTK) matrices for implicit DEQs, when
the input data are drawn from a high-dimensional
Gaussian mixture. We prove that, in this setting,
the spectral behavior of these Implicit-CKs and
NTKs depend on the DEQ activation function
and initial weight variances, but only via a system
of four nonlinear equations. As a direct consequence of this theoretical result, we demonstrate
that a shallow explicit network can be carefully
designed to produce the same CK or NTK as a
given DEQ. Despite derived here for Gaussian
mixture data, empirical results show that the proposed theory and design principles also apply to
popular real-world datasets.

DEQs have demonstrated remarkable performance across a
variety of applications, including computer vision (Bai et al.,
2020; Xie et al., 2022), natural language processing (Bai
et al., 2019), neural rendering (Huang et al., 2021), and
solving inverse problems (Gilton et al., 2021). Despite the
empirical success achieved by DEQs, our theoretical understanding of these implicit models is still limited. As a telling
example, it remains unclear whether the training and/or generalization properties of implicit DEQs can be connected
to those of explicit NN models. Bai et al. (2019) show that
any deep explicit NN can be reformulated as an implicit
DEQ with carefully-designed weight re-parameterization.
Nonetheless, questions such as
• whether general DEQs have advantages over explicit
networks, or
• whether an equivalent explicit NN exists for a given
implicit DEQ,

1. Introduction

remain largely open. Novel insights into these questions
are strongly desired, since implicit DEQs incur significantly
higher computational costs than explicit NNs during training
and inference, as a consequence of their reliance on iterative
solutions to fixed points (Micaelli et al., 2023; Fung et al.,
2022; Ramzi et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2021).

Recently, a novel approach in neural network (NN) design
has gained prominence in the form of Implicit Neural Networks (Bai et al., 2019; El Ghaoui et al., 2021). As typical
1
School of Electronic Information and Communications,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
2
Ezhou Industrial Technology Research Institute, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. 3 Department
of CSE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
4
China-Austria Belt and Road Joint Laboratory on AI and AM,
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China. 5 Center for
Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University
of China, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhenyu Liao
<zhenyu liao@hust.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we provide affirmative answers to the two
open questions above, by considering input data following
a Gaussian mixture model; refer to Remark 3.9 in Section 3 for a precise statement. Building upon recent advances in random matrix theory (RMT), we investigate the
high-dimensional behavior of DEQs by focusing on their
conjugate kernel (CK) and neural tangent kernel (NTK) matrices. These matrices offers an analytical assessment of the
convergence and generalization properties for both implicit

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

