Major-Minor Mean Field Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Kai Cui 1 Christian Fabian 1 Anam Tahir 1 Heinz Koeppl 1

Abstract

Mean field control for MARL. Dynamical control and
behavior in systems with many agents is the subject of studies in mean field games (MFG) (Huang et al., 2006; Lasry
and Lions, 2007) and mean field control (MFC) (Nourian
et al., 2012; Bensoussan et al., 2013; Carmona et al., 2023b).
Such aggregated interaction models simplify MARL in
the limit of infinite agents, whenever agents interact only
through their empirical distribution. The simplification provides a problem complexity that is independent of the exact
number of agents. The result is tractability, by avoiding otherwise exponentially large joint state-action spaces (Zhang
et al., 2021). This has led to scalable control based on
MFC (Gu et al., 2023; Carmona et al., 2023b). And indeed, in applications such aggregation is commonly found
on some level, e.g., in chemical reaction networks for aggregate molecule mass (Anderson and Kurtz, 2011), related
mass-action epidemics models (Kiss et al., 2017), or traffic
where congestion depends on the number of travelling cars
(Cabannes et al., 2022), to name just a few. See also epidemics control (Dunyak and Caines, 2021), drone swarms
(Shiri et al., 2019), self organization (Carmona et al., 2023a),
and many more financial (Carmona, 2020) or engineering
scenarios (Djehiche et al., 2017).

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) remains difficult to scale to many agents. Recent
MARL using Mean Field Control (MFC) provides
a tractable and rigorous approach to otherwise
difficult cooperative MARL. However, the strict
MFC assumption of many independent, weaklyinteracting agents is too inflexible in practice. We
generalize MFC to instead simultaneously model
many similar and few complex agents – as MajorMinor Mean Field Control (M3FC). Theoretically,
we give approximation results for finite agent control, and verify the sufficiency of stationary policies for optimality together with a dynamic programming principle. Algorithmically, we propose
Major-Minor Mean Field MARL (M3FMARL)
for finite agent systems instead of the limiting system. The algorithm is shown to approximate the
policy gradient of the underlying M3FC MDP. Finally, we demonstrate its capabilities experimentally in various scenarios. We observe a strong
performance in comparison to state-of-the-art policy gradient MARL methods.

Limitations of standard MFC. However, the strict assumption of only minor agents – i.e. independent, homogeneous agents that can be summarized by their distribution
(MF) – limits applicability. In practice, systems often consist of more than homogeneous agents, and hence one must
extend standard MFC towards major agents or environment
states that are not aggregated. For instance, in modelling car
traffic on road networks (Cabannes et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2023), when considering only the distribution of cars (minor
agents) on the network, one cannot model major agents or
environment states, such as traffic lights or the road conditions respectively. Another example is given by the logistics
scenario in Figure 1 and in the experiments, where many
drones on a moving truck collect many packages.

1. Introduction
Recent successes of reinforcement learning (RL) (Vinyals
et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022)
motivate the search for techniques for the multi-agent case,
referred to as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL).
Due to the high complexity of multi-agent control (Bernstein
et al., 2002; Daskalakis et al., 2009), exploiting problem
structure is important for scalable MARL. In this work,
we consider systems with many agents interacting through
aggregated information of all agents – the mean field (MF).
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.
Correspondence to: Kai Cui <kai.cui@tu-darmstadt.de>, Heinz
Koeppl <heinz.koeppl@tu-darmstadt.de>.

For this purpose, a first step in the continuous-time MFG
literature is to consider common noise (Carmona et al.,
2016; Perrin et al., 2020), in order to relax the unconditional independence of minor agents. Some more recent
works consider such common noise also in discrete-time
MFC (Carmona et al., 2023b; Bäuerle, 2023; Motte and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

