Slicedit: Zero-Shot Video Editing With Text-to-Image Diffusion Models Using
Spatio-Temporal Slices

Nathaniel Cohen * 1 2 Vladimir Kulikov * 2 Matan Kleiner * 2 Inbar Huberman-Spiegelglas 2 Tomer Michaeli 2
A man is surfing

A humanoid robot is jumping

Iron Man is surfing

A shiny silver robot is jumping

Spider Man is surfing

Edited

Input

A man is jumping

Figure 1: Slicedit. We present a zero-shot method for text-based video editing based on a pretrained text-to-image diffusion
model. Our method can edit challenging long videos with complex nonrigid motion and occlusions, while preserving the
regions not specified in the text prompt (e.g. changing only the person into a robot without affecting the background). See
our website for video results.

Abstract

similar characteristics to natural images. Thus, the
same T2I diffusion model that is normally used
only as a prior on video frames, can also serve as
a strong prior for enhancing temporal consistency
by applying it on spatiotemporal slices. Based on
this observation, we present Slicedit, a method
for text-based video editing that utilizes a pretrained T2I diffusion model to process both spatial
and spatiotemporal slices. Our method generates
videos that retain the structure and motion of the
original video while adhering to the target text.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate
Slicedit’s ability to edit a wide range of real-world
videos, confirming its clear advantages compared
to existing competing methods.

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models achieve
state-of-the-art results in image synthesis and editing. However, leveraging such pretrained models
for video editing is considered a major challenge.
Many existing works attempt to enforce temporal
consistency in the edited video through explicit
correspondence mechanisms, either in pixel space
or between deep features. These methods, however, struggle with strong nonrigid motion. In
this paper, we introduce a fundamentally different approach, which is based on the observation
that spatiotemporal slices of natural videos exhibit
*
Equal contribution 1 Mines Paris – PSL Research University, Paris, France 2 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Vladimir Kulikov
<vladimir.k@campus.technion.ac.il>.

1. Introduction

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have reached remarkable capabilities, enabling high-quality image synthesis that
1

