Language-Driven Cross-Modal Classifier for Zero-Shot
Multi-Label Image Recognition

Yicheng Liu 1 Jie Wen * 1 Chengliang Liu 1 Xiaozhao Fang * 2 Zuoyong Li 3 Yong Xu 1 Zheng Zhang * 1

Abstract

ing from 400 million image-text pairs to map images and
texts into a shared embedding space. Such models show remarkable generalization capabilities in various downstream
vision tasks (Zhou et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022; Luo et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024).

Large-scale pre-trained vision-language models
(e.g., CLIP) have shown powerful zero-shot transfer capabilities in image recognition tasks. Recent approaches typically employ supervised finetuning methods to adapt CLIP for zero-shot multilabel image recognition tasks. However, obtaining sufficient multi-label annotated image data for
training is challenging and not scalable. In this paper, we propose a new language-driven framework
for zero-shot multi-label recognition that eliminates the need for annotated images during training. Leveraging the aligned CLIP multi-modal
embedding space, our method utilizes language
data generated by LLMs to train a cross-modal
classifier, which is subsequently transferred to
the visual modality. During inference, directly
applying the classifier to visual inputs may limit
performance due to the modality gap. To address
this issue, we introduce a cross-modal mapping
method that maps image embeddings to the language modality while retaining crucial visual information. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms other zeroshot multi-label recognition methods and achieves
competitive results compared to few-shot methods.

Multi-label recognition (MLR) is an important vision task,
which aims to describe what is present in an image using
multiple labels. Compared to single-label image recognition
tasks, which solely focus on the subject objects in an image, MLR tasks must recognize images with more complex
scenarios and multiple objects. Many works have achieved
great improvements in adopting CLIP to multi-label recognition tasks. For instance, ADDS (Xu et al., 2022) learned
a transformer decoder to facilitate the fusion of the semantics from dual-modal information sources. DualCoOp (Sun
et al., 2022) learned positive and negative prompts to adapt
the knowledge learned in CLIP to multi-label image recognition. HSPNet (Ramesh et al., 2022) proposed a hierarchical
semantic prompt network to explore the hierarchical semantic relationship in the CLIP model. Although these methods
can achieve remarkable performance of multi-label image
recognition, they usually require sufficient labeled images
to fine-tune the model. Unfortunately, the collection of
large-scale and high-quality annotated multi-label datasets
remains challenging and resource-intensive.
To mitigate this issue, researchers have developed a new setting, i.e., multi-label zero-shot learning (ML-ZSL), in which
an image is associated with potentially multiple seen and
unseen classes, but only labels of seen classes are provided
during training. Recent methods (Zhang et al., 2016; BenCohen et al., 2021; He et al., 2023; Pu et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2022) commonly utilized label embeddings in the semantic space to transfer the knowledge from seen classes to
unseen classes. However, these methods still require image
data annotated by seen classes to train the model and suffer
from significant performance degradation due to the lack of
annotated image data.

1. Introduction
Large-scale multi-modal pre-trained models, such as Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al.,
2021), have shown impressive capabilities in cross-modal
representation learning. CLIP leveraged contrastive learn∗

Corresponding author 1 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China 2 Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou,
China 3 Minjiang University, Fuzhou, China. Correspondence
to: Jie Wen <jiewen pr@126.com>, Xiaozhao Fang <xzhfang168@126.com>, Zheng Zhang <darrenzz219@gmail.com>.

Generally speaking, compared with the collection of largescale annotated image datasets, it is significantly easier to
collect large amounts of natural language data. If we can
find a cohesive alignment of semantics across vision and
language modalities, then we can explore the information

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

