How to Make the Gradients Small Privately:
Improved Rates for Differentially Private Non-Convex Optimization

Andrew Lowy 1 Jonathan Ullman 2 Stephen J. Wright 1

Abstract

these models. Extensive research has demonstrated that ML
models can leak the training data of individuals, violating
their privacy (Shokri et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2021). For
instance, individual training examples were extracted from
GPT-2 using only black-box queries (Carlini et al., 2021).
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) provides a
rigorous guarantee that training data cannot be leaked. Informally, it guarantees that an adversary cannot learn much
more about an individual piece of training data than they
could have learned had that piece never been collected.

We provide a simple and flexible framework for
designing differentially private algorithms to find
approximate stationary points of non-convex loss
functions. Our framework is based on using a private approximate risk minimizer to “warm start”
another private algorithm for finding stationary
points. We use this framework to obtain improved,
and sometimes optimal, rates for several classes
of non-convex loss functions. First, we obtain
improved rates for finding stationary points of
smooth non-convex empirical loss functions. Second, we specialize to quasar-convex functions,
which generalize star-convex functions and arise
in learning dynamical systems and training some
neural nets. We achieve the optimal rate for this
class. Third, we give an optimal algorithm for
finding stationary points of functions satisfying
the Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KL) condition. For example, over-parameterized neural networks often
satisfy this condition. Fourth, we provide new
state-of-the-art rates for stationary points of nonconvex population loss functions. Fifth, we obtain
improved rates for non-convex generalized linear
models. A modification of our algorithm achieves
nearly the same rates for second-order stationary
points of functions with Lipschitz Hessian, improving over the previous state-of-the-art for each
of the above problems.

Differentially private optimization has been studied extensively over the last 10–15 years (Bassily et al., 2014; 2019;
Feldman et al., 2020; Asi et al., 2021; Lowy & Razaviyayn,
2023b). Despite this large body of work, certain fundamental and practically important problems remain open. In
particular, for minimizing non-convex functions, which is
ubiquitous in ML applications, we have a poor understanding of the optimal rates achievable under DP.
In this work, we measure the performance of an algorithm
for optimizing a non-convex function g by its ability to find
an α-stationary point, meaning a point w such that
}∇gpwq} ď α.
We want to understand the smallest α achievable. There
are several reasons to study stationary points. First, finding approximate global minima is intractable for general
non-convex functions (Murty & Kabadi, 1985), but finding an approximate stationary point is tractable. Second,
there are many important non-convex problems for which
all stationary (or second-order stationary) points are global
minima (e.g. phase retrieval (Sun et al., 2018), matrix completion (Ge et al., 2016), and training certain classes of
neural networks (Liu et al., 2022)). Third, even for problems where it is tractable to find approximate global minima,
the stationarity gap may be a better measure of quality than
the excess risk (Nesterov, 2012; Allen-Zhu, 2018).

1. Introduction
The increasing prevalence of machine learning (ML) systems, such as large language models (LLMs), in societal
contexts has led to growing concerns about the privacy of
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin Institute of Discovery, Madison, WI, USA 2 Northeastern University, Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Andrew Lowy <alowy@wisc.edu>.

Stationary Points of Empirical Loss Functions. A fundamental open problem in DP optimization is determining
the sample complexity of finding stationary points of non-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

