Towards Efficient Training and Evaluation of Robust Models
against l0 Bounded Adversarial Perturbations

Xuyang Zhong 1 Yixiao Huang 1 2 Chen Liu 1

Abstract

by l0 norm in this work. These perturbations are sparse
and quite common in physical scenarios, including broken
pixels in LED screens to fool object detection models and
adversarial stickers on road signs to make an auto-driving
system fail (Papernot et al., 2017; Akhtar & Mian, 2018; Xu
et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023).

This work studies sparse adversarial perturbations
bounded by l0 norm. We propose a white-box
PGD-like attack method named sparse-PGD to
effectively and efficiently generate such perturbations. Furthermore, we combine sparse-PGD with
a black-box attack to comprehensively and more
reliably evaluate the models’ robustness against
l0 bounded adversarial perturbations. Moreover,
the efficiency of sparse-PGD enables us to conduct adversarial training to build robust models
against sparse perturbations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed attack algorithm exhibits strong performance in different scenarios. More importantly, compared with other
robust models, our adversarially trained model
demonstrates state-of-the-art robustness against
various sparse attacks. Codes are available at
https://github.com/CityU-MLO/sPGD.

However, constructing l0 bounded adversarial perturbations
is challenging as the corresponding adversarial budget is
non-convex. Therefore, gradient-based methods, such as
projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2017), usually cannot efficiently obtain a strong adversarial perturbation. In this regard, existing methods to generate sparse
perturbations (Modas et al., 2018; Croce & Hein, 2019b; Su
et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2020; Croce et al., 2022) either cannot control the l0 norm of perturbations or have prohibitively
high computational complexity, which makes them inapplicable for adversarial training to obtain robust models against
sparse perturbations. The perturbations bounded by l1 norm
are the closest scenario to sparse perturbations among convex adversarial budgets defined by an lp norm. Nevertheless,
adversarial training in this case (Tramer & Boneh, 2019;
Croce & Hein, 2021) still suffers from issues such as slow
convergence and instability. Jiang et al. (2023) demonstrates that these issues arise from non-sparse perturbations
bounded by l1 norm. In other words, l1 adversarial budget
still cannot guarantee the sparsity of the perturbations. Thus,
it is necessary to study the case of l0 bounded perturbations.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been developing tremendously fast in the
last decade. However, it is shown vulnerable to adversarial
attacks: imperceivable adversarial perturbations (Szegedy
et al., 2013; Kurakin et al., 2016) could change the prediction of a model without altering the input’s semantic content, which poses great challenges in safety-critical systems.
Among different kinds of adversarial perturbations, the ones
bounded by l∞ or l2 norms are mostly well-studied (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019c)
and benchmarked (Croce et al., 2020), because these adversarial budgets, i.e., the sets of all allowable perturbations,
are convex, which facilitates theoretical analyses and algorithm design. By contrast, we study perturbations bounded

In this work, we propose a white-box attack named sparsePGD (sPGD) to effectively and efficiently generate sparse
perturbations bounded by l0 norm. Specifically, we decompose the sparse perturbation δ as the product of a magnitude
tensor p and a binary sparse mask m: δ = p ⊙ m , where
p and m determine the magnitudes and the locations of perturbed features, respectively. We adopt PGD-like algorithms
to update p and m. However, it is challenging to directly
optimize the binary mask m in the discrete space. We
thereby introduce an alternative continuous variable f
m to
approximate m and update f
m by gradient-based methods,
f is then transformed to m by projection to the discrete
m
space. Due to the sparsity of m by the projection operator,
the gradient of p is sparse, which may lead to slow convergence by coordinate descent. Therefore, we can remove

1
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Correspondence
to: Chen Liu <chen.liu@cityu.edu.hk>, Xuyang Zhong
<xuyang.zhong@my.cityu.edu.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

