Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments
with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Arvi Jonnarth 1 2 Jie Zhao 3 Michael Felsberg 1 4

Abstract

(Huang, 2001). However, if the environment is initially
unknown, or at least partially unknown, the path has to be
planned online, e.g. by a robot, using sensors to simultaneously map the environment. In this case, an optimal path
cannot generally be found (Galceran & Carreras, 2013).

Coverage path planning (CPP) is the problem of
finding a path that covers the entire free space of
a confined area, with applications ranging from
robotic lawn mowing to search-and-rescue. When
the environment is unknown, the path needs to be
planned online while mapping the environment,
which cannot be addressed by offline planning
methods that do not allow for a flexible path space.
We investigate how suitable reinforcement learning is for this challenging problem, and analyze
the involved components required to efficiently
learn coverage paths, such as action space, input
feature representation, neural network architecture, and reward function. We propose a computationally feasible egocentric map representation
based on frontiers, and a novel reward term based
on total variation to promote complete coverage.
Through extensive experiments, we show that our
approach surpasses the performance of both previous RL-based approaches and highly specialized
methods across multiple CPP variations.

Coverage path planning is an essential part in a wide variety of robotic applications, where the range of settings
define different variants of the CPP problem. In applications such as robotic lawn mowing (Cao et al., 1988), snow
removal (Choset, 2001), and vacuum cleaning (Yasutomi
et al., 1988), the region that is covered is defined by an
attached work tool. In contrast, in applications such as
search-and-rescue (Jia et al., 2016), autonomous underwater
exploration (Hert et al., 1996), and aerial terrain coverage
(Xu et al., 2011), the covered region is defined by the range
of a sensor. Additionally, the space of valid paths is limited,
induced by the motion constraints of the robot.
We aim to develop a task- and robot-agnostic method for
online CPP in unknown environments. This is a challenging
task, as intricacies in certain applications may be difficult
to model, or even impossible. In the real world, unforeseen
discrepancies between the modeled and true environment
may occur, e.g. due to wheel slip. A further aspect that needs
to be considered is the sensing capability of the agent, e.g.
if it is not omnidirectional, the agent needs to rotate itself
to explore a different view. Incompleteness of the present
model must be assumed to account for open world scenarios.
Thus, we approach the problem from the perspective of
learning through embodiment. Reinforcement learning (RL)
lends itself as a natural choice, where an agent can interact
with the world and adapt to specific environment conditions,
without the need for an explicit model. Concretely, we
consider the case where an RL model directly predicts the
control signals for an agent from sensor data. Besides the
benefit of adapting to specific environment characteristics,
this approach does not constrain the path space in terms
of pre-defined patterns in cellular decomposition methods
(Choset & Pignon, 1998), or primitive motions in grid-based
methods (Gabriely & Rimon, 2002). In other words, it
allows for flexibility in the path space, as shown in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Task automation is an ever growing field, and as automated
systems become more intelligent, they are expected to solve
increasingly challenging problems. One such problem is
coverage path planning (CPP), where a path is sought that
covers the entire free space of a confined area. It is related
to the traveling salesman and covering salesman problems
(Galceran & Carreras, 2013), and known to be NP-hard
(Arkin et al., 2000). If the environment is known a priori,
including the extent of the area and the location and geometry of all obstacles, an optimal path can be planned offline
1

Linköping University. 2 Husqvarna Group. 3 Dalian University
of Technology. 4 Co-affiliation: University of KwaZulu-Natal.
Correspondence to: Arvi Jonnarth <arvi.jonnarth@liu.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We analyze the different components in RL to efficiently
learn coverage paths. To enable learning every valid path, a
1

