Improved Stability and Generalization Guarantees
of the Decentralized SGD Algorithm

Batiste Le Bars 1 Aurélien Bellet 2 Marc Tommasi 3 Kevin Scaman 1 Giovanni Neglia 4

Abstract

Over the last few years, a substantial amount of work has
been dedicated to the study of the generalization properties of optimization algorithms, more specifically gradientbased methods (Lin et al., 2016; London, 2017; Zhou et al.,
2018; Amir et al., 2021; Neu et al., 2021; Scaman et al.,
2024). In particular, since the seminal work of Hardt et al.
(2016), approaches based on algorithmic stability have encountered a large success as they allow to shed light on
the implicit regularization brought by (stochastic) gradient
methods (Kuzborskij & Lampert, 2018; Bassily et al., 2020;
Lei & Ying, 2020; Schliserman & Koren, 2022). However,
this large amount of work is mostly focusing on centralized
gradient-based algorithms.

This paper presents a new generalization error
analysis for Decentralized Stochastic Gradient
Descent (D-SGD) based on algorithmic stability.
The obtained results overhaul a series of recent
works that suggested an increased instability due
to decentralization and a detrimental impact of
poorly-connected communication graphs on generalization. On the contrary, we show, for convex,
strongly convex and non-convex functions, that
D-SGD can always recover generalization bounds
analogous to those of classical SGD, suggesting
that the choice of graph does not matter. We then
argue that this result is coming from a worst-case
analysis, and we provide a refined optimizationdependent generalization bound for general convex functions. This new bound reveals that the
choice of graph can in fact improve the worst-case
bound in certain regimes, and that surprisingly, a
poorly-connected graph can even be beneficial for
generalization.

Decentralized learning algorithms, such as the celebrated
Decentralized Stochastic Gradient Descent (D-SGD) algorithm (Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009), allow several agents to
train models on their local data by exchanging model updates rather than the data itself. In D-SGD, agents solve
an empirical risk minimization task by alternating between
computing local gradient steps and averaging model parameters with their neighbors in a communication graph.
A sparser graph thus reduces the per-iteration communication cost but tends to increase the number of iterations
needed to converge. Most theoretical analyses of D-SGD
and its variants focus on understanding the optimization error by characterizing the convergence rate to the empirical
risk minimizer. They notably highlight the impact of the
communication graph and data heterogeneity across agents
(Koloskova et al., 2020; Neglia et al., 2020; Ying et al., 2021;
Le Bars et al., 2023). In contrast, the generalization error
of decentralized learning algorithms is far less understood.

1. Introduction
Studying the ability of machine learning models to generalize to unseen data is a fundamental and long-standing objective. Among the several approaches that have been proposed
to bound generalization errors, the most prominent ones are
based on the complexity of the hypothesis class like the
Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension or Rademacher complexity (Bousquet et al., 2004), algorithmic stability (Bousquet
& Elisseeff, 2002), PAC-Bayesian bounds (Shawe-Taylor &
Williamson, 1997; McAllester, 1998; Catoni, 2007; Alquier
et al., 2024), or more recently information-theoretic generalization bounds (Xu & Raginsky, 2017).

In the work of Richards & Rebeschini (2020), the authors focus on a specific variant of D-SGD (thereafter referred to as
Variant A, see Algorithm 1) where the agents perform a local
stochastic gradient update before averaging their parameters
with their neighbors. With an analysis based on algorithmic
stability, they come to the conclusion that for convex functions the decentralization does not have any impact, recovering the same generalization bounds as those obtained by
Hardt et al. (2016) for centralized SGD. In contrast, a more
recent line of work (Sun et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Taheri
& Thrampoulidis, 2023) has investigated this question for

1

Inria Paris - Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University 2 Inria, Université de Montpellier 3 Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS,
Centrale Lille, UMR 9189, CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille 4 Inria, Université Côte d’Azur. Correspondence to: Batiste Le Bars <batiste.lebars@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

