Enhancing Vision Transformer: Amplifying Non-Linearity in Feedforward
Network Module
Yixing Xu 1 Chao Li 1 Dong Li 1 Xiao Sheng 1 Fan Jiang 1 Lu Tian 1 Ashish Sirasao 1 Emad Barsoum 1

Abstract

achieve impressive results on many tasks such as image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021; Wu
et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024), object detection (Fang et al.,
2021; Zheng et al., 2023), semantic segmentation (Strudel
et al., 2021) and video analysis (Neimark et al., 2021) nowadays. Compared to convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
transformer models have less inductive bias due to the lowpass filter property of the self-attention (Park & Kim, 2022)
and have the capability to utilize more training data to enhance generalization ability (Chen et al., 2024). However,
when given a limited amount of training data, the original Vision Transformer (ViT) model (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021) cannot perform on par with state-of-the-art CNN
models (Hao et al., 2023), making it difficult to apply ViT
to complicated vision tasks.

Transformer models have been gaining substantial
interest in the field of computer vision tasks nowadays. Although a vision transformer contains two
important components which are self-attention
module and feedforward network (FFN) module,
the majority of research tends to concentrate on
modifying the former while leaving the latter in its
original form. In this paper, we focus on improving the FFN module within the vision transformer.
Through theoretical analysis, we demonstrate that
the effect of the FFN module primarily lies in providing non-linearity, whose degree corresponds to
the hidden dimensions. Thus, the computational
cost of the FFN module can be reduced by enhancing the degree of non-linearity in the nonlinear
function. Leveraging this insight, we propose an
improved FFN (IFFN) module for vision transformers which involves the usage of the arbitrary
GeLU (AGeLU) function and integrating multiple instances of it to augment non-linearity so that
the number of hidden dimensions can be effectively reduced. Besides, a spatial enhancement
part is involved to further enrich the non-linearity
in the proposed IFFN module. Experimental results show that we can apply our method to a
wide range of state-of-the-art vision transformer
models irrespective of how they modify their selfattention part and the overall architecture, and
reduce FLOPs and parameters without compromising classification accuracy on the ImageNet
dataset.

The modification of the vanilla ViT model primarily lies in
two parts. The first one is to change the basic architecture of
ViT. Hierarchical ViTs (Heo et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Xu
et al., 2023) leverage the advantage of hierarchical architecture of CNNs and reduce the spatial size as well as expand
the channel dimensions multiple times with the help of pooling layers. A convolution stem with multiple convolutional
layers is introduced in (He et al., 2019) to replace the nonoverlapping patch embedding operation. The second one is
to modify the self-attention module in ViT. Local-enhanced
vision transformers (Huang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022)
constrain the range of attention and generate patches within
a local region, and facilitate interactions between patches
to extract and interpret global information. Efficient selfattention operations reduce computational complexity of
previous operation from O(n2 ) to O(n) (Wang et al., 2020)
or O(nlog(n)) (Kitaev et al., 2020).
Although a substantial number of works concentrate on
studying the variations of vision transformers, very few
of them pay attention to modifying the feedforward network (FFN) module. CMT (Guo et al., 2022) uses an inverted residual feed-forward network to replace the original
FFN module, CoAtNet (Dai et al., 2021) uses MBConv
blocks (Sandler et al., 2018) to replace some of the ViT
blocks in its network architecture. However, there are multiple modifications in their architectures and the effectiveness
of modifying FFN module remains unclear. Furthermore,
there is a lack of theoretical analysis explaining why these

1. Introduction
Transformer models with self-attention operation have been
applied to the field of computer vision (Han et al., 2022) and
1
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yixing Xu <yixing.xu@amd.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

