Position: An Inner Interpretability Framework for AI
Inspired by Lessons from Cognitive Neuroscience

Martina G. Vilas 1 2 Federico Adolfi 1 David Poeppel 1 3 Gemma Roig 2 4

Abstract

more general framework for developing, discussing, analyzing, and refining these high-level mechanistic explanations
is still needed. The lack of such a conceptual framework
has made this subfield vulnerable to critiques that question
its usefulness to advance the broader goals of AI.

Inner Interpretability is a promising emerging
field tasked with uncovering the inner mechanisms of AI systems, though how to develop these
mechanistic theories is still much debated. Moreover, recent critiques raise issues that question
its usefulness to advance the broader goals of
AI. However, it has been overlooked that these
issues resemble those that have been grappled
with in another field: Cognitive Neuroscience.
Here we draw the relevant connections and highlight lessons that can be transferred productively
between fields. Based on these, we propose a
general conceptual framework and give concrete
methodological strategies for building mechanistic explanations in AI inner interpretability research. With this conceptual framework, Inner
Interpretability can fend off critiques and position
itself on a productive path to explain AI systems.

In addition, responses to these criticisms have not taken
notice of how similar the issues raised are those to another
field that has extensively dealt with them: Cognitive Neuroscience (but see Lindsay & Bau, 2023, for more general
links). In this position paper, we address these gaps. We
explain the connections between issues in AI Inner Interpretability and those in Cognitive Neuroscience, and we
propose that we can take advantage of these links to derive lessons and concrete conceptual and methodological
strategies to interpret AI systems mechanistically.
Overview: The remaining sections are organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the field of Inner
Interpretability and current critiques directed at it. Section 3 describes the issues that give rise to these critiques,
draws parallels with longstanding issues in Cognitive Neuroscience, and explains how these have been tackled. Section
4 draws on these lessons, proposes a conceptual framework
for Inner Interpretability, and derives concrete methodological strategies. Finally, in Section 5 we explain how adopting
this framework allows us to better integrate past and future
studies and address critiques.

1. Introduction
Inner Interpretability is an emerging subfield of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that is drawing increasing attention as models
get larger and better. Interpreting the internal mechanisms of
these models in human-understandable terms is of great interest for scientific, engineering, and safety reasons (Räuker
et al., 2023). However, despite interesting recent results,
the field seems to be missing a conceptual framework that
guides the development and analysis of these mechanistic
explanations. Although proposals have been made on how
to quantify the alignment of human-intelligible high-level
theories with the internal operations of neural networks (e.g.
causal abstraction approaches, see Geiger et al., 2023), a

2. AI inner interpretability research
Recent years have seen an increase in research aiming to understand the internal structural components, operations, and
representations of deep neural networks. This line of work
has recently been given the name of inner interpretability
(for a review see Räuker et al., 2023). A significant amount
of work in this field is concerned with explaining how the
inner mechanisms of these models give rise to their capabilities1 . This differs from other lines of interpretability
research where the behavior of the model is attributed to
specific properties of the input or the training dataset (Bommasani et al., 2021).

1
Ernst Strüngmann Institute for Neuroscience, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 3 Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA 4 The Hessian Center
for AI, Hessen, Germany. Correspondence to: Martina G. Vilas
<martina.vilas@esi-frankfurt.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
In this paper, the term inner interpretability is used to refer to
this subset of work.

1

