Split-and-Denoise: Protect Large Language Model Inference with Local
Differential Privacy

Peihua Mai * 1 Ran Yan * 1 Zhe Huang 2 Youjia Yang 3 Yan Pang 1

Abstract

online service, giving rise to significant privacy concerns.
In particular, users may input sensitive information, such as
names, phones, and email addresses, that needs to be kept
hidden from the service provider. With the growing concern
around the potential leakage of confidential data, certain
companies, such as Samsung, have temporally prohibited
the usage of online LLM services.

Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in natural language understanding by capturing hidden
semantics in vector space. This process enriches
the value of text embeddings for various downstream tasks, thereby fostering the Embeddingas-a-Service (EaaS) business model. However,
the risk of privacy leakage due to direct text
transmission to servers remains a critical concern.
To address this, we introduce Split-N-Denoise
(SnD), an private inference framework that splits
the model to execute the token embedding layer
on the client side at minimal computational cost.
This allows the client to introduce noise prior to
transmitting the embeddings to the server, and
subsequently receive and denoise the perturbed
output embeddings for downstream tasks. Our
approach is designed for the inference stage of
LLMs and requires no modifications to the model
parameters. Extensive experiments demonstrate
SnD’s effectiveness in optimizing the privacyutility tradeoff across various LLM architectures
and diverse downstream tasks. The results reveal an improvement in performance under the
same privacy budget compared to the baselines by
over 10% on average, offering clients a privacypreserving solution for local privacy protection.

Recent research on privacy-preserving model inference investigates around two directions, cryptographic (Liu & Liu,
2023; Chen et al., 2022) and perturbation (Du et al., 2023).
Cryptography typically employs homomorphic encryption
(HE) to compute the inference result of the users’ encrypted
input. Unfortunately, the application of cryptographic technique is constrained by the significant computation overhead
of cryptographic operations, especially on large transformer
models. Perturbation provides differential privacy (DP)
guarantee by adding calibrated noise to the original data. A
key challenge of this approach is how to balance the utility
and privacy tradeoff in a local differential privacy (LDP)
setting, where users’ inputs are privatized before being released to the server. Furthermore, privatization on text data
is particularly difficult when the randomized algorithm is
required to map text input to text output.
Split learning (Gupta & Raskar, 2018; Vepakomma et al.,
2018) has emerged as a solution to privacy-preserving computation between two parties. During inference, the user
performs affordable computation locally to obtain intermediate results (IRs), and forwards them to the service provider
for subsequent operations. To mitigate privacy leakage,
recent research has integrate DP with split learning by injecting noises into the IRs before sharing with the server
(Yang et al., 2022). In the split inference setting, a crucial
problem is to design an algorithm that minimizes the impact
on model performance while ensuring LDP.

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown powerful capability in natural language understanding by capturing hidden
semantics in vector space. Consequently, users can leverage
LLMs to obtain embeddings and subsequently apply them
to their own downstream tasks, known as ”embedding as a
service” (EaaS). However, EaaS is typically provided as an

A notable approach involves the application of denoising
techniques to conduct error correction and enhance model
utility. Existing studies incorporate denoising layers on the
server side, leveraging the post-processing properties of
DP (Nasr et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2022).
However, the effectiveness of denoising is hindered by the
fact that the server is ignorant of the injected noise levels.
Driven by the limitation, a question arises: can we improve

*

Equal contribution 1 National University of Singapore 2 North
China Electric Power University 3 University of South California.
Correspondence to: Yan Pang <jamespang@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

