Offline Inverse RL:
New Solution Concepts and Provably Efficient Algorithms

Filippo Lazzati 1 Mirco Mutti 2 Alberto Maria Metelli 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), also called inverse
optimal control, consists of recovering a reward function
from expert’s demonstrations (Russell, 1998). Specifically,
the reward is required to be compatible with the expert’s
behavior, i.e., it shall make the expert’s policy optimal. As
pointed out in Arora & Doshi (2018), IRL allows mitigating the challenging task of the manual specification of the
reward function, thanks to the presence of demonstrations,
and provides an effective method for imitation learning (Osa
et al., 2018). In opposition to mere behavioral cloning, IRL
allows focusing on the expert intent (instead of behavior),
and, for this reason, it has the potential to reveal the underlying objectives that drive the expert’s choices. In this sense,
IRL enables interpretability, improving the interaction with
the expert by explaining and predicting its behavior, and
transferability, as the reward (more than a policy) can be
employed under environment shifts (Adams et al., 2022).

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims to recover the reward function of an expert agent from
demonstrations of behavior. It is well-known that
the IRL problem is fundamentally ill-posed, i.e.,
many reward functions can explain the demonstrations. For this reason, IRL has been recently
reframed in terms of estimating the feasible reward set (Metelli et al., 2021), thus, postponing
the selection of a single reward. However, so far,
the available formulations and algorithmic solutions have been proposed and analyzed mainly
for the online setting, where the learner can interact with the environment and query the expert at
will. This is clearly unrealistic in most practical
applications, where the availability of an offline
dataset is a much more common scenario. In this
paper, we introduce a novel notion of feasible
reward set capturing the opportunities and limitations of the offline setting and we analyze the
complexity of its estimation. This requires the
introduction of an original learning framework
that copes with the intrinsic difficulty of the setting, for which the data coverage is not under
control. Then, we propose two computationally
and statistically efficient algorithms, IRLO and
PIRLO, for addressing the problem. In particular,
the latter adopts a specific form of pessimism to
enforce the novel, desirable property of inclusion
monotonicity of the delivered feasible set. With
this work, we aim to provide a panorama of the
challenges of the offline IRL problem and how
they can be fruitfully addressed.

One of the main concerns of IRL is that the problem is
inherently ill-posed or ambiguous (Ng & Russell, 2000), i.e.,
there exists a variety of reward functions compatible with
expert’s demonstrations. In the literature, many criteria for
the selection of a single reward among the compatible ones
were proposed (e.g., Ng & Russell, 2000; Ratliff et al., 2006;
Ziebart et al., 2008; Boularias et al., 2011). Nevertheless,
the ambiguity issue has limited the theoretical understanding
of the IRL problem for a long time.
Recently, IRL has been reframed by Metelli et al. (2021) into
the problem of computing the set of all rewards compatible
with expert’s demonstrations, named feasible reward set (or
just feasible set). By postponing the choice of a specific
reward within the feasible set, this formulation has opened
the doors to a new perspective that has enabled a deeper
theoretical understanding of the IRL problem. The majority
of previous works on the reconstruction of the feasible set
have focused mostly on the online setting (e.g., Metelli et al.,
2021; Lindner et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023; Metelli et al.,
2023), in which the learner is allowed to actively interact
with the environment and with the expert to collect samples.

1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 Technion, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence to: Filippo Lazzati <filippo.lazzati@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Although these works succeeded in obtaining sample efficient algorithms and represent a fundamental step ahead in
1

