Efficient Policy Evaluation with Offline Data Informed Behavior Policy Design

Shuze Liu 1 Shangtong Zhang 1

Abstract

be both expensive and slow in the real world (Li, 2019;
Zhang, 2023). Second, even if a simulator is available, obtaining massive online data can still be prohibitively slow
for high-fidelity simulation (Chervonyi et al., 2022).

Most reinforcement learning practitioners evaluate their policies with online Monte Carlo estimators for either hyperparameter tuning or testing
different algorithmic design choices, where the
policy is repeatedly executed in the environment
to get the average outcome. Such massive interactions with the environment are prohibitive
in many scenarios. In this paper, we propose
novel methods that improve the data efficiency
of online Monte Carlo estimators while maintaining their unbiasedness. We first propose a tailored closed-form behavior policy that provably
reduces the variance of an online Monte Carlo
estimator. We then design efficient algorithms to
learn this closed-form behavior policy from previously collected offline data. Theoretical analysis
is provided to characterize how the behavior policy learning error affects the amount of reduced
variance. Compared with previous works, our
method achieves better empirical performance in
a broader set of environments, with fewer requirements for offline data.

Offline RL (Ernst et al., 2005; Lange et al., 2012; Fujimoto
et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020) attacks this issue using existing, previously logged data, called offline data. Compared
with online data, offline data is cheaper and safer (Li, 2019;
Zhang, 2023). Offline RL also demonstrates great success.
For example, Mathieu et al. (2023) train an offline AlphaStar, which uses only existing human replays without any
interaction with the StarCraft II simulator during training.
The offline AlphaStar obtains over 90% win rates against
the supervised learning agent in Vinyals et al. (2019).
However, most RL practitioners, even offline RL practitioners, still heavily rely on online Monte Carlo estimators.
For example, Mathieu et al. (2023) repeatedly execute their
trained offline AlphaStar agents in the StartCraft II simulator
and use the win rates as the performance metric for hyperparameter tuning and evaluating different algorithmic design
choices. This evaluation practice is the straightforward online Monte Carlo evaluation and requires massive online
data. There are indeed offline evaluation methods, most of
which, however, still rely on online Monte Carlo evaluation
for hyperparameter tuning and testing different algorithmic
design choices (see, e.g., Fu et al. (2020); Gülçehre et al.
(2020); Schrittwieser et al. (2021); Mathieu et al. (2023)).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton & Barto (2018)) has
recently demonstrated great success in solving sequential decision-making problems. For example, AlphaStar
(Vinyals et al., 2019) defeats the best human StarCraft II
players and is ranked at the GrandMaster level in the StarCraft ladder. The canonical RL paradigm behind the success,
however, requires massive active interactions with the environment to obtain data (Sutton, 1988; Watkins & Dayan,
1992; Sutton et al., 1999; Mnih et al., 2015). Those data are
called online data, and this paradigm is called online RL.
Requiring massive online data is, however, prohibitive in
many scenarios. First, obtaining massive online data can

Improving the sample efficiency of online Monte Carlo
estimators while maintaining their unbiasedness is thus
a need for both online and offline RL practitioners. We emphasize unbiasedness because it is arguably one of the key
reasons that make Monte Carlo estimators so dominating.
In this paper, we make three contributions toward fulfilling
this need. First, we propose tailored closed-form behavior
policies that provably reduce the variance of online Monte
Carlo estimators. Second, we design efficient algorithms
to learn the closed-form behavior policies from offline data.
Theoretical analysis is provided to characterize how the behavior policy learning error affects the amount of reduced
variance. Notably, this learning error does not introduce
any bias in the estimation. Third, we conduct thorough
empirical studies in a broad set of environments. Compared
with previous works, our method achieves better empirical

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia.
Correspondence to: Shuze Liu <shuzeliu@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

