CARTE: Pretraining and Transfer for Tabular Learning

Myung Jun Kim 1 Léo Grinsztajn 1 Gaël Varoquaux 1 2

Abstract

revolution of foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021)
such as large language models (Touvron et al., 2023). But
this revolution has not happened for tabular data despite its
huge importance for enterprise and institutional data. One
roadblock is that integrating data from tables in the wild is
often difficult, sometimes impossible. Different tables might
not have any related data and when they do, data integration
is a whole field of database research (Doan et al., 2012).
One might need to solve correspondence across columns
–schema matching– or across data sources with different
naming conventions for entries –entity matching. For lack
of matching schemas and entities, pretraining across tables
in the wild has not been possible. Without pretraining, deep
learning is less practical, and tree-based methods are often
preferable (Grinsztajn et al., 2022).

Pretrained deep-learning models are the go-to
solution for images or text. However, for tabular data the standard is still to train tree-based
models. Indeed, transfer learning on tables hits
the challenge of data integration: finding correspondences, correspondences in the entries (entity matching) where different words may denote
the same entity, correspondences across columns
(schema matching), which may come in different orders, names... We propose a neural architecture that does not need such correspondences.
As a result, we can pretrain it on background
data that has not been matched. The architecture –CARTE for Context Aware Representation
of Table Entries– uses a graph representation of
tabular (or relational) data to process tables with
different columns, string embedding of entries
and columns names to model an open vocabulary,
and a graph-attentional network to contextualize
entries with column names and neighboring entries. An extensive benchmark shows that CARTE
facilitates learning, outperforming a solid set of
baselines including the best tree-based models.
CARTE also enables joint learning across tables
with unmatched columns, enhancing a small table
with bigger ones. CARTE opens the door to large
pretrained models for tabular data.

Here we introduce a learning architecture that learns across
tables without schema and string matching. The key is to
represent tables with a graph and all symbols with embeddings (for column names and table entries). The architecture,
dubbed CARTE (Context-Aware Representation of Table
Entries), is pretrained on a large knowledge base, to capture
information on a vast amount of entities and relations. It
can then be fine-tuned on a given downstream task, helping
learning even in few shot settings. It can also be used for
joint learning across multiple tables, enriching a target table with weakly related sources. CARTE brings a sizable
performance gain, outperforming markedly a set of 42 solid
baselines (including the best tree-based methods and various feature engineering). It benefits particularly tables with
string entries, frequent in applications but seldom present in
machine learning benchmarks.

1. Introduction

Section 2 presents related work; section 3 describes the
CARTE architecture and training procedures; and section 4
provides an extensive empirical study across many tabular
datasets, benchmarking the settings of a single downstream
table as well as multiple related ones.

The wide availability of pre-trained models has greatly facilitated machine learning for various data modalities, for
example with images (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015) or
texts (Devlin et al., 2019). These models can be downloaded
from model hubs, embarking a lot of implicit information
and transformations that unleashes the power of deep learning even on small datasets. This paradigm has led to the

2. Related Works
Tabular deep learning Tables are central to many applications. As a result, numerous deep learning methods tailored
for this modality have been proposed (Abutbul et al., 2020;
Arik & Pfister, 2020; Popov et al., 2019; Gorishniy et al.,
2023b; Somepalli et al., 2021). However, they typically

1
SODA Team, Inria Saclay, France 2 Probabl.ai, France. Correspondence to: Myung Jun Kim <myung.kim@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

