Iterative Preference Learning from Human Feedback: Bridging Theory and
Practice for RLHF under KL-constraint
Wei Xiong * 1 Hanze Dong * 2 Chenlu Ye * 3 Ziqi Wang 1 Han Zhong 4 Heng Ji 1 Nan Jiang 1 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract

human values and preferences. This approach has shown
significant effectiveness in applications such as ChatGPT
(OpenAI, 2023), Claude (Anthropic, 2023), Bard (Google,
2023), and LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023), by making the
built AI system helpful, harmless, honest and controllable
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022).

This paper studies the theoretical framework of
the alignment process of generative models with
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF). We consider a standard mathematical
formulation, the reverse-KL regularized contextual bandit for RLHF. Despite its widespread
practical application, a rigorous theoretical analysis of this formulation remains open. We investigate its behavior in three distinct settings—
offline, online, and hybrid—and propose efficient
algorithms with finite-sample theoretical guarantees. Moving towards practical applications, our
framework, with a robust approximation of the
information-theoretical policy improvement oracle, naturally gives rise to several novel RLHF
algorithms. This includes an iterative version of
the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) algorithm for online settings, and a multi-step rejection sampling strategy for offline scenarios. Our
empirical evaluations on real-world alignment experiment of large language model demonstrate
that these proposed methods significantly surpass
existing strong baselines, such as DPO and Rejection Sampling Optimization (RSO), showcasing
the connections between solid theoretical foundations and their potent practical implementations.

Despite its effectiveness, RLHF’s implementation often involves ad-hoc practices and extensive algorithmic tuning in
the entire pipeline, including preference data collection (it
is hard to select representative humans (Bai et al., 2022),
larger language models (Wang et al., 2024) or program compiler (Wang et al., 2023b)), preference/reward modeling
(reward misspecification and misgeneralization (Hong et al.,
2022; Gao et al., 2023)), and model optimization (instability
of training (Choshen et al., 2019) and distribution shift issue
(Michaud et al., 2020; Tien et al., 2022)). Meanwhile, the
resulting models of RLHF typically suffer from issues like
performance degeneration if we impose strong optimization pressure toward an imperfect reward function (Michaud
et al., 2020; Tien et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2023), which contains bias and approximation error from the data collection
and preference modeling (Gao et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2023d). Casper et al. (2023) also discussed many other
challenges of RLHF. Thus, it is important to understand the
mathematical principle of the RLHF process, as well as the
connections among its different steps, which should be able
to motivate future algorithmic design in principle.
In current RLHF theory, the agent’s objective is to maximize
an observed reward function, with the optimal policy typically being deterministic and reward-greedy (Agarwal et al.,
2019). However, in practical RLHF applications, merely
maximizing the reward function is often insufficient and
probably results in overfitting, as the generative model must
simultaneously ensure both diversity and high fidelity in its
outputs. A deterministic maximizer of the reward tends to
compromise on these aspects significantly. For example,
the maximizer of the “safety reward” tends to avoid providing answers all the time, which contradicts the LLM’s
training objective. The situation worsens due to bias and
approximation errors in reward modeling, leading to the
critical problem of reward hacking, where the model often
repeats superfluous, pleasing yet irrelevant words to appease
the reward model (Michaud et al., 2020; Tien et al., 2022;

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)
(Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019) has emerged as
a powerful paradigm to align modern generative models like
Large Language Models (LLMs) and diffusion models with
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Salesforce AI Research 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 Work done during an internship at The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Wei Xiong <wx13@illinois.edu>, Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

