MoMo: Momentum Models for Adaptive Learning Rates

Fabian Schaipp 1 Ruben Ohana 2 Michael Eickenberg 2 Aaron Defazio 3 Robert M. Gower 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Training a modern production-grade large neural network
can cost over 1 million dollars in compute. For instance,
the cost for the Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer T5-model
(Raffel et al., 2020) is estimated to be more than 1.3 million
dollars for a single run (Sharir et al., 2020). What makes
training models highly expensive is that multiple runs are
needed to tune the hyperparameters, with arguably the most
important parameter being the learning rate. Indeed, finding
a good learning-rate schedule plays a disproportionately
large role in the resulting test error of the model, with one
extensive study showing that it is of similar importance as
the choice of optimizer (Schmidt et al., 2021).

Training a modern machine learning architecture
on a new task requires extensive learning-rate tuning, which comes at a high computational cost.
Here we develop new Polyak-type adaptive learning rates that can be used on top of any momentum method, and require less tuning to perform
well. We first develop MoMo, a Momentum Model
based adaptive learning rate for SGD-M (stochastic gradient descent with momentum). MoMo uses
momentum estimates of the losses and gradients
sampled at each iteration to build a model of the
loss function. Our model makes use of any known
lower bound of the loss function by using truncation, e.g. most losses are lower-bounded by
zero. The model is then approximately minimized
at each iteration to compute the next step. We
show how MoMo can be used in combination with
any momentum-based method, and showcase this
by developing MoMo-Adam, which is Adam with
our new model-based adaptive√learning rate. We
show that MoMo attains a O(1/ K) convergence
rate for convex problems with interpolation, needing knowledge of no problem-specific quantities
other than the optimal value. Additionally, for
losses with unknown lower bounds, we develop
on-the-fly estimates of a lower bound, that are
incorporated in our model. We show that MoMo
and MoMo-Adam improve over SGD-M and Adam in
terms of robustness to hyperparameter tuning for
training image classifiers on MNIST, CIFAR, and
Imagenet, for recommender systems on Criteo,
for a transformer model on the translation task
IWSLT14, and for a diffusion model.

Here, we develop adaptive learning rates that can be used together with any momentum-based method. To showcase our
method, we apply our learning rates to SGD-M (stochastic
gradient descent with momentum) and to Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2015), which gives the MoMo and MoMo-Adam method,
respectively. We make use of model-based stochastic optimization (Asi & Duchi, 2019; Davis & Drusvyatskiy, 2019;
Chadha et al., 2021), and leverage that loss functions are
bounded below (typically by zero) to derive our new MoMo
(Momentum Model) adaptive learning rate. An implementation of MoMo is available in Pytorch and optax.
1.1. The Model-Based Approach
Consider the problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

f (x) := Es∼D [f (x, s)] ,

(1)

where f (x, s) is a loss function, s is an input (mini-batch of
data), and x are the learnable parameters of a model. We
assume throughout that f (x, s) ≥ 0, which is true for most
loss functions1 . We also assume that f (·, s) is continuously
differentiable for all s ∈ D, that there exists a solution x∗
to (1) and denote the optimal value by f ∗ := f (x∗ ) ∈ R.
In our main algorithms MoMo and MoMo-Adam (Algorithms 1
and 2), we present adaptive learning rates2 for SGD-M and

1
Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich,
Munich 2 Flatiron Institute, CCM, New York 3 Meta AI, Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) team, New York. Correspondence to:
Fabian Schaipp <fabian.schaipp@tum.de>.

1

We choose zero as a lower bound for simplicity, but any constant lower bound could be handled.
2
Here the term adaptivity refers to a scalar learning rate that
changes from one iteration to the next by using easy-to-compute
quantities.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

