TinyTrain: Resource-Aware Task-Adaptive Sparse Training of DNNs
at the Data-Scarce Edge

Young D. Kwon 1 2 Rui Li 2 Stylianos I. Venieris 2 Jagmohan Chauhan 3 Nicholas D. Lane 2 Cecilia Mascolo 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

On-device training of deep neural networks (DNNs) on edge
devices has the potential to enable diverse real-world applications to dynamically adapt to new tasks (Parisi et al.,
2019) and different (i.e. cross-domain/out-of-domain) data
distributions from users (e.g. personalisation) (Pan & Yang,
2010), without jeopardising privacy over sensitive data
(e.g. healthcare) (Gim & Ko, 2022).

On-device training is essential for user personalisation and privacy. With the pervasiveness of IoT
devices and microcontroller units (MCUs), this
task becomes more challenging due to the constrained memory and compute resources, and the
limited availability of labelled user data. Nonetheless, prior works neglect the data scarcity issue, require excessively long training time (e.g. a
few hours), or induce substantial accuracy loss
(≥10%). In this paper, we propose TinyTrain, an
on-device training approach that drastically reduces training time by selectively updating parts
of the model and explicitly coping with data
scarcity. TinyTrain introduces a task-adaptive
sparse-update method that dynamically selects
the layer/channel to update based on a multiobjective criterion that jointly captures user data,
the memory, and the compute capabilities of the
target device, leading to high accuracy on unseen tasks with reduced computation and memory footprint. TinyTrain outperforms vanilla finetuning of the entire network by 3.6-5.0% in accuracy, while reducing the backward-pass memory and computation cost by up to 1,098× and
7.68×, respectively. Targeting broadly used realworld edge devices, TinyTrain achieves 9.5×
faster and 3.5× more energy-efficient training
over status-quo approaches, and 2.23× smaller
memory footprint than SOTA methods, while
remaining within the 1 MB memory envelope
of MCU-grade platforms. Code is available at
https://github.com/theyoungkwon/TinyTrain

Despite its benefits, several challenges hinder the broader
adoption of on-device training. Firstly, labelled user data
are neither abundant nor readily available in real-world
IoT applications. Secondly, edge devices are often characterised by severely limited memory. With the forward
and backward passes of DNN training being significantly
memory-hungry, there is a mismatch between memory requirements and memory availability at the edge. Even architectures tailored to microcontroller units (MCUs), such
as MCUNet (Lin et al., 2020), require almost 1 GB of peak
training-time memory (see Table 2), which far exceeds the
RAM size of widely used embedded devices, such as Raspberry Pi Zero 2 (512 MB), and commodity MCUs (1 MB).
Lastly, on-device training is limited by the constrained processing capabilities of edge devices, with training requiring
at least 3× more computation (i.e. multiply-accumulate
(MAC) count) than inference (Xu et al., 2022). This places
an excessive burden on tiny edge devices that host less
powerful processors, compared to server-grade CPUs and
GPUs (Lin et al., 2022).
Despite the growing effort towards on-device training, the
current methods have important limitations. First, the common approach of fine-tuning only the last layer (Lee &
Nirjon, 2020; Ren et al., 2021) leads to considerable accuracy loss (≥10%) that far exceeds the typical drop tolerance. Moreover, recomputation-based memory-saving
techniques (Chen et al., 2016; Patil et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022; Gim & Ko, 2022) that trade-off more operations for
lower memory usage, incur significant computation overhead, further aggravating the already excessive on-device
training time. Lastly, sparse-update methods (Profentzas
et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Cai et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2019; Qu et al., 2022) selectively update only a subset
of layers (and channels) during on-device training, reduc-

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge,
United Kingdom 3 School of Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Young D. Kwon <ydk21@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

