Random Masking Finds Winning Tickets for Parameter Efficient Fine-tuning

Jing Xu 1 Jingzhao Zhang 1 2 3

Abstract
Fine-tuning large language models (LLM) can
be costly. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)
addresses the problems by training a fraction of
the parameters, whose success reveals the expressiveness and flexibility of pretrained models. This
paper studies the limit of PEFT, by further simplifying its design and reducing the number of
trainable parameters beyond standard setups. To
this end, we use Random Masking to fine-tune the
pretrained model. Despite its simplicity, we show
that Random Masking is surprisingly effective:
with a larger-than-expected learning rate, Random
Masking can match the performance of standard
PEFT algorithms such as LoRA on various tasks,
using fewer trainable parameters. We provide
both empirical and theoretical explorations into
the success of Random Masking. We show that
masking induces a flatter loss landscape and more
distant solutions, which allows for and necessitates large learning rates.

Figure 1: The average performance of PEFT methods over with various numbers of trainable parameters. Masking stands for our Random Masking method;
FT stands for full parameter fine-tuning; Prefix stands for
Prefix-Tuning. The metrics are calculated on 11 datasets
using OPT-1.3b. Despite its simple design, Random Masking achieves competitive performance with fewer trainable
parameters.

1. Introduction

gorithms, such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2021), adapter (Houlsby
et al., 2019), prompt tuning (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al.,
2021). These methods have seen widespread application for
both language (Shi et al., 2023; Lialin et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2022) and vision tasks (Sung et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023).

Large-scale pretrained models (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a) have revolutionized deep learning, demonstrating remarkable capabilities
in various domains such as natural language processing and
computer vision. These models use an extensive number
of parameters to capture complex patterns in data. Despite
their success, the intensive resources required for utilizing these models pose significant challenges, especially in
the setting where they have to be fine-tuned to adapt to
downstream data or align with human behaviors. To reduce
the computational and memory demands, researchers have
developed various parameter efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) alInstitute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University, China 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Correspondence to:
Jing
Xu <xujing21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Jingzhao Zhang
<jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

The success of PEFT using a remarkably small fraction of
parameters inspired research efforts to understand the phenomenon. For example, Aghajanyan et al. (2020) and Malladi et al. (2023b) show that though the pretrained model
parameters live in a high dimensional space, fine-tuning
tasks have low complexity in terms of intrinsic dimensions.
Additionally, research indicates that pretrained networks
have better optimization landscapes compared with random
initialized networks (Hao et al., 2019; Zhou & Srikumar,
2021), making them easier to fit the downstream datasets.
Furthermore, Su et al. (2023b) highlights the importance
of model scaling in PEFT, showing that it can even mitigate
the impact of design differences among PEFT methods.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Motivated by the observations and analyses on the effectiveness of PEFT, our work hopes to take a step forward
and explore the performance limit of PEFT. More specif-

1

1

