Combinatorial Multivariant Multi-Armed Bandits
with Applications to Episodic Reinforcement Learning and Beyond

Xutong Liu 1 2 Siwei Wang 3 Jinhang Zuo 2 4 Han Zhong 5 Xuchuang Wang 2 Zhiyong Wang 1 Shuai Li 6
Mohammad Hajiesmaili 2 John C.S. Lui 1 Wei Chen 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) (Robbins, 1952;
Auer et al., 2002) is a classical model for sequential decisionmaking that has been widely studied(cf. Slivkins et al.
(2019); Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020)). As a noteworthy extension of MAB, combinatorial multi-armed bandits
(CMAB) have drawn considerable attention due to their rich
applications in domains such as online advertising, network
optimization, and healthcare systems (Gai et al., 2012; Kveton et al., 2015b; Chen et al., 2013b; 2016; Wang & Chen,
2017; Merlis & Mannor, 2019; Liu et al., 2021; Zuo & JoeWong, 2021; Zuo et al., 2022). In CMAB, the learning
agent chooses a combinatorial action (often referred to as
super arm) in each round. This combinatorial action would
trigger a set of arms to be pulled simultaneously, and the
outcomes of these arms are observed as feedback (typically
known as semi-bandit feedback). The agent then receives a
reward, which can be a general function of the pulled arms’
outcomes, with the summation function being the most common example. The agent’s goal is to minimize the expected
regret, which quantifies the difference in expected cumulative rewards between always selecting the best action (i.e.,
the action with the highest expected reward) and following
the agent’s own policy. CMAB poses the challenge of balancing exploration and exploitation while dealing with an
exponential number of combinatorial actions.

We introduce a novel framework of combinatorial multi-armed bandits (CMAB) with multivariant and probabilistically triggering arms (CMABMT), where the outcome of each arm is a ddimensional multivariant random variable and the
feedback follows a general arm triggering process.
Compared with existing CMAB works, CMABMT not only enhances the modeling power but
also allows improved results by leveraging distinct statistical properties for multivariant random
variables. For CMAB-MT, we propose a general
1-norm multivariant and triggering probabilitymodulated smoothness condition, and an optimistic CUCB-MT algorithm built upon this condition. Our framework can include many important
problems as applications, such as episodic reinforcement learning (RL) and probabilistic maximum coverage for goods distribution, all of which
meet the above smoothness condition and achieve
matching or improved regret bounds compared to
existing works. Through our new framework, we
build the first connection between the episodic RL
and CMAB literature, by offering a new angle to
solve the episodic RL through the lens of CMAB,
which may encourage more interactions between
these two important directions.

To model a wider range of application scenarios where
the combinatorial action may probabilistically trigger arms,
Chen et al. (2016) first introduce a generalization of CMAB,
known as CMAB with probabilistically triggered arms
(CMAB-T). This extension successfully encompasses a
broader range of applications, including cascading bandits (Combes et al., 2015) and online influence maximization (OIM) (Wen et al., 2017). Subsequently, Wang & Chen
(2017); Liu et al. (2022) improve the regret bounds of (Chen
et al., 2016) by introducing novel triggering probability
modulated (TPM) smoothness conditions and/or variance
adaptive algorithms. Further elaboration on related works
can be found in Appendix A.

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China 2 University of Massachusetts Amherst, Massachusetts,
United States 3 Microsoft Research, Beijing, China 4 California
Institute of Technology, California, United States 5 Peking University, Beijing, China 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Shuai Li <shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>,
Siwei Wang <siweiwang@microsoft.com>, Wei Chen
<weic@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Despite the expanded modeling capabilities and improved
regret bounds, all prior CMAB-T frameworks assume that
1

