Learning High-Frequency Functions Made Easy
with Sinusoidal Positional Encoding

Chuanhao Sun 1 Zhihang Yuan 1 Kai Xu 2 Luo Mai 1 Siddharth N 1 Shuo Chen 1 Mahesh K. Marina 1

Abstract

features, induced by positional encoding (PE), are applied
to learn 3D representations of objects or scenes by taking in
1D sequences that represent samples of light.

Fourier features based positional encoding (PE) is
commonly used in machine learning tasks that involve learning high-frequency features from lowdimensional inputs, such as 3D view synthesis and
time series regression with neural tangent kernels.
Despite their effectiveness, existing PEs require
manual, empirical adjustment of crucial hyperparameters, specifically the Fourier features, tailored
to each unique task. Further, PEs face challenges
in efficiently learning high-frequency functions,
particularly in tasks with limited data. In this paper, we introduce sinusoidal PE (SPE), designed
to efficiently learn adaptive frequency features
closely aligned with the true underlying function. Our experiments demonstrate that SPE, without hyperparameter tuning, consistently achieves
enhanced fidelity and faster training across various tasks, including 3D view synthesis, Text-toSpeech generation, and 1D regression. SPE is
implemented as a direct replacement for existing
PEs. Its plug-and-play nature lets numerous tasks
easily adopt and benefit from SPE.

Despite its effectiveness, a successful application of PE is
non-trivial. A series of studies emerge to resolve the practical issues of PE on its sensitivity to hyper-parameters (Gao
et al., 2023), difficulty to capture high-frequency components during training (Yang et al., 2023), etc. Those practical issues also block a wider application of PE in emerging
generative AI tasks, especially those involving complex
high-frequency details. For example, our experiment shows
that a direct application of PE in speech synthesis does not
offer any benefit in capturing high-frequency details (Ren
et al., 2019b; 2020), though “by design” it should do.
In this study, we delve into the challenges of training neural networks for machine learning tasks that demand the
retention of high-frequency components in their outputs.
Our exploration into the quantity and training dynamics of
frequency components within PE has led us to identify two
primary factors that can undermine the effectiveness of PE:
(1) the difficulty in configuring stationary frequency features
without adequate prior knowledge, which can result in PE
failing to learn if configurations are incorrect, and (2) the
detrimental impact on performance caused by compelling
the model to perfectly align with the specific frequency components of the training set (e.g., the case of overfitting PE
for an original NeRF).

Code: github.com/zhyuan11/SPE

1. Introduction
Fully connected neural networks, a.k.a multilayer perceptrons or MLPs, are trained to generate representations of
high-dimensional data such as shapes, images, and signed
distances, by processing low-dimensional coordinates. Recent works have shown that the Fourier series regression using MLP (Tancik et al., 2020) can enable neural networks to
learn high-frequency functions in low-dimensional spaces.
In neural radiance fields (NeRFs) and its follow-up studies (Tancik et al., 2020; Mildenhall et al., 2021), Fourier

To overcome the challenges identified, we seek to develop
a new PE that can effectively learn the appropriate number
of components and their frequencies conditionally on the
inputs. Our development has led to sinusoidal positional
encoding (SPE) which augments PE (Tancik et al., 2020)
with periodic activation functions (Sitzmann et al., 2020),
thus making the number and frequencies of Fourier series
trainable and adaptive to inputs. Although we initially propose SPE for challenging few-view NeRF tasks, we find it
is a generic method that can benefit a diverse set of tasks
which need modelling complex high-frequency features.
With SPE, we have a simple yet effective form of PE for the
first time that can effectively work in a wide range of tasks
without manually tuning the numbers as well as the values
of the Fourier features.

1
The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA, US. Correspondence to: Chuanhao Sun <chuanhao.sun@ed.ac.uk>, Mahesh K. Marina <mahesh@ed.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

