Trustless Audits without Revealing Data or Models

Suppakit Waiwitlikhit 1 Ion Stoica 2 Yi Sun 3 Tatsunori Hashimoto 1 Daniel Kang 4

Abstract

proprietary. For example, Twitter recently released their
algorithm but not the model weights (Twitter, 2023), and
many LLM providers only provide access via APIs. On
the other hand, there is also an increasing societal need
for transparency in the model and data behind these APIs:
closed models harm transparency and trust (Bell, 2023).

There is an increasing conflict between business
incentives to hide models and data as trade secrets,
and the societal need for algorithmic transparency.
For example, a rightsholder wishing to know
whether their copyrighted works have been used
during training must convince the model provider
to allow a third party to audit the model and
data. Finding a mutually agreeable third party is
difficult, and the associated costs often make this
approach impractical.

As ML has become more capable and is being deployed
in sensitive settings, models and data are increasingly kept
proprietary. This is because data and model weights are
increasingly treated as trade secrets. Furthermore, the data
cannot be released in many circumstances, such as in medical
settings. Unfortunately, keeping models and training data
secret harms transparency and trust. Users may have specific
requirements when using gated models, such as avoiding
copyrighted material. Model providers may lose customers
due to this lack of transparency.

In this work, we show that it is possible to simultaneously allow model providers to keep their model
weights (but not architecture) and data secret while
allowing other parties to trustlessly audit model
and data properties. We do this by designing a protocol called Z K AUDIT in which model providers
publish cryptographic commitments of datasets
and model weights, alongside a zero-knowledge
proof (ZKP) certifying that published commitments are derived from training the model. Model
providers can then respond to audit requests by
privately computing any function F of the dataset
(or model) and releasing the output of F alongside
another ZKP certifying the correct execution of
F . To enable Z K AUDIT, we develop new methods
of computing ZKPs for SGD on modern neural
nets for simple recommender systems and image
classification models capable of high accuracies
on ImageNet. Empirically, we show it is possible
to provide trustless audits of DNNs, including
copyright, censorship, and counterfactual audits
with little to no loss in accuracy.

To address this, we want to perform audits where model
providers and users agree on specific properties to test for
the ML training procedure and models. For example, the
property that the training dataset contains no copyrighted
content or a recommender system is not censoring items
(e.g., tweets). An audit would ideally release results for
exactly these properties and nothing else.
Currently, there are three methods of performing such audits
on modern ML methods. One method is to release the data,
random seed, and final model weights: the user can replay
training. However, this procedure does not keep the data and
weights hidden. Another method is multi-party computation
(MPC), which allows several parties to participate in a
computation while keeping data hidden. Unfortunately,
MPC requires all participants to participate honestly, but an
audit presupposes a lack of trust between the model provider
and users. MPC that handles malicious adversaries is extremely bandwidth intensive: a back-of-the-order calculation
suggests the training procedure for an 8-layer CNN may
take up to 5 petabytes of communication, which would cost
$450,000 in cloud egress fees (Pentyala et al., 2021). Finally,
a trusted third party (TTP) could perform the audit, but TTPs
are rarely practical. The TTP must have access to trade
secrets, which model providers wish to keep secret. Furthermore, audits are expensive, requiring highly specialized
expertise (deep understanding of ML training), and strong
security (to avoid leaking trade secrets). In many cases, no

1. Introduction
As ML models become more capable, businesses are
incentivized to keep the model weights and datasets
4

1
Stanford University 2 UC Berkeley 3 University of Chicago
UIUC. Correspondence to: Daniel Kang <ddkang@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

