Predicting Dose-Response Curves with Deep Neural Networks

Pedro A. Campana 1 Paul Prasse 1 Tobias Scheffer 1

Abstract

high-volume dose-response screenings in which the growthinhibitory properties of different candidate molecules and
concentrations are studied in vitro for panels of tumoral cells
with known genotypes and transcriptomes.

Dose-response curves characterize the relationship between the concentration of drugs and their
inhibitory effect on the growth of specific types
of cells. The predominant Hill-equation model of
an ideal enzymatic inhibition unduly simplifies
the biochemical reality of many drugs; and for
these drugs, the widely-used drug performance indicator of the half-inhibitory concentration IC50
can lead to poor therapeutic recommendations
and poor selections of promising drug candidates.
We develop a neural model that uses an embedding of the interaction between drug molecules
and the tissue transcriptome to estimate the entire
dose-response curve rather than a scalar aggregate. We find that, compared to the prior state
of the art, this model excels at interpolating and
extrapolating the inhibitory effect of untried concentrations. Unlike prevalent parametric models, it it able to accurately predict dose-response
curves of drugs on cells with previously unseen
transcriptomes as well as of previously untested
drug molecules on established cell lines. Our implementation is available at https://github.
com/alonsocampana/ARCANet.

An inhibitory effect E(x) is a rate of decline in the number
of living cells after a fixed time interval in which a cell
culture has been exposed to a concentration x of a drug
compound, where E(x) = 0 indicates perfect conservation,
and E(x) = 1 means total eradication of the cell culture. A
dose-response curve describes the effect E(x) as a function
of the concentration x. The Hill equation is a widely used
parametric dose-response model that assumes a sigmoidal
transition from the inhibitory effect E0 in absence of the
drug to the maximal effect of the drug E∞ at its saturation:
ÊHill (x) = E0 +

E∞ − E0
,
1 + eβx+β0

(1)

where E0 , E∞ , β, and β0 are model parameters. Parameters
of multiple drugs and cell lines can be modeled jointly by
mixed-effect or hierarchical Bayesian models (Lindstrom
& Bates, 1990; Labelle et al., 2019), or they can be estimated independently for each drug-cell pair. In both cases,
each drug and cell line has individual parameters that have
to be estimated, which renders zero-shot predictions for
previously unseen drugs or cell lines impossible.
The Hill equation is an appropriate model of ideal enzymatic inhibition, but it is known to be a simplification of
the biochemical reality of most drugs; it is either monotonically increasing or decreasing, and the curve and its
derivative are symmetric to its inflection point. The Hill
equation cannot adequately describe the behavior of compounds that interact with multiple cellular mechanisms; for
instance, it is unable to model the fairly common case of
biphasic compounds (Mattson, 2008) that have a stimulating effect at a low dose but become toxic at high doses.
This model inadequacy cannot be alleviated by increasing
amounts of training data. Hill curves are aggregated into a
scalar value IC50 , the concentration that inhibits half of the
cells: ÊHill (IC50 ) = 21 . The IC50 is frequently used as a
performance indicator of drugs. But for drugs whose behavior is poorly approximated by the Hill equation, this value
can be misleading, and decisions based on this indicator can
result in unnecessary and unsuccessful animal trials, or in
failures to detect effective molecules.

1. Introduction
The concept of a dose-response curve lies at the heart of
both drug discovery and personalized medicine: it describes
how the growth of a type of tissue is inhibited as a function
of the concentration of a drug which the cells are exposed to.
Estimates of the dose-response curves of candidate drugs
for certain targeted cells—often tumor tissue—as well as for
types of healthy tissue are used to predict whether the potential drugs may have a therapeutically useful and safe dosage
range. To this end, several large-scale projects perform
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Potsdam,
Potsdam, Germany. Correspondence to: Pedro A. Campana
<alonsocampana@uni-potsdam.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

