Experts Don’t Cheat: Learning What You Don’t Know By Predicting Pairs

Daniel D. Johnson 1 2 Daniel Tarlow 1 David Duvenaud 2 Chris J. Maddison 2

Abstract

Standard Training

Tell me
about digit
7 of pi.

θ

Identifying how much a model p̂Y|X knows about
the stochastic real-world process pY|X it was
trained on is important to ensure it avoids producing incorrect or “hallucinated” answers or taking
unsafe actions. But this is difficult for generative
models because probabilistic predictions do not
distinguish between per-response noise (aleatoric
uncertainty) and lack of knowledge about the process (epistemic uncertainty), and existing epistemic uncertainty quantification techniques tend
to be overconfident when the model underfits. We
propose a general strategy for teaching a model
to both approximate pY|X and also estimate the
remaining gaps between p̂θY|X and pY|X : train it
to predict pairs of independent responses drawn
from the true conditional distribution, allow it to
“cheat” by observing one response while predicting the other, then measure how much it cheats.
Remarkably, we prove that being good at cheating (i.e. cheating whenever it improves your prediction) is equivalent to being second-order calibrated, a principled extension of ordinary calibration that allows us to construct provably-correct
frequentist confidence intervals for pY|X and detect incorrect responses with high probability. We
demonstrate empirically that our approach accurately estimates how much models don’t know
across ambiguous image classification, (synthetic)
language modeling, and partially-observable navigation tasks, outperforming existing techniques.

That's an even number.
Expert

Paired Response Training

That's an even number.
Tell me
about digit
7 of pi.

Expert 1

Sure, it is six.
Expert 2

Generation

?

?
Tell me
about digit
2166 of pi.

?

Sure, that's 4. ?
It's even.

?

?

That is the number 7.

Uncertainty Elicitation (Self-Cheating)

That is the number 7.
Tell me
about digit
2166 of pi.

?

It's five.

That's spelled T W O.

?

Diﬀerent? Must have
been uncertain!

Fake Expert

Sure, that's 7.

!

It's odd.

It's seven.

That's spelled S E V E N.

That is the number 7.

Figure 1. We train a model (green p̂θ ) to predict pairs of i.i.d.
ground-truth answers (blue and red ), and allow it to “cheat”
by observing one ( ) while predicting the other ( ). Calibrated
models only need to cheat when there is something they don’t
know, so the amount that the model cheats when its own guesses
are presented as expert answers can be used to construct provablycorrect “cheat-corrected” estimates of how close p̂θY|X is to pY|X .

Google DeepMind 2 University of Toronto, Department of
Computer Science, Ontario, Canada. Correspondence to: Daniel
D. Johnson <ddjohnson@cs.toronto.edu>.

about the process. Missing information can cause even welltrained models to “hallucinate” incorrect claims (Ji et al.,
2022; Kalai & Vempala, 2023), make unjustified decisions
(Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018), or exhibit “self-delusions”
that conflate cause and effect (Ortega et al., 2021). Unfortunately, detecting missing information is very difficult when
the true responses Y are not deterministic functions of the
input X, because probabilistic predictions made by p̂θY|X
must account for both the model’s uncertainty about the
process (called “epistemic uncertainty”) and the variability
intrinsic to pY|X (“aleatoric uncertainty”). For example, if
responding to a query X = “Tell me about digit 5641 of
π”, the predicted probability of a response (e.g. “That is 7”)
may be small either because the model does not know how
pY|X would respond (e.g. whether the answer is actually
“That is 4”), or simply because there are many plausible
responses under pY|X (e.g. “Sure, it’s an odd number”).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

If we want to determine whether our model knows enough
about pY|X for us to trust its responses, we cannot rely on
the value of p̂θY|X (y|x) alone, since it may just be small be-

1. Introduction
When a generative model p̂θY|X (such as a large language
model) is trained to imitate a stochastic real-world process
pY|X , it’s important to identify what the model doesn’t know
1

1

