Prodigy: An Expeditiously Adaptive Parameter-Free Learner

Konstantin Mishchenko 1 Aaron Defazio 2

Abstract

each optimizing their objective locally. Another example
is Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Zoph & Le, 2017),
where the goal is to find the best neural network architecture
automatically by training a lot of networks and evaluating
them on a validation set. In such cases it becomes very
expensive to manually tune the learning rate.

We consider the problem of estimating the learning rate in adaptive methods, such as AdaGrad
and Adam. We propose Prodigy, an algorithm
that provably estimates the distance to the solution D, which is needed to set the learning rate
optimally. At its core, Prodigy is a modification
of the D-Adaptation method for learning-rate-free
learning. It improves upon the convergence
rate
p
of D-Adaptation by a factor of O( log(D/d0 )),
where d0 is the initial estimate of D. We test
Prodigy on 12 common logistic-regression benchmark datasets, VGG11 and ResNet-50 training
on CIFAR10, ViT training on Imagenet, LSTM
training on IWSLT14, DLRM training on Criteo
dataset, VarNet on Knee MRI dataset, as well as
RoBERTa and GPT transformer training on BookWiki. Our experimental results show that our
approach consistently outperforms D-Adaptation
and reaches test accuracy values close to that of
hand-tuned Adam.

Recently, parameter-free adaptive learning rate methods
(Orabona & Tommasi, 2017; Cutkosky & Orabona, 2018;
Zhang et al., 2022; Carmon & Hinder, 2022; Ivgi et al.,
2023) have gained considerable attention due to their ability
to automatically adjust learning rates based on the problem
structure and data characteristics. Among these, the DAdaptation method, introduced by Defazio & Mishchenko
(2023), has emerged as a promising practical approach for
learning-rate-free optimization.
For a convex objective function f , D-Adaptation works
by maintaining a lower bound on the initial distance to
solution D = ∥x0 − x∗ ∥, for any x∗ in the solution set of
the following problem:
min f (x).

x∈Rp

In practice, the lower bound estimated by D-Adaptation
increases rapidly during the course of optimization, plateauing to a value close to the true D. This D quantity is the
key unknown constant needed to set the learning rate for
adaptive optimization methods, forming the numerator of
the step size:

1. Introduction
Optimization is an essential tool in modern machine learning, enabling efficient solutions to large-scale problems that
arise in various domains, such as computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement learning. One
of the key challenges is the selection of appropriate learning rates, which can significantly impact the convergence
speed and the quality of the final solution. Learning-rate tuning has been particularly challenging in applications where
there are multiple agents that use their own optimizer. For
instance, when training Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020), there are two neural networks with different architectures. In federated learning,
tuning is even more challenging (Khodak et al., 2021), since
there might be billions of devices (Kairouz et al., 2021),

ηk = qP

D

k
2
i=0 ∥gi ∥

,

where D = ∥x0 − x∗ ∥,

(1)

and the denominator is based on the AdaGrad step
size (Duchi et al., 2011; Streeter & McMahan, 2010; Ward
et al., 2019). The Gradient Descent form of D-Adaptation
simply plugs in the current lower bound at each step in place
of D. This simple approach can be applied to estimate the
step size in Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), which yields stateof-the-art performance across a wide-range of deep learning
problems. Defazio & Mishchenko (2023) also show that
asymptotically, D-Adaptation is as fast as specifying the
step size using the true D (up to small constant factors).

1

Samsung AI Center 2 Fundamental AI Research Team,
Meta. Correspondence to: Konstantin Mishchenko <konsta.mish@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Contributions
We summarize our contributions as follows:
1

