Subhomogeneous Deep Equilibrium Models

Pietro Sittoni 1 Francesco Tudisco 1 2

Abstract

storage of internal weights, allowing to handle deep NN
architectures more efficiently.

Implicit-depth neural networks have grown as
powerful alternatives to traditional networks in
various applications in recent years. However,
these models often lack guarantees of existence
and uniqueness, raising stability, performance,
and reproducibility issues. In this paper, we
present a new analysis of the existence and uniqueness of fixed points for implicit-depth neural networks based on the concept of subhomogeneous
operators and the nonlinear Perron-Frobenius theory. Compared to previous similar analyses, our
theory allows for weaker assumptions on the parameter matrices, thus yielding a more flexible
framework for well-defined implicit networks.
We illustrate the performance of the resulting subhomogeneous networks on feedforward, convolutional, and graph neural network examples.

DEQ models can be viewed as infinite-depth feed-forward
neural networks, with weight tying, i.e. where the same
transformation is used on each layer (Dabre & Fujita, 2019;
Dehghani et al., 2019). Indeed, in this type of model, the
evaluation of the network is executed by solving a fixedpoint equation z = fθ (z; x) which can be thought of as the
limit for the number of layers n → ∞ of an n-deep network
z (n) = fθ (z (n−1) ; x). As the network is now implicitly
defined as the solution of the equation fθ (z; x) − z = 0,
one can use the Implicit Function Theorem to compute and
propagate the gradients, thus reducing the memory cost with
respect to standard backpropagation (Bai et al., 2019; 2020).
Despite their potential advantages, not all DEQ models are
well-defined. In fact, one of the main open questions for
DEQ architectures is whether any fixed point actually exists
and whether this is unique. Lack of uniqueness, in particular, can be a problem as for a given data x and fixed
pre-trained weights θ, the resulting fixed-point embedding z
may change, raising stability, performance, and reproducibility issues. These potential drawbacks are often ignored or
addressed only via empirical arguments based on experimental evidence that deep networks work well in practice.
The most prominent line of analysis of uniqueness for deep
equilibrium fixed points is based on monotone operator theory (Winston & Kolter, 2020; Ryu & Boyd, 2016). While
elegant and efficient, monotone operator DEQs (MonDEQs)
require special parametrizations of the layer weights to guarantee the DEQ model fθ is operator monotone.

1. Introduction
Implicit-depth Neural Networks (NNs) have emerged as
powerful tools in deep learning. Rather than using a sequence of nested layers, these models define feature embeddings as the solution to specific nonlinear equations. Two
popular examples of implicit-depth networks are Neural
ODEs (Chen et al., 2018), whose output is calculated by
solving an ordinary differential equation, and Deep Equilibrium (DEQ) Models (Bai et al., 2019), which define the
output in terms of a fixed-point equation. These approaches
have a number of advantages as (a) they have been shown
to match or even exceed the performance of traditional NNs
on several tasks, including time series and sequence modeling (Bai et al., 2019; Rusch & Mishra, 2021), and (b)
memory-wise, they are more efficient than traditional NNs
as backpropagation is done analytically and does not require

In this work, we present a new analysis of existence and
uniqueness of DEQ fixed points based on positive, subhomogeneous operators. Using the Thomson projective metric and techniques from nonlinear Perron–Frobenius theory
(Lemmens & Nussbaum, 2012; Gautier et al., 2019), we provide a new theorem showing that a broad class of operators
fθ admits unique fixed points. In particular, we show that
our uniqueness theorem holds for several example architectures of the form fθ (z; x) = σ(W z) + MLP(x), provided
the activation function is subhomogeneous, which we show
is the case for a variety of commonly used activations.

1

School of Mathematics, Gran Sasso Science Institute,
L’Aquila, Italy 2 School of Mathematics and Maxwell Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. Correspondence
to: Pietro Sittoni <pietro.sittoni@gssi.it>, Francesco Tudisco
<f.tudisco@ed.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

This existence and uniqueness result allow us to design
stable DEQ models under much weaker assumptions than
1

