Superposition Prompting: Improving and Accelerating RetrievalAugmented Generation

Thomas Merth 1 Qichen Fu 1 Mohammad Rastegari* 2 Mahyar Najibi 1

Natural Questions Best EM Subspan

Abstract
Despite the successes of large language models
(LLMs), they exhibit significant drawbacks, particularly when processing long contexts. Their
inference cost scales quadratically with respect
to sequence length, making it expensive for deployment in some real-world text processing applications, such as retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG). Additionally, LLMs also exhibit the “distraction phenomenon”, where irrelevant context
in the prompt degrades output quality. To address these drawbacks, we propose a novel RAG
prompting methodology, superposition prompting, which can be directly applied to pre-trained
transformer-based LLMs without the need for finetuning. At a high level, superposition prompting allows the LLM to process input documents
in parallel prompt paths, discarding paths once
they are deemed irrelevant. We demonstrate the
capability of our method to simultaneously enhance time efficiency across a variety of questionanswering benchmarks using multiple pre-trained
LLMs. Furthermore, our technique significantly
improves accuracy when the retrieved context is
large relative the context the model was trained
on. For example, our approach facilitates an 93×
reduction in compute time while improving accuracy by 43% on the NaturalQuestions-Open
dataset with the MPT-7B instruction-tuned model
over naive RAG.

0.5

0.4

better

0.3

0.2

Naive LLM-RAG
BM-25
TF-IDF
Contriever

0.1

Attention Sort
Prompt Cache
Superposition (Ours)

0
5

1

2

5

10

2

5

100

Theoretical Max. Speedup (Log)

Figure 1. Theoretical Maximum Speedup vs.
Accuracy
(Best EM Subspan) on NaturalQuestions-Open using the
mpt-7b-instruct model (Muennighoff et al., 2023). Refer to
Section 4.1.1 for experimental details. Plotted values are sourced
from Table 1 and Table 5.

mance over previous methods (Zhao et al., 2023). However, they have massive compute requirements, especially
as the context length increases due to the quadratic compute cost of self-attention. Many prior works have explored
how to accelerate LLM inference (Huang et al., 2023; Miao
et al., 2023). However, such optimizations often require
significant architectural or parameter modifications to the
pre-trained model, thus mandating expensive re-training or
fine-tuning procedures. In addition to causing undesirable
compute requirements, long input contexts can also lead to
hallucinations and/or divergent responses in model outputs
(Liu et al., 2023a; Shi et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Transformer-based autoregressive large language models
(LLMs) have led to quantum leaps in text modeling perfor-

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is one alluring application of transformer-based LLMs. In this setting, the
LLM can ground its responses in auxiliary, relevant context. Often, the retrieved documents contain long-form text,
leading to the aforementioned downsides (Gao et al., 2023).
To improve and accelerate RAG, we propose superposition
prompting 1 . Superposition prompting is demonstrated to

1
Apple, Cupertino, CA, USA 2 Meta, Menlo xPark, CA, USA
(*Work done while at Apple). Correspondence to: T. Merth
<tmerth@apple.com>, Q. Fu <qfu22@apple.com>, M. Rastegari <mrastegari@meta.com>, M. Najibi <najibi@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
We drew inspiration from the “path integral” formulation of
quantum mechanics (Feynman, 1965), where a particle’s dynamics

1

