Position: Mission Critical – Satellite Data is a Distinct Modality in Machine
Learning

Esther Rolf * 1 2 Konstantin Klemmer 3 Caleb Robinson 4 Hannah Kerner * 5

Abstract

Machine learning, especially deep learning, was born to
extract insights from raw data at scale. However, current ML
solutions designed for other data modalities, such as natural
images or language, are sub-optimal for satellite data.

Satellite data has the potential to inspire a seismic
shift for machine learning—one in which we
rethink existing practices designed for traditional
data modalities. As machine learning for satellite
data (SatML) gains traction for its real-world
impact, our field is at a crossroads. We can either
continue applying ill-suited approaches, or we can
initiate a new research agenda that centers around
the unique characteristics and challenges of satellite data. This position paper argues that satellite
data constitutes a distinct modality for machine
learning research and that we must recognize it as
such to advance the quality and impact of SatML
research across theory, methods, and deployment.
We outline critical discussion questions and actionable suggestions to transform SatML from merely
an intriguing application area to a dedicated
research discipline that helps move the needle on
big challenges for machine learning and society.

Satellite data presents challenges and opportunities distinct
from other data modalities (Figure 1). Unlike natural images,
the size of targets in satellite images span a logarithmic scale
from < 1m (e.g., trees) to > 1km (e.g., forests). Temporal
patterns in satellite time series also span logarithmic scales,
from hours or days (e.g., floods) to years or decades (e.g.,
sea level rise). Data are acquired using a variety of sensors
that capture diverse spectral channels (beyond 3-channel
RGB) and precise measurements (beyond 8 bits). Satellites
collect data over the entire surface of the Earth at fixed time
intervals and spatial resolutions. Observations are acquired
from an overhead perspective from fixed altitudes and lack
a “natural” orientation, unlike natural images.
While there has been increasing interest in ML for satellite
data (SatML) (Zhu et al. (2017); Table A1), SatML research
as a whole falls short on these challenges and opportunities.
The mainstream approach to SatML has been to adapt or “lift
and shift” solutions designed for other modalities, especially
natural images, to satellite data with minimal tailoring.
Rather than tackling novel or outstanding challenges,
many studies propose ML solutions to well-resolved or
low-priority problems in the field of remote sensing (Tuia
et al., 2021). Researchers favor large, “state of the art”
models designed for other modalities without regard for
the unique characteristics and deployment considerations
of SatML models. This comes at a cost of performance,
scalability, and missed research opportunities.

1. Introduction
Hundreds of remote sensing satellites continuously monitor
the Earth’s surface, creating petabyte-scale time series
datasets. These datasets hold information needed to measure
and address pressing planetary-scale challenges including
climate change (Yang et al., 2013), poverty (Jean et al., 2016),
food insecurity (Nakalembe, 2020), biodiversity loss (Skidmore et al., 2021), and many other global goals (Kavvada
et al., 2020). However, extracting actionable insights from
satellite data at scale requires specialized analysis.

The unique properties of satellite data and the challenges
of SatML—as with other data modalities such as natural
images and text—warrant specialized methods for collecting, modelling, and interpreting data. For example,
self-supervised learning techniques have been proposed to
explicitly learn spatiotemporal relationships in geospatial
data, such as nearby locations being more similar than distant
locations (Jean et al., 2019) or the same location varying
in appearance over different seasons (Manas et al., 2021).
Marcos et al. (2018) proposed a small rotation-equivariant
neural network that outperformed a larger convolutional

*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard Data Science Initiative and
Center for Research on Computation and Society, Harvard
University 2 University of Colorado, Boulder 3 Microsoft Research
4
Microsoft AI for Good Research Lab 5 School of Computing
and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University. Correspondence to: Hannah Kerner <hkerner@asu.edu>, Esther Rolf
<esther.rolf@colorado.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

