Sign is Not a Remedy: Multiset-to-Multiset Message Passing for Learning on
Heterophilic Graphs

Langzhang Liang 1 Sunwoo Kim 2 Kijung Shin 2 Zenglin Xu 3 4 1 5 Shirui Pan 6 Yuan Qi 3 4

Abstract

Despite their success, the effectiveness of GNNs often diminishes on heterophilic graphs, where neighboring nodes
typically have dissimilar labels or features. Surprisingly,
GNNs can even be outperformed by graph-agnostic models like MLPs (Zhu et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022). This
issue arises from the inherent smoothing effect of message
passing, which tends to make adjacent nodes have similar
embeddings.

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained significant attention as a powerful modeling and inference method, especially for homophilic graphstructured data. To empower GNNs in heterophilic graphs, where adjacent nodes exhibit
dissimilar labels or features, Signed Message
Passing (SMP) has been widely adopted. However, there is a lack of theoretical and empirical analysis regarding the limitations of SMP. In
this work, we unveil some potential pitfalls of
SMP and their remedies. We first identify two
limitations of SMP: undesirable representation
update for multi-hop neighbors and vulnerability against oversmoothing issues. To overcome
these challenges, we propose a novel messagepassing function called Multiset to Multiset GNN
(M2M-GNN). Our theoretical analyses and extensive experiments demonstrate that M2M-GNN
effectively alleviates the aforementioned limitations of SMP, yielding superior performance in
comparison.

To address this limitation, Signed Message Passing (SMP)
has been widely adopted (Bo et al., 2021; Chien et al., 2020;
Yan et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023). SMP incorporates negative weights in message passing to push neighboring nodes
apart in the embedding space. Consequently, SMP is also
recognized as an effective solution for alleviating a key drawback of GNNs known as oversmoothing (Li et al., 2018).
It refers to the tendency of node embeddings to become
indistinguishable as multiple GNN layers are stacked.
However, in this work, we uncover two significant limitations of SMP. First, we prove that, even when the messagepassing weights are “desirable” for direct neighbors, the
cumulative weights for multi-hop neighbors may not necessarily be desirable. Second, we reveal that, even when
message-passing weights are desirable, SMP can still be
vulnerable to oversmoothing. More importantly, we point
out that these limitations of SMP arise from its simple aggregator, which linearly combines the embeddings of all
neighbors of each node into a single message vector.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Defferrard et al., 2016;
Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017; Veličković
et al., 2018) have emerged as a prominent approach for
machine learning on graph-structured data, such as social
networks (Tang et al., 2013) and biomedical networks (Lin
et al., 2020). In essence, GNNs employ message passing to
iteratively aggregate information from neighboring nodes,
ultimately yielding node embeddings for downstream tasks.

Motivated by our findings, we propose a novel message passing scheme for GNNs, which we refer to as M2M-GNN
(Multiset to Multiset GNN), to address the limitations of
SMP. In essence, M2M-GNN aggregates neighborhood information by mapping the embeddings of neighbors, which
can be considered a multiset of vectors, to another multiset. This differs from existing message passing schemes,
where a multiset of vectors is mapped to a single message vector. We prove M2M-GNN’s theoretical properties related to alleviating the limitations of SMP together
with its empirical effectiveness. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Jinx-byebye/m2mgnn

1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul,
South Korea 3 Fudan University, Shanghai, China 4 Shanghai
Academy of Artificial Intelligence for Science, Shanghai, China
5
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 6 Griffith University,
Gold Coast, Australia. Correspondence to: Langzhang Liang
<lazylzliang@gmail.com>, Zenglin Xu <zenglin@gmail.com>.
2

Our contributions are summarized as follows:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

