Keypoint-based Progressive Chain-of-Thought Distillation for LLMs

Kaituo Feng 1 Changsheng Li 1 Xiaolu Zhang 2 Jun Zhou 2 Ye Yuan 1 Guoren Wang 1 3

Abstract

prompting (e.g., “Let’s think step-by-step”), which prompts
LLMs to generate a step-by-step rationale to help reasoning
(Kojima et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022). However, such abilities usually emerge in extremely large models, especially
those with over 100 billion parameters (Fu et al., 2023; Hoffmann et al., 2022) , such as 175B GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)
and 540B PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023). The substantial
amount of parameters unavoidably leads to high inference
costs and makes it challenging to deploy LLMs in environments with limited computational resources (Hsieh et al.,
2023). To tackle with this, a recent surge of works, known as
CoT distillation, has arisen as a promising avenue to distill
reasoning capabilities of LLMs to smaller student models
(Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Fu et al., 2023). The
core idea of these methods is to require the student model
to mimic the step-by-step rationale generated by LLMs in
response to a question.

Chain-of-thought distillation is a powerful technique for transferring reasoning abilities from
large language models (LLMs) to smaller student models. Previous methods typically require
the student to mimic the step-by-step rationale
produced by LLMs, often facing the following
challenges: (i) Tokens within a rationale vary in
significance, and treating them equally may fail
to accurately mimic keypoint tokens, leading to
reasoning errors. (ii) They usually distill knowledge by consistently predicting all the steps in a
rationale, which falls short in distinguishing the
learning order of step generation. This diverges
from the human cognitive progression of starting
with easy tasks and advancing to harder ones, resulting in sub-optimal outcomes. To this end, we
propose a unified framework, called KPOD, to
address these issues. Specifically, we propose a
token weighting module utilizing mask learning
to encourage accurate mimicry of keypoint tokens
by the student during distillation. Besides, we develop an in-rationale progressive distillation strategy, starting with training the student to generate
the final reasoning steps and gradually extending
to cover the entire rationale. To accomplish this, a
weighted token generation loss is proposed to assess step reasoning difficulty, and a value function
is devised to schedule the progressive distillation
by considering both step difficulty and question
diversity. Extensive experiments on four reasoning benchmarks illustrate our KPOD outperforms
previous methods by a large margin.

However, current CoT distillation methods often encounter
the following two issues: First, in a rationale, each token carries different levels of importance in the reasoning process.
Certain keypoint tokens play a pivotal role in reasoning,
while other tokens are of less importance or even irrelevant
to the reasoning process. For instance, consider a step in a
rationale: “Next, we just need to simply add up the calories
from the lettuce and cucumber: 30 + 80 = 110”. Here, terms
like “just”, “simply” are reasoning-irrelevant, whereas the
calculation “30 + 80 = 110” stands out as the keypoint for
reasoning. The reasoning-irrelevant tokens can be replaced
without negative effects, but even a slight deviation from the
keypoint token could result in errors in reasoning. Therefore, it’s crucial for the student model to focus on the precise
mimicry of these keypoint tokens. Nevertheless, previous
CoT distillation methods usually treat all tokens equally
during distillation (Li et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b).

1. Introduction

The second issue stems from the fact that previous approaches usually demand the student model to consistently
learn all the steps in a rationale throughout the distillation
process, without distinguishing the learning order of step
generation. This distillation strategy diverges from the human cognitive pattern that progresses from easier tasks to
more challenging ones. This deviation might lead to suboptimal outcomes. In the process of human or biological
agent learning, ability acquisition doesn’t simply stem from
random tasks (Molina & Jouen, 1998). Instead, there is an

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable reasoning capabilities via chain-of-thought (CoT)
1

Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Ant Group 3 Hebei Province
Key Laboratory of Big Data Science and Intelligent Technology.
Correspondence to: Changsheng Li <lcs@bit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

