On the Sample Complexity of Conditional Independence Testing with Von Mises
Estimator with Application to Causal Discovery

Fateme Jamshidi 1 Luca Ganassali 1 Negar Kiyavash 1

Abstract

data can be divided into two categories: score-based (e.g.,
Chickering, 2002; Solus et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2018; Zhu
et al., 2019), and constraint-based, e.g., Peter-Clark (PC)
algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2000) and grow-shrink (GS) algorithm (Margaritis & Thrun, 1999). Score-based approaches
place restrictions on the functional causal model and/or the
distribution of data. Consequently, these methods can struggle to identify an accurate causal graph when dealing with
complex relationships between variables or in the presence
of hidden variables. On the other hand, constraint-based
methods often do not rely on the aforementioned assumptions and directly test for conditional independence (CI)
relations between pairs of variables to determine causal
connections.

Motivated by conditional independence testing,
an essential step in constraint-based causal discovery algorithms, we study the nonparametric Von
Mises estimator for the entropy of multivariate distributions built on a kernel density estimator. We
establish an exponential concentration inequality
for this estimator. We design a test for conditional independence (CI) based on our estimator,
called VM-CI, which achieves optimal parametric rates under smoothness assumptions. Leveraging the exponential concentration, we prove a
tight upper bound for the overall error of VM-CI.
This, in turn, allows us to characterize the sample complexity of any constraint-based causal discovery algorithm that uses VM-CI for CI tests.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
sample complexity guarantee for causal discovery
for non-linear models and non-Gaussian continuous variables. Furthermore, we empirically show
that VM-CI outperforms other popular CI tests
in terms of either time, sample complexity, or
both. This enhancement significantly improves
the performance in structure learning as well.

Theoretical performance guarantees of constraint-based discovery algorithms in the literature nearly always hinge on
the availability of a perfect CI oracle, which determines
whether two random variables are conditionally independent. In practice, this oracle is substituted with a statistical
conditional independence test, which assesses independence
using a limited number of observed data points. Hence, to
ensure the reliability and applicability of constraint-based
causal discovery methods, it is imperative to establish robust sample complexity guarantees. Sample complexity of
a causal discovery algorithm is the minimum number of
data samples needed to infer the causal graph accurately at
a given confidence level.

1. Introduction

Unlike unconditional independence testing, conditional independence is not a testable hypothesis without further
assumptions on the distribution. Shah & Peters (2020)
proved this fundamental hardness result by showing that
if (X, Y, Z) has an absolutely continuous distribution with
respect to the Lebesgue measure and a given CI test (to
identify if X and Y are independent given Z) has a level
less than α, there is no alternative under which the test has
a power greater than α. Neykov et al. (2021) showed that
minimax optimal bounds could be obtained when defining
an alternative by discarding distributions that are ‘ε−close’
to the null hypothesis.

Causal discovery, the pursuit of uncovering the cause-andeffect relationships governing complex systems, has been
the focus of research in machine learning, statistics, and
various scientific domains over the past few decades. This
is due to the extensive impact of causal inference, which
enables us to make well-informed decisions and policies.
Current approaches for learning causal mechanisms with
1

College of Management of Technology, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Fateme
Jamshidi <fateme.jamshidi@epfl.ch>,
Luca Ganassali
<luca.ganassali@universite-paris-saclay.fr>, Negar Kiyavash
<negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch>.

It is noteworthy that CI tests are well understood for discrete
variables (see Canonne et al., 2018). Another solved case is
that of linear models with Gaussian noise, where conditional

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

