Feedback Efficient Online Fine-Tuning of Diffusion Models

Masatoshi Uehara * 1 Yulai Zhao * 2 Kevin Black 3 Ehsan Hajiramezanali 1 Gabriele Scalia 1
Nathaniel Lee Diamant 1 Alex M Tseng 1 Sergey Levine† 3 Tommaso Biancalani† 1

Abstract
Diffusion models excel at modeling complex data
distributions, including those of images, proteins,
and small molecules. However, in many cases,
our goal is to model parts of the distribution that
maximize certain properties: for example, we may
want to generate images with high aesthetic quality, or molecules with high bioactivity. It is natural to frame this as a reinforcement learning (RL)
problem, in which the objective is to fine-tune a
diffusion model to maximize a reward function
that corresponds to some property. Even with access to online queries of the ground-truth reward
function, efficiently discovering high-reward samples can be challenging: they might have a low
probability in the initial distribution, and there
might be many infeasible samples that do not
even have a well-defined reward (e.g., unnatural images or physically impossible molecules).
In this work, we propose a novel reinforcement
learning procedure that efficiently explores on the
manifold of feasible samples. We present a theoretical analysis providing a regret guarantee, as
well as empirical validation across three domains:
images, biological sequences, and molecules.

Region With
Reward Feedback

Feasible Space

Full Design Space
Query feedback
(e.g., bioactivity)

Samples (e.g., molecules)
Diffusion
Model

Dataset
Reward Model

Finetune for novel,
feasible, high-reward

Uncertainty Model

Figure 1. We consider a scenario where we have a pre-trained diffusion model capturing a feasible region embedded as an intricate
manifold (green) in a high-dimensional full design space (yellow).
We aim to fine-tune the model to get feasible samples with high
rewards and novelty. The purple area corresponds to the region
where we have reward feedback, which we aim to expand with
efficient online queries to the reward function.

Igashov et al., 2022). However, in many cases, our goal is to
focus on parts of the distribution that maximize certain properties. For example, in chemistry, one might train a diffusion
model on a wide range of possible molecules, but applications of such models in drug discovery might need to steer
the generation toward samples with high bioactivity. Similarly, in image generation, diffusion models are trained on
large image datasets scraped from the internet, but practical
applications often desire images with high aesthetic quality. This challenge be framed as a reinforcement learning
(RL) problem, where the objective is to fine-tune a diffusion
model to maximize a reward function that corresponds to
the desirable property.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models belong to the family of deep generative
models that reverse a diffusion process to generate data from
noise. These diffusion models are highly adept at capturing
complex spaces, such as the manifold of natural images,
biological structures (e.g., proteins and DNA sequences),
or chemicals (e.g., small molecules) (Watson et al., 2023;
Jing et al., 2022; Alamdari et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024;
*

Equal contribution: ueharam.masatoshi@gene.com, yulaiz@princeton.edu 1 Genentech 2 Princeton University 3 University
of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Sergey Levine
<sergey.levine@berkeley.edu>, Tommaso Biancalani <biancalt@gene.com>.

One significant obstacle in many applications is the cost of
acquiring feedback from the ground-truth reward function.
For instance, in biology or chemistry, evaluating ground
truth rewards requires time-consuming wet lab experiments.
In image generation, attributes such as aesthetic quality
are subjective and require human judgment to establish
ground truth scores. While several recent works have pro-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

