From Geometry to CausalityRicci Curvature and the Reliability of Causal Inference on Networks

Amirhossein Farzam 1 Allen Tannenbaum 2 Guillermo Sapiro 1 3

Abstract

demiology, economics, and political science (Rothman &
Greenland, 2005; Keele, 2015; Varian, 2016; Yao et al.,
2021). Causal effect estimation methods aim to estimate
causal quantities by statistical ones (Pearl, 2009a). Estimating treatment effects on networked treatment units poses
considerable difficulties due to violations of standard identification assumptions (van der Laan, 2012; Zheleva & Arbour, 2021). Despite progress on leveraging graph neural
networks (GNNs) for causal models for structured data (Guo
et al., 2020; Wein et al., 2021; Ma & Tresp, 2021; Harada &
Kashima, 2021; Kaddour et al., 2021; Jiang & Sun, 2022;
Cristali & Veitch, 2022), the full potentials of GNNs and
the graph structure they encode are yet to be unleashed for
causal inference on networked data.

Causal inference on networks faces challenges
posed in part by violations of standard identification assumptions due to dependencies between
treatment units. Although graph geometry fundamentally influences such dependencies, the potential of geometric tools for causal inference on
networked treatment units is yet to be unlocked.
Moreover, despite significant progress utilizing
graph neural networks (GNNs) for causal inference on networks, methods for evaluating their
achievable reliability without ground truth are
lacking. In this work we establish for the first
time a theoretical link between network geometry, the graph Ricci curvature in particular, and
causal inference, formalizing the intrinsic challenges that negative curvature poses to estimating
causal parameters. The Ricci curvature can then
be used to assess the reliability of causal estimates
in structured data, as we empirically demonstrate.
Informed by this finding, we propose a method
using the geometric Ricci flow to reduce causal
effect estimation error in networked data, showcasing how this newfound connection between
graph geometry and causal inference could improve GNN-based causal inference. Bridging
graph geometry and causal inference, this paper
opens the door to geometric techniques for improving causal estimation on networks.

1

In the realm of geometric deep learning, GNNs enable the
use of inherent geometry in graph-structured data (Bruna
et al., 2014; Bronstein et al., 2017; Monti et al., 2017; Cao
et al., 2020; Gong et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2020; Bronstein
et al., 2021; Atz et al., 2021; Topping et al., 2021; Southern et al., 2023). While the geometry of the graph is a
key driver of network-induced endogeneities and consequent challenges posed to causal inference, the potential
of geometric tools for understanding and enhancing causal
inference on networks remains largely unexplored, leaving
a significant gap in GNN-based arsenal of tools for causal
inference. Moreover, existing techniques cannot canonically
assess reliability without ground truth, which significantly
limits validation.
Our work sets out to address these gaps by formally connecting network geometry, in the form of discrete curvature, and
causal inference on networked data. Guided by the proposition that curvature could serve as a practical measure for
system robustness in networks (Demetrius & Manke, 2005;
Tannenbaum et al., 2015), we take theoretical steps to enable exploiting this geometric signature of robustness to
gauge the confidence of causal models on networked data.
Validated by our empirical observations revealing a negative
correlation between Ricci curvature and individual treatment effect (ITE) estimation error, our theoretical results
show that negative Ricci curvature corresponds to greater
intrinsic difficulty in identifying learned causal parameters.
Drawing from the theory of invariance of causal models and

Introduction

Inferring causal effects of interventions from observational
data is a critical task across disciplines — spanning epi1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, United States 2 Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United
States 3 Apple, Cupertino, CA, United States. Correspondence to:
Amirhossein Farzam <a.farzam@duke.edu>, Guillermo Sapiro
<guillermo.sapiro@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

