Early Time Classification with Accumulated Accuracy Gap Control

Liran Ringel 1 Regev Cohen 2 Daniel Freedman 2 Michael Elad 2 Yaniv Romano 1 3
Question: What was the nationality of Ronald Fisher?
Options: (1) American (2) British (3) Canadian (4) Australian
Context: Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher FRS (17 February 1890 – 29 July

Abstract
Early time classification algorithms aim to label
a stream of features without processing the full
input stream, while maintaining accuracy comparable to that achieved by applying the classifier to the entire input. In this paper, we introduce a statistical framework that can be applied to
any sequential classifier, formulating a calibrated
stopping rule. This data-driven rule attains finitesample, distribution-free control of the accuracy
gap between full and early-time classification. We
start by presenting a novel method that builds on
the Learn-then-Test calibration framework to control this gap marginally, on average over i.i.d. instances. As this algorithm tends to yield an excessively high accuracy gap for early halt times, our
main contribution is the proposal of a framework
that controls a stronger notion of error, where the
accuracy gap is controlled conditionally on the
accumulated halt times. Numerical experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness, applicability, and
usefulness of our method. We show that our proposed early stopping mechanism reduces up to
94% of timesteps used for classification while
achieving rigorous accuracy gap control.

1962) was a British polymath who was active as a mathematician,
statistician, biologist, geneticist, and academic.

For his work in

statistics, he has been described as ”a genius who almost singlehandedly created the foundations for modern statistical science”
and ”the single most important figure in 20th century statistics”.
In genetics, his work used mathematics to combine Mendelian genetics
and natural selection. . .
Answer: (2) British.

Figure 1. An illustration of a reading comprehension task. An
LLM sequentially processes the given document to find the answer
to the question provided and, ideally, should stop scanning the
document immediately after the required information is found.
The context is taken from Wikipedia.

that the inference time of LLMs increases with the number
of processed tokens (or sentences), we wish to terminate
the processing of the context retrieved from the document
as soon as the necessary information is found, rather than
processing the entire document naively. Other tasks for
which ETSC is highly desired include real-time song identification (think of the Shazam application) and reducing
radiation exposure in computational tomography (CT) systems, among many others. In all of these applications, the
objective is to stop the inference process early while preserving accuracy, as if the predictive model had been applied to
the entire data stream.

1. Introduction
The goal of early time series classification (ETSC) is to
predict the label of a given input data stream as quickly as
possible. Such methods are especially advantageous in scenarios requiring prompt predictive inference. For example,
consider the problem of reading comprehension, illustrated
in Figure 1. Suppose we employ an autoregressive large
language model (LLM) to analyze a given document (context) and select an answer to the provided question. Given

Consider labeled pairs of the form (X, Y ) sampled i.i.d.
from PXY , where X = (X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X tmax ) ∈ X represents an observed input sequence with a maximum length
of tmax , e.g. a sequence of tokens representing sentences
in a document and a question. The variable Y ∈ Y =
{1, . . . , K} is the unknown label we wish to predict, e.g.
1
the correct answer to the given question. Suppose we are
handed a pre-trained classifier fˆ : X → [0, 1]K that processes the input X sequentially and, at each timestep t, maps
X ≤t = (X 1 , . . . , X t ) to an estimated probability distribution over the labels. We employ a stopping rule function
that, at each timestep t, decides whether to stop the inference process only based on the data observed up to timestep
t. Denote the stopping time by τ̂ (X) ∈ {1, . . . , tmax } and
let Ŷearly (τ̂ ) and Ŷfull be the predicted labels obtained by
fˆ(X ≤τ̂ (X) ) and fˆ(X), respectively. With these notations

1

Department of Computer Science, Technion—Israel Institute
of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Verily AI, Israel 3 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute
of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Liran Ringel
<liranringel@cs.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

