Probabilistic Subgoal Representations for Hierarchical Reinforcement learning

Vivienne Huiling Wang * 1 Tinghuai Wang * 2 Wenyan Yang 3 Joni-Kristian Kämäräinen 3 Joni Pajarinen 1

Abstract

dling various temporally extended tasks with sparse rewards.
This is achieved through its ability to facilitate control at
multiple temporal scales using a hierarchical framework.
Goal-conditioned HRL methods, in which the higher-level
policies periodically set subgoals for lower-level policies
and the lower level is intrinsically rewarded for reaching
those subgoals, have long held the promise to be an effective
paradigm in HRL (Dayan & Hinton, 1992; Schmidhuber &
Wahnsiedler, 1993; Kulkarni et al., 2016; Vezhnevets et al.,
2017; Nachum et al., 2018; Levy et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2021; 2022; Wang et al., 2023).

In goal-conditioned hierarchical reinforcement
learning (HRL), a high-level policy specifies a
subgoal for the low-level policy to reach. Effective HRL hinges on a suitable subgoal representation function, abstracting state space into latent
subgoal space and inducing varied low-level behaviors. Existing methods adopt a subgoal representation that provides a deterministic mapping
from state space to latent subgoal space. Instead,
this paper utilizes Gaussian Processes (GPs) for
the first probabilistic subgoal representation. Our
method employs a GP prior on the latent subgoal
space to learn a posterior distribution over the subgoal representation functions while exploiting the
long-range correlation in the state space through
learnable kernels. This enables an adaptive memory that integrates long-range subgoal information
from prior planning steps allowing to cope with
stochastic uncertainties. Furthermore, we propose
a novel learning objective to facilitate the simultaneous learning of probabilistic subgoal representations and policies within a unified framework.
In experiments, our approach outperforms stateof-the-art baselines in standard benchmarks but
also in environments with stochastic elements and
under diverse reward conditions. Additionally,
our model shows promising capabilities in transferring low-level policies across different tasks.

The subgoal representation function in goal-conditioned
HRL maps the state space to a latent subgoal space. Learning an appropriate subgoal representation function is critical
to the performance and stability of goal-conditioned HRL.
Since the subgoal space corresponds to the high-level action
space, the subgoal representation contributes to the stationarity of the high-level transition functions. Furthermore, the
low-level reward function, i.e., intrinsic rewards, is defined
in latent subgoal space in goal-conditioned HRL, and lowlevel behaviors can be induced by dynamically changing
subgoal space as well. As such, a proper abstract subgoal
space contributes to the stationarity of hierarchical policy
learning.
A wide variety of subgoal representations have been investigated, ranging from directly utilizing the state space (Levy
et al., 2019) or hand-crafted space (Nachum et al., 2018),
to end-to-end learning without explicit objectives (Vezhnevets et al., 2017) or deterministic representations learned
by imposing local constraints (Li et al., 2021). Notably, previous works utilizing deterministic subgoal representation
functions, e.g., Li et al. (2021), often struggle to adapt to
unforeseen or novel states, as they rely on fixed representations that may not accurately capture the variability and
unpredictability of dynamic environments. The deterministic mapping inherently lacks the capacity to account for
stochastic uncertainties, some arising directly from environmental stochasticity, while others can be attributed to
unexplored areas of the state space. This potentially limits
the exploration capacity of hierarchical policies and leading
to convergence on suboptimal solutions. In scenarios involving novel state regions, deterministic mapping may not have
sufficient historical data to form an appropriate subgoal representation, possibly underfitting the learning objective and

1. Introduction
Addressing intricate issues that require long-term credit assignment remains a significant hurdle in reinforcement learning (RL). Hierarchical deep reinforcement learning (HRL)
stands out in this context, demonstrating potential in han*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Automation, Aalto University, Finland 2 Huawei Helsinki Research Center, Finland 3 Computing Sciences, Tampere University, Finland. Correspondence to: Vivienne Huiling Wang <vivienne.wang@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

