On the Minimal Degree Bias in Generalization on the Unseen
for non-Boolean Functions
Denys Pushkin 1 Raphaël Berthier 2 Emmanuel Abbe 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Some of the most challenging tasks for state-of-the-art machine learning models reside in settings where the training
data is not representative of the testing data, or more specifically, when there is significant distribution shift. This is
in particular central to ‘reasoning tasks’, such as arithmetic
and algebra (Saxton et al., 2019; Lewkowycz et al., 2022),
visual reasoning such as CLEVR (Johnson et al., 2017),
physical reasoning such as Phyre (Bakhtin et al., 2019), algorithmic data such as CLRS (Veličković et al., 2022) and
reasoning on graphs (Mahdavi et al., 2022). In such settings,
the combinatorial nature of the data makes comprehensive
data sampling challenging, resulting naturally in ‘holes’ in
the sampled domain.

We investigate the out-of-domain generalization
of random feature (RF) models and Transformers.
We first prove that in the ‘generalization on the
unseen (GOTU)’ setting, where training data is
fully seen in some part of the domain but testing
is made on another part, and for RF models in
the small feature regime, the convergence takes
place to interpolators of minimal degree as in the
Boolean case (Abbe et al., 2023). We then consider the sparse target regime and explain how
this regime relates to the small feature regime, but
with a different regularization term that can alter
the picture in the non-Boolean case. We show
two different outcomes for the sparse regime with
q-ary data tokens: (1) if the data is embedded with
roots of unities, then a min-degree interpolator is
learned like in the Boolean case for RF models,
(2) if the data is not embedded as such, e.g., simply as integers, then RF models and Transformers
may not learn minimal degree interpolators. This
shows that the Boolean setting and its roots of
unities generalization are special cases where the
minimal degree interpolator offers a rare characterization of how learning takes place. For more
general integer and real-valued settings, a more
nuanced picture remains to be fully characterized.

An archetype example of this kind is the ‘length generalization’ setting: no matter how dense we sample discrete
inputs, the training data will have inputs of some bounded
length, and one can naturally ask for generalization to larger
length. This has motivated Abbe et al. (2023) to consider a
special case of out-of-distribution generalization: generalization on the unseen (GOTU). In its most extremal form,
the GOTU setting assumes that part of the domain (in a
large embedded dimension) is fully observed at training,
and the generalization of the model is tested on a new (unseen) part of the domain. Therefore in this setting, there is
no ‘estimation error’ since the model always learns perfectly
in-distribution, but the question of interest is to understand
how well the model generalizes on new domains depending
on the model parametrization and the optimization.
In (Abbe et al., 2023), it is shown that for sparse Boolean
functions, i.e., functions defined on {+1, −1}d that depend
only on a bounded number of variables, and in such a GOTU
setting where training data is available in U c ⊆ {+1, −1}d
and generalization is tested on U, random feature models
learn functions that are interpolators on U c with minimal
degree-profile: a specific type of polynomials that have
minimal degree and also largest mass on the lowest-degree
Fourier coefficients. Further, experiments provided in (Abbe
et al., 2023) show that this ‘minimal degree bias’ also takes
place for Transformers.

1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Inria Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(While RB is currently affiliated with Inria, the work presented
here was partly done while affiliated with the School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland) 3 Apple, Machine Learning Research (MLR), Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Denys Pushkin <denys.pushkin@epfl.ch>,
Raphael Berthier <raphael.berthier@inria.fr>, Emmanuel Abbe
<emmanuel.abbe@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

In this paper, we study how this picture changes when con-

1

