Distributed High-Dimensional Quantile Regression: Estimation Efficiency and
Support Recovery

Caixing Wang 1 Ziliang Shen 1

Abstract

usually distributed across different machines due to storage and privacy concerns, making the direct application of
existing statistical methods infeasible. On the other hand,
another challenge arises from the high dimensionality of
modern data. In the literature, a sparse assumption is often
adopted (Zhao & Yu, 2006; Wainwright, 2009; Hastie et al.,
2015), and support recovery is an essential problem for highdimensional analysis. Despite its importance in practice, the
support recovery in a distributed system is underexplored in
theory, compared to the well-studied statistical estimation
of the interested parameters (Zhang et al., 2013; Lee et al.,
2017; Jordan et al., 2019).

In this paper, we focus on distributed estimation
and support recovery for high-dimensional linear quantile regression. Quantile regression is a
popular alternative tool to the least squares regression for robustness against outliers and data
heterogeneity. However, the non-smoothness of
the check loss function poses big challenges to
both computation and theory in the distributed setting. To tackle these problems, we transform the
original quantile regression into the least-squares
optimization. By applying a double-smoothing
approach, we extend a previous Newton-type distributed approach without the restrictive independent assumption between the error term and covariates. An efficient algorithm is developed,
which enjoys high computation and communication efficiency. Theoretically, the proposed distributed estimator achieves a near-oracle convergence rate and high support recovery accuracy
after a constant number of iterations. Extensive
experiments on synthetic examples and a real data
application further demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method.

Since the seminar work of Koenker & Bassett Jr (1978),
quantile regression has gained increasing attention across
various fields, including economics, biomedicine, and environmental studies. Compared to the least squares regression
that only estimates the conditional means, quantile regression models the entire conditional quantiles of the response,
making it more robust against outliers in the response measurements (Koenker, 2005; Feng et al., 2023). Although
quantile regression can better handle data heterogeneity,
computational challenges arise when both sample size and
dimension are large due to the non-smooth check loss function (He et al., 2023). Consequently, it is natural to consider
a distributed estimation procedure to address scalability concerns.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we focus on distributed estimation and support recovery for high-dimensional linear quantile regression. We aim to bridge the theoretical and practical gap
by addressing several fundamental questions regarding distributed high-dimensional linear quantile regression. First,
what is the statistical limit of estimation in the presence of
distributed data? And how does this limit depend on the
number of local machines in the distributed system? Second,
can distributed high-dimensional linear quantile regression
achieve the same convergence rate of the parameters and
support recovery rate as those in a single machine setting?
Third, can the proposed method be applied to various practical settings, such as homoscedastic and heteroscedastic
data structures?

With the development of modern technology, the proliferation of massive data has garnered significant attention
from researchers and practitioners (Li et al., 2020; Gao
et al., 2022). For example, financial institutions leverage
big data to scrutinize customer preferences and fine-tune
their marketing approaches, while manufacturers and transportation departments lean heavily on extensive datasets to
streamline supply chain management and enhance delivery
route optimization. However, these large-scale datasets are
1

School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics. Correspondence to: Caixing Wang
<wang.caixing@stu.sufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We address the aforementioned theoretical and practical
questions by designing a distributed high-dimensional linear
1

