Bivariate Causal Discovery using Bayesian Model Selection

Anish Dhir 1 Samuel Power 2 Mark van der Wilk 3

Abstract

paper, we aim to identify causal direction within a Markov
equivalence class. Hence, for simplicity, we focus solely on
distinguishing X → Y and X ← Y1 .

Much of the causal discovery literature prioritises
guaranteeing the identifiability of causal direction in statistical models. For structures within
a Markov equivalence class, this requires strong
assumptions which may not hold in real-world
datasets, ultimately limiting the usability of these
methods. Building on previous attempts, we show
how to incorporate causal assumptions within the
Bayesian framework. Identifying causal direction
then becomes a Bayesian model selection problem. This enables us to construct models with realistic assumptions, and consequently allows for the
differentiation between Markov equivalent causal
structures. We analyse why Bayesian model selection works in situations where methods based on
maximum likelihood fail. To demonstrate our approach, we construct a Bayesian non-parametric
model that can flexibly model the joint distribution. We then outperform previous methods on a
wide range of benchmark datasets with varying
data generating assumptions.

In the bivariate case, much of the causal literature assumes
restrictions on a model, which when they match reality,
guarantee identifiabilility of the causal direction. For example, for data generated by an additive noise model (ANM),
an ANM model achieves a higher likelihood in the causal
direction, as the anti-causal direction violates the ANM
assumptions (Hoyer et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2015). A
method’s overall usefulness is then empirically verified
on a wider array of data generating distributions, including datasets where the rigid restrictions of models such as
ANMs hamper their performance, as the models are misspecified. Moreover, in these settings, causal identifiability
is no longer guaranteed. The goal of our work is to investigate whether causality can be identified in models without
hard restrictions, reducing misspecification, even if we lose
strict guarantees of identifiability.
We replace hard restrictions on models with softer ones encoded by Bayesian priors. Each causal direction is treated
as a separate Bayesian model, after which causal discovery can be formulated as Bayesian model selection. The
causal models encode the independent causal mechanisms
(ICM) assumption in their respective causal directions. We
show that if the anti-causal factorisation violates the ICM assumption, Bayesian model selection can discern the causal
direction. This is true even for model classes whose flexibility prevents likelihood based discrimination. We then
analyse the probability of error of the method, both when
the model is correct and when it is misspecified. Our work
shows that when faced with datasets for which no restricting
assumptions can reasonably be made, our framework allows
for use of an appropriate model that can better enable identification of causal direction, relative to a more restricted
model with inappropriate assumptions.

1. Introduction
Many fields use statistical models to predict the response
to actions (interventions), e.g. health outcomes after treatment. Such predictions can not be made based on correlations gained from purely observational data, but require
access to causal structure (Pearl, 2009). In machine learning, causal structure also helps in many prediction tasks
ranging from domain adaptation (Wang and Veitch), robustness (Bühlmann, 2020), and generalisation (Scherrer et al.,
2022). Conditional independencies in data can be used to
infer causal structures, but only up to a Markov equivalence
class (MEC) (app. A) (Pearl, 2009). Further assumptions
are required to completely recover a causal structure. In this

To demonstrate the usefulness of our approach, we use a
Gaussian process latent variable model (GPLVM) (Titsias
and Lawrence, 2010), which has the ability to model a wide
range of densities. We test this on a range of benchmark
datasets with various data generating assumptions. We also
compare against previously proposed methods, both those

1

Imperial College London 2 University of Bristol
University of Oxford.
Correspondence to: Anish Dhir
<anish.dhir13@imperial.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

For clarity, we colour the cause blue throughout.

