Efficient Pareto Manifold Learning with Low-Rank Structure

Weiyu Chen 1 James T. Kwok 1

Abstract

producing a finite set of discrete trade-off solutions, lacking
the flexibility to adapt to varying user preferences.

Multi-task learning, which optimizes performance
across multiple tasks, is inherently a multiobjective optimization problem. Various algorithms are developed to provide discrete trade-off
solutions on the Pareto front. Recently, continuous Pareto front approximations using a linear
combination of base networks have emerged as
a compelling strategy. However, it suffers from
scalability issues when the number of tasks is
large. To address this issue, we propose a novel
approach that integrates a main network with
several low-rank matrices to efficiently learn the
Pareto manifold. It significantly reduces the number of parameters and facilitates the extraction
of shared features. We also introduce orthogonal regularization to further bolster performance.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed approach outperforms state-of-theart baselines, especially on datasets with a large
number of tasks.

Continuous approximation of the PF aims to provide an
arbitrary number of solutions on the PF based on the userprovided preference vector. Pareto hypernetwork-based
methods (Navon et al., 2020b; Hoang et al., 2023) utilize a
hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2016) to learn the parameter space
of a base network. This hypernetwork accepts preference
vector as input and outputs the corresponding parameter
of base network. Despite its efficacy, the size of the hypernetwork significantly exceeds that of the base network,
thus restricting its use to small base networks. COSMOS
(Ruchte & Grabocka, 2021) attempts to circumvent this limitation by incorporating preference vectors directly into the
base network as an extra input. However, it falls short of
achieving satisfactory results due to the limited parameter
space.
Pareto Manifold Learning (PaMaL) (Dimitriadis et al., 2023)
proposes to find a collection of base networks whose linear
combination in the parameter space based on the preference
vectors yields the corresponding Pareto-optimal solution.
This approach exhibits promising performance. However,
as we need to maintain a separate base network for each
task, it incurs a corresponding surge in the number of parameters when we have a large number of tasks. Moreover,
base networks cannot learn from each other during training.
This lack of sharing poses challenges when the ensemble
comprises a large number of base networks.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1997; Vandenhende
et al., 2021) endeavors to efficiently and effectively learn
multiple tasks, leveraging shared information to enhance
overall performance. As tasks may have disparate scales and
potentially conflicting objectives, the challenge of balancing
the tasks is a critical aspect of MTL.

To surmount these challenges, we introduce a novel approach that employs a main network and multiple lowrank matrices, which can significantly reduce the number
of parameters when the number of tasks is large. Moreover, this design facilitates the extraction of shared features
through the main network while simultaneously capturing
task-specific differences via the low-rank matrices. We
further integrate orthogonal regularization to promote disentanglement of these matrices. Empirical investigations
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms PaMaL and other baselines, particularly when the number of
tasks is large.

Building on the seminal work that conceptualizes MTL as
a multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem (Sener &
Koltun, 2018), a suite of algorithms has been developed to
obtain trade-off solutions along the Pareto front (PF). Examples include EPO (Mahapatra & Rajan, 2020), PMTL (Lin
et al., 2019), CAGrad (Liu et al., 2021a), and Nash-MTL
(Navon et al., 2022). However, these methods are limited to
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to:
Weiyu Chen <wchenbx@cse.ust.hk>.

Notations. We denote the set {1,
Pm. . . , m} as [m], and the
m-dimensional simplex {α |
i=1 αi = 1, αi ≥ 0} as
∆m . The norm ∥ · ∥ refers to the Euclidean norm when

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

