Deep Functional Factor Models: Forecasting High-Dimensional Functional Time
Series via Bayesian Nonparametric Factorization

Yirui Liu 1 2 Xinghao Qiao 3 Yulong Pei 1 Liying Wang 4

Abstract

each Ytj (·) is a random function defined on a compact interval U. The number of functional variables p is comparable
to, or even larger than, the number of temporally dependent observations n. Analyzing high-dimensional functional
time series presents a challenging task, as it necessitates the
use of dimension reduction techniques to address the highdimensional problem, functional approaches to handle the
infinite-dimensional nature of curve data, and time series
modeling methods to capture the temporal dependence.

This paper introduces the Deep Functional Factor
Model (DF2 M), a Bayesian nonparametric model
designed for analysis of high-dimensional functional time series. DF2 M is built upon the Indian
Buffet Process and the multi-task Gaussian Process, incorporating a deep kernel function that
captures non-Markovian and nonlinear temporal
dynamics. Unlike many black-box deep learning
models, DF2 M offers an explainable approach to
utilizing neural networks by constructing a factor model and integrating deep neural networks
within the kernel function. Additionally, we develop a computationally efficient variational inference algorithm to infer DF2 M. Empirical results from four real-world datasets demonstrate
that DF2 M provides better explainability and superior predictive accuracy compared to conventional deep learning models for high-dimensional
functional time series.

Several statistical methods have been proposed to address
these challenges, such as those presented in Gao et al.
(2019); Chen et al. (2022); Fang et al. (2022); Chang et al.
(2023a); Guo & Qiao (2023); Zhou & Dette (2023). However, these approaches often assume the existence of linear
and Markovian dynamics over time, which may fail to accurately capture the complex nonlinear or non-Markovian
temporal dependence that often arises in real-world scenarios.
On the other hand, while deep learning has achieved impressive results in computer vision and natural language processing (NLP) (Guo et al., 2016; He et al., 2016; Vaswani et al.,
2017; Torfi et al., 2020), applying deep neural networks
directly to handle high-dimensional functional time series is
challenging. One major issue when dealing with time series
data is that deep learning is a general black-box method that
lacks explainability, thus making it difficult to understand
the cross-sectionally and serially correlated relationships.
However, explainability is crucial in many applications. For
instance, in finance, healthcare, and climate change, the
accuracy and reliability of a model’s predictions have significant impacts on business decisions, patient outcomes, or
environmental safety, respectively. Additionally, the nonstationarity of data and the large number of parameters in
deep neural networks pose extra challenges during training.

1. Introduction
Functional time series refers to a sequential collection of
functional objects that exhibit temporal dependence, and
this area of study has garnered increasing attention in recent
years. With the advancements in data collection technology and computational power, high-dimensional datasets
containing numerous functional time series have become
more prevalent. Examples of such data include annual agespecific mortality rates for different countries, daily energy
consumption curves from various households, and cumulative intraday return trajectories for hundreds of stocks.
These datasets can be represented as p-dimensional funcT
tional time series Y t (·) = Yt1 (·), . . . , Ytp (·) , where

In this paper, we propose an explainable approach called the
deep functional factor model (DF2 M), which has the ability
to discover nonlinear and non-Markovian dynamics in highdimensional functional time series. Developed as a Bayesian
nonparametric model, DF2 M employs a functional version
of a factor model for dimension reduction, incorporates
an Indian buffet process prior in the infinite-dimensional
loading matrix to encourage column sparsity (Guo et al.,

1
J.P. Morgan 2 London School of Economics and Political Science 3 Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Hong
Kong 4 Management School, University of Liverpool. Correspondence to: Xinghao Qiao <xinghaoq@hku.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

