Causal Bandits: The Pareto Optimal Frontier of Adaptivity, a Reduction to
Linear Bandits, and Limitations around Unknown Marginals

Ziyi Liu * 1 2 Idan Attias * 2 3 Daniel M. Roy 1 2

Abstract

properties of real-world scenarios. Adaptive sequential
decision-making offers a framework to design algorithms to
achieve these objectives.

In this work, we investigate the problem of adapting to the presence or absence of causal structure
in multi-armed bandit problems. In addition to
the usual reward signal, we assume the learner
has access to additional variables, observed in
each round after acting. When these variables
d-separate the action from the reward, existing
work in causal bandits demonstrates that one can
achieve strictly better (minimax) rates of regret
(Lu et al., 2020). Our goal is to adapt to this
favorable “conditionally benign” structure, if it
is present in the environment, while simultaneously recovering worst-case minimax regret, if it
is not. Notably, the learner has no prior knowledge of whether the favorable structure holds. In
this paper, we establish the Pareto optimal frontier
of adaptive rates. We prove upper and matching
lower bounds on the possible trade-offs in the
performance of learning in conditionally benign
and arbitrary environments, resolving an open
question raised by Bilodeau et al. (2022). Furthermore, we are the first to obtain instance-dependent
bounds for causal bandits, by reducing the problem to the linear bandit setting. Finally, we examine the common assumption that the marginal
distributions of the post-action contexts are known
and show that a nontrivial estimate is necessary
for better-than-worst-case minimax rates.

In this paper, we explore adaptivity in multi-armed bandit
problems. In standard multi-armed bandits, the learner (policy) takes an action, receives a reward, and then this process
repeats over a number of rounds. The learner’s regret is the
difference between its cumulative reward and the cumulative
reward of the single best action in hindsight. Can we work
to identify high-reward actions while minimizing regret?
In this work, we assume there is post-action context, i.e.,
there may be additional information available to the learner
after taking an action, beyond the reward signal. In a
worst-case analysis, however, the learner can ignore the
post-action context and still achieve minimax rates of regret:
the worst-case environment will not offer useful information.
However, many real-world settings possess the structure of
multi-armed bandit problems with post-action context and,
in those cases, this additional information is useful towards
minimizing regret.
One way that post-action context can be useful is if we can
assume causal structure relating the action (i.e., an intervention) to the reward and post-action (post-intervention)
context. Several authors have studied models in this vein
(Bareinboim et al., 2015; Lattimore et al., 2016). In this
work, we build on the framework of Lattimore et al. (2016),
wherein the post-action context is assumed to d-separate
each intervention from its associated reward.
Under d-separation, the intervention and reward are independent, conditional on the post-intervention context. Bilodeau
et al. (2022) formalized this structure in general terms: a
bandit environment is conditionally benign whenever the
conditional distribution of the reward, given the post-action
context, does not depend on the action.

1. Introduction
In real-world decision making, we often want strong worstcase guarantees as well as the ability to adapt to favorable
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistical Sciences,
University of Toronto, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University, Israel.
Correspondence to: Ziyi Liu <kevind.liu@mail.utoronto.ca>,
Idan Attias <idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il>, Daniel M. Roy
<daniel.roy@utoronto.ca>.

Minimax regret is well understood for both the classical
and causal variant of multi-armed bandits. Notably, algorithms tailored to conditionally benign environments can
achieve lower rates of regret, scaling with the number of
post-action contexts, rather than the potentially much larger
set of actions (Lu et al., 2020; Bilodeau et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

