Incentivized Learning in Principal-Agent Bandit Games

Antoine Scheid 1 Daniil Tiapkin 1 2 Etienne Boursier 3 Aymeric Capitaine 1 Eric Moulines 1
Michael I. Jordan 4 5 El-Mahdi El-Mhamdi 1 Alain Durmus 1

Abstract

basic bandit solution involves an agent who learns which
decisions yield high rewards via repeated experimentation.
Real-world decision-making problems, however, often
present challenges that are not addressed in this simple
optimization framework. These include the challenge of
scarcity when there are multiple decision-makers, issues
of misaligned objectives, and problems arising from
information asymmetries and signaling. The economics
literature addresses these issues through the design of
game-theoretic mechanisms, including auctions and
contracts (see, e.g., Myerson, 1989; Laffont & Martimort,
2009), aiming to achieve favorable outcomes despite agents’
self-interest and limited information set. Unfortunately,
the economics literature tends to neglect the learning
aspect of the problem, often assuming that preferences, or
distributions on preferences, are known a priori. Our work
focuses on the blend of mechanism design and learning. We
study a principal-agent model with information asymmetry
and we develop a learning framework in which the principal
aims to uncover the true preferences of the agent while
optimizing her own gains.

This work considers a repeated principal-agent
bandit game, where the principal can only
interact with her environment through the agent.
The principal and the agent have misaligned
objectives and the choice of action is only left to
the agent. However, the principal can influence
the agent’s decisions by offering incentives which
add up to his rewards. The principal aims to
iteratively learn an incentive policy to maximize
her own total utility. This framework extends
usual bandit problems and is motivated by several
practical applications, such as healthcare or
ecological taxation, where traditionally used
mechanism design theories often overlook the
learning aspect of the problem. We present
nearly optimal (with respect to a horizon T )
learning algorithms for the principal’s regret in
both multi-armed and linear contextual settings.
Finally, we support our theoretical guarantees
through numerical experiments.

1

Building on the work of Dogan et al. (2023a;b), we consider
a repeated game between a principal and an agent, where,
at each round, the principal proposes an incentive transfer
associated with any action. The agent greedily chooses
the action that maximizes the sum of his expected reward
and the incentive. The goal of the principal is to learn an
incentive policy which maximizes her own utility over time,
taking into account both the rewards that she reaps and the
costly incentives that she offers.

Introduction

Decision-making under uncertainty is a ubiquitous feature
of real-world applications of machine learning, arising in
domains as diverse as recommendation systems (Li et al.,
2010), healthcare (Yu et al., 2021), and agriculture (Evans
et al., 2017). Multi-armed bandits provide a classical
point of departure for decision-making under uncertainty
in these settings (Thompson, 1933; Woodroofe, 1979;
Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020; Slivkins et al., 2019). The

Our contributions are as follows:
• We present the Incentivized Principal-Agent
Algorithm (IPA) framework, which comprises two steps.
First, IPA estimates the minimal level of incentive needed
to make the agent select any desired action. Subsequently,
forming an upper estimate of these incentives, IPA uses
a regret-minimization algorithm in a black-box fashion.
The overall algorithm achieves both nearly optimal
distribution-free and instance-dependent regret bounds.
• We extend IPA to the linear contextual bandit setting
(see, e.g., Abe & Long, 1999; Auer, 2002; Dani et al.,
2008), significantly broadening its applicability in
various applications. Here Contextual IPA achieves

1
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées – CNRS – École
polytechnique – Institut Polytechnique de Paris – route de
Saclay 91128 Palaiseau cedex 2 Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS,
Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France
3
INRIA, Universite Paris Saclay, LMO, Orsay, France 4 University
of California, Berkeley 5 Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL
Research University. Correspondence to: Antoine Scheid
<antoine.scheid@polytechnique.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

