Rethinking Generative Large Language Model Evaluation for
Semantic Comprehension

Fangyun Wei * 1 Xi Chen * 1 Lin Luo * 1

Abstract

natural language processing and understanding. However,
the rapid development of LLMs also present significant
challenges, particularly in terms of evaluation. The effective assessment of these models is crucial to ensure their
reliability, fairness, harmlessness, and ethical use.

Despite their sophisticated capabilities, large language models (LLMs) encounter a major hurdle
in effective assessment. This paper first revisits
the prevalent evaluation method—multiple choice
question answering (MCQA), which allows for
straightforward accuracy measurement. Through
a comprehensive evaluation of 24 models across
11 benchmarks, we highlight several potential
drawbacks of MCQA, for instance, the inconsistency between the MCQA evaluation and the
generation of open-ended responses in practical
scenarios. In response, we introduce an RWQ-Elo
rating system, engaging 24 LLMs such as GPT-4,
GPT-3.5, Google-Gemini-Pro and LLaMA-1/-2,
in a two-player competitive format, with GPT-4
serving as the judge. Each LLM receives an Elo
rating thereafter. This system is designed to mirror real-world usage, and for this purpose, we
have compiled a new benchmark called “Realworld questions” (RWQ), comprising 20,772 authentic user inquiries. Additionally, we thoroughly analyze the characteristics of our system
and compare it with prior leaderboards like AlpacaEval and MT-Bench. Our analysis reveals
the stability of our RWQ-Elo system, the feasibility of registering new models, and its potential to reshape LLM leaderboards. Project
page: https://luolinrowling.github.io/RethinkLLM-Eval.

This paper aims to contribute to the ongoing discourse in the
field of natural language processing by providing a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs. Prior research has primarily
focused on evaluating a range of capabilities including broad
world knowledge, commonsense reasoning, and specialized
skills like coding and mathematics. This has led to the introduction of various benchmarks (e.g. MMLU (Hendrycks
et al., 2020), AGIEval (Zhong et al., 2023), and ARC (Clark
et al., 2018)) and assessment platforms (e.g., HELM (van
Gemert-Pijnen et al., 2011) and Harness (Gao et al., 2021)).
While evaluating specific skills like coding, which can be
assessed through targeted coding tasks and test cases using pass rate as a metric (Chen et al., 2021), and mathematics, where unique solutions enable accuracy-based metrics (Cobbe et al., 2021), is relatively clear-cut, assessing
open-ended areas such as semantic comprehension, remains
challenging. This complexity stems from two primary factors: 1) the open-ended nature of LLM responses leads
to a broad spectrum of possible answers; and 2) the nonuniqueness of what constitutes a reasonable answer to a
given question.
The evaluation of LLMs has predominantly centered around
multiple choice question answering (MCQA) due to its
straightforward approach in measuring LLM performance
via accuracy and its facilitation of comparisons with other
LLMs. This paper delves into the inherent shortcomings of
the MCQA evaluation. Initially, we highlight the discrepancy between the real-world usage of LLMs for responding
to user queries in an open-ended manner, and the confined
nature of selecting the best option in MCQA. Moreover,
the methodology for generating MCQA predictions differs
among models. This can involve either pinpointing the likeliest token (e.g., “A” or “B”) upon reviewing the main question and its associated choices, or calculating the alignment
between the question and each option using perplexity. Such
variations result in inconsistent evaluations across different
LLMs. Additionally, the open-ended responses provided by

1. Introduction
In recent years, the advent of large language models
(LLMs) (Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020;
Touvron et al., 2023b) has revolutionized the field of artificial intelligence, offering unprecedented capabilities in
*
Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research Asia. Correspondence
to: Fangyun Wei <fawe@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

