Retrieval-Augmented Score Distillation for Text-to-3D Generation

Junyoung Seo * 1 Susung Hong * 1 Wooseok Jang * 1 Inès Hyeonsu Kim 1
Min-Seop Kwak 1 Doyup Lee 2 Seungryong Kim 1

Abstract

2016; Chen et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021). However, their
performance is limited due to the insufficient quality and
diversity of 3D datasets compared with 2D datasets.

Text-to-3D generation has achieved significant
success by incorporating powerful 2D diffusion
models, but insufficient 3D prior knowledge also
leads to the inconsistency of 3D geometry. Recently, since large-scale multi-view datasets have
been released, fine-tuning the diffusion model on
the multi-view datasets becomes a mainstream to
solve the 3D inconsistency problem. However, it
has confronted with fundamental difficulties regarding the limited quality and diversity of 3D
data, compared with 2D data. To sidestep these
trade-offs, we explore a retrieval-augmented approach tailored for score distillation, dubbed ReDream. We postulate that both expressiveness of
2D diffusion models and geometric consistency
of 3D assets can be fully leveraged by employing
the semantically relevant assets directly within
the optimization process. To this end, we introduce novel framework for retrieval-based quality
enhancement in text-to-3D generation. We leverage the retrieved asset to incorporate its geometric
prior in the variational objective and adapt the diffusion model’s 2D prior toward view consistency,
achieving drastic improvements in both geometry
and fidelity of generated scenes. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that ReDream
exhibits superior quality with increased geometric
consistency. Project page is available at https:
//ku-cvlab.github.io/ReDream/.

The seminal works for text-to-3D (Poole et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023a) have introduced Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS) to leverage the 2D diffusion models trained on largescale images (Schuhmann et al., 2022). Given a text prompt,
SDS-based frameworks (Chen et al., 2023; Seo et al., 2023;
Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b) directly optimize a
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021) by
distilling the scores of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models
through the rendered views of the optimizing NeRF. Exploiting the capability of T2I models to synthesize high-quality
images (Rombach et al., 2022b; Saharia et al., 2022), SDSbased frameworks have generated high-fidelity 3D models
even without 3D datasets. However, the generated scenes
often suffer from artifacts and geometric inconsistencies
due to the lack of knowledge on 3D geometry (Armandpour
et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2023).
Recent approaches (Liu et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023b) focus
on fine-tuning 2D diffusion models on a large 3D dataset
for novel view synthesis. Existing approaches (Liu et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2023b) modify and fine-tune a T2I model on
Objaverse (Deitke et al., 2023b;a) to incorporate 3D awareness into its parameters for synthesizing novel multi-views.
However, compared with 2D images, the insufficiency of
high-quality 3D data has consequence of severely limiting
and confining the style and fidelity of the generated novel
views. For example, MVDream, trained on Objaverse, undergoes a cartoonish style shift (Shi et al., 2023a) , hindering
the model from generating photorealistc 3D textures, and
Zero123 shows drastically weakened performance when
photorealistic images are given as input.

1. Introduction
Text-to-3D generation has emerged as an important application that enables non-experts to easily create 3D contents.
The conventional approaches for text-to-3D train a generative model directly on 3D data from scratch (Wu et al.,

To address these issues, we propose a novel retrievalaugmented framework, ReDream, for text-to-3D generation
to leverage 3D data information without full fine-tuning of
2D diffusion models. Our key motivation is that 3D assets,
which are semantically aligned with a given text, become a
minimal yet effective guidance of 3D geometries for SDSbased approaches. Then, ReDream can largely maintain
the quality of the pre-trained 2D diffusion model, but also
provide an effective geometric prior.

*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Univeristy, Seoul, Korea 2 Runway,
New York, USA. Correspondence to: Seungryong Kim <seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr>, Doyup Lee <doyup@runwayml.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

