How Learning by Reconstruction Produces
Uninformative Features for Perception

Randall Balestriero 1 Yann LeCun 2

Abstract
Input space reconstruction is an attractive representation learning paradigm. Despite interpretability benefit of reconstruction and generation, we identify a misalignment between learning
to reconstruct, and learning for perception. We
show that the former allocates a model’s capacity towards a subspace of the data explaining the
observed variance–a subspace with uninformative
features for the latter. For example, the supervised TinyImagenet task with images projected
onto the top subspace explaining 90% of the pixel
variance can be solved with 45% test accuracy.
Using the bottom subspace instead, accounting
for only 20% of the pixel variance, reaches 55%
test accuracy. Learning by reconstruction is also
wasteful as the features for perception are learned
last, pushing the need for long training schedules. We finally prove that learning by denoising
can alleviate that misalignment for some noise
strategies, e.g., masking. While tuning the noise
strategy without knowledge of the perception task
seems challenging, we provide a solution to detect
if a noise strategy is never beneficial regardless of
the perception task, e.g., additive Gaussian noise.

bottom 25% variance

top 75% variance

1. Introduction
One of the far reaching mandate of deep learning is to provide a self-contained methodology to learn intelligible and
universal representations of data (LeCun et al., 2015). That
is, to learn a nonlinear transformation of the data producing
a parsimonious representation able to solve numerous downstream tasks. Significant progress has been made through
the lens of supervised learning, i.e., by learning a representation that maps the observed data to provided labels of an

Figure 1. Features for reconstruction are uninformative for perception (top): TinyImagenet ResNet9 top-1 accuracy when trained
and validated on images projected on the top-subspace (red) or
bottom subspace (blue) of explained variance, corresponding images displayed in the middle and in Fig. 10. Perception features
are learned last (bottom): training loss evolution (red to blue)
of reconstructed training images from a deep Autoencoder projected onto the eigenspace of the original data (black). The top
eigenspace (right) is learned first, and then, if training lasts long
enough, the features most useful for perception (left) are finally
learned. This explains why learning by performances on perception task keep increasing long after reconstructed samples look
appealing.

1
Brown University 2 NYU. Correspondence to: Randall
Balestriero <rbalestr@brown.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

