Deep Demonstration Tracing: Learning Generalizable Imitator Policy
for Runtime Imitation from a Single Demonstration

Xiong-Hui Chen * 1 2 Junyin Ye * 1 2 Hang Zhao * 3 2 Yi-Chen Li 1 2 Xu-Hui Liu 1 2 Haoran Shi 2 Yu-Yan Xu 2
Zhihao Ye 1 2 Si-Hang Yang 1 2 Yang Yu 1 2 Anqi Huang 4 2 Kai Xu 3 Zongzhang Zhang 1

Abstract

to emulate this learning paradigm, training an imitator agent
to execute multiple tasks with only a single demonstration
as context at runtime (Duan et al., 2017). Currently, the
framework has been extended to imitation with visual inputs (Dasari & Gupta, 2021), multi-modal skill (Shin et al.,
2023), and cross-modal task imitation (Li et al., 2021).

One-shot imitation learning (OSIL) is to learn
an imitator agent that can execute multiple tasks
with only a single demonstration. In real-world
scenario, the environment is dynamic, e.g., unexpected changes can occur after demonstration.
Thus, achieving generalization of the imitator
agent is crucial as agents would inevitably face
situations unseen in the provided demonstrations.
While traditional OSIL methods excel in relatively stationary settings, their adaptability to such
unforeseen changes, which asking for a higher
level of generalization ability for the imitator
agents, is limited and rarely discussed. In this
work, we present a new algorithm called Deep
Demonstration Tracing (DDT). In DDT, we propose a demonstration transformer architecture
to encourage agents to adaptively trace suitable
states in demonstrations. Besides, it integrates
OSIL into a meta-reinforcement-learning training
paradigm, providing regularization for policies
in unexpected situations. We evaluate DDT on
a new navigation task suite and robotics tasks,
demonstrating its superior performance over existing OSIL methods across all evaluated tasks in
dynamic environments with unforeseen changes.
The project page is in https://osil-ddt.github.io.

succeed
picked

(a) Provided demonstration.

picked

dropped！

failed

(b) Policy trained by a traditional OSIL method.

succeed
picked

dropped！

re-picked

(c) Policy trained by DDT.

Figure 1: Illustration of OSIL policies under unforeseen
changes in Meta-World tasks (Yu et al., 2019). The policy
in (b) is trained by traditional OSIL (Dasari & Gupta, 2021).
The grasped block may drop by chance due to disturbances
that do not exist during demonstration collection.

1. Introduction

However, these studies often assume a strong resemblance
between the situations encountered during demonstration
collection and those encountered when deploying the imitator policy (Duan et al., 2017). Consider a typical scenario:
during demonstration collection, an expert guides a car or
robot from a starting point to a target point, which may
be unseen during training. Upon policy deployment, the
task remains the same, i.e., reaching the same target point
in a setting characterized by similar surroundings, terrain,
deterministic dynamics, etc. In such settings, OSIL can be
simplified to find the corresponding states and replay the action sequence. Real-world applications, however, demand a
more sophisticated approach, as tasks frequently involve un-

Humans exhibit the ability to acquire diverse skills through
a handful of demonstrations for each task. One-shot imitation learning (OSIL) has emerged as a prominent framework
*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China & School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 2 Polixir Technologies
3
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense
Technology 4 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing. Correspondence to: Yang Yu <yuy@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

