Collaborative Learning with Different Labeling Functions

Yuyang Deng * 1 Mingda Qiao * 2

Abstract

Collaborative PAC Learning (Blum et al., 2017) is a theoretical framework that abstracts the challenge above. In this
model, there are n data distributions D1 , D2 , . . . , Dn , from
which we can adaptively sample. We are asked to learn n
classifiers fˆ1 , fˆ2 , . . . , fˆn , such that each fˆi has an error at
most ϵ on Di . The goal is to minimize the number of labeled
examples that we sample from the n distributions in total.

We study a variant of Collaborative PAC Learning,
in which we aim to learn an accurate classifier for
each of the n data distributions, while minimizing
the number of samples drawn from them in total.
Unlike in the usual collaborative learning setup, it
is not assumed that there exists a single classifier
that is simultaneously accurate for all distributions. We show that, when the data distributions
satisfy a weaker realizability assumption, which
appeared in (Crammer & Mansour, 2012) in the
context of multi-task learning, sample-efficient
learning is still feasible. We give a learning algorithm based on Empirical Risk Minimization
(ERM) on a natural augmentation of the hypothesis class, and the analysis relies on an upper
bound on the VC dimension of this augmented
class. In terms of the computational efficiency,
we show that ERM on the augmented hypothesis
class is NP-hard, which gives evidence against
the existence of computationally efficient learners
in general. On the positive side, for two special
cases, we give learners that are both sample- and
computationally-efficient.

Note that if we ignore the potential connection among the n
learning tasks and solve them separately, the sample complexity is necessarily linear in n. Previously, Blum et al.
(2017) introduced a sample-efficient algorithm when all
distributions admit the same labeling function, i.e., some
classifier in the hypothesis class has a zero error on every
Di . Their algorithm has an O((d + n) log n) sample complexity, where d is the VC dimension of hypothesis class.1
When d is large, the overhead of the sample complexity is
significantly reduced from n to log n.
However, in the real world, it is often too strong an assumption that every data distribution is consistent with the same
ground truth classifier. This is especially true when we are
learning for a diverse population consisting of multiple subgroups, each with different demographics and preferences.
In light of this, we study a model of collaborative learning with different labeling functions. In particular, we aim
to determine the conditions under which sample-efficient
learning is viable when the data from different sources are
labeled differently, and find the optimal sample complexity.

1. Introduction

The contribution of this work is summarized as follows; see
Section 3 for formal statements of our results.

In recent years, the remarkable success of data-driven machine learning has transformed numerous domains using the
vast and diverse datasets collected from the real world. An
ever-increasing volume of decentralized data is generated on
a multitude of distributed devices, such as smartphones and
personal computers. To better utilize these distributed data
shards, we are faced with a challenge: how to effectively
learn from these heterogeneous and noisy data sources?

• We formalize a model of collaborative learning with
different labeling functions, and a sufficient condition, termed (k, ϵ)-realizability, for sample-efficient
collaborative learning. This realizability assumption
was used by Crammer & Mansour (2012) in the context of multi-task learning. Under this assumption,
we give a learning algorithm with sample complexity
O(kd log(n/k) + n log n). This algorithm is based on
Empirical Risk Minimizarion (ERM) over an augmentation of the hypothesis class.

Authors are listed in alphabetical order. 1 Pennsylvania
State University, State College, PA, USA 2 University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yuyang Deng <yzd82@psu.edu>, Mingda Qiao
<mingda.qiao@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
For brevity, we treat the accuracy and confidence parameters
as constants here.

1

