Detecting Influence Structures in
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Fabian R. Pieroth 1 Katherine Fitch 2 Lenz Belzner 3

Abstract

strategies in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL).
In MARL, agents operate within a shared environment, with
each agent’s action influencing the environment’s state and
the rewards received by all agents. Our work focuses on providing a unified, interpretable, and measurable framework
for quantifying influence among agents in such settings.

We consider the problem of quantifying the
amount of influence one agent can exert on another in the setting of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL). As a step towards a unified approach to express agents’ interdependencies, we
introduce the total and state influence measurement functions. Both of these are valid for all
common MARL systems, such as the discounted
reward setting. Additionally, we propose novel
quantities, called the total impact measurement
(TIM) and state impact measurement (SIM), that
characterize one agent’s influence on another by
the maximum impact it can have on the other
agents’ expected returns and represent instances
of impact measurement functions in the average
reward setting. Furthermore, we provide approximation algorithms for TIM and SIM with simultaneously learning approximations of agents’ expected returns, error bounds, stability analyses under changes of the policies, and convergence guarantees. The approximation algorithm relies only
on observing other agents’ actions and is, other
than that, fully decentralized. Through empirical
studies, we validate our approach’s effectiveness
in identifying intricate influence structures in complex interactions. Our work appears to be the first
study of determining influence structures in the
multi-agent average reward setting with convergence guarantees.

Previous studies in MARL have tackled influence from
various angles, such as minimizing collaboration needs
(Guestrin et al., 2002a), enhancing exploration (Wang et al.,
2020), or optimizing communication strategies (Jaques et al.,
2018). They focus on analyzing their method’s effect on the
system’s objective without explicitly addressing the influence measurement’s common theoretical aspects. Furthermore, the mentioned methods to measure influence among
agents are exclusively focusing on the discounted reward
setting (Sutton & Barto, 2018). As such, there is a lack of research related to influence in the average reward setting (Puterman, 1994), which is particularly relevant for real-world
applications like energy network management(Callaway &
Hiskens, 2011), vehicle formation control (Fax & Murray,
2004), and repeated auctions (Hoen et al., 2005).
The existing approaches mentioned above seek to resolve
specific problems, such as a reduction of the joint action
space by using a proxy of agents’ influence on one another.
While our method can be used for these applications as well,
the main goal of our work is to address the fundamental
question of how to reliably detect the inherent influence
structure of an environment given a specific policy.
The main contributions of our work are the following. We
introduce a unified approach to express a multi-agent system’s inherent influence structure, regardless of the reward
setting and overall objective. We then build upon this foundation by introducing the total impact measurement and
state impact measurement. These measurements quantify
the overall and state-dependent influence structure, respectively, in the multi-agent average reward setting. In addition,
we provide decentralized algorithms with stability analysis
and convergence guarantees along with complementary empirical evaluations. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the first study of determining influence structures in the
multi-agent average reward setting with provable convergence guarantees.

1. Introduction
Understanding the mutual influence among agents within
a multi-agent system is crucial for the effective learning of
1

School of Computation, Science and Technology, Technical
University of Munich, Germany 2 Formerly, Chair of Operations
Research, Technical University of Munich, Germany 3 Technische
Hochschule Ingolstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Fabian R.
Pieroth <fabian.pieroth@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

