Optimal Exact Recovery in Semi-Supervised Learning:
A Study of Spectral Methods and Graph Convolutional Networks

Haixiao Wang 1 Zhichao Wang 1

Abstract

ical networks, and knowledge graphs. The versatility of
GNNs allows for applications ranging from node classification to link prediction and graph classification. To explore
the mechanism and functionality behind GNNs, it is natural
to assume certain data generation models, such that the fundamental limits of certain tasks appear mathematically. In
particular, we focus on the synthetic data sampled from Contextual Stochastic Block Model (CSBM), first introduced by
(Deshpande et al., 2018).

We delve into the challenge of semi-supervised
node classification on the Contextual Stochastic
Block Model (CSBM) dataset. Here, nodes from
the two-cluster Stochastic Block Model (SBM)
are coupled with feature vectors, which are derived from a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
that corresponds to their respective node labels.
With only a subset of the CSBM node labels accessible for training, our primary objective becomes the accurate classification of the remaining nodes. Venturing into the transductive learning landscape, we, for the first time, pinpoint the
information-theoretical threshold for the exact recovery of all test nodes in CSBM. Concurrently,
we design an optimal spectral estimator inspired
by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with the
training labels and essential data from both the adjacency matrix and feature vectors. We also evaluate the efficacy of graph ridge regression and
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) on this
synthetic dataset. Our findings underscore that
graph ridge regression and GCN possess the ability to achieve the information threshold of exact
recovery in a manner akin to the optimal estimator
when using the optimal weighted self-loops. This
highlights the potential role of feature learning in
augmenting the proficiency of GCN, especially in
the realm of semi-supervised learning.

In the literature, the existing work has been focused on
the generalization property of GNN (Esser et al., 2021),
(Bruna & Li, 2017), (Baranwal et al., 2021), the role of nonlinearity (Lampert & Scholtes, 2023) and oversmoothing
phenomenon (Wu et al., 2022). We focus on the fundamental
limits of CSBM and the following questions: (1) When do
we expect to classify all nodes correctly? (2) What is the best
possible accuracy we can achieve when given the parameters
of the data generation model? (3) Can we design an efficient
estimator to accomplish the previous tasks and how well
GNN performs under this evaluation metric? In addressing
this challenge, we venture into the transductive learning
landscape. For the first time, we identify the informationtheoretical limits required for classifying all nodes correctly
for CSBM, specifically in transductive learning setting. This
discovery is pivotal as it sets a benchmark for evaluating the
performance of various models and algorithms on this type
of data for the node classification problem.
Related work
Graph machine learning on CSBM CSBM has become
a popular model for theoretical analysis on the performance
of GCNs(Kipf & Welling, 2017). For instance, (Wu et al.,
2022) studied over-smoothing on CSBM; the generalization performance of GCNs and graph attentions has been
considered in (Baranwal et al., 2021; 2023a; Fountoulakis
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2019); the expressivity of GCNs
on CSBM (Oono & Suzuki, 2019); bayesian-inference on
nonlinear GCNs (Wei et al., 2022; Baranwal et al., 2023b).
Although (Huang et al., 2023) analyzed the feature learning
on modified CSBM (SNM therein) and (Lu, 2022) showed
the learning performance on SBM, currently, there is no
complete analysis of the training dynamics for GCNs on

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful method for tackling various problems in the domain
of graph-structured data, such as social networks, biolog1
Department of Mathematics, University of California
San Diego, San Diego, California, USA. Correspondence
to: Haixiao Wang <h9wang@ucsd.edu>, Zhichao Wang
<zhw036@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

