Open-Vocabulary Calibration for Fine-tuned CLIP

Shuoyuan Wang 1 2 † Jindong Wang 3 Guoqing Wang 4 Bob Zhang 2 Kaiyang Zhou 5 Hongxin Wei 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP (Radford et al.,
2021) have achieved strong performance in open-vocabulary
image recognition by leveraging natural language supervision (Radford et al., 2021). To strengthen performance for
VLMs in downstream applications, numerous fine-tuning
methods have been studied in the literature, among which
prompt learning (Zhou et al., 2022b) has gained the most attention due to its parameter-efficient design and robustness.
Ideally, in an open-vocabulary setting a fine-tuned VLM
should make accurate and reliable predictions on both seen
(base) and unseen (novel) classes. While prompt learning
algorithms can achieve considerable improvement in accuracy, the reliability issue is still underexplored, preventing
the deployment of such models in high-stakes applications
like medical diagnosis and autonomous driving.

Vision-language models (VLMs) have emerged as
formidable tools, showing their strong capability
in handling various open-vocabulary tasks in image recognition, text-driven visual content generation, and visual chatbots, to name a few. In recent
years, considerable efforts and resources have
been devoted to adaptation methods for improving the downstream performance of VLMs, particularly on parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods like prompt learning. However, a crucial aspect that has been largely overlooked is the confidence calibration problem in fine-tuned VLMs,
which could greatly reduce reliability when deploying such models in the real world. This paper
bridges the gap by systematically investigating the
confidence calibration problem in the context of
prompt learning and reveals that existing calibration methods are insufficient to address the problem, especially in the open-vocabulary setting. To
solve the problem, we present a simple and effective approach called Distance-Aware Calibration
(DAC), which is based on scaling the temperature
using as guidance the distance between predicted
text labels and base classes. The experiments with
7 distinct prompt learning methods applied across
11 diverse downstream datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of DAC, which achieves high efficacy without sacrificing the inference speed.
Our code is available at https://github.com/mlstat-Sustech/CLIP Calibration.

Existing research has shown that the pre-trained CLIP model
is well-calibrated in the zero-shot setting (Minderer et al.,
2021). However, after fine-tuning for downstream tasks,
the model struggles with miscalibration, i.e., the predicted
class probabilities do not align with the true correctness
likelihood (Oh et al., 2023). Existing research has only
studied the calibration of fine-tuned CLIP on base classes. In
this work, we present the first study on calibrating fine-tuned
VLMs under an open-vocabulary setting. Our experiments
reveal that fine-tuned VLMs exhibit overconfidence in novel
classes but underconfidence in base classes. Moreover, we
find that the current state-of-the-art post-hoc calibration
methods can mitigate the miscalibration problem on base
classes. However, the calibration result fails to transfer
to novel classes, which motivates us to design post-hoc
methods for open-vocabulary calibration.
In this work, we show that the miscalibration issue on novel
classes can be mitigated through a simple fix to temperature
scaling (Guo et al., 2017)—the most popular method for
post-hoc calibration—by scaling the temperature with class
information. Our approach, Distance-Aware Calibration
(DAC), is motivated by our analysis on the deviation degree
of novel classes. Specifically, we show that prompt tuning
leads to a large gap between the text features of base classes
and those of novel classes. Furthermore, as the deviation
degree of a novel class increases, the model becomes more
“confident” in its predictions.

†

Work done while working at SUSTech as a visiting scholar.
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University
of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. 2 Department of
Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Taipa,
Macau 3 William & Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia, USA 4 School of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China. 5 Department of Computer
Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China.
Correspondence to: Hongxin Wei <weihx@sustech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

