Preference Fine-Tuning of LLMs Should Leverage Suboptimal, On-Policy Data

Fahim Tajwar * 1 Anikait Singh * 2 Archit Sharma 2 Rafael Rafailov 2 Jeff Schneider 1 Tengyang Xie 3
Stefano Ermon 2 Chelsea Finn 2 Aviral Kumar 4

Abstract

want these solutions to optimize some task-dependent success criteria (e.g., align with human preferences, optimize
correctness or compactness). To align pre-trained LLMs
with downstream success criteria, they are then fine-tuned
with various objectives. In this paper, we focus on finetuning problems that aim to optimize for binary preferences
(from humans or other AI models). A plethora of methods
have been proposed for this sort of fine-tuning, including
supervised learning on filtered responses (Gulcehre et al.,
2023), contrastive training (Rafailov et al., 2023), and onpolicy reinforcement learning (RL) (Ouyang et al., 2022)
on a reward function extracted from human preferences.

Learning from preference labels plays a crucial
role in fine-tuning large language models — this
is done via supervised learning, on-policy reinforcement learning (RL), or contrastive learning.
Different methods come with different implementation tradeoffs, and existing empirical findings
present different conclusions, for instance, some
results show that online RL is quite important
to attain good fine-tuning results, while others
find offline methods sufficient. This raises a question: what kind of approaches are important
for fine-tuning with preference data and why?
In this paper, we answer this question by performing a rigorous analysis of a number of finetuning techniques on didactic and full-scale LLM
problems. Our main finding is that approaches
that use on-policy sampling and attempt to push
down the likelihood on certain responses (i.e.,
employ a “negative gradient”) outperform offline
and maximum likelihood objectives. We conceptualize our insights and unify methods that use
on-policy sampling or negative gradient under a
notion of mode-seeking objectives for categorical
distributions. Mode-seeking objectives are able
to alter probability mass on specific bins of a categorical distribution at a fast rate compared to
maximum likelihood, allowing them to relocate
masses across bins more effectively. Our analysis
prescribes actionable insights for preference finetuning of LLMs and informs how data should be
collected for maximal improvement.

In theory, while all of these methods aim to discover identical optimal policies, achieving this in practice would require
full data coverage and infinite computation. These requirements are not met in practice, and hence, the choice of the
loss function and the optimization procedure affects performance. However, a lack of a clear understanding of different
approaches, coupled with different tradeoffs in implementation, has resulted in substantial confusion: practitioners
are unsure as to: (1) whether RL (Ouyang et al., 2022) is required at all, or contrastive approaches (Rafailov et al., 2023;
Gheshlaghi Azar et al., 2023) or supervised fine-tuning are
good enough; and (2) whether preference data should be
collected with models in the loop (i.e., “on-policy”) or not.
Our goal is to provide clarity on these questions by performing a rigorous study to understand the behavior of
existing methods. Concretely, we operate under typical
assumptions in preference fine-tuning literature such as existence of a ground-truth reward function that explains the
preference dataset and study surrogate objectives that optimize KL-penalized (with respect to a reference policy)
expected reward. We develop an analysis framework consisting of didactic bandit problems, synthetic LLM problems, and full-scale LLM problems, constructed out of AlpacaFarm (Dubois et al., 2024) and UltraFeedback (Cui
et al., 2023). We then study behaviors of different methods
given coverage conditions and geometric relationships in
the problem. Our main observation is that algorithms that
use on-policy RL against a reward model or attempt to pushdown likelihood on certain responses, i.e., utilize a negative
gradient term as in contrastive objectives tend to outperform other offline supervised objectives with no on-policy

1. Introduction
Pre-training endows a large language model (LLM) with
knowledge about the world. Yet, it does not provide a lever
to control responses from these models, especially when we
*

1
Equal contribution
CMU 2 Stanford 3 UW-Madison
Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Anikait Singh
<anikait@stanford.edu>, Fahim Tajwar <ftajwar@cs.cmu.edu>.

4

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

