A Statistical Framework for Data-dependent Retrieval-Augmented Models

Soumya Basu * 1 Ankit Singh Rawat * 2 Manzil Zaheer * 3

Abstract

2021; Dehghani et al., 2023), the excellent performance realized by this approach is marred by drawbacks such as high
computational cost, inefficient storage of world knowledge
in parameters, lack of transparency in model behavior, and
reduced grounding/factuality of model predictions.

Modern ML systems increasingly augment input
instances with additional relevant information to
enhance final prediction. Despite growing interest
in such retrieval-augmented models, their fundamental properties and training are not well understood. We propose a statistical framework to study
such models with two components: 1) a retriever
to identify the relevant information out of a large
corpus via a data-dependent metric; and 2) a predictor that consumes the input instances along
with the retrieved information to make the final
predictions. We present a principled method for
end-to-end training of both components and draw
connections with various training approaches in
the literature. Furthermore, we establish excess
risk bounds for retrieval-augmented models while
delineating the contributions of both retriever and
predictor towards the model performance.We validate the utility of our proposed training methods
along with the key takeaways from our statistical
analysis on open domain question answering task
where retrieval augmentation is important.

Recognizing these shortcomings, retrieval-augmented models (RAMs) have emerged as a promising alternative. Such
models typically employ two components, namely retriever
and predictor, during inference on a given input instance:
The retriever first identifies instance-specific relevant information from a data-store, and then the predictor jointly
processes the retrieved information and the input instance to
make a final prediction. In practice, RAMs have enjoyed favorable performance vs. compute trade-off (Borgeaud et al.,
2021; Das et al., 2021; Thai et al., 2023) as employing
moderate-size parametric models as retriever and predictor
in a RAM often matches or exceeds the performance of a
much larger standalone ML model that directly maps input
instances to predictions. Similarly, conditioning prediction
on the retrieved information has shown to exhibit improved
grounding (Shuster et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023; Asai et al.,
2023). Furthermore, having access to an external corpus
can obviate the need to store task-specific world knowledge
in model parameters and enable incorporating dynamically
evolving knowledge (Izacard et al., 2022; Liska et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

Despite these desirable characteristics, training RAMs
presents multiple challenges. The natural approach of independently training retriever and predictor can be suboptimal (Izacard et al., 2022). Moreover, it requires collecting intermediate supervision on the instance-dependent
relevant information to retrieve, which is missing in common datasets and expensive to obtain in general. A common
strategy to circumvent the lack of intermediate supervision
is to perform end-to-end training which presents its own
unique challenges in the context of RAMs. Fundamentally,
the retrieval corresponds to the non-differentiable discrete
operation of selecting relevant information from a data-store,
e.g., via top-k selection based on retriever scores, which prevents direct gradient propagation to the entire receiver. Several clever solutions to above-mentioned issues have been
proposed in the literature that focus on different training
objectives to propagate learning signal from the predictor
into the retriever. However, a formal study that unifies these
solutions is missing from the literature.

Recent advancements in machine learning (ML) have not
only led to breakthroughs on long-standing challenging
tasks across various fields, but they have also inspired a
great deal of interest to develop ML models that can solve
even harder tasks (Meinhardt et al., 2022; Lewkowycz
et al., 2022; Cramer, 2021) or focus on completely new
fields (Austin et al., 2021; OpenAI, 2023; Singhal et al.,
2023). While scaling the size of parametric ML models,
such as neural networks, is becoming the predominant approach to meet such demands (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Dosovitskiy et al.,
*
Equal contribution; in alphabetical order 1 Google, New York,
USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA 3 Google DeepMind,
New York, USA. Correspondence to: Soumya Basu <basusoumya@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

