Exploration by Optimization with Hybrid Regularizers:
Logarithmic Regret with Adversarial Robustness in Partial Monitoring

Taira Tsuchiya 1 2 Shinji Ito 1 2 3 Junya Honda 4 2

Abstract

problems with limited feedback (Rustichini, 1999; Piccolboni & Schindelhauer, 2001). A PM game with k-actions
and d-outcomes, denoted by G = (L, Φ), is deﬁned by a
loss matrix L ∈ [0, 1]k×d and feedback matrix Φ ∈ Σk×d ,
where Σ is a set of feedback symbols.

Partial monitoring is a generic framework of
online decision-making problems with limited
feedback. To make decisions from such limited
feedback, it is necessary to ﬁnd an appropriate
distribution for exploration. Recently, a powerful approach for this purpose, exploration by optimization (ExO), was proposed, which achieves
optimal bounds in adversarial environments with
follow-the-regularized-leader for a wide range of
online decision-making problems. However, a
naive application of ExO in stochastic environments signiﬁcantly degrades regret bounds. To
resolve this issue in locally observable games, we
ﬁrst establish a new framework and analysis for
ExO with a hybrid regularizer. This development
allows us to signiﬁcantly improve existing regret bounds of best-of-both-worlds (BOBW) algorithms, which achieves nearly optimal bounds
both in stochastic and adversarial environments.
In particular,
we derive a stochastic regret bound
P
of O( a̸=a∗ k 2 m2 log T /∆a ), where k, m, and
T are the numbers of actions, observations and
rounds, a∗ is an optimal action, and ∆a is the
suboptimality gap for action a. This bound is
roughly Θ(k 2 log T ) times smaller than existing
BOBW bounds. In addition, for globally observable games, we provide a new BOBW algorithm
with the ﬁrst O(log T ) stochastic bound.

This game unfolds in a sequential manner, involving interactions between a learner and an adversary for T rounds.
At the start of the game, the learner and adversary observe L and Φ. At every round t ∈ [T ] := {1, . . . , T },
the adversary chooses an outcome xt ∈ [d]. The learner
then chooses an action At ∈ [k] without knowing xt , incurs an unobserved loss LAt xt , and receives a feedback
symbol σt = ΦAt xt , where Aij is the (i, j)-element of
matrix A. The learner does not have access to outcome and
loss, but only to feedback symbols. The learner aims to
minimize the cumulative loss over all the rounds with such
limited feedback.
To measure the performance of the learner, we consider the
(pseudo-)regret RegT , which is deﬁned as the difference
between the cumulative loss of the learner and the single
optimal action a∗ , which is determined
 PT in hindsight. More

speciﬁcally, letting RegT (a) = E
t=1 (LAt xt − Laxt ) ,
we deﬁne the regret by RegT = RegT (a∗ ) for optimal ac PT

tion a∗ = arg mina∈[k] E
t=1 Laxt .
The difﬁculty of PM games is determined based on its
loss matrix and feedback matrix (Bartók et al., 2011; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2019a). PM games fall into trivial,
easy, hard, and√hopeless games, for which its minimax regrets are 0, Θ( T ), Θ(T 2/3 ), and Θ(T
√ ), respectively. PM
games for which the regret can be O( T ) and O(T 2/3 ) are
called locally and globally observable, respectively.

1. Introduction

Department of Mathematical Informatics, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan 3 NEC Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan (afﬁliation upon submission) 4 Department
of Systems Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Correspondence to: Taira Tsuchiya <tsuchiya@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

PM has been mainly studied in stochastic environments and
adversarial environments. In stochastic environments, a sequence of outcomes x1 , . . . , xT ∈ [d] is drawn independently and identically from an unknown distribution ν ∗ . In
contrast, in adversarial environments, outcomes are generated in an arbitrary manner and xt can depend on the past
history of actions (As )t−1
s=1 .

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

For the adversarial environments, many algorithms have
been developed to achieve the aforementioned minimax
regrets and most of the algorithms are based on follow-

This paper investigates partial monitoring (PM), a comprehensive model for dealing with online decision-making
1

1

