MagicLens : Self-Supervised Image Retrieval with Open-Ended Instructions

Kai Zhang * 1 Yi Luan 2 Hexiang Hu 2 Kenton Lee 2 Siyuan Qiao 2 Wenhu Chen 2 Yu Su 1 Ming-Wei Chang 2

Teaser Figure
Query Image

Abstract

Instruction

MagicLens

Prior SOTA

Find the identical image

Image retrieval, i.e., finding desired images given
a reference image, inherently encompasses rich,
multi-faceted search intents that are difficult to
capture solely using image-based measures. Recent works leverage text instructions to allow
users to more freely express their search intents.
However, they primarily focus on image pairs
that are visually similar and/or can be characterized by a small set of pre-defined relations. The
core thesis of this paper is that text instructions
can enable retrieving images with richer relations
beyond visual similarity. To show this, we introduce MagicLens, a series of self-supervised
image retrieval models that support open-ended
instructions. MagicLens is built on a key novel insight: image pairs that naturally occur on the same
web pages contain a wide range of implicit relations (e.g., inside view of), and we can bring
those implicit relations explicit by synthesizing
instructions via foundation models. Trained on
36.7M (query image, instruction, target image)
triplets with rich semantic relations mined from
the web, MagicLens achieves results comparable
with or better than prior best on eight benchmarks
of various image retrieval tasks, while maintaining high parameter efficiency with a significantly
smaller model size. Additional human analyses
on a 1.4M-image unseen corpus further demonstrate the diversity of search intents supported by
MagicLens. Code and models are publicly available at the Project Website.

Compare its height to the
world's tallest building

Outside view from the
inside of it

Find other attractions
in this country

Figure 1. Top-1 retrieved images using MagicLens and the prior
state-of-the-art (SOTA) method (Gu et al., 2024) from a retrieval
pool with 1.4M images. The prior SOTA method, while accepting
text instructions, primarily retrieves images based on visual similarity to the query image, ignoring the nuances of the text instructions.
In contrast, MagicLens excels at retrieving both visually similar
images and those that align with the deeper meaning and context
of the text instructions — even when the images do not resemble
the query. For example, if given a query image of the Burj Al Arab
and the instruction “Find other attractions in this country”, it can
successfully locate images of the Palm Islands in Dubai.

range of real-world applications, such as visual search, object localization, and re-identification. However, since its
inception, this task has suffered from ambiguous definitions
due to the complex and rich content encapsulated in images.
Similar images may differ in key aspects, and different images can share commonalities. In image search scenarios,
users frequently present multiple search intents for a single query image, indicating that mere image relevance is
insufficient for precise search results. For instance, when
searching with an image of the Burj Al Arab hotel
in Dubai (see Figure 1), a user might seek other attractions in Dubai or an interior view, each relating differently to
the query image. Therefore, incorporating text instructions
that articulate search intents is essential and indispensable
for enhancing retrieval accuracy. Ideally, models should
accurately capture and interpret diverse real-world search
intents as conveyed by open-ended text instructions.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is a long-established problem in computer
vision (Datta et al., 2008; Gordo et al., 2016) with a wide
*

Work done at Google DeepMind. 1 The Ohio State University 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Kai Zhang
<zhang.13253@osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

These open-ended search instructions, span a wide range
of topics and concepts, and reflect the diverse ways users
1

