Completing Visual Objects via Bridging Generation and Segmentation

Xiang Li 1 Yinpeng Chen 2 Chung-Ching Lin 2 Hao Chen 1 Kai Hu 1 Rita Singh 1 Bhiksha Raj 1 3
Lijuan Wang 2 Zicheng Liu 2
Complete Objects

Layered
Image

Complete Objects

MaskComp
Masked
Image

Partial Objects

Partial Objects

Figure 1. Given an image with mutual-occluded objects, MaskComp effectively completes occluded objects achieving a layered image.

1. Introduction

Abstract

In recent years, creative image editing has attracted substantial attention and seen significant advancements. Recent
breakthroughs in image generation techniques have delivered impressive results across various image editing tasks,
including image inpainting (Xie et al., 2023), composition
(Yang et al., 2023a) and colorization (Chang et al., 2023).
However, another intriguing challenge lies in the domain of
object completion (Fig. 1). This task involves the restoration
of partially occluded objects within an image, representing
the image as a layered stack of objects and background,
which can potentially enable a number of more complicated
editing tasks such as object layer switching. Unlike other
conditional generation tasks, e.g., image inpainting, which
only generates and integrates complete objects into images,
object completion requires seamless alignment between the
generated content and the given partial object, which imposes more challenges to recover realistic and comprehensive object shapes.

This paper presents a novel approach to object
completion, with the primary goal of reconstructing a complete object from its partially visible
components. Our method, named MaskComp,
delineates the completion process through iterative stages of generation and segmentation. In
each iteration, the object mask is provided as an
additional condition to boost image generation,
and, in return, the generated images can lead to a
more accurate mask by fusing the segmentation
of images. We demonstrate that the combination
of one generation and one segmentation stage effectively functions as a mask denoiser. Through
alternation between the generation and segmentation stages, the partial object mask is progressively refined, providing precise shape guidance
and yielding superior object completion results.
Our experiments demonstrate the superiority of
MaskComp over existing approaches, e.g., ControlNet and Stable Diffusion, establishing it as an
effective solution for object completion.

To guide the generative model in producing images according to a specific shape, additional conditions can be incorporated (Koley et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b). Image
segmentation has been shown to be a critical technique for
enhancing the realism and stability of generative models by
providing pixel-level guidance during the synthesis process.
Recent research, as exemplified in the latest study by Zhang
et al. (Zhang et al., 2023), showcases that, by supplying
object segmentations as additional high-quality masks for

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft 3 MBZUAI. Correspondence to: Xiang Li <xl6@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

