Seesaw: Compensating for Nonlinear Reduction with Linear Computations for
Private Inference
Fabing Li 1 2 Yuanhao Zhai 3 Shuangyu Cai 4 Mingyu Gao 4 5 6

Abstract

fectiveness of ML hinges on massive training data and extensive computational resources to efficiently process large
neural network models. Consequently, ML tasks start to
be outsourced to and deployed on cloud computing systems (ai.; clo; azu; int; aws; ope). However, such cloudbased deployment has raised serious concerns regarding the
privacy of user data like health/medical records, financial
status, and location information, which must now be sent to
public cloud platforms and suffer from leakage risks.

With increasingly serious data privacy concerns
and strict regulations, privacy-preserving machine
learning (PPML) has emerged to securely execute
machine learning tasks without violating privacy.
Unfortunately, the computational cost to securely
execute nonlinear computations in PPML remains
significant, calling for new model architecture
designs with fewer nonlinear operations. We propose Seesaw, a novel neural architecture search
method tailored for PPML. Seesaw exploits a previously unexplored opportunity to leverage more
linear computations and nonlinear result reuse, in
order to compensate for the accuracy loss due to
nonlinear reduction. It incorporates specifically
designed pruning and search strategies, not only
to efficiently handle the much larger design space
of both linear and nonlinear operators, but also
to achieve a better balance between the model accuracy and the online/offline execution latencies.
Compared to the state-of-the-art design for image classification on ImageNet, Seesaw achieves
1.68× lower online latency and 1.55× lower total
online + offline latency at 71% iso-accuracy, or
3.65% higher accuracy at iso-latency of 190 seconds, while using much simpler and faster search
and training methods.

In response to such privacy concerns, privacy-preserving
machine learning (PPML) has been proposed to securely
store and process users’ sensitive data. During model training, differential privacy and federated learning techniques
could be leveraged to protect individual person’s data privacy (Zhang et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2020). More general
PPML frameworks for both training and inference now heavily use cryptographic primitives, including homomorphic
encryption and multi-party computation, to achieve provable security (Dowlin et al., 2016; Brutzkus et al., 2019;
Badawi et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2017; Riazi et al., 2018; Juvekar et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2020; Ng & Chow, 2021;
Chandran et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023). However, despite
extensive algorithm and system optimizations, their computational cost is still several orders of magnitude higher
than the original plaintext models, restricting their practical
usage in time-sensitive scenarios like online inference. The
high processing overheads are primarily associated with
nonlinear activation functions such as ReLU and Sigmoid,
which require complex secure multi-party computation protocols with heavy cryptographic computations and frequent
communication between the user and the cloud.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML), particularly deep neural networks,
has become a ubiquitous technique in contemporary datadriven applications such as image/video classification and
natural language processing (LeCun et al., 2015). The ef-

Great efforts have been made to alleviate the nonlinear computational cost in PPML, such as developing more efficient
protocols for nonlinear operators (Mishra et al., 2020; Ghodsi et al., 2021; Lou et al., 2021), or reducing the number
of such operations through pruning and neural architecture search (NAS) (Ghodsi et al., 2020; Cho et al., 2022a;
Jha et al., 2021; Cho et al., 2022b; Kundu et al., 2023a;
Huang et al., 2022; Kundu et al., 2023b). Nevertheless,
almost all prior techniques simply started with an existing network architecture, and only focused on reducing the
amount of nonlinear operators while struggling to minimize
the corresponding negative accuracy impact. This inevitably

1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 2 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core Technology, Xi’an, China 3 State
University of New York at Buffalo, New York, USA 4 Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 5 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Lab,
Shanghai, China 6 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Mingyu Gao <gaomy@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

