Adaptively Learning to Select-Rank in Online Platforms

Jingyuan Wang 1 Perry Dong 2 3 Ying Jin 4 Ruohan Zhan 5 6 Zhengyuan Zhou 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Online platforms have significantly influenced various aspects of daily life. Ranking algorithms, central to these
platforms, are designed to organize vast quantities of information to enhance user satisfaction. This has shown to be
valuable for businesses: for example, YouTube uses these
algorithms to present the most relevant videos for an optimal
user experience, while Amazon employs them to display
products that are likely to maximize revenue. Arena, a leading AI-driven B2B startup, uses active learning (combined
with foundation models) to rank promotions, products, sales
tasks (for in-store sales representatives) in omnichannel
commerce for global enterprises in the consumer packaged
goods industry. This paper focuses on optimizing ranking
algorithms within such platforms. The process is twofold:
(i) the retrieval/select phase, where the most relevant K
items are selected from a large pool, and (ii) the ranking
phase, where these items are arranged in a way that aims to
maximize overall user satisfaction over the entire ranked list
(Guo et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2021; Lerman & Hogg, 2014).

Ranking algorithms are fundamental to various
online platforms across e-commerce sites to content streaming services. Our research addresses
the challenge of adaptively ranking items from
a candidate pool for heterogeneous users, a key
component in personalizing user experience. We
develop a user response model that considers diverse user preferences and the varying effects of
item positions, aiming to optimize overall user
satisfaction with the ranked list. We frame this
problem within a contextual bandits framework,
with each ranked list as an action. Our approach
incorporates an upper confidence bound to adjust predicted user satisfaction scores and selects
the ranking action that maximizes these adjusted
scores, efficiently solved via maximum weight
imperfect matching. We demonstrate that our algorithm
√ achieves a cumulative regret bound of
O(d N KT ) for ranking K out of N items in a
d-dimensional context space over T rounds, under the assumption that user responses follow a
generalized linear model. This regret alleviates dependence on the ambient action space, whose cardinality grows exponentially with N and K (thus
rendering direct application of existing adaptive
learning algorithms – such as UCB or Thompson
sampling – infeasible). Experiments conducted
on both simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate our algorithm outperforms the baseline.

Large-scale ranking algorithms employed by major companies often utilize an “explore-then-commit” (ETC) strategy.
This approach ensures stable performance in production environments but relies heavily on passive learning, where outcomes are largely dependent on previously collected data. In
typical ETC methods, models are initially trained using historical production data. During deployment, these models
rank a subset of items, aiming to achieve the highest possible
user satisfaction based on predictions made by the trained
model. One common such method is score-based ranking,
where models assign scores to user-item pairs, predicting
the level of user satisfaction with each item. Consequently,
items are sorted in descending order of these scores (Liu
et al., 2009; Joachims, 2002; Herbrich et al., 1999; Freund
et al., 2003; Burges et al., 2005; Cao et al., 2007; Lee &
Lin, 2014; Li et al., 2007; Li & Lin, 2006; Burges, 2010).
Alternatively, some methods employ offline reinforcement
learning, where the objective is to directly generate a ranked
list of items to optimize total user satisfaction across the
entire list (Bello et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019).

1

Stern School of Business, New York University 2 EECS,
UC Berkeley 3 Arena Technologies 4 Department of Statistics, Stanford University 5 IEDA, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (HKUST) 6 HKUST Shenzhen-Hong
Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute. Correspondence to: Ruohan Zhan <rhzhan@ust.hk>, Zhengyuan Zhou
<zhengyuanzhou24@gmail.com>.

However, a fundamental limitation of these ETC methods
is the inherent estimation uncertainty: the models cannot
precisely predict user responses, regardless of the volume

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

