Sliced-Wasserstein Estimation with Spherical Harmonics as Control Variates

Rémi Leluc 1 Aymeric Dieuleveut 1 François Portier 2 Johan Segers 3 Aigerim Zhuman 3

Abstract

for analyzing and solving a wide range of machine learning
problems including generative modeling (Deshpande et al.,
2018; 2019; Liutkus et al., 2019), autoencoders (Kolouri
et al., 2018), Bayesian computation (Nadjahi et al., 2020a),
image processing (Bonneel et al., 2015), and computational
physics (Carpintero Perez et al., 2024).

The Sliced-Wasserstein (SW) distance between
probability measures is defined as the average of
the Wasserstein distances resulting for the associated one-dimensional projections. As a consequence, the SW distance can be written as an
integral with respect to the uniform measure on
the sphere and the Monte Carlo framework can be
employed for calculating the SW distance. Spherical harmonics are polynomials on the sphere that
form an orthonormal basis of the set of squareintegrable functions on the sphere. Putting these
two facts together, a new Monte Carlo method,
hereby referred to as Spherical Harmonics Control
Variates (SHCV), is proposed for approximating
the SW distance using spherical harmonics as control variates. The resulting approach is shown to
have good theoretical properties, e.g., a no-error
property for Gaussian measures under a certain
form of linear dependency between the variables.
Moreover, an improved rate of convergence, compared to Monte Carlo, is established for general
measures. The convergence analysis relies on the
Lipschitz property associated to the SW integrand.
Several numerical experiments demonstrate the
superior performance of SHCV against state-ofthe-art methods for SW distance computation.

Informally, for p ≥ 1 the SWp distance between probability
distributions µ and ν on Rd is defined as the integral value,
over θ uniformly distributed on the unit sphere Sd−1 , of the
Wasserstein distance Wp between the projections of distributions µ and ν on the direction of θ. It takes advantage
of the fact that (a) the Wasserstein distance between onedimensional measures has a simple analytical form, being
the Lp ([0, 1])-distance between their quantile functions (approximated using empirical quantiles), and (b) the integral
is approximated by Monte Carlo sampling (uniformly on
the unit sphere). As a consequence, two types of error affect
the accuracy of most algorithms estimating the SW distance:
first, the statistical error, due to the approximation of the
distributions µ and ν by their empirical counterparts, which
scales as m−1/2 , with m the size of the samples observed
from µ and ν (Nietert et al., 2022); second, the Monte Carlo
integration error, which scales as n−1/2 , with n the number
of projections, as demonstrated in Nadjahi et al. (2020b) and
Nietert et al. (2022). Importantly, these results establish that
the sample complexity to approximate the SW distance does
not depend on the dimension. As pointed out in Nadjahi
et al. (2020b), even though the SW sample complexity is
reduced compared to Wasserstein, it requires an additional
Monte Carlo step which might offset the previous benefits
if the associated variance is large.

1. Introduction
The Sliced-Wasserstein (SW) distance between two probability measures, introduced in Rabin et al. (2012), shares
similar topological properties with the standard Wasserstein
distance (Bonnotte, 2013; Bayraktar & Guo, 2021; Nadjahi
et al., 2020b) while having better properties in terms of
computational complexity, especially for measures defined
on spaces with relatively large dimension (Nadjahi et al.,
2020b). As such, it has emerged as a powerful framework

In this paper, we propose and study a new approach to improve SW distance computation by improving the Monte
Carlo estimation (step (b) above). The approach follows
from a well-known variance reduction principle introducing
control variates (functions having known integrals) in the
Monte Carlo estimate. Following recent papers (Oates et al.,
2017; Portier & Segers, 2019; Leluc et al., 2021; South
et al., 2023), the use of many control variates can significantly reduce the variance of the Monte Carlo method when
the integrand f is well-approximated in some L2 -space by
the control variates. In Portier & Segers (2019) for instance,
2
the obtained convergence rate is n−1/2 σcv , where σcv
is
the variance of the residual function resulting from approx-

1

CMAP, École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
France 2 CREST, ENSAI, France 3 ISBA/LIDAM, UCLouvain, Belgium. Correspondence to: Rémi Leluc <remi.leluc@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

