OSN: Infinite Representations of Dynamic 3D Scenes from Monocular Videos

Ziyang Song 1 2 Jinxi Li 1 2 Bo Yang 1 2

Abstract

!!

!#

⋯

⋯

Scene #1

!"

⋯

⋯

Scene #2

Video

It has long been challenging to recover the underlying dynamic 3D scene representations from a
monocular RGB video. Existing works formulate
this problem into finding a single most plausible
solution by adding various constraints such as
depth priors and strong geometry constraints, ignoring the fact that there could be infinitely many
3D scene representations corresponding to a single dynamic video. In this paper, we aim to learn
all plausible 3D scene configurations that match
the input video, instead of just inferring a specific
one. To achieve this ambitious goal, we introduce
a new framework, called OSN. The key to our
approach is a simple yet innovative object scale
network together with a joint optimization module
to learn an accurate scale range for every dynamic
3D object. This allows us to sample as many faithful 3D scene configurations as possible. Extensive
experiments show that our method surpasses all
baselines and achieves superior accuracy in dynamic novel view synthesis on multiple synthetic
and real-world datasets. Most notably, our method
demonstrates a clear advantage in learning finegrained 3D scene geometry. Our code and data are
available at https://github.com/vLAR-group/OSN

⋯

⋯

Figure 1. An illustration of multiple correct 3D scene configurations that match the same dynamic monocular video.

could be infinitely many geometric explanations that match
an input dynamic video.
To tackle the challenge of modelling a dynamic 3D scene
from a single video, existing methods formulate this problem into finding a singular, most plausible solution by
adding various additional constraints, such as monocular
depths (Cai et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024),
camera poses (Li et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021; Stier et al.,
2023), shape templates (Weng et al., 2022), consistency
(Gao et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023c; Guo et al., 2023; Yang
et al., 2024), physical restrictions (Yang et al., 2023a), diffusion priors (Tu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024), etc.. Thanks
to the powerful SDF (Park et al., 2019), NeRF (Mildenhall
et al., 2020), and Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023)
as backbones, these methods demonstrate excellent performance in modelling dynamic 3D scenes including dynamic novel view rendering and 3D shape reconstruction.
However, such a formulation oversimplifies the problem of
monocular-based dynamic 3D modelling.

1. Introduction
Our 3D world is primarily a collection of many movable
objects, often rigid with dynamics over time, e.g., balloons
flying in the air and balls bouncing back and forth. It has
long been desired to recover object structures of such dynamic 3D scenes just from casually captured monocular
videos (Costeira & Kanade, 1995; Fitzgibbon & Zisserman,
2000). However, this problem is highly ill-posed, as there

As illustrated in Figure 1, regarding a dynamic monocular video with a moving object inside (shown in the top
row), clearly, there are numerous 3D scene configurations
matched with the video. For example, both Scene#1 with
a large object (the middle row) and Scene#2 with a small
object (the bottom row) are true solutions. This means that
the problem of monocular-based dynamic 3D modelling
inherently needs to be resolved by inferring all correct solutions, instead of just estimating a specific one as has been
done in all existing works.

1

Shenzhen Research Institute, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Shenzhen, China
2
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung
Hom, HKSAR
. Correspondence to: Bo Yang <bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

