Online Learning under Budget and ROI Constraints via Weak Adaptivity

Matteo Castiglioni 1 Andrea Celli 2 Christian Kroer 3

Abstract

constraint functions. The decision maker is allowed to make
decisions that are not feasible, provided that the overall
sequence of decisions obeys the long-term constraints over
the entire time horizon, up to a small cumulative violation
across the T rounds. The goal of the decision maker is to
maximize their cumulative reward, while satisfying the longterm constraints. This model was first proposed by Mannor
et al. (2009) and later developed along various directions
(Mahdavi et al., 2012; Jenatton et al., 2016; Liakopoulos
et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2017; Castiglioni et al., 2022b).

We study online learning problems in which a decision maker has to make a sequence of costly
decisions, with the goal of maximizing their
expected reward while adhering to budget and
return-on-investment (ROI) constraints. Existing
primal-dual algorithms designed for constrained
online learning problems under adversarial inputs
rely on two fundamental assumptions. First, the
decision maker must know beforehand the value
of parameters related to the degree of strict feasibility of the problem (i.e. Slater parameters). Second, a strictly feasible solution to the offline optimization problem must exist at each round. Both
requirements are unrealistic for practical applications such as bidding in online ad auctions. In
this paper, we show how such assumptions can be
circumvented by endowing standard primal-dual
templates with weakly adaptive regret minimizers. This results in a “dual-balancing” framework
which ensures that dual variables stay sufficiently
small, even in the absence of knowledge about
Slater’s parameter. We prove the first best-ofboth-worlds no-regret guarantees which hold in
absence of the two aforementioned assumptions,
under stochastic and adversarial inputs. Finally,
we show how to instantiate the framework to optimally bid in various mechanisms of practical
relevance, such as first-price auctions.

Motivated by applications in online ad auctions, we consider
the case in which the decision maker has a budget and
a return-on-investment (ROI) constraint (Auerbach et al.,
2008; Golrezaei et al., 2023; 2021). The decision maker
is subject to bandit feedback: at each time t, the decision
maker takes a decision xt and then observes the realized
reward ft (xt ) and a cost ct (xt ). Inputs (ft , ct ) can either
be generated i.i.d. or selected by an oblivious adversary.
A key challenge of our model is that ROI constraints are not
packing, thereby preventing the direct application of known
algorithms for adversarial bandits with knapsacks (ABwK)
(Immorlica et al., 2022; Castiglioni et al., 2022a), or for
online allocation problems with resource-consumption constraints (Balseiro et al., 2022). Moreover, previous work
addressing the adversarial case with non-packing constraints
makes the assumption that the “worst-case feasibility” with
respect to all constraint functions observed up to T is strictly
positive (Sun et al., 2017; Castiglioni et al., 2022b; Immorlica et al., 2022; Balseiro et al., 2022). In other words, there
has to exist a “safe” policy guaranteeing that, at each t,
the constraints can be satisfied by a margin at least α > 0,
which has to be known in advance by the learner. This can
be problematic for at least two reasons: i) α may not be
known in advance to the decision maker, and ii) the safe
policy may not exist in all rounds t. For example, in the
case of bidding in repeated ad auctions under budget and
ROI constraints, such assumptions do not hold. In particular, the decision maker would be required to have an action
yielding expected ROI strictly above their target for each
round t. If we assume one ad placement is being allocated
at each t then this assumption is equivalent to assuming that
the bidders’ value is always strictly higher than the highest
competing bid, which clearly would not hold in practice.
In this paper, we propose a general approach to enhance

1. Introduction
A decision maker takes decisions over T rounds. At each
round t, the decision xt ∈ X is chosen before observing
a reward function ft together with a set of time-varying
1
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy 2 Department of
Computing Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy 3 IEOR
Department, Columbia University, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Matteo Castiglioni <matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it>, Andrea Celli <andrea.celli2@unibocconi.it>, Christian Kroer <christian.kroer@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

