Confidence-aware Contrastive Learning for Selective Classification

Yu-Chang Wu 1 2 Shen-Huan Lyu 3 4 1 Haopu Shang 1 2 Xiangyu Wang 1 2 Chao Qian 1 2

Abstract

teva et al., 2017), self-driving (Ghodsi et al., 2021), or security systems (Talreja et al., 2017), erroneous predictions may
lead to serious repercussions (Amodei et al., 2016). The
concept of selective classification for DNNs emerges in this
context, providing a mechanism that allows a DNN to decide
whether to make a prediction on an instance based on its prediction confidence estimation (El-Yaniv & Wiener, 2010).
The goal of selective classification typically revolves around
minimizing the model’s selective risk while maintaining a
high prediction coverage rate (Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017).

Selective classification enables models to make
predictions only when they are sufficiently confident, aiming to enhance safety and reliability,
which is important in high-stakes scenarios. Previous methods mainly use deep neural networks
and focus on modifying the architecture of classification layers to enable the model to estimate
the confidence of its prediction. This work provides a generalization bound for selective classification, disclosing that optimizing feature layers
helps improve the performance of selective classification. Inspired by this theory, we propose
to explicitly improve the selective classification
model at the feature level for the first time, leading
to a novel Confidence-aware Contrastive Learning method for Selective Classification, CCL-SC,
which similarizes the features of homogeneous
instances and differentiates the features of heterogeneous instances, with the strength controlled
by the model’s confidence. The experimental results on typical datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, CelebA, and ImageNet, show that CCL-SC
achieves significantly lower selective risk than
state-of-the-art methods, across almost all coverage degrees. Moreover, it can be combined with
existing methods to bring further improvement.

The key issue in selective classification is how to select samples that may be predicted incorrectly and hand them over
to humans for delayed prediction. A direct method is to use
the maximum logit in the Softmax Layer (SR) (Hendrycks
& Gimpel, 2017; Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017) of the model
as the confidence function; a higher value indicates that the
model is more confident in predicting the sample. Another
approach is to utilize the inferences of multiple models to estimate the prediction confidence, such as MC-dropout (Gal
& Ghahramani, 2016), deep ensemble (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017), and snapshot ensemble (Rabanser et al.,
2022). Given the expensive training or prediction costs,
recent works predominantly focus on individual selective
classification models. SelectiveNet (SN) (Geifman & ElYaniv, 2019) introduces an additional selection head to
learn the confidence of predictions within a given coverage constraint. Deep Gamblers (DG) (Liu et al., 2019) and
Self-Adaptive Training (SAT) (Huang et al., 2020; 2022)
add a homogeneous logit to the output layer, serving as an
“abstention head” to predict the confidence of abstaining
from making predictions. Feng et al. (2023) proposed an
additional Entropy-Minimization (EM) regularization loss
to make the model more confident in its predictions, and
applied it to the SAT method. However, their results suggest
that the state-of-the-art selective classification methods with
explicit selective heads actually lead to higher selective risk
compared to directly using SR for confidence prediction.

1. Introduction
As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely
adopted across various industries, the reliability of their
predictive outcomes has become increasingly critical. In
many high-stakes domains such as medical diagnosis (Es1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
University, China 3 Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology
of Ministry of Water Resources, Hohai University, China 4 College
of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University,
China. Correspondence to: Chao Qian <qianc@nju.edu.cn>.

In this work, we provide a generalization bound for selective classification, disclosing that optimizing feature layers
to reduce variance between samples of the same category
is helpful for improving the performance. In addition, the
selective classification problem inherently requires models
to better differentiate between correctly classified and misclassified samples, and also requires consistency between

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

