Error Feedback Can Accurately Compress Preconditioners

Ionut-Vlad Modoranu 1 Aleksei Kalinov 1 Eldar Kurtic 1 Elias Frantar 1 Dan Alistarh 1

Abstract

2017; 2019; Yao et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2018).

Leveraging second-order information about the
loss at the scale of deep networks is one of the
main lines of approach for improving the performance of current optimizers for deep learning.
Yet, existing approaches for accurate full-matrix
preconditioning, such as Full-Matrix Adagrad
(GGT) or Matrix-Free Approximate Curvature
(M-FAC) suffer from massive storage costs when
applied even to small-scale models, as they must
store a sliding window of gradients, whose memory requirements are multiplicative in the model
dimension. In this paper, we address this issue
via a novel and efficient error-feedback technique
that can be applied to compress preconditioners
by up to two orders of magnitude in practice,
without loss of convergence. Specifically, our
approach compresses the gradient information via
sparsification or low-rank compression before it
is fed into the preconditioner, feeding the compression error back into future iterations. Experiments on deep neural networks show that this
approach can compress full-matrix preconditioners to up to 99% sparsity without accuracy loss,
effectively removing the memory overhead of fullmatrix preconditioners such as GGT and M-FAC.
Our code is available on our GitHub repository
https://github.com/IST-DASLab/EFCP/.

Yet, most work in this area restricts preconditioning of
the descent direction to a diagonal matrix. By contrast,
a promising—but considerably less developed—direction
employs what we will call full-matrix preconditioning, i.e.
pre-multiplying the descent direction with a full matrix,
whose structure is justified either via adaptive regularization (Agarwal et al., 2019), or via approximations of natural
gradient such as the Fisher approximation (Amari, 1998;
Frantar et al., 2021).
Yet, existing implementations of full-matrix preconditioning
are currently impractical given their massive memory costs.
Interestingly, although they have different theoretical justifications, both full-matrix adaptive preconditioning methods
such as GGT (Agarwal et al., 2019) and full-matrix naturalgradient methods such as M-FAC (Frantar et al., 2021) run
into the same key practical limitation: each maintains a
“sliding window” of several past gradients, employed in estimating the preconditioner at each step. Even for small-scale
models, maintaining the gradient history results in unmanageable total cost of Θ(md) memory, where d is the model
dimension, usually in the millions, and m is the size of the
gradient history, usually of size 100-1000. For example,
a standard recipe for fine-tuning the medium-scale BERTbase model using the M-FAC preconditioner with standard
settings requires more than 450GB of GPU RAM, unavailable on any single GPU. Thus, while showing promising
results in terms of accuracy, full-matrix preconditioning is
currently impractical at scale due to memory constraints.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD)-based optimizers in deep learning motivated a long
line of research for accelerated preconditioned variants
that can still scale to the massive parameter and dataset
sizes common in the area. Among these, optimizers based
on adaptive regularization, such as Adagrad (Duchi et al.,
2010) and Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) are extremely wellestablished, with myriads of extensions, e.g. (Agarwal et al.,

Contribution. In this paper, we present a new algorithmic
approach for reducing the massive memory cost of fullmatrix preconditioning at the scale of DNNs, called Error
Feedback for Compressed Preconditioning (EFCP), which
applies to both adaptive (Adagrad/GGT (Agarwal et al.,
2019)) and natural-gradient (M-FAC (Frantar et al., 2021))
full-matrix preconditioners. In a nutshell, EFCP works by
compressing the gradient window either via high sparsity
or extremely low rank. In practice, we are able to compress
the gradient history by one to two orders of magnitude without impacting accuracy, effectively removing the memory
limitations of full-matrix preconditioning.

1
Institute of Science and Technology Austria. Correspondence
to: Ionut-Vlad Modoranu <ionut-vlad.modoranu@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our results are enabled by two technical innovations. On
1

