Understanding Inter-Concept Relationships in Concept-Based Models

Naveen Raman 1 Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga 2 Mateja Jamnik 2

Abstract

“grey wings” tend to have “grey tails”, and patients who have
“lung lesions” tend to be on “support devices”. Learning
from inter-concept relationships better mimics the way humans process information (McClelland & Rogers, 2003) and
could assist with downstream tasks. However, leveraging
these relationships can be difficult because (1) concept labels
tend to be noisy, as annotations can be imperfect (Collins
et al., 2023), and (2) explainability methods are inherently
unstable (Brown & Kvinge, 2021; Dombrowski et al., 2019).

Concept-based explainability methods provide insight into deep learning systems by constructing
explanations using human-understandable concepts. While the literature on human reasoning demonstrates that we exploit relationships
between concepts when solving tasks, it is unclear whether concept-based methods incorporate
the rich structure of inter-concept relationships.
We analyse the concept representations learnt
by concept-based models to understand whether
these models correctly capture inter-concept relationships. First, we empirically demonstrate that
state-of-the-art concept-based models produce
representations that lack stability and robustness,
and such methods fail to capture inter-concept
relationships. Then, we develop a novel algorithm which leverages inter-concept relationships
to improve concept intervention accuracy, demonstrating how correctly capturing inter-concept relationships can improve downstream tasks.

We study inter-concept relationships in concept-based models to understand how concept-based models capture interconcept relationships, an often overlooked area in prior
work. By analysing learnt representations, we surprisingly
find that state-of-the-art concept-based models may fail to
capture known inter-concept relationships. We then construct a novel algorithm which exploits inter-concept relationships to improve the effectiveness of human-AI concept
interventions – where experts correct some mispredicted
concepts – highlighting how leveraging inter-concept relationships can improve downstream tasks. We illustrate our
approach in Figure 1 and summarise our contributions:
1. We analyse the concept representations constructed by
existing concept-based models and show that, unexpectedly, these representations may fail to capture known
inter-concept relationships1 .

1. Introduction
Explainability methods construct explanations for predictions made by deep learning systems. One approach for
generating such explanations is via high-level units of information referred to as “concepts” (Koh et al., 2020). For
example, a model’s classification of a fruit as an “apple” can
be explained because the model detected the concepts of
“red colour” and “round shape”. These models have been applied to tasks such as human-AI teaming (Espinosa Zarlenga
et al., 2023b), uncertainty quantification (Kim et al., 2023),
and model debugging (Bontempelli et al., 2022).

2. We propose an algorithm that exploits inter-concept relationships to improve test-time concept interventions.
3. We theoretically show that leveraging inter-concept relationships can improve concept intervention performance
and validate this result empirically.

2. Related Works
Concept-based Explainability Developing explainability methods is challenging due to potentially conflicting
goals (Rudin et al., 2022; Lipton, 2018) including eliciting trust (Shen, 2022), accurately representing model reasoning (Lipton, 2018), and efficiently generating explanations (Langer et al., 2021). Concept-based explainability
methods aim to cover these desiderata by developing explanations for model predictions using high-level units of

Many existing concept-based models (Koh et al., 2020; Kim
et al., 2018; Espinosa Zarlenga et al., 2022) predict concepts independently, despite the prevalence of interrelated
concepts in real-world situations. For example, birds with
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Cambridge. Correspondence to: Naveen Raman <naveenr@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Our code is available here: https://github.com/
naveenr414/Concept-Learning.

1

