Accelerating Legacy Numerical Solvers by Non-intrusive Gradient-based
Meta-solving

Sohei Arisaka 1 2 Qianxiao Li 1

Abstract

direction (Karniadakis et al., 2021; Thuerey et al., 2021;
Vinuesa & Brunton, 2022; Willard et al., 2022). These hybrid methods can be categorized into two groups according
to how they are trained: separately or jointly.

Scientific computing is an essential tool for scientific discovery and engineering design, and its
computational cost is always a main concern in
practice. To accelerate scientific computing, it is
a promising approach to use machine learning (especially meta-learning) techniques for selecting
hyperparameters of traditional numerical methods. There have been numerous proposals to this
direction, but many of them require automaticdifferentiable numerical methods. However, in reality, many practical applications still depend on
well-established but non-automatic-differentiable
legacy codes, which prevents practitioners from
applying the state-of-the-art research to their own
problems. To resolve this problem, we propose a
non-intrusive methodology with a novel gradient
estimation technique to combine machine learning and legacy numerical codes without any modification. We theoretically and numerically show
the advantage of the proposed method over other
baselines and present applications of accelerating
established non-automatic-differentiable numerical solvers implemented in PETSc, a widely used
open-source numerical software library.

In the first group, ML models are trained separately from
numerical solvers and combined after training. Typically,
they are trained to predict the solution of the target problem, and the solver uses the prediction as an initial guess
(Ajuria Illarramendi et al., 2020; Özbay et al., 2021; Huang
et al., 2020; Vaupel et al., 2020; Venkataraman & Amos,
2021). However, as shown in Arisaka & Li (2023), using the
prediction as an initial guess while ignoring the property of
the solver can lead to worse performance than a traditional
non-learning choice. In addition to learning initial guesses,
ML models can be used to learn other solver parameters
such as preconditioners. To train them, one can use certain
objectives as the loss fucntion that reflect the performance
of the solver, such as the condition number of the preconditioned matrix (Sappl et al., 2019; Calı̀ et al., 2023) and
the spectral radius of the iteration matrix (Luz et al., 2020).
This approach is effective and efficient because the models
can be trained without running solvers. However, it requires
some domain knowledge to design effective objectives, and
derived methods are applicable to specific problems and
solvers.
In the second group, to which this paper belongs, ML models are trained jointly with running numerical solvers. This
approach is more general and straightforward than the first
group, because the ML model can learn from actual solver’s
behavior through their gradients that represent how ML
model’s output affects solver’s output. For example, in Um
et al. (2020), authors propose a framework to train neural
networks with differentiable numerical solvers and report a
significant error reduction by correcting solutions using neural networks trained with PDE solvers. In Hsieh et al. (2018)
and Chen et al. (2022), neural networks are trained to learn
parameters of numerical solvers by minimizing the residual
obtained by running the iterative solver with the learned
parameters. Furthermore, Arisaka & Li (2023) proposed a
general gradient-based learning framework to combine ML
and numerical solvers, which can be applied to a wide range
of problems and solvers.

1. Introduction
Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) is an emerging research area, where scientific data and advancing Machine
Learning (ML) techniques are utilized for new data-driven
scientific discovery (Baker et al., 2019; Takamoto et al.,
2022; Cuomo et al., 2022). One of the important topics
in SciML is ML-enhanced simulation that leverages the
strengths of both ML and traditional scientific computing,
and recently numerous methods have been proposed to this
1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
Kajima Corporation, Japan. Correspondence to: Sohei Arisaka
<sohei.arisaka@u.nus.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

