Sparser, Better, Deeper, Stronger:
Improving Static Sparse Training with Exact Orthogonal Initialization

Aleksandra Irena Nowak 1 2 3 Łukasz Gniecki 1 Filip Szatkowski 4 3 Jacek Tabor 1

Abstract

numbers of parameters. One popular solution to decrease
the size of the model is to remove a portion of the parameters of the network based on some predefined criterion, a
procedure known as pruning. Classical network pruning is
typically performed after the training and is often followed
by a fine-tuning phase (LeCun et al., 1989; Han et al., 2015;
Molchanov et al., 2016)). Although such an approach decreases the memory footprint during the inference, it still
requires training the dense model in the first place.

Static sparse training aims to train sparse models
from scratch, achieving remarkable results in recent years. A key design choice is given by the
sparse initialization, which determines the trainable sub-network through a binary mask. Existing
methods mainly select such mask based on a predefined dense initialization. Such an approach
may not efficiently leverage the mask’s potential
impact on the optimization. An alternative direction, inspired by research into dynamical isometry,
is to introduce orthogonality in the sparse subnetwork, which helps in stabilizing the gradient
signal. In this work, we propose Exact Orthogonal Initialization (EOI), a novel sparse orthogonal
initialization scheme based on composing random
Givens rotations. Contrary to other existing approaches, our method provides exact (not approximated) orthogonality and enables the creation of
layers with arbitrary densities. We demonstrate
the superior effectiveness and efficiency of EOI
through experiments, consistently outperforming
common sparse initialization techniques. Our
method enables training highly sparse 1000-layer
MLP and CNN networks without residual connections or normalization techniques, emphasizing
the crucial role of weight initialization in static
sparse training alongside sparse mask selection.

More recently, Frankle & Carbin (2019) showed the existence of lottery tickets — sparse subnetworks that are able
to recover the performance of the dense model when trained
from scratch. Subsequent works have been devoted to understanding the properties of such initializations (Zhou et al.,
2019; Malach et al., 2020; Frankle et al., 2020a; Evci et al.,
2022; McDermott & Cummings, 2023) and proposing solutions that allow to obtain the sparse masks without the
need to train the dense model. This gave birth to the field
of sparse training (ST), which focuses on studying sparse
deep neural network architectures that are already pruned
at initialization – see e.g. Wang et al. (2021) for a survey.
Such sparse initializations can be obtained either through
weight-agnostic methods (e.g. random pruning (Liu et al.,
2022), Erdős-Rényi initialization (Mocanu et al., 2018)), or
through the use of a predefined criterion dependent on the
training data or the model parameters (Lee et al., 2019b;
Wang et al., 2020a; Tanaka et al., 2020).
The term static sparse training (also known as pruning at
initialization) refers to a version of ST in which a model is
pruned at initialization, and the mask is kept fixed throughout the whole training. (Lee et al., 2019b; Liu & Wang,
2023). Interestingly, even randomly removing a significant
portion of the parameters at the initialization does not hurt
the optimization process (Liu et al., 2022; Malach et al.,
2020). Furthermore, Frankle et al. (2020b), alongside Su
et al. (2020), demonstrated that the pruning at initialization techniques are insensitive to a random reshuffling or
reinitialization of the unpruned weights within each layer.
However, at the same time they achieve lower accuracy than
the sparse networks obtained by pruning after the full dense
training Frankle et al. (2020b). Recently, (Pham et al., 2023)
argue that the resilience to reshuffling depends on the input-

1. Introduction
Neural Network compression techniques have gained increased interest in recent years in light of the development
of even larger deep learning models consisting of enormous
1

Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science 2 Jagiellonian University, Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences 3 IDEAS NCBR 4 Warsaw University
of Technology. Correspondence to: Aleksandra Irena Nowak
<nowak.aleksandrairena@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

