Few-shot Adaptation to Distribution Shifts By Mixing
Source and Target Embeddings

Yihao Xue 1 Ali Payani 2 Yu Yang 1 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Abstract

in many real-world scenarios only a limited number of examples from the target domain is available. For example,
data for training autonomous vehicles in severe weather
conditions, are not only rare in certain geographical areas
but also pose safety risks for data collection. In medical
diagnosis, collecting data for rare diseases is often challenging. In such scenarios, fine-tuning on the small target data
fails, by overfitting the few available examples instead of
learning their features in a generalizable manner. Few-shot
adaptation of a model to a new domain requires developing
data-efficient methods that can effectively adapt the model
with only a few examples from the target domain.

Pretrained machine learning models need to be
adapted to distribution shifts when deployed in
new target environments. When obtaining labeled
data from the target distribution is expensive, fewshot adaptation with only a few examples from the
target distribution becomes essential. In this work,
we propose MixPro, a lightweight and highly
data-efficient approach for few-shot adaptation.
MixPro first generates a relatively large dataset
by mixing (linearly combining) pre-trained
embeddings of large source data with those of
the few target examples. This process preserves
important features of both source and target
distributions, while mitigating the specific noise
in the small target data. Then, it trains a linear
classifier on the mixed embeddings to effectively
adapts the model to the target distribution without
overfitting the small target data. Theoretically,
we demonstrate the advantages of MixPro over
previous methods. Our experiments, conducted
across various model architectures on 8 datasets
featuring different types of distribution shifts,
reveal that MixPro can outperform baselines by
up to 7%, with only 2-4 target examples.

Recent studies revealed that neural networks learn versatile
features from the training data in their penultimate layer
(Kirichenko et al., 2022; Izmailov et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2022a; Mehta et al., 2022; Rosenfeld et al., 2022), and
retraining only the last layer using the target data can effectively re-weight features to improve generalization on the
target distribution. This approach is extremely lightweight
and outperforms end-to-end fine-tuning of the whole model
on the target data (Appendix C.1, Kirichenko et al. 2022),
and therefore has recently become a popular technique to
deal with different kinds of distribution shift (Kirichenko
et al., 2022; Mehta et al., 2022; Rosenfeld et al., 2022; Izmailov et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2023). Nevertheless, last-layer retraining is not the most data-efficient
technique and can perform poorly for few-shot adaptation
(Chen et al., 2023). To address this, Chen et al. (2023)
proposed P RO2 that finds a diverse set of features from the
source data and re-weights them by training a linear model
on the few available target data. But, as finding the set of
compact features is done independent of the target data, this
approach may miss capturing important relevant features
for the target domain, and yields sub-optimal performance.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning models often struggle to generalize well, when deployed in domains where the data distribution significantly differs from their source training data
distribution (Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008). Thus, before
deployment in a new domain, they need to be adapted to
the target distribution. When abundant data from the target
domain is available, one can simply fine-tune the model on
the target data to improve its performance. Nevertheless,

In this work, we develop a highly data-efficient method,
MixPro, that takes advantage of the few available target examples in addition to the abundant source data, to re-weight
the last layer of a pre-trained model, effectively adapting it
to the target distribution. MixPro first constructs a large new
dataset by mixing embedding of every source examples with
that of a randomly chosen target example in the same class,
via taking their weighted linear combination. Then, it trains

1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles 2 Cisco Systems Inc.. Correspondence to: Yihao Xue
<yihaoxue@g.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

