Regression Learning with Limited Observations
of Multivariate Outcomes and Features
Yifan Sun 1 Grace Y. Yi 1 2

Abstract

characterize relationships between multi-dimensional outcomes and multiple features. It is commonly employed to
predict outcomes for new features. The literature on this
topic is extensive; some notable works include Breiman
& Friedman (1997); Su et al. (2012); Price & Sherwood
(2018), and the references therein.

Multivariate linear regression models are broadly
used to facilitate relationships between outcomes
and features. However, their effectiveness is compromised by the presence of missing observations,
a ubiquitous challenge in real-world applications.
Considering a scenario where learners access only
limited components for both outcomes and features, we develop efficient algorithms tailored
for the least squares (L2 ) and least absolute (L1 )
loss functions, each coupled with a ridge-like and
Lasso-type penalty, respectively. Moreover, we
establish rigorous error bounds for all proposed
algorithms. Notably, our L2 loss function algorithms are probably approximately correct (PAC),
distinguishing them from their L1 counterparts.
Extensive numerical experiments show that our
approach outperforms methods that apply existing algorithms for univariate outcome individually to each coordinate of multivariate outcomes
in a naive manner. Further, utilizing the L1 loss
function or introducing a Lasso-type penalty can
enhance predictions in the presence of outliers
or high dimensional features. This research contributes valuable insights into addressing the challenges posed by incomplete data.

However, the applicability of those available methods is often hindered by limitations in observations, a phenomenon
arising frequently in applications. This constraint can occur intentionally as part of a design. For example, in
machine learning tasks involving high-dimensional data
like electronic health records and large-scale administrative data, selecting a subset of features and/or outcomes
is crucial due to constraints such as limited computational
resources.Moreover, not all variables contribute equally to
predictive performance. Opting for the most informative
variables not only enhances the interpretability of the model
but also improves the model generalization ability by mitigating the risk of overfitting.
On the other hand, limited observations can arise beyond our
control. For example, in medical studies, not all examination
items for each patient can be measured due to factors like
time constraints or cost. Similarly, in weather forecasting, it
is difficult or even impossible to observe the entire historical
data, necessitating the selection of representative stations
and specific times for measurements. These constraints
drive the need for algorithms capable of handling datasets
with restricted observations.

1. Introduction

Under the univariate outcome setting, the issue of missing
features has been extensively studied in statistics and received attention in the machine learning literature. This
problem is also named as learning with limited attribute
observation (LAO) (Ben-David & Dichterman, 1993), restricted focus of attention (Ben-David & Dichterman, 1998),
or budget learning (Madani et al., 2004). Cesa-Bianchi
et al. (2011) analyzed the linear prediction in this setting
and proposed algorithms with theoretical guarantees for
the generalization error. Hazan & Koren (2012) proposed
more efficient online algorithms for regression with ridge
or Lasso constraint, which was then improved by Kukliansky & Shamir (2015) using a different sampling strategy.
Rostamizadeh et al. (2011) developed batch and online algo-

Datasets with multiple outcomes are pervasive in many practical applications, especially in the era of big data. Typical
examples include longitudinal data (Diggle, 2002), panel
data (Baltagi & Baltagi, 2008), functional data (Horváth &
Kokoszka, 2012), and image data (Zhu et al., 2023). Multivariate linear regression is a simple and widely used tool to
1
Department of Statistical and Actuarial Sciences, University
of Western Ontario, London, Canada 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. Correspondence to: Grace Y. Yi <gyi5@uwo.ca>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

