Unified Generation, Reconstruction, and Representation:
Generalized Diffusion with Adaptive Latent Encoding-Decoding
Guangyi Liu * 1 Yu Wang * 2 Zeyu Feng * 2 Qiyu Wu 3 Liping Tang 1 Yuan Gao 4
Zhen Li 5 Shuguang Cui 5 Julian McAuley 2 Zichao Yang 6
Eric P. Xing 1 6 Zhiting Hu 2

Abstract

Tasks:
The chips and
guacamole were
excellent too!

The vast applications of deep generative models are anchored in three core capabilities—
generating new instances, reconstructing inputs,
and learning compact representations—across
various data types, such as discrete text/protein sequences and continuous images. Existing model
families, like variational autoencoders (VAEs),
generative adversarial networks (GANs), autoregressive models, and (latent) diffusion models, generally excel in specific capabilities and
data types but fall short in others. We introduce Generalized Encoding-Decoding Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (EDDPMs) which integrate
the core capabilities for broad applicability and
enhanced performance. EDDPMs generalize the
Gaussian noising-denoising in standard diffusion
by introducing parameterized encoding-decoding.
Crucially, EDDPMs are compatible with the wellestablished diffusion model objective and training recipes, allowing effective learning of the
encoder-decoder parameters jointly with diffusion. By choosing appropriate encoder/decoder
(e.g., large language models), EDDPMs naturally apply to different data types. Extensive experiments on text, proteins, and images demonstrate the flexibility to handle diverse data and
tasks and the strong improvement over various
existing models. Code is available at https:
//github.com/guangyliu/EDDPM

Core
capabilities:

Optimization

Generation
Synthesis

Reconstruction

Encoding

Representation
Black hair

She was
happy
watching
movie

She was happy
reading book
It’s a nice movie

It’s a nice
movie

sad

It’s a terrible
movie

Editing

Interpolation

（a）
Synthesis

Distribution
match

EDDPM (ours)

Diversity

Restoration
Content

(20-shot)

Fluency

Fluency

Editing
Interpolation

Accuracy
Distribution
match

（b）

Figure 1. (a) Generation, reconstruction, and representation are
the core capabilities for diverse applications. (b) EDDPM shows
comprehensive abilities on different text tasks in the customerreview domain (§4.1).

1. Introduction
Numerous real-world applications involve synthesizing,
modifying, restoring, and encoding data of different types,
such as text, images, and biological molecules. Deep gener-

ative models are pivotal in these applications, owing to their
three fundamental capabilities: (1) Generation of new samples from the data distribution; (2) Reconstruction of given
instances with high fidelity; and (3) Extracting compact representations of raw data. Different applications can require
different combinations of the capabilities (Figure 1a): for
example, protein editing requires to produce a new valid
protein sequence (generation) that retains many properties
of the original sequence (reconstruction), while text inter-

*

Equal contribution 1 MBZUAI 2 UC San Diego 3 University of
Tokyo 4 Stanford University 5 CUHK-Shenzhen 6 CMU. Correspondence to: Guangyi Liu <guangyiliu.xx@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

