On Positivity Condition for Causal Inference

Inwoo Hwang * 1 Yesong Choe * 2 Yeahoon Kwon 2 Sanghack Lee 1 2

Abstract

Z

Identifying and estimating a causal effect is a fundamental task when researchers want to infer a
causal effect using an observational study without experiments. A conventional assumption is
the strict positivity of the given distribution, or
so called positivity (or overlap) under the unconfounded assumption that the probabilities of treatments are positive. However, there exist many
environments where neither observational data exhibits strict positivity nor unconfounded assumption holds. Against this background, we examine the graphical counterpart of the conventional
positivity condition so as to license the use of
identification formula without strict positivity. In
particular, we explore various approaches, including analysis in a post-hoc manner, do-calculus,
Q-decomposition, and algorithmic, to yielding a
positivity condition for an identification formula,
where we relate them, providing a comprehensive
view. We further discuss the design of a positivityaware identification algorithm based on the theoretical characterization of identification formulas.

X

(a)

X

Z

Y

(b)

Figure 1: Causal diagrams where Px (y) is identified via a
(a) backdoor and (b) front-door criterion, respectively.
Formally, the causal effect of a set of treatment variables X
on a disjoint set of outcome variables Y is said to be identifiable from a causal graph G if the quantity Px (y) = P (y |
do(x)) can be uniquely computed from any positive distribution over the observed variables (Tian & Pearl, 2002; Shpitser & Pearl, 2006a). If an effect is non-identifiable, there
exist two models eliciting the same causal structure and
agreeing on the provided observational distribution while
disagreeing on the effect of the intervention of interest.
In the absence of unmeasured confounders, all causal effects
are trivially identifiable (Robins, 1986; Pearl, 1993; Spirtes
et al., 1993; Galles & Pearl, 1998). However, if there are
unmeasured confounders (i.e., a semi-Markovian model),
the problem of causal effect identifiability is getting sophisticated. Tian & Pearl (2003); Huang & Valtorta (2006);
Shpitser & Pearl (2006a) developed complete identification algorithms taking an arbitrary causal graph. When not
identifiable, one might rely on partial identification, which
provides bounds for the causal effect, or alike (Tian & Pearl,
2000; Balke, 1995; Zhang et al., 2022; Li & Pearl, 2022).

1. Introduction
Knowing only associations among variables is insufficient
to establish the direction of causation, thereby limiting its
utility in making informed decisions. On the other hand,
understanding cause-effect relationships can help elucidate
the effect of intervention so that precise control of the underlying environment can lead to the desired outcome. Causal
effect identification is the task of answering whether eliciting a causal quantity under given information (typically a set
of causal assumptions encoded as a causal diagram) is probable and, if so, providing a mapping from an observational
distribution to the causal quantity.
*

Y

Regardless of the existence of complete graphical identification algorithms, one simple, widely adopted identification
condition is the adjustment criterion (i.e., backdoor criterion
(Pearl, 1993); g-computation (Robins, 1986)). It yields the
following form of the formula for Px (y):
P
Px (y) = z P (y | x, z)P (z),
(1)
where Z is an admissible set. Here, positivity P (x | z) > 0
is assumed to license the use of the above formula for the
causal effect. In the context of estimating average treatment
effect E[Y | do(X = 1)] − E[Y | do(X = 0)], Hernán &
Robins (2006) stated that, for each value of the covariate
in the population, there are some subjects that received the
treatment—i.e., P (X | z) > 0 for all z with P (z) ̸= 0.
With all individuals receiving the same treatment, it would

1

Equal contribution Artificial Intelligence Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Graduate School of Data
Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Sanghack Lee <sanghack@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

