Dense Reward for Free in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback

Alex J. Chan 1 Hao Sun 1 Samuel Holt 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) has been credited as the key advance that
has allowed Large Language Models (LLMs) to
effectively follow instructions and produce useful
assistance. Classically, this involves generating
completions from the LLM in response to a query
before using a separate reward model to assign a
score to the full completion. As an auto-regressive
process, the LLM has to take many “actions” (selecting individual tokens) and only receives a single, sparse reward at the end of an episode, a setup
that is known to be difficult to optimise in traditional reinforcement learning. In this work we
leverage the fact that the reward model contains
more information than just its scalar output, in particular, it calculates an attention map over tokens
as part of the transformer architecture. We use
these attention weights to redistribute the reward
along the whole completion, effectively densifying the signal and highlighting the most important
tokens, all without incurring extra computational
cost or requiring any additional modelling. We
demonstrate that, theoretically, this approach is
equivalent to potential-based reward shaping, ensuring that the optimal policy remains unchanged.
Empirically, we show that it stabilises training,
accelerates the rate of learning, and, in practical
cases, may lead to better local optima.

Figure 1. Attention Based Credit. Instead of just relying on the
scalar output of the reward model at the end of the completion,
we look at the attention weights in the last layer and use them to
redistribute the reward on a token level instead of the completion
level. This denser reward makes it easier for RL algorithms such
as PPO to optimise and leads to more efficient and stable learning.

eliciting more helpful and harmless responses in turn-based
dialogue (Bai et al., 2022).
In this paradigm, a model is trained to assign high reward to
completions that are chosen by human annotators, according to a simplified model of preferences (Bradley & Terry,
1952). This reward model is then frozen and used to train the
generative language model using standard RL techniques,
most commonly proximal policy optimisation (Schulman
et al., 2017, PPO) given its relative stability (Henderson
et al., 2018). Despite its effectiveness, using reward feedback for optimisation is inherently more complicated than
simple supervised learning (Choshen et al., 2019), including difficulties assigning credit to actions (Sutton, 1984),
complications from vanishing gradients (Razin et al., 2023),
and seemingly innocuous implementation details (Engstrom
et al., 2019). Some attempts have been made to stabilise the
training, including using learnt advantage (as opposed to
reward) models (Peng et al., 2023), but many solutions forgo
the reward modelling step completely and either optimise
a supervised loss on the preference dataset (Rafailov et al.,
2023; Azar et al., 2023), or simply sample a large number
of completions and pick the best one (Cobbe et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (Christiano
et al., 2017, RLHF), as well as extensions to alternatives
including AI feedback (Bai et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023),
is now a central component in the language model pipeline
for fine-tuning to specific tasks like mathematical reasoning
(Uesato et al., 2022) and translation (Nguyen et al., 2017),
as well as generally improving fluency (Wu et al., 2021) and
1
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence
to: Alex J. Chan <ajc340@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

