On Online Experimentation without Device Identifiers

Shiv Shankar 1 Ritwik Sinha 2 Madalina Fiterau 1

Abstract

basic version of this procedure, two variants of a system or
their outputs (e.g., versions of LLM generated completions),
denoted as variant A and variant B, (sometimes also called
control and treatment) are compared by randomly assigning
them to the end-users and evaluating the metrics of concern
on the two groups. For online businesses, A/B testing is
crucial for evaluating users’ preferences and experiences
with the product [67, 2, 105].

Measuring human feedback via randomized experimentation is a cornerstone of data-driven
decision-making. The methodology used to estimate user preferences from their online behaviours is critically dependent on user identifiers.
However, in today’s digital landscape, consumers
frequently interact with content across multiple
devices, which are often recorded with different
identifiers for the same consumer. The inability
to match different device identities across consumers poses significant challenges for accurately
estimating human preferences and other causal
effects. Moreover, without strong assumptions
about the device-user graph, the causal effects
might not be identifiable. In this paper, we propose HIFIVE, a variational method to solve the
problem of estimating global average treatment
effects (GATE) from a fragmented view of exposures and outcomes. Experiments show that our
estimator is superior to standard estimators, with
a lower bias and greater robustness to network
uncertainty.

The digital technologies that enable A/B testing are critically dependent on identifiers, such as cookies or mobile
device IDs, traditionally used by websites and apps to track
users’ browsing behavior and provide personalized content
and ads [83, 67]. However, this assumption about the availability of identifiers has become more and more tenuous.
Users have become increasingly reliant on multiple devices.
At the same time, the use of third-party identifiers is being curbed, due to privacy concerns, by both governmental
and non-governmental entities, through legislation such as
the GDPR [29] and through the deprecation of third-party
cookies and mobile advertising identifiers. This means that
a customer’s effective persona that can be observed online
is broken into multiple units – a phenomenon known as
‘identity fragmentation’ [20, 52].
Lack of identifiable information across devices creates a
fundamental issue in A/B testing, as the users’ exposure
to treatment is not controllable. Consider the case of a
business exploring whether a new model produces content
that is preferred by its users. Under the standard A/B testing
protocol, a random subset of users will be shown the new
content B, and their feedback recorded. By comparing the
results for these users against the set of users who received
content A, one can estimate the relative preferences of users
for output B over A. For a user who visits using different
devices, for instance a smartphone and a tablet, the unique
identifier (say IDFA) allows the server to consistently show
the user only content B. However, without identifiers, one
cannot be certain of whether the current device should be
in the treatment group or the control group. This happens
because, while the treatment is administered at device level,
the outcomes are dependent on user-level treatments. Thus,
the outcome as observed for a device can potentially be
affected by the treatment on other devices. This constitutes
a violation of the stable unit treatment – SUTVA assumption
[69] – which causal inference from A/B tests relies upon.

1. Introduction
Using human feedback to align AI systems with the user’s
goals and preferences is an important problem, especially
as these models are becoming widely used in critical areas
including health [107] and education [109]. A commonly
used workflow for obtaining human feedback involves presenting users with multiple versions of content (produced
by a language model) and obtaining their preferences. For
example, we have variations for the task, “a marketer would
like to target a segment of customers, and uses generative AI
to create images for the campaign”. A principled method of
learning about which outputs are preferred by users is to use
randomized control trials, also known as A/B tests [8]. In a
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
Massachusetts, USA 2 Adobe Research, USA. Correspondence to:
Shiv Shankar <sshankar@umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

