Training Large Language Models for Reasoning
through Reverse Curriculum Reinforcement Learning

Zhiheng Xi 1 * Wenxiang Chen 1 * Boyang Hong 1 * Senjie Jin 1 * Rui Zheng 1 Wei He 1 Yiwen Ding 1
Shichun Liu 1 Xin Guo 1 Junzhe Wang 1 Honglin Guo 1 Wei Shen 1 Xiaoran Fan 1 Yuhao Zhou 1 Shihan Dou 1
Xiao Wang 1 Xinbo Zhang 2 Peng Sun 2 Tao Gui 3 Qi Zhang 1 Xuanjing Huang 1
https://github.com/WooooDyy/LLM-Reverse-Curriculum-RL

Abstract

Table 1. Comparison of the proposed R3 with other supervision
methods in terms of three key features. Golden means whether the
supervisory signals are based on golden labels (e.g., correctness)
or human preference; Human-Annotation-free indicates that the
method does not require detailed annotations for each intermediate
step; Step-level Sup. means whether the method can provide stepby-step supervisory signals.

In this paper, we propose R3 : Learning Reasoning
through Reverse Curriculum Reinforcement
Learning (RL), a novel method that employs only
outcome supervision to achieve the benefits of
process supervision for large language models.
The core challenge in applying RL to complex
reasoning is to identify a sequence of actions that
result in positive rewards and provide appropriate
supervision for optimization. Outcome supervision provides sparse rewards for final results without identifying error locations, whereas process
supervision offers step-wise rewards but requires
extensive manual annotation. R3 overcomes these
limitations by learning from correct demonstrations. Specifically, R3 progressively slides the
start state of reasoning from a demonstration’s
end to its beginning, facilitating easier model exploration at all stages. Thus, R3 establishes a stepwise curriculum, allowing outcome supervision
to offer step-level signals and precisely pinpoint
errors. Using Llama2-7B, our method surpasses
RL baseline on eight reasoning tasks by 4.1 points
on average. Notably, in program-based reasoning,
7B-scale models perform comparably to larger
models or closed-source models with our R3 .

S UPERVISION M ETHOD
F EATURE
Golden
Human-Annotation-free
Step-level Sup.

Outcome Sup.

Process Sup.

Ours

"
"
%

%
%
"

"
"
"

or learning to generate solutions in a step-by-step Chainof-Thought manner (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022;
Kim et al., 2023a). Training a language model specialized
in reasoning is proved to be superior to prompting-based
approaches (Uesato et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023b). However,
Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT) focuses on imitating human
demonstrations, requiring large-scale, diverse annotations
to achieve generalization (Lightman et al., 2023; Yuan et al.,
2023; Shen et al., 2021). Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a viable alternative to improve reasoning via exploration
and learning (Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Zheng
et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

When applying RL to complex reasoning tasks, the core
challenge lies in identifying a sequence of actions that yield
positive rewards and providing appropriate supervisory signals for optimization (Sutton et al., 1998). On one hand, as
task difficulty increases, so does the complexity and length
of the reasoning chain. LLMs struggle with the accumulation of errors and uncertainties across multiple intermediate
steps (Lightman et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023a; Zhang et al.,
2023). The increase of reasoning steps leads to an exponential growth in the search space for reasoning, making it
challenging to obtain correct final results (Xie et al., 2023).
On the other hand, existing methods for supervised signals

Large language models (LLMs) have made impressive advancements in complex, multi-step reasoning, by prompting
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Fudan University 2 ByteDance Research 3 Institute of Modern Languages and
Linguistics, Fudan University. Correspondence to: Zhiheng Xi
<zhxi22@m.fudan.edu.cn>, Tao Gui <tgui@fudan.edu.cn>, Qi
Zhang <qz@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

