Class-Imbalanced Graph Learning without Class Rebalancing

Zhining Liu 1 Ruizhong Qiu 1 Zhichen Zeng 1 Hyunsik Yoo 1 David Zhou 1 Zhe Xu 1 Yada Zhu 2
Kommy Weldemariam 3 Jingrui He 1 Hanghang Tong 1

Abstract

have overwhelming numbers in the training set. In ClassImbalanced Graph Learning (CIGL), GNNs are prone to
suffer from severe performance degradation on minority
class nodes (Park et al., 2022). This results in a pronounced
predictive bias characterized by a large performance disparity between the majority and minority classes.

Class imbalance is prevalent in real-world node
classification tasks and poses great challenges
for graph learning models. Most existing studies are rooted in a class-rebalancing (CR) perspective and address class imbalance with classwise reweighting or resampling. In this work, we
approach the root cause of class-imbalance bias
from an topological paradigm. Specifically, we
theoretically reveal two fundamental phenomena
in the graph topology that greatly exacerbate the
predictive bias stemming from class imbalance.
On this basis, we devise a lightweight topological augmentation framework BAT to mitigate the
class-imbalance bias without class rebalancing.
Being orthogonal to CR, BAT can function as an
efficient plug-and-play module that can be seamlessly combined with and significantly boost existing CR techniques. Systematic experiments
on real-world imbalanced graph learning tasks
show that BAT can deliver up to 46.27% performance gain and up to 72.74% bias reduction over
existing techniques. Code, examples, and documentations are available at https://github.
com/ZhiningLiu1998/BAT.

Traditional imbalance-handling techniques rely on class rebalancing (CR) such as class reweighting and resampling
(Chawla et al., 2002; Cui et al., 2019), which works well for
non-graph data. Recent studies propose more graph-specific
CR strategies tailored for CIGL, e.g., neighborhood-aware
reweighting (Li et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022) and oversampling (Zhao et al., 2021b; Park et al., 2022). Nonetheless, these works are restricted to the class-rebalancing
paradigm. Parallel to class imbalance, another emerging
line of research studies topology imbalance, characterized
by “the asymmetric topological properties of the labeled
nodes” (Chen et al., 2021). It is considered an orthogonal
problem to class imbalance, and hence, few work theoretically investigates how topological structure affects the
learning on class imbalanced graphs. To fill this gap, we
conduct an in-depth analysis of the role that topology plays
in class-imbalanced graph learning. We theoretically show
that topological differences between minority and majority classes significantly amplify the class imbalance bias,
imposing great challenges to CIGL. This reveal an unexplored avenue that limits the performance of existing CIGL
techniques: mitigating class imbalance bias arising from imbalanced topology structure through topological operations.
Following this novel perspective, we devise a lightweight
practical solution for CIGL that can be seamlessly combined
with and further boost existing CR techniques.

1. Introduction
Node classification stands as one of the most fundamental
tasks in graph machine learning, holding significant relevance in various real-world applications (Akoglu et al.,
2015; Tang & Liu, 2010). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have demonstrated great success in tackling related tasks
due to their robust representation learning capabilities (Song
et al., 2022b; Fu & He, 2021). However, real-world graphs
are often inherently class-imbalanced, i.e., the sizes of
unique classes vary significantly, and a few majority classes

In this work, we formally define and theoretically investigate
two fundamental local topological phenomena that greatly
hinder CIGL: (i) ambivalent message-passing (AMP), i.e.,
high ratio of non-self-class neighbors in the node receptive
field, and (ii) distant message-passing (DMP), i.e., poor
connectivity with self-class labeled nodes. Intuitively, AMP
leads to a higher influx of noisy information and DMP leads
to poor reception of effective supervision signals in messagepassing. Both result in lower signal-to-noise ratios and thus
induce higher classification errors. Our theoretical finding
reveals that the minority class is inherently more susceptible

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 IBM Research
Amazon Science.
Correspondence to: Hanghang Tong
<htong@illinois.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

