Mapping the Multiverse of Latent Representations
Jeremy Wayland 1 2 Corinna Coupette † 3 4 Bastian Rieck † 1 2

Abstract

performance result, we are unsure to which extent it is
impacted by (i) intrinsic problems with the data, such as poor
data quality or data leakage, (ii) intrinsic problems with the
model architecture, such as insufficient learning capacity,
(iii) misfit between the data and the model architecture,
(iv) unsuitable (parameter) choices for the training process,
or (v) an under-explored hyperparameter landscape. These
uncertainties contribute to a looming reproducibility crisis
in machine learning that threatens to impede fundamental
progress and reduce real-life impact (Gundersen et al.,
2022; Haibe-Kains et al., 2020; Kapoor & Narayanan, 2023;
McDermott et al., 2021).

Echoing recent calls to counter reliability and
robustness concerns in machine learning via multiverse analysis, we present P RESTO, a principled framework for mapping the multiverse of
machine-learning models that rely on latent representations. Although such models enjoy widespread adoption, the variability in their embeddings remains poorly understood, resulting in
unnecessary complexity and untrustworthy representations. Our framework uses persistent homology to characterize the latent spaces arising
from different combinations of diverse machinelearning methods, (hyper)parameter configurations, and datasets, allowing us to measure their
pairwise (dis)similarity and statistically reason
about their distributions. As we demonstrate
both theoretically and empirically, our pipeline
preserves desirable properties of collections of
latent representations, and it can be leveraged to
perform sensitivity analysis, detect anomalous embeddings, or efficiently and effectively navigate
hyperparameter search spaces.

Into the Multiverse. Ensuring robust, reliable, and
reproducible results in machine-learning applications
requires new conceptual frameworks and tools. As a starting
point, we must acknowledge that all data work involves
many different choices that may support many different
conclusions (Simonsohn et al., 2020). In machine learning,
such choices regularly include the model architecture and its
hyperparameters (Feurer & Hutter, 2019), the dataset and its
preprocessing (Muller & Strohmayer, 2022), as well as the
technicalities of model training and evaluation (Sivaprasad
et al., 2020). To rigorously assess machine-learning models,
then, we should explicitly embrace the variation resulting
from all reasonable combinations of reasonable choices,
rather than keep individual choices hidden or implicit. This
is the essence of multiverse analysis (Steegen et al., 2016),
which was originally proposed to mitigate the perceived
replication crisis in psychology (Simmons et al., 2011).

1. Introduction
Our ability to design and deploy new machine-learning
models has far outpaced our understanding of their inner
workings. The real-world successes of Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs), Large Language Models (LLMs), and
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) notwithstanding, our
benchmark-driven engineering approaches often come at
the cost of an inability to make formal predictions about
the capacity of a specific model to perform a specific task
on a specific dataset. Thus, when observing a particular

Representation Matters. In multiverse analysis, each
set of mutually compatible choices (according to some
specification) gives rise to a different analytical universe,
and we assess the results of all universes in the same multiverse collectively to derive our conclusions. While the
early applications of multiverse approaches in machine
learning (Bell et al., 2022; Simson et al., 2023) have
focused on variability in performance (performance
variability), which afflicts all machine-learning models,
the influential class of latent-space models (including
VAEs, LLMs, and GNNs) also exhibits variability in latent
representations (representational variability). In many
cases, even relatively small (hyper)parameter changes can
radically alter the embedding structure of latent-space
models. As an example, consider Figure 1, which depicts

†
These authors jointly directed this work. 1 Helmholtz
Munich 2 Technical University of Munich 3 KTH Royal
Institute of Technology 4 Max Planck Institute for Informatics.
Correspondence to: Jeremy Wayland <jeremy.wayland@tum.de>,
Corinna Coupette <coupette@mpi-inf.mpg.de>, Bastian Rieck
<bastian.rieck@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

