Erasing the Bias: Fine-Tuning Foundation Models for Semi-Supervised Learning

Kai Gan 1 Tong Wei 1

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has witnessed remarkable progress, resulting in the emergence of
numerous method variations. However, practitioners often encounter challenges when attempting to deploy these methods due to their subpar
performance. In this paper, we present a novel
SSL approach named F INE SSL that significantly
addresses this limitation by adapting pre-trained
foundation models. We identify the aggregated
biases and cognitive deviation problems inherent
in foundation models, and propose a simple yet
effective solution by imposing balanced margin
softmax and decoupled label smoothing. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate that F I NE SSL sets a new state of the art for SSL on
multiple benchmark datasets, reduces the training cost by over six times, and can seamlessly
integrate various fine-tuning and modern SSL algorithms. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/Gank0078/FineSSL.

80

90

WideResNet
Pre-Trained ViT

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

90

Abstract

70
60
50

N4

N25

Settings

N100

70
50
30

Full Fine-Tuning
Linear Probing
VPT

10
N2

N4

N25 N50 N75 N100

Settings

Figure 1. Left: Fine-tuning pre-trained ViT significantly outperforms training Wide ResNet starting from scratch. Right: VPT
improves full fine-tuning and linear probing by a large margin. Experiments are conducted on CIFAR-100 using FixMatch. Throughout the paper, we denote the setting with 4 labeled samples for
each class as “N4”, and other settings are defined accordingly.

2020) and FlexMatch (Zhang et al., 2021) determine the
use of pseudo-labels based on a fixed threshold of 0.95 or
dynamic thresholds, employing consistency regularization
to enforce consistent predictions between weak and strong
augmented views of an image.
While current SSL algorithms have shown promising performance on various tasks, there is still a gap when it comes
to deploying them in real-world applications, especially in
scenarios with extremely limited labeled data. To address
this issue, we propose to develop a more effective SSL approach based on foundation models, e.g., CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021), instead of training models from scratch. These
foundation models are pre-trained on large-scale pretext
datasets and possess the ability to learn generalizable representations that can be transferred to different tasks. In fact,
the adaptation of foundation models has already demonstrated effectiveness in various downstream tasks, including
few-shot learning (Liu et al., 2022), long-tail learning (Shi
et al., 2023), and natural language understanding (Yang
et al., 2022b). However, the potential of foundation models
in improving SSL remains unexplored. To motivate our
approach, we first find that visual prompt tuning (VPT) (Jia
et al., 2022), a representative parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) method, is better suited for SSL tasks compared to
commonly used full fine-tuning (FFT) and linear probing
(LP). Note that PEFT keeps the pre-trained model frozen
and only learns a small set of task-specific parameters for
adaptation, while FFT updates the entire neural network
and LP modifies only the linear classifier. As depicted in

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a prominent learning paradigm of machine learning, which aims
to train models using a combination of a large amount of
unlabeled data and a limited number of labeled samples.
Recently, numerous SSL algorithms have been proposed to
address this challenge by automatically generating pseudolabels for unlabeled samples using the model and selecting
reliable ones for subsequent training (Lee et al., 2013; Bachman et al., 2014; Laine & Aila, 2016; Sajjadi et al., 2016;
Xie et al., 2020; Rizve et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022c).
Specifically, these algorithms consider model predictions
with confidence higher than a specified threshold as reliable
pseudo-labels, which are then used to calculate the unsupervised loss. Modern SSL methods like FixMatch (Sohn et al.,
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. Correspondence to: Tong Wei
<weit@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

