Compositional Text-to-Image Generation with Dense Blob Representations

Weili Nie 1 Sifei Liu 1 Morteza Mardani 1 Chao Liu 1 Benjamin Eckart 1 Arash Vahdat 1
Real image

Abstract
Existing text-to-image models struggle to follow
complex text prompts, raising the need for extra grounding inputs for better controllability. In
this work, we propose to decompose a scene into
visual primitives – denoted as dense blob representations – that contain fine-grained details of the
scene while being modular, human-interpretable,
and easy-to-construct. Based on blob representations, we develop a blob-grounded text-to-image
diffusion model, termed BlobGEN, for compositional generation. Particularly, we introduce a
new masked cross-attention module to disentangle the fusion between blob representations and
visual features. To leverage the compositionality
of large language models (LLMs), we introduce
a new in-context learning approach to generate
blob representations from text prompts. Our extensive experiments show that BlobGEN achieves
superior zero-shot generation quality and better layout-guided controllability on MS-COCO.
When augmented by LLMs, our method exhibits
superior numerical and spatial correctness on compositional image generation benchmarks. Project
page: https://blobgen-2d.github.io.

Blobs

Generated images

00-10

00-14

00-27

00-29

00-104

Figure 1. Generated images from blob representations can reconstruct fine-grained details of real images. Each row shows the real
image (Left), blobs (Middle), and two randomly generated samples
(Right). We do not show blob descriptions for simplicity.

1. Introduction
ignore keywords (Betker et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a).
Thus, fine-grained controllability is an open problem.

Recent advances in text-to-image models enable us to generate realistic high-quality images (Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023; Balaji et al., 2022).
This rapid rise in quality has been driven by new training and sampling strategies (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020), new network architectures (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021;
Rombach et al., 2022), and internet-scale image-text paired
data (Schuhmann et al., 2022). Despite the progress, current
large-scale text-to-image models struggle to follow complex
prompts, where they tend to misunderstand the context and
1
NVIDIA Corporation.
<wnie@nvidia.com>.

To cope with these challenges, recent works have attempted
to condition text-to-image models on visual layouts. Since
a text prompt can be vague in describing visual concepts
(i.e., the precise location of an object), image generation
models may face difficulty striking a balance between expressing the given information and hallucinating missing
information. Additional grounding inputs can guide the generation process for better controllability. These layouts can
be represented by bounding boxes (Li et al., 2023), semantic
maps (Zhang et al., 2023), depths (Rombach et al., 2022),
and other modalities (Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023).
Among them, semantic and depth maps provide fine-grained
information but are not easy for users to construct and manipulate. In contrast, bounding boxes are user-friendly but

Correspondence to: Weili Nie

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

