DataFreeShield: Defending Adversarial Attacks without Training Data

Hyeyoon Lee 1 Kanghyun Choi 1 Dain Kwon 1 Sunjong Park 1 Mayoore Selvarasa Jaiswal 2 Noseong Park 3
Jonghyun Choi 1 Jinho Lee 1

Abstract

Among many efforts made over the past few years, adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al., 2018) has become the de
facto standard approach to training a robust model. AT uses
adversarially perturbed examples as part of training data so
that models can learn to correctly classify them. Due to its
success, many variants of AT have been proposed to further
improve its effectiveness (Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al.,
2019; Zhu et al., 2022). For AT and its variants, it is commonly assumed that the original data is available for training.
Going a step further, many approaches import external data
from the same or similar domains to add diversity to the
training samples (e.g., adding Tiny-ImageNet to CIFAR-10),
such that the trained model can have better generalization
ability (Rebuffi et al., 2021; Carmon et al., 2019).

Recent advances in adversarial robustness rely on
an abundant set of training data, where using external or additional datasets has become a common
setting. However, in real life, the training data
is often kept private for security and privacy issues, while only the pretrained weight is available
to the public. In such scenarios, existing methods that assume accessibility to the original data
become inapplicable. Thus we investigate the pivotal problem of data-free adversarial robustness,
where we try to achieve adversarial robustness
without accessing any real data. Through a preliminary study, we highlight the severity of the
problem by showing that robustness without the
original dataset is difficult to achieve, even with
similar domain datasets. To address this issue,
we propose DataFreeShield, which tackles the
problem from two perspectives: surrogate dataset
generation and adversarial training using the generated data. Through extensive validation, we
show that DataFreeShield outperforms baselines,
demonstrating that the proposed method sets the
first entirely data-free solution for the adversarial
robustness problem.

Unfortunately, the original training dataset is often not
available in many real-world scenarios (Liu et al., 2021a;
Hathaliya & Tanwar, 2020). While there are some public
datasets available for certain domains (e.g., image classification), many real-world data are publicly unavailable due
to privacy, security, or proprietary issues, with only the pretrained models available (Patashnik et al., 2021; Saharia
et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2021). The problem becomes
even more severe when it comes to specific domains that
are privacy-sensitive (e.g., biometric, medical, etc.) where
alternative datasets for training are difficult to find in the
public. Therefore, if a user wants a pretrained model to
become robust against adversarial attacks, there is currently
no clear method to do so without the original training data.

1. Introduction
Since the discovery of the adversarial examples (Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2014) and their ability to successfully fool well-trained classifiers, training a robust classifier
has become an important topic of research (Schmidt et al.,
2018; Athalye et al., 2018). If not properly circumvented,
adversarial attacks can be a great threat to real-life applications such as self-driving automobiles and face recognition
when intentionally abused.

In such circumstances, we study the problem of adversarial robustness under a more realistic and practical setting
of data-free adversarial robustness, where a non-robustly
pretrained model is given and its robust version should be
learned without access to the original training data. To
address the problem, we propose DataFreeShield, a novel
method thoroughly designed to achieve robustness without
any real data. Specifically, we propose a synthetic sample
diversification method with dynamic synthetic loss modulation to maximize the diversity of the synthetic dataset. Moreover, we propose a gradient refinement method GradRefine
to obtain a smoother loss surface, to minimize the impact of
the distribution gap between synthetic and real data. Along
with a soft guided training loss designed to maximize the
transferability of robustness, DataFreeShield achieves sig-

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea 2 NVIDIA, Work done
while at IBM 3 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea. Correspondence to: Jinho Lee <leejinho@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

