Particle Denoising Diffusion Sampler

Angus Phillips 1 Hai-Dang Dau 1 Michael John Hutchinson 1 Valentin De Bortoli 2 George Deligiannidis 1
Arnaud Doucet 1

Abstract

intractable marginal densities of the noising diffusion, i.e.
the score. For generative modeling, where one has access to
samples from π, one can rely on neural networks and score
matching (Hyvärinen, 2005; Vincent, 2011). This strategy
is not applicable in the Monte Carlo sampling context as
we cannot sample the “noising” diffusion since we do not
have access to any samples from π to approximate the initial
distribution of the diffusion with.

Denoising diffusion models have become ubiquitous for generative modeling. The core idea is
to transport the data distribution to a Gaussian
by using a diffusion. Approximate samples from
the data distribution are then obtained by estimating the time-reversal of this diffusion using
score matching ideas. We follow here a similar
strategy to sample from unnormalized probability
densities and compute their normalizing constants.
However, the time-reversed diffusion is here simulated by using an original iterative particle scheme
relying on a novel score matching loss. Contrary
to standard denoising diffusion models, the resulting Particle Denoising Diffusion Sampler (PDDS)
provides asymptotically consistent estimates under mild assumptions. We demonstrate PDDS on
multimodal and high dimensional sampling tasks.

The idea of using denoising diffusion models for Monte
Carlo sampling has already been explored by Berner et al.
(2022); McDonald & Barron (2022); Vargas et al. (2023);
Huang et al. (2024); Richter et al. (2024); Zhang et al.
(2024). Berner et al. (2022); Richter et al. (2024); Vargas et al. (2023) focus on the minimization of a reverse
Kullback–Leibler divergence or log-variance criterion while
McDonald & Barron (2022) rely on an importance sampling
scheme which scales poorly in high dimensions. Finally,
Huang et al. (2024) relies on a series of Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) to estimate the score. This last scheme does
not provide estimates of normalizing constants.

1. Introduction

We develop here an alternative approach inspired by denoising diffusion models with guidance. Guided diffusions
combine pre-trained diffusion models with a guidance term
derived from a likelihood to sample approximately from
posterior distributions; see e.g. Song et al. (2021); Chung
et al. (2023); Song et al. (2023); Corso et al. (2023). While
they provide samples with appealing perceptual properties,
they rely on various approximations, in order of importance: (1) approximation of the score and guidance terms,
(2) time-discretization of the diffusion and (3) approximate
initialization of the diffusion. Wu et al. (2023); Cardoso
et al. (2024) have used particle methods also known as Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) (Doucet et al., 2001; Chopin
& Papaspiliopoulos, 2020) to obtain consistent estimates in
the generative modeling context.

d

Consider a target probability density π on R of the form
Z
γ(x)
π(x) =
,
Z=
γ(x)dx,
(1)
Z
Rd
where γ : Rd → R+ can be evaluated pointwise but its
normalizing constant Z is intractable. We develop here a
Monte Carlo scheme to sample approximately from π and
estimate Z.
We follow an approach inspired by denoising diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Song & Ermon, 2019)
by considering a “noising” diffusion progressively transporting the original target to a Gaussian. The time-reversal of
this diffusion, the “denoising” diffusion, allows us theoretically to sample from the target starting from Gaussian noise.
However, it is impossible to simulate this process exactly
as its drift depends on the gradient of the logarithm of the

Our contributions are as follows:
(1) we adapt guided diffusions to sampling problems,
(2) we provide theoretical results quantifying the error introduced by current guided diffusions in a simple scenario,
(3) we develop an SMC scheme to provide consistent estimates in this setup and establish limit theorems,
(4) we introduce an algorithm that reduces the variance of

1
University of Oxford 2 CNRS, ENS Ulm. Correspondence to:
Angus Phillips <angus.phillips@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

