Do Transformer World Models Give Better Policy Gradients?

Michel Ma * 1 2 Tianwei Ni 1 2 Clement Gehring 1 2 Pierluca D’Oro * 1 2 Pierre-Luc Bacon 1 2

Abstract

J can be directly evaluated through automatic differentiation and used to optimize J by gradient ascent. If the
dynamics are unknown, a differentiable world model can
be trained on interaction data, whose predicted states will
be backpropagated through. This model-based approach to
reinforcement learning (RL) has been explored early on in
the field with Werbos (1974); Schmidhuber (1990); Miller
et al. (1995) and led to contemporary work in deep RL
such as Hafner et al. (2021; 2023). While backpropagation
through time (Werbos, 1990) using a world model is conceptually appealing and readily compatible with deep learning
practice, most attempts to scale it up have been unsuccessful
beyond a few dozen steps (Hafner et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2022; Ghugare et al., 2023). Indeed, even in the presence
of perfectly accurate differentiable simulators, policy gradients obtained by backpropagation through time can quickly
become unstable over long horizons (Parmas et al., 2018;
Suh et al., 2022; Metz et al., 2021).

A natural approach for reinforcement learning
is to predict future rewards by unrolling a neural network world model, and to backpropagate
through the resulting computational graph to learn
a policy. However, this method often becomes impractical for long horizons since typical world
models induce hard-to-optimize loss landscapes.
Transformers are known to efficiently propagate
gradients over long horizons: could they be the
solution to this problem? Surprisingly, we show
that commonly-used transformer world models
produce circuitous gradient paths, which can be
detrimental to long-range policy gradients. To
tackle this challenge, we propose a class of world
models called Action-conditioned World Models (AWMs), designed to provide more direct
routes for gradient propagation. We integrate such
AWMs into a policy gradient framework that underscores the relationship between network architectures and the policy gradient updates they inherently represent. We demonstrate that AWMs can
generate optimization landscapes that are easier
to navigate even when compared to those from the
simulator itself. This property allows transformer
AWMs to produce better policies than competitive
baselines in realistic long-horizon tasks.

This problem of stability in differentiating through world
models over long horizons echoes similar challenges observed in sequence modeling. The latter field has experienced numerous advances in deep network architectures
specifically aimed at alleviating this challenge. As a notable
example, transformers were designed to directly propagate
gradients from any output to any input arbitrarily far in the
past, within their context length (Vaswani et al., 2017). It is,
therefore, natural to ponder whether using a transformer as a
world model and differentiating through it could overcome
the difficulties encountered in model-based policy optimization. Or, in other words, to ask the question: do transformer
world models give better policy gradients? In this paper, we
provide a new answer to this question: surprisingly, transformers do not necessarily confer the same benefit for policy
optimization when used as world models conditioned on
the full history of states and actions. Instead, conditioning
solely on a sequence of actions tends to yield better-behaved
policy gradients. This, in turn, leads to improved temporal
credit assignment and policy performance.

1. Introduction
Given a class of parameterized policies, policy optimization methods aim to find parameters θ that maximize a
performance criterion J – typically the expected sum of
rewards over the episodes of experiences generated by an
agent in an environment. When the environment dynamics
are known and differentiable, the gradient of the objective
Code is available at https://github.com/micklethepickle/actionconditioned-world-models. * Equal contribution 1 Mila, Montreal, Canada 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Montreal, Canada. Correspondence to: Michel Ma
<michel.ma@mila.quebec>.

We first show that backpropagating naively through a transformer predicting the next state conditioned on the full history (Micheli et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Robine et al.,
2023) does not necessarily lead to better policy gradients
in long-horizon tasks. We demonstrate, conceptually and
theoretically, that this phenomenon can be attributed to the

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

