In-context Vectors: Making In Context Learning More Effective and
Controllable Through Latent Space Steering

Sheng Liu 1 Haotian Ye 2 Lei Xing 3 James Zou 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable
performance in various applications such as healthcare, education, and social interaction (Lee et al., 2023; Gilbert
et al., 2023; Hwang & Chang, 2023; Skjuve et al., 2021).
With the increasing scale of these LLMs, in-context learning
(ICL) has emerged as a striking property of LLMs (Brown
et al., 2020; Black et al., 2022). Unlike learning methods
that require updating model parameters, in-context learning allows for good model performance with a prompt that
only includes natural language instructions and/or a few
demonstration examples (Dong et al., 2022).

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate
emergent in-context learning capabilities, where
they adapt to new tasks based on example demonstrations. However, in-context learning has seen
limited effectiveness in many settings, is difficult to quantitatively control and takes up context
window space. To overcome these limitations,
we propose an alternative approach that recasts
in-context learning as in-context vectors (ICV).
Using ICV has two steps. We first use a forward pass on demonstration examples to create
the in-context vector from the latent embedding
of the LLM. This vector captures essential information about the intended task. On a new query,
instead of adding demonstrations to the prompt,
we shift the latent states of the LLM using the
ICV. The ICV approach has several benefits: 1)
it enables the LLM to more effectively follow
the demonstration examples; 2) it’s easy to control by adjusting the magnitude of the ICV; 3)
it reduces the length of the prompt by removing
the in-context demonstrations; 4) ICV is computationally much more efficient than fine-tuning.
We demonstrate that ICV achieves better performance compared to standard in-context learning
and fine-tuning on diverse tasks including safety,
style transfer, role-playing and formatting. Moreover, we show that we can flexibly teach LLM
to simultaneously follow different types of instructions by simple vector arithmetics on the corresponding ICVs. Code is available at https:
//github.com/shengliu66/ICV.

Despite the remarkable ICL ability of LLMs, the efficacy
of ICL is uneven and can be highly sensitive to the choices
of templates (Min et al., 2022b), verbalizers (Holtzman
et al., 2021), and demonstrations (Liu et al., 2022a). This
results in barriers in achieving LLM applications that are
both adaptable and robust. In addition, the computational
overhead of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) limit the
ability of existing LLMs to process extended contexts. A
maximum context length (i.e., 4096) is set in the popular
open-source LLMs, e.g. Llama 2. The direct consequence
is that scaling up to large numbers of samples in in-context
learning becomes inefficient and computational expensive.
In this paper, we show how standard in-context learning
can be viewed as a process of “shifting” the latent states
of the transformer. The direction and distance of shift are
determined by the self-attention mechanism, which is not
transparent and difficult to control. Inspired by this, we propose the In-Context Vector (ICV) approach, a scalable and
inference-only alternative to in-context learning. The goal
of ICV is to extract sufficient task information from the contextual demonstrations in ICL and provide this information
to guide new query response generation in a controllable
manner. We achieve this by breaking the process into two
parts: Task summary, where an “in-context” vector is computed from the demonstration examples using the latent
states of the Transformer; Feature shifting where the vector
is applied to shift all latent states of the LLM during the
forward pass of the query example, steering the generation
process to incorporate the context task information.

1
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Sheng Liu <shengl@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

