BetterV: Controlled Verilog Generation with Discriminative Guidance

Zehua Pei 1 Hui-Ling Zhen 2 Mingxuan Yuan 2 Yu Huang 2 Bei Yu 1

Abstract

finding and fixing bugs in code, and even generating entire
codebases from descriptions (Chen et al., 2021; Nijkamp
et al., 2023).

Due to the growing complexity of modern Integrated Circuits (ICs), there is a need for automated circuit design methods. Recent years
have seen increasing research in hardware design
language generation to facilitate the design process. In this work, we propose a Verilog generation framework, BetterV, which fine-tunes large
language models (LLMs) on processed domainspecific datasets and incorporates generative discriminators for guidance on particular design demands. Verilog modules are collected, filtered,
and processed from the internet to form a clean
and abundant dataset. Instruct-tuning methods
are specially designed to fine-tune the LLMs to
understand knowledge about Verilog. Furthermore, data are augmented to enrich the training
set and are also used to train a generative discriminator on particular downstream tasks, providing
guidance for the LLMs to optimize Verilog implementation. BetterV has the ability to generate syntactically and functionally correct Verilog,
outperforming GPT-4 on the VerilogEval benchmark. With the help of task-specific generative
discriminators, BetterV achieves remarkable improvements on various electronic design automation (EDA) downstream tasks, including netlist
node reduction for synthesis and verification runtime reduction with Boolean Satisfiability (SAT)
solving.

Electronic design automation (EDA) is a set of software
and services for designing integrated circuits (ICs), which
work together in the design flow to conceive and analyze
circuit designs. The slowing down of Moore’s Law puts
increasing pressure on EDA, creating an emergent need to
further improve and automate the design flow. Therefore, it
is expected that LLMs will be incorporated into the EDA
flow. LLMs in EDA have already achieved remarkable
success in various tasks (He et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a).
Hardware design languages (HDLs), such as Verilog and
VHDL, describe the hardware design at the very beginning
of the design flow, playing an important role in the EDA flow
and strongly influencing the subsequent stages. However,
writing HDL is time-consuming and prone to bugs, making
it more expensive for today’s complex ICs. Therefore, it
is promising to utilize LLMs to automatically generate the
desired HDL. Recently, several works have focused on Verilog generation (Dehaerne et al., 2023; Thakur et al., 2023).
However, these works primarily refine LLMs with selected
datasets, neglecting the direct integration of syntactic or
functional correctness in the model’s development. Moreover, they insufficiently address pivotal downstream tasks
in the EDA process, which should be crucial evaluations for
the generated Verilog.
Despite the expectation that LLMs can play an important
role in Verilog generation, several challenges need to be
addressed. Firstly, the complex and strict requirements of
hardware designs restrain LLMs from learning and understanding the knowledge related to Verilog. Secondly, there
are limited Verilog resources available globally, which often
leads to problems of overfitting and data bias during LLM
fine-tuning. Moreover, considering the complicated and
varied downstream tasks further complicates the issue. In
industrial production, optimizing downstream targets from
Verilog design to physical implementation involves numerous iterations and cannot be accomplished in a single step.
This makes it difficult for LLMs to anticipate future stages
and impractical to fine-tune the LLMs for each downstream
task.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are leading the world due to
their strong capability in generating and understanding natural language at a massive scale, which makes their potential
applications and benefits vast across various domains and
tasks. In the field of coding, LLMs can act as seasoned assistants for developers by providing advice on programming,
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to:
Bei Yu <byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
2

Controllable text generation involves techniques that train
extra discriminators to guide LLMs in desired directions (Scialom et al., 2020). However, these works primarily

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

