Tripod: Three Complementary Inductive Biases
for Disentangled Representation Learning

Kyle Hsu * 1 Jubayer Ibn Hamid * 1 Kaylee Burns 1 Chelsea Finn 1 Jiajun Wu 1
Quantized Latents

Abstract
Inductive biases are crucial in disentangled representation learning for narrowing down an underspecified solution set. In this work, we consider endowing a neural network autoencoder
with three select inductive biases from the literature: data compression into a grid-like latent
space via quantization, collective independence
amongst latents, and minimal functional influence
of any latent on how other latents determine data
generation. In principle, these inductive biases
are deeply complementary: they most directly
specify properties of the latent space, encoder,
and decoder, respectively. In practice, however,
naively combining existing techniques instantiating these inductive biases fails to yield significant
benefits. To address this, we propose adaptations
to the three techniques that simplify the learning problem, equip key regularization terms with
stabilizing invariances, and quash degenerate incentives. The resulting model, Tripod, achieves
state-of-the-art results on a suite of four image
disentanglement benchmarks. We also verify that
Tripod significantly improves upon its naive incarnation and that all three of its “legs” are necessary
for best performance.

Tripod

Independent Latents

Minimal Mixed Generator Derivatives

Figure 1: Each of the three inductive biases for disentanglement
we consider in this work specifies a different set of preferred
models (circles). In principle, using them in conjunction should
more precisely specify the desired solution set and better recover
models akin to the true data-generating process. Our method,
Tripod, makes crucial modifications to these three “legs” to realize
this synergy in practice. Code is available at https://github.com/
kylehkhsu/tripod.

Beyond aesthetic motivations, achieving disentanglement
is a potential stepping stone toward the holy grails of compositional generalization (Bengio, 2013; Wang et al., 2023)
and interpretability (Rudin et al., 2022; Zheng & Lapata,
2022). Despite this problem’s importance, there persists a
gulf between how well machine learning models and humans disentangle even on carefully curated datasets (Gondal
et al., 2019; Nie, 2019).

1. Introduction
How can we enable machine learning models to process
raw perceptual signals into organized concepts similar to
how humans do? This intuitively desirable goal has a wellstudied formalization known as unsupervised disentangled
representation learning: a model is tasked with teasing apart
an unlabeled dataset’s underlying sources (a.k.a. factors) of
variation and representing them separately from one another,
e.g., in independent components of a learned latent space.

Inductive biases play a paramount role in enabling disentanglement: they help identify desired solutions amongst the
space of all models that explain the data. In this work, we
consider three select inductive biases proposed and validated
in prior work to have some disentangling effect:
• data compression into a grid-like latent space via quantization (Hsu et al., 2023)
• collective independence amongst latents (Chen et al.,
2018; Kim & Mnih, 2018)
• minimal functional influence of any latent on how other
latents determine data generation (Peebles et al., 2020)

*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Kyle Hsu <kylehsu@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

