Doubly Robust Causal Effect Estimation under Networked Interference via
Targeted Learning

Weilin Chen

1

Ruichu Cai

12

Zeqin Yang

1

Jie Qiao

1

Yuguang Yan

1

Zijian Li

3

Zhifeng Hao

4

Abstract
Causal effect estimation under networked interference is an important but challenging problem. Available parametric methods are limited
in their model space, while previous semiparametric methods, e.g., leveraging neural networks to
fit only one single nuisance function, may still
encounter misspecification problems under networked interference without appropriate assumptions on the data generation process. To mitigate
bias stemming from misspecification, we propose
a novel doubly robust causal effect estimator under networked interference, by adapting the targeted learning technique to the training of neural
networks. Specifically, we generalize the targeted
learning technique into the networked interference setting and establish the condition under
which an estimator achieves double robustness.
Based on the condition, we devise an end-to-end
causal effect estimator by transforming the identified theoretical condition into a targeted loss.
Moreover, we provide a theoretical analysis of
our designed estimator, revealing a faster convergence rate compared to a single nuisance model.
Extensive experimental results on two real-world
networks with semisynthetic data demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed estimators.

Figure 1. A toy example showing networked interference between
units. The solid red and dashed green arrows, i.e., → and ⇢, mean
the interaction from one to another unit. Whether the dashed green
arrow ⇢ exists depends on the assumption on DGP.

(Barkley et al., 2020), advertisement (Parshakov et al.,
2020), and so on. Networked interference arises when interconnected units impact each other, leading to a violation of
the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). For
example, as shown in Figure 1, in epidemiology, preventive
measures like vaccination can indirectly protect unvaccinated units due to the vaccinated individuals surrounding
them. Consequently, the infection risk for a unit depends
not only on its vaccination status but also on the vaccination
statuses of neighboring units. Such networked interference
breaks the SUTVA and leads to bias in traditional causal inference (Forastiere et al., 2021), making traditional estimand
no longer applicable. To model the interference between
units, different kinds of estimands can be defined, i.e., main
effects (effects of units’ own treatments), spillover effects
(effects of units’ treatments on other units), and total effects
(combined main and spillover effects).

1. Introduction
Estimating causal effects under networked interference has
drawn increasing attention across various domains such
as human ecology (Ferraro et al., 2019), epidemiology

To estimate causal effects from observational networked
data, a series of works have been proposed to remove the
complex confounding bias introduced by networked interference. One standard way is utilizing the parametric regression including the neighbors’ covariate and treatment to
model the nuisance function. In particular, Liu et al. (2016)
propose covariate-adjustment methods using parametric regression on propensity scores for causal effect estimation.
However, the parametric models are fragile and would yield
bias once the model is misspecified, i.e., the designed model

1

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of
2
Technology, Guangzhou, China Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu),
3
Guangzhou, China Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artifi4
cial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE College of Science, Shantou University, Shantou, China. Correspondence to: Ruichu Cai
<cairuichu@gmail.com>.
st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

