Hierarchical Neural Operator Transformer with Learnable Frequency-aware
Loss Prior for Arbitrary-scale Super-resolution

Xihaier Luo 1 Xiaoning Qian 1 2 Byung-Jun Yoon 1 2

Abstract

computer vision, including but not limited to medical imaging (Li et al., 2022), climate modeling (Reichstein et al.,
2019), and remote sensing (Akiva et al., 2022). Nevertheless, existing deep learning-based SR methods often limit
themselves to a fixed-scale (e.g., ×2, ×3, ×4). The emergence of implicit neural representation (INR) in computer vision allows for continuous representation of complex 2D/3D
objects and scenes (Xie et al., 2022). This development introduces opportunities for arbitrary-scale SR.

In this work, we present an arbitrary-scale superresolution (SR) method to enhance the resolution of scientific data, which often involves complex challenges such as continuity, multi-scale
physics, and the intricacies of high-frequency signals. Grounded in operator learning, the proposed
method is resolution-invariant. The core of our
model is a hierarchical neural operator that leverages a Galerkin-type self-attention mechanism,
enabling efficient learning of mappings between
function spaces. Sinc filters are used to facilitate
the information transfer across different levels
in the hierarchy, thereby ensuring representation
equivalence in the proposed neural operator. Additionally, we introduce a learnable prior structure
that is derived from the spectral resizing of the
input data. This loss prior is model-agnostic and
is designed to dynamically adjust the weighting
of pixel contributions, thereby balancing gradients effectively across the model. We conduct
extensive experiments on diverse datasets from
different domains and demonstrate consistent improvements compared to strong baselines, which
consist of various state-of-the-art SR methods.

Challenges: Current arbitrary-scale SR methods, while
capable of learning continuous representations from discretized data, face several challenges. 1) Low-resolution
Features: The spatial resolution of extracted features is
often inadequate for dense tasks such as image segmentation and regression. For example, using ResNet-50 on
a 224 × 224 pixel input results in 7 × 7 deep features,
showing a marked loss of resolution due to aggressive pooling (He et al., 2016). Even without resolution reduction,
empirical evidence shows performance decline after flipping
the feature map-a phenomenon termed flipping consistency
decline (Song et al., 2023). 2) Spectral Bias: INRs are
coordinate-based continuous functions usually parameterized by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The point-wise
behavior of MLP in spatial dimensions poses challenges
in learning high-frequency information, commonly known
as spectral bias (Rahaman et al., 2019). This issue is particularly problematic when modeling scientific data, where
the super-resolved predictions often appear over-diffused
and fail to capture fine-scale details, such as small-scale
vortices in turbulent flows (Fukami et al., 2019). 3) Loss
Function: Most arbitrary-scale methods rely on per-pixel
loss metrics (e.g., L1/L2 loss) (Liu et al., 2023). Training
the model with a per-pixel L1 loss in a regression manner
biases the reconstruction error towards an averaged output
of all potential high-resolution images. Consequently, this
often leads to blurry model predictions.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) plays a pivotal role in low-level vision
tasks. The primary objective of SR is to transform blurred,
fuzzy, and low-resolution images into clear, high-resolution
images with enhanced visual perception. In recent years,
deep learning has significantly advanced SR and has demonstrated promising performances in diverse domains beyond
1

Computational Science Intiative, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
Correspondence to: Xihaier Luo <xluo@bnl.gov>, Byung-Jun
Yoon <bjyoon@tamu.edu>.

Solutions: For challenge 1), the key solution lies in upsampling deep features. Traditional spatial upsampling methods,
such as transposed convolution, focus on local pixel attention and overlook global dependencies (Dumoulin & Visin,
2016). In contrast, Fourier domain upsampling supports
global modeling. Therefore, we propose a hybrid approach

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

