Knowledge Distillation with Auxiliary Variable

Bo Peng 1 Zhen Fang 1 Guangquan Zhang 1 Jie Lu 1

Abstract

lightweight models (students) are preferable due to limited resources (Li et al., 2023). In this context, knowledge
distillation (KD) (Gou et al., 2021; Wang & Yoon, 2021) is
introduced to transfer knowledge from a teacher to a student
model. Conventionally, KD is approached by minimizing
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between predictive
distributions of the teacher and student (Hinton et al., 2015).
To implement this vision, an intuitive yet commonly accepted approach, initially introduced in Hinton et al. (2015),
is that the student follows the pre-trained teacher to formulate predictive posterior probabilities with logit outputs.
Consequently, knowledge can be distilled from the teacher
to the student by matching their logit outputs.

Knowledge distillation (KD) provides an efficient
framework for transferring knowledge from a
teacher model to a student model by aligning their
predictive distributions. The existing KD methods
adopt the same strategy as the teacher to formulate the student’s predictive distribution. However, employing the same distribution-modeling
strategy typically causes sub-optimal knowledge
transfer due to the discrepancy in model capacity
between teacher and student models. Designing
student-friendly teachers contributes to alleviating
the capacity discrepancy, while it requires either
complicated or student-specific training schemes.
To cast off this dilemma, we propose to introduce
an auxiliary variable to promote the ability of the
student to model predictive distribution. The auxiliary variable is defined to be related to target
variables, which will boost the model prediction.
Specifically, we reformulate the predictive distribution with the auxiliary variable, deriving a
novel objective function of KD. Theoretically, we
provide insights to explain why the proposed objective function can outperform the existing KD
methods. Experimentally, we demonstrate that the
proposed objective function can considerably and
consistently outperform existing KD methods.

This logit-matching approach, however, is challenged by
the counter-intuitive observations (Cho & Hariharan, 2019;
Stanton et al., 2021). Specifically, a larger teacher does
not necessarily increase a student’s accuracy compared to a
relatively smaller teacher. This is attributed to the capacity
gap between the two models (Huang et al., 2022a; Mirzadeh
et al., 2020) since the discrepancy between their predictions
can be significantly large. Thus, directly aligning their predictive distributions would lead to sub-optimal knowledge
transfer and even disturb the training of the student.
Advanced methods introduce a novel direction to go beyond the logit-matching approach. These methods develop
student-friendly teachers to shrink the capacity gap. For
instance, TAKD (Mirzadeh et al., 2020) introduces multiple
middle-sized teaching assistant models to guide the student;
DGKD (Son et al., 2021) improves TAKD by densely gathering all the assistant models; SFTN (Park et al., 2021)
provides the teacher with a snapshot of the student during
training. Despite remarkable progress, these methods need
to resort to either sophisticated or student-specific training
schemes, which weakens the practicability and universality.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, deep learning has shown its significance by boosting the performance of various real-world
tasks (Hassaballah & Awad, 2020; Hupkes et al., 2023).
The effectiveness of deep learning generally comes at the
expense of huge computational complexity and massive
storage requirements. This restricts the deployment of largescale models (teachers) in real-time applications where

In order to get out of this dilemma, this paper proceeds from
a different perspective and raises the following important
yet under-explored question: is it possible to compensate
for the weaker capacity of the student with a stronger ability
to model predictive distribution? We give an affirmative answer to this question by introducing an auxiliary variable for
modeling predictive distributions. The insight is to leverage
a suitable auxiliary variable to promote the ability of the
student to model predictive distribution.

1

Faculty of Engineering & Information Technology, University
of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Correspondence to:
Zhen Fang <Zhen.Fang@uts.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

