Benign Overfitting in Adversarial Training of Neural Networks

Yunjuan Wang 1 Kaibo Zhang 1 Raman Arora 1

Abstract

data, achieving zero training error; (2) no classifier in the
related hypothesis class can achieve near-zero generalization error; (3) the trained classifier achieves near-optimal
generalization error. Several recent works seek to unravel
the mystery of benign overfitting in various settings, including training linear models (Bartlett et al., 2020; Chatterji
et al., 2022), kernel methods (Belkin et al., 2018; Liang
& Rakhlin, 2020; Mei & Montanari, 2022) and training of
neural networks (Frei et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2022).

Benign overfitting is the phenomenon wherein
none of the predictors in the hypothesis class can
achieve perfect accuracy (i.e., non-realizable or
noisy setting), but a model that interpolates the
training data still achieves good generalization. A
series of recent works aim to understand this phenomenon for regression and classification tasks
using linear predictors as well as two-layer neural
networks. In this paper, we study such a benign
overfitting phenomenon in an adversarial setting.
We show that under a distributional assumption,
interpolating neural networks found using adversarial training generalize well despite inferencetime attacks. Specifically, we provide convergence and generalization guarantees for adversarial training of two-layer networks (with smooth as
well as non-smooth activation functions) showing
that under moderate ℓ2 norm perturbation budget,
the trained model has near-zero robust training
loss and near-optimal robust generalization error.
We support our theoretical findings with an empirical study on synthetic and real-world data.

While models based on neural networks have been tremendously successful, they are highly vulnerable to small, nearly
imperceptible, albeit strategic, perturbation of data. These
perturbations, called adversarial examples, are abundant and
easy to find computationally (Bubeck et al., 2021). The potential of such adversarial attacks to substantially degrade
the performance of an otherwise well-performing model has
been a source of significant concern regarding deployment
of machine learning models in real-world systems. It is no
surprise, then, that developing algorithms that can provably
defend against such attacks and are guaranteed to improve
the robustness of machine learning has gained tremendous
traction in recent years.
One of the most prominent empirical defense algorithms
against inference-time attacks is the adversarial training
method of Madry et al. (2018). Adversarial training proceeds by simulating attacks as part of training – generating
adversarial examples from (clean) training examples and
using them to train a neural network. We can view adversarial training as a two-player game, wherein the learner
seeks to minimize their error on the training set while an
adversary strives to maximize the error by crafting small
strategic corruptions of the input training examples. Several
empirical studies show that by using adversarial training
or its variants (Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020), the
learner returns a model that is more resilient to perturbations
in the input space (Madry et al., 2018; Shafahi et al., 2019b;
Dong et al., 2020; Pang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Neural networks have been widely used in real-world applications, achieving state-of-the-art performance on various
tasks such as image classification and speech recognition.
Despite their tendency to be over-parameterized and capable of interpolating the training data with significant label
noise, neural networks perform surprisingly well on previously unseen test data. This seemingly contradicts the
classical learning theory where overfitting to the training
data would typically hinder with generalization. Such phenomena, known as benign overfitting (Bartlett et al., 2020),
is technically characterized by the following conditions:
(1) the trained classifier perfectly fits the noisy training

In contrast to the benign overfitting phenomenon that occurs
in the standard (clean) setting, Sanyal et al. (2020) identified a sufficient condition on the data distribution that hurts
robust generalization when the classifier perfectly fits the
noisy label data. This “robust overfitting” phenomenon was
also confirmed by Rice et al. (2020) showing that on sev-

1

Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA. Correspondence to: Yunjuan Wang
<ywang509@jhu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

