Not All Distributional Shifts Are Equal:
Fine-Grained Robust Conformal Inference
Jiahao Ai 1 Zhimei Ren 2

Abstract

high probability. The prediction set informs the confidence
we have in the predicted outcome.

We introduce a fine-grained framework for uncertainty quantification of predictive models under distributional shifts. This framework distinguishes the shift in covariate distributions from
that in the conditional relationship between the
outcome (Y ) and the covariates (X). We propose
to reweight the training samples to adjust for an
identifiable shift in covariate distribution while
protecting against the worst-case conditional distribution shift bounded in an f -divergence ball.
Based on ideas from conformal inference and distributionally robust learning, we present an algorithm that outputs (approximately) valid and
efficient prediction intervals in the presence of
distributional shifts. As a use case, we apply the
framework to sensitivity analysis of individual
treatment effects with hidden confounding. The
proposed methods are evaluated in simulations
and four real data applications, demonstrating superior robustness and efficiency compared with
existing benchmarks.

Among the tools for constructing prediction sets, conformal
prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005) is an attractive framework that generates valid prediction sets that are guaranteed
to include the true outcome with pre-specified probability.
The validity of CP holds for any predictive model, as long
as the training and test data are exchangeable, e.g., when
they are identically independently distributed (i.i.d.). In
the presence of distributional shifts, however, the exchangeability/i.i.d. assumption breaks, and CP no longer delivers valid prediction sets. To address this challenge, prior
work (Cauchois et al., 2023) proposes a robust CP method
that outputs prediction sets that are valid when the target
distribution ranges within a neighborhood of the training
distribution. To be more specific, let X ∈ X denote the
covariates and Y ∈ Y the outcome/response. Consider a
i.i.d.
training set of n samples (Xi , Yi ) ∼ PX,Y and an independent test unit (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) ∼ QX,Y , where we only get
to observe Xn+1 and wish to predict Yn+1 . Cauchois et al.
(2023) assumes that the f -divergence between QX,Y and
PX,Y is bounded by a parameter ρ, and provides prediction
sets that ensure guarantees even for the worst-case QX,Y .

1. Introduction

The method of Cauchois et al. (2023) provides robustness
against the worst-case joint distributional shift of (X, Y ),
but no distinction is made between the shift in X and that in
Y | X. As pointed out by a recent line of research, different
types of distributional shifts appear in different tasks and
result in different consequences (Mu et al., 2022; Namkoong
et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023). Without
separating the sources of distributional shifts and taking
specialized treatment, the method of Cauchois et al. (2023)
can be overly conservative in practice (to be demonstrated
shortly). In this work, we take a closer look at distributional
shift, and provide a fine-grained robust predictive inference
approach with improved efficiency.

It has been widely observed that the performance of predictive models falls short of expectation when generalized to a
population whose distribution differs from that of the training data (see e.g., Recht et al. (2019); Miller et al. (2020);
Wong et al. (2021); Namkoong et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023)
and the references therein). As predictive models are increasingly employed in high-stakes settings, it is imperative to accompany the predicted outcomes with calibrated uncertainty
quantification when deploying them to new environments. A
widely adopted approach to uncertainty quantification is to
provide a prediction set that contains the true outcome with
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Zhimei Ren
<zren@wharton.upenn.edu>.

1.1. Decomposing the Distributional Shifts
We decompose the distributional shifts into two types:

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

(1) The X shift: the marginal distribution of X is different
in the training and target environment. For example,
1

