Adversarial Attacks on Combinatorial Multi-Armed Bandits
Rishab Balasubramanian 1 Jiawei Li 2 Prasad Tadepalli 1 Huazheng Wang 1 Qingyun Wu 3 Haoyu Zhao 4

Abstract

average reward) and exploration (exploring arms that have
high potential but have not been played enough).

We study reward poisoning attacks on Combinatorial Multi-armed Bandits (CMAB). We first
provide a sufficient and necessary condition for
the attackability of CMAB, a notion to capture
the vulnerability and robustness of CMAB. The
attackability condition depends on the intrinsic
properties of the corresponding CMAB instance
such as the reward distributions of super arms
and outcome distributions of base arms. Additionally, we devise an attack algorithm for attackable
CMAB instances. Contrary to prior understanding of multi-armed bandits, our work reveals a
surprising fact that the attackability of a specific
CMAB instance also depends on whether the bandit instance is known or unknown to the adversary.
This finding indicates that adversarial attacks on
CMAB are difficult in practice and a general attack strategy for any CMAB instance does not exist since the environment is mostly unknown to the
adversary. We validate our theoretical findings via
extensive experiments on real-world CMAB applications including probabilistic maximum covering problem, online minimum spanning tree,
cascading bandits for online ranking, and online
shortest path.

Combinatorial multi-armed bandits (CMAB) is a generalized framework of original MAB with many real-world
applications, including online advertising, recommendation, ranking, and influence maximization (Liu & Zhao,
2012; Kveton et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Wang & Chen,
2017). In CMAB, the agent chooses a combinatorial action
(called a super arm) over the m base arms in each round,
and observes outcomes of base arms triggered by the action as feedback, known as the semi-bandit feedback. The
exploration-exploitation trade-off in CMAB is extremely
hard compared to MAB because the number of candidate
super arms could be exponential in m.
Recent studies showed that MAB and its variants are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, especially poisoning attacks
(Jun et al., 2018; Liu & Shroff, 2019; Wang et al., 2022;
Garcelon et al., 2020). Under such attacks, an adversary
observes the pulled arm and its reward feedback, and then
modifies the reward to misguide the bandit algorithm to pull
a target arm that is in the adversary’s interest. Specifically,
the adversary aims to spend attack cost sublinear in time
horizon T to modify rewards, i.e., o(T ) cost, such that the
bandit algorithm pulls the target arm almost all the time, i.e.,
T − o(T ) times. Liu & Shroff (2019) showed that no-regret
MAB algorithms can be efficiently attacked under any problem instance, while Wang et al. (2022) showed that there
exist instances of linear bandits that cannot be attacked without linear cost, indicating such instances are intrinsically
robust to adversarial attacks even provided vanilla bandit
algorithms.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Auer, 2002) is a classic framework of sequential decision-making problems that has been
extensively studied (Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020; Slivkins
et al., 2019). In each round, the learning agent selects one
out of m arms and observes its reward feedback which
follows an unknown reward distribution. The goal is to
maximize the cumulative reward, which requires the agent
to balance exploitation (selecting the arm with the highest

Due to the wide applicability of CMAB, understanding its
vulnerability and robustness to poisoning attacks is increasingly important. Directly applying the MAB concept of
attackability to CMAB is tempting (Liu & Shroff, 2019;
Wang et al., 2022). However, it leads to a sublinear cost
bound in T but exponential in the number of base arms m.
This approach follows the same attack strategy as in MAB.
However, in practice, the exponential cost in m is undesirable, and can even exceed T , resulting in vacuous results.
Therefore, the original attackability notion is insufficient,
and we have the following research question:

*Alphabetical order 1 Oregon State University 2 University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 Pennsylvania State University
4
Princeton University. Correspondence to: Huazheng Wang
<huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

RQ: What is a good notion to capture the
1

