Time Weaver: A Conditional Time Series Generation Model
Sai Shankar Narasimhan 1 Shubhankar Agarwal 1 Oguzhan Akcin 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1 Sandeep Chinchali 1
Metadata

Abstract
Imagine generating a city’s electricity demand pattern based on weather, the presence of an electric
vehicle, and location, which could be used for capacity planning during a winter freeze. Such realworld time series are often enriched with paired
heterogeneous contextual metadata (e.g., weather
and location). Current approaches to time series
generation often ignore this paired metadata. Additionally, the heterogeneity in metadata poses
several practical challenges in adapting existing
conditional generation approaches from the image, audio, and video domains to the time series domain. To address this gap, we introduce
T IME W EAVER, a novel diffusion-based model
that leverages the heterogeneous metadata in the
form of categorical, continuous, and even timevariant variables to significantly improve time series generation. Additionally, we show that naive
extensions of standard evaluation metrics from
the image to the time series domain are insufficient. These metrics do not penalize conditional
generation approaches for their poor specificity
in reproducing the metadata-specific features in
the generated time series. Thus, we innovate a
novel evaluation metric that accurately captures
the specificity of conditional generation and the
realism of the generated time series. We show
that T IME W EAVER outperforms state-of-the-art
benchmarks, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), by up to 30% in downstream classification tasks on real-world energy, medical, air
quality, and traffic datasets.

Location:
XYZ
Month:
May

Air Quality Index

Time
Weaver

Figure 1. T IME W EAVER generates realistic metadata-specific
time series. Consider generating the air quality index of a particular location (XYZ) given the expected precipitation (green) for a
specific month (May). T IME W EAVER uses these metadata features to generate samples (red) that closely match reality (blue).

testing production systems with new scenarios (Rizzato
et al., 2022; Agarwal & Chinchali, 2022), asking “what-if”
questions, and even augmenting imbalanced datasets (Gowal
et al., 2021). Imagine generating a realistic medical electrocardiogram (ECG) pattern based on a patient’s age, gender,
weight, medical record, and even the presence of a pacemaker. This generated data could be used to train medical
residents, sell realistic data to third parties (anonymization),
or even stress-test a pacemaker’s ability to detect diseases
on rare variations of ECG data.
Despite potential advantages, current time series generation
methods (Yoon et al., 2019; Jeha et al., 2021; Donahue et al.,
2019) ignore the rich contextual metadata and are incapable
of generating time series for specific real-world conditions.
This is not due to a lack of data, as standard time series
datasets have long come with paired metadata conditions.
Instead, it is because today’s methods cannot handle diverse
metadata conditions.

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, USA. Correspondence to:
Sai Shankar Narasimhan <nsaishankar@utexas.edu>.

At first glance, generating realistic time series based on rich
metadata conditions might seem like a straightforward extension of conditional image, video, or audio generation
(Rombach et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Kong et al.,
2021). However, we argue that there are practical differences that make conditional time series generation and evaluation challenging, which are:

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1. Rich Metadata: Metadata can be categorical (e.g.,
whether a patient has a pacemaker), quantitative (e.g.,

1. Introduction
Generating synthetic time series data is useful for creating
realistic variants of private data (Yoon et al., 2020), stress1

1

