Robust Inverse Graphics via Probabilistic Inference

Tuan Anh Le * 1 Pavel Sountsov * 1 Matthew D. Hoffman 1 Ben Lee 1 Brian Patton 1 Rif A. Saurous 1

Abstract
Uniform

How do we infer a 3D scene from a single image
in the presence of corruptions like rain, snow or
fog? Straightforward domain randomization relies on knowing the family of corruptions ahead
of time. Here, we propose a Bayesian approach—
dubbed robust inverse graphics (RIG)—that relies
on a strong scene prior and an uninformative uniform corruption prior, making it applicable to a
wide range of corruptions. Given a single image,
RIG performs posterior inference jointly over the
scene and the corruption. We demonstrate this
idea by training a neural radiance field (NeRF)
scene prior and using a secondary NeRF to represent the corruptions over which we place an
uninformative prior. RIG, trained only on clean
data, outperforms depth estimators and alternative
NeRF approaches that perform point estimation
instead of full inference. The results hold for
a number of scene prior architectures based on
normalizing flows and diffusion models. For the
latter, we develop reconstruction-guidance with
auxiliary latents (ReGAL)—a diffusion conditioning algorithm that is applicable in the presence of
auxiliary latent variables such as the corruption.
RIG demonstrates how scene priors can be used
beyond generation tasks.

Corruption
NeRF

c

Pθ
x

ydata
Compose

Scene
NeRF

Conditioning
view

P(y|x, c)
Render

y

Reconstruction
with corruption

Camera (ζ)

P'(y'|x)
Render

y'

Clean
reconstruction

Figure 1. Robust Inverse Graphics (RIG). By modeling the generative process of 2D renderings y of 3D scenes, we can reconstruct
clean scenes by performing joint probabilistic inference on scene
latents (x) and corruption parameters (c).

Current approaches either use domain randomization (Zhao
et al., 2022; Gasperini et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023; Saunders et al., 2023) or regularize training using additional loss
terms (Wynn & Turmukhambetov, 2023; Warburg et al.,
2023). Data randomization involves selecting a family of
corruptions which are included in the data generation process. However, we don’t always know the kind of corruptions we want to be robust to. Floaters—inaccurate high
density regions in the reconstructed scenes—are difficult
to predict ahead of time, so are commonly handled by including additional loss terms in the reconstruction loss. It is
unclear how to extend this approach to other possibly more
extreme situations.
We propose robust inverse graphics (RIG), where we view
the problem through the lens of probabilistic inference. We
rely on a pre-trained scene prior, in our case a prior over
neural radiance fields (NeRFs)1 , and a weak prior over
corruptions—in the case of 3D scene corruptions, another
NeRF with a uniform prior over its parameters. RIG performs full probabilistic inference over both the scene and
corruption NeRF parameters instead of searching for the
most probable solution, such as a single set of NeRF parameters obtained via maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference.

1. Introduction
We explore the inference of a 3D scene from a single image
that is robust to corruptions to the underlying 3D scene and
its measurement, such as the presence of rain, snow, fog or
other floaters, or imperfect knowledge of camera parameters.
Being robust to such corruptions would extend the range
of normal operation of such a system. For example, a selfdriving car would be able to drive in more diverse weather
conditions.
*

1
Equal contribution
Google.
Correspondence to:
Tuan Anh Le <tuananhl@google.com>, Pavel Sountsov
<siege@google.com>.

Fine-tuning by minimizing reconstruction error is a standard
technique in conditional 3D generation (e.g. Chen et al.,
1
We require a 3D representation which supports differentiable
rendering and is convenient to place a distribution over. NeRFs
were the best at fulfilling these requirements at the time of writing,
but other approaches could also work, such as Gaussian splatting.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

