3D-VLA: A 3D Vision-Language-Action Generative World Model

Haoyu Zhen 1 2 Xiaowen Qiu 1 Peihao Chen 3 Jincheng Yang 2 Xin Yan 4
Yilun Du 5 Yining Hong 6 Chuang Gan 1 7
https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/3dvla

Abstract

1. Introduction
Nowadays, there has been a proliferation of vision-language
models (Liu et al., 2023; Alayrac et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2023b) that can take images as inputs and perform a series
of reasoning tasks in the 2D space, mirroring the versatility
of the human brain. Such 2D foundation models also lay
the foundation for recent embodied foundation models such
as RT-2 (Brohan et al., 2023) and PALM-E (Driess et al.,
2023a) that could generate high-level plans or low-level
actions contingent on the images. However, they neglect
the fact that human beings are situated within a far richer
3D physical world beyond 2D images - they reason, plan,
and act based on their 3D understanding of the environment
(Palmer, 1975; Pylyshyn, 2003; Marr, 2010). It’s crucial
that human-like intelligent embodied agents are equipped
with the same 3D understanding ability.

Recent vision-language-action (VLA) models rely
on 2D inputs, lacking integration with the broader
realm of the 3D physical world. Furthermore,
they perform action prediction by learning a direct
mapping from perception to action, neglecting the
vast dynamics of the world and the relations between actions and dynamics. In contrast, human
beings are endowed with world models that depict
imagination about future scenarios to plan actions
accordingly. To this end, we propose 3D-VLA
by introducing a new family of embodied foundation models that seamlessly link 3D perception,
reasoning, and action through a generative world
model. Specifically, 3D-VLA is built on top of
a 3D-based large language model (LLM), and a
set of interaction tokens is introduced to engage
with the embodied environment. Furthermore, to
inject generation abilities into the model, we train
a series of embodied diffusion models and align
them into the LLM for predicting the goal images
and point clouds. To train our 3D-VLA, we curate
a large-scale 3D embodied instruction dataset by
extracting vast 3D-related information from existing robotics datasets. Our experiments on held-in
datasets demonstrate that 3D-VLA significantly
improves the reasoning, multimodal generation,
and planning capabilities in embodied environments, showcasing its potential in real-world applications.

Taking a step forward, recent works (Huang et al., 2023b;
Hong et al., 2024) develop embodied foundation models
that could plan and act in the 3D environment. However,
such models mainly learn a direct mapping from perception
to action, devoid of a broader understanding of the dynamics
of the world, and the relations between actions and world
dynamics. On the other hand, human beings are blessed
with world models that simulate future events based on 3D
internal representations. By depicting the imagination and
anticipation about the future states, one could better plan
actions toward the predicted goals.
Challenges inevitably exist for building such human-like 3D
world models. Firstly, existing foundation models focus on
language generation, unable to imagine modalities beyond
language and simulate future states to facilitate action generation, which is a crucial aspect of world models. Secondly,
existing embodied datasets mainly contain 2D images or
videos, lacking 3D-related annotations for reasoning and
planning in the 3D space.

1

University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong
University 3 South China University of Technology 4 Wuhan University 5 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 6 University of California, Los Angeles 7 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. Correspondence
to: Chuang Gan <ganchuang1990@gmail.com>.

To this end, we propose 3D-VLA by introducing a new
family of embodied foundation models that seamlessly link
3D perception, reasoning, and action through a generative
world model. Specifically, we build our 3D-VLA on top
of a 3D large language model (Hong et al., 2023) to equip

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

