Mastering Zero-Shot Interactions in
Cooperative and Competitive Simultaneous Games

Yannik Mahlau 1 Frederik Schubert 1 Bodo Rosenhahn 1

Abstract

32

105

31

Albatross (ours)
AlphaZero
MCTS + Value Heuristic

TrueSkill Score

30
29

104

MCTS Iterations

The combination of self-play and planning has
achieved great successes in sequential games, for
instance in Chess and Go. However, adapting
algorithms such as AlphaZero to simultaneous
games poses a new challenge. In these games,
missing information about concurrent actions of
other agents is a limiting factor as they may select different Nash equilibria or do not play optimally at all. Thus, it is vital to model the
behavior of the other agents when interacting
with them in simultaneous games. To this end,
we propose Albatross: AlphaZero for Learning
Bounded-rational Agents and Temperature-based
Response Optimization using Simulated Selfplay. Albatross learns to play the novel equilibrium concept of a Smooth Best Response Logit
Equilibrium (SBRLE), which enables cooperation and competition with agents of any playing
strength. We perform an extensive evaluation of
Albatross on a set of cooperative and competitive simultaneous perfect-information games. In
contrast to AlphaZero, Albatross is able to exploit weak agents in the competitive game of Battlesnake. Additionally, it yields an improvement
of 37.6% compared to previous state of the art in
the cooperative Overcooked benchmark.

28
27
26

103

25
24
23

4

5
6
7
8
9
Temperature (Estimated Rationality)

10

102

Figure 1. TrueSkill scores (Herbrich et al., 2006) of a tournament consisting of an Albatross agent, Monte-Carlo-Tree-Search
(MCTS) baseline agents and an AlphaZero baseline. Each game
takes place in a free for all setting of four agents in the stochastic
simultaneous game of Battlesnake. Albatross estimates the temperature, i.e. rationality, of the baseline agents online using only data
from the current game. A temperature of 0 corresponds to random
play and 10 to optimal play if all other agents play optimally as
well. AlphaZero achieves optimal play given that all other agents
play optimally (temperature of 10), but fails to adapt to subrational
agents. In contrast, Albatross is able to respond optimally against
any combination of weak and strong agents due to its rationality
estimation, resulting in a higher TrueSkill tournament score.

1. Introduction
tial games, this only entails finding the best response after
observing the action of the other agent. However, in simultaneous games, where all agents make their move at the same
time, it is also necessary predict the next concurrent move.
Therefore, opponent modelling is an important factor for
zero-shot interactions in simultaneous games. Most existing
methods learn a policy that performs well with or against as
many agents as possible (Strouse et al., 2021; Lupu et al.,
2021; Zhao et al., 2023; Dockhorn & Kruse, 2017). However, a more scalable approach is the prediction of the other
agent’s behavior, based on the immediate interactions within
a single episode. Lou et al. (2023) apply this idea and classify other agents into groups of low, medium or high skill.

Games have been played by humans for centuries, some
of the earliest dating back more than 4000 years (Sebbane,
2001). They enable us to measure skill, either in cooperation or competition with other agents. When facing unseen
agents, one has to adapt to their playing style, which is
called zero-shot interaction (Hu et al., 2020). In sequen1

Department for Information Processing, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany. Correspondence to: Yannik Mahlau
<mahlau@tnt.uni-hannover.de>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

