Overcoming Data and Model heterogeneities in Decentralized Federated
Learning via Synthetic Anchors

Chun-Yin Huang 1 2 Kartik Srinivas 1 3 Xin Zhang 4 Xiaoxiao Li 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as an important
paradigm to perform machine learning from multi-source
data in a distributed manner. Conventional FL techniques
leverage a large number of clients to process a global model
learning, which is coordinated by a central server. However, there arises concerns on increased vulnerability of
system failures and trustworthiness concerns for the central server design in the conventional FL. An emerging
paradigm, called decentralized FL, is featured by its serverless setting to address the issues. Recent work has shown
decentralized FL framework can provide more flexibility
and solubility (Beltrán et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023b),
where they relax the use of central server for model aggregation. However, this could deflect the generalization
capability of each client model. Although most of the works
in decentralized FL focus on model personalization (Huang
et al., 2022), we consider it crucial for decentralized FL to
be generalizable since local training data may not align with
local testing data in practice.

Conventional Federated Learning (FL) involves
collaborative training of a global model while
maintaining user data privacy. One of its branches,
decentralized FL, is a serverless network that allows clients to own and optimize different local
models separately, which results in saving management and communication resources. Despite
the promising advancements in decentralized FL,
it may reduce model generalizability due to lacking a global model. In this scenario, managing
data and model heterogeneity among clients becomes a crucial problem, which poses a unique
challenge that must be overcome: How can every
client’s local model learn generalizable representation in a decentralized manner? To address
this challenge, we propose a novel Decentralized
FL technique by introducing Synthetic Anchors,
dubbed as D E SA. Based on the theory of domain
adaptation and Knowledge Distillation (KD), we
theoretically and empirically show that synthesizing global anchors based on raw data distribution
facilitates mutual knowledge transfer. We further
design two effective regularization terms for local
training: 1) REG loss that regularizes the distribution of the client’s latent embedding with the
anchors and 2) KD loss that enables clients to
learn from others. Through extensive experiments
on diverse client data distributions, we showcase
the effectiveness of D E SA in enhancing both
inter- and intra-domain accuracy of each client.
The implementation of D E SA can be found at:
https://github.com/ubc-tea/DESA

Client heterogeneity is a common phenomenon in FL that
can deteriorate model generalizability. On one hand, dataheterogeneity relaxes the assumption that the data across
all the client are independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.). To solve the problem, a plethora of methods have
been proposed. However, most of them assumes that the
model architectures are invariant across clients (Li et al.,
2020b;a; 2021b; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2022).
On the other hand, many practical FL applications (e.g.,
Internet-of-Things and mobile device system) face modelheterogeneity, where clients have devices with different
computation capabilities and memory constraints. In conventional FL, strategies have been proposed to leverage
knowledge transferring to address the model heterogeneity
issue, e.g., server collects labeled data with the similar distribution as the client data or clients transmit models (Lin et al.,
2020; Zhu et al., 2021). However, these operations usually
require a server to coordinate the knowledge distillation and
assume global data is available (Li & Wang, 2019; Lin et al.,
2020; Tan et al., 2022). Thus, they are not applicable to
decentralized FL and may not fit into real-world scenarios.
Recently, there are works proposing to perform test-time

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The
University of British Columbia, Canada 2 Vector Institute, Canada
3
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India (Work was done
during internship at UBC) 4 Meta, U.S.A.. Correspondence to:
Xiaoxiao Li <xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

