USTAD: Unified Single-model Training Achieving Diverse Scores
for Information Retrieval
Seungyeon Kim * 1 Ankit Singh Rawat * 1 Manzil Zaheer * 2
Wittawat Jitkrittum 1 Veeranjaneyulu Sadhanala 1 Sadeep Jayasumana 1 Aditya Krishna Menon 1
Rob Fergus 2 Sanjiv Kumar 1

Abstract

triever. Dual-encoder (DE) models are the de-facto architecture for retrievers (Lee et al., 2019; Karpukhin et al., 2020a).
Such models independently embed queries and documents
into a common space via query and document encoders,
respectively, and capture their relevance by simple operations on these embeddings such as the inner product. This
enables offline creation of a document index, supporting
fast retrieval during inference via efficient maximum inner
product search implementations (Guo et al., 2020; Johnson
et al., 2021), with online query embedding generation primarily dictating the inference latency. Cross-encoder (CE)
models, on the other hand, are preferred as rerankers, owing to their excellent performance (Nogueira & Cho, 2019;
Dai & Callan, 2019; Yilmaz et al., 2019). A CE model
jointly encodes a query-document pair via a single encoder
while enabling early interaction among query and document
features. Employing a CE model for retrieval is often infeasible, as it would require processing a given query with
every document in the collection at inference time.

Modern information retrieval (IR) systems consists of multiple stages like retrieval and ranking,
with Transformer-based models achieving stateof-the-art performance at each stage. In this paper, we challenge the tradition of using separate
models for different stages and ask if a single
Transformer encoder can provide relevance score
needed in each stage. We present USTAD – a new
unified approach to train a single network that
can provide powerful ranking scores as a crossencoder (CE) model as well as factorized embeddings for large-scale retrieval as a dual-encoder
(DE) model. Empirically, we find a single USTAD
model to be competitive to separate ranking CE
and retrieval DE models. Furthermore, USTAD
combines well with a novel embedding matchingbased distillation, significantly improving CE to
DE distillation. It further motivates novel asymmetric architectures for student models to ensure
a better embedding alignment between the student and the teacher while ensuring small online
inference cost. On standard benchmarks like MSMARCO, we demonstrate that USTAD with our
proposed distillation method leads to asymmetric
students with only 1/10th trainable parameter but
retaining 95-97% of the teacher performance.

A recent line of work explores late interaction models that
provide a middle ground between DE and CE models (Pang
et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2017a; Dai et al., 2018; Hofstätter
et al., 2020; Khattab & Zaharia, 2020; Menon et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023). These model ensure computational efficiency
by utilizing two encoders similar to DE, while allowing for
a complex interaction beyond simple inner product for better
modeling of the true query-document relevance.
The presence of multiple models with different functionalities and quality-cost operating points increases the complexity of developing and maintaining such IR pipelines.
Interestingly, all of these models increasingly rely on Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) to design the underlying
encoders. Given that Transformers provide an extremely
powerful architecture (Yun et al., 2020; Menon et al., 2022)
that has the ability to produce high-quality individual representations for query and document features in isolation
as well as joint query-document representations from query
and document features together, it’s natural to ask:
Can we train a unified Transformer encoder that can
simultaneously enable CE, DE, and late interaction models
when combined with different suitable scoring functions?

1. Introduction
A typical information retrieval (IR) system comprises two
stages: (1) A retriever first selects a small subset of potentially relevant candidate documents (out of a large collection) for a given query; and (2) A reranker then identifies
a precise ranking among the candidates provided by the re*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, New York, USA
Google DeepMind, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Seungyeon Kim <seungyeonk@google.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

