The Pitfalls of Next-Token Prediction
Gregor Bachmann * 1 Vaishnavh Nagarajan * 2

Abstract

imagine, curate and backtrack plans in their heads before
executing them. Such strategies are unfortunately not explicitly built into the backbone of the present-day language
model. This criticism has been floating around as an informal viewpoint (LeCun, 2024; Bubeck et al., 2023). Our
paper is aimed at crystallizing this intuitive criticism of nexttoken prediction, and developing the core arguments of this
debate.

Can a mere next-token predictor faithfully model
human intelligence? We crystallize this intuitive
concern, which is fragmented in the literature.
As a starting point, we argue that the two oftenconflated phases of next-token prediction — autoregressive inference and teacher-forced training — must be treated distinctly. The popular
criticism that errors can compound during autoregressive inference, crucially assumes that teacherforcing has learned an accurate next-token predictor. This assumption sidesteps a more deep-rooted
problem we expose: in certain classes of tasks,
teacher-forcing can simply fail to learn an accurate next-token predictor in the first place. We
describe a general mechanism of how teacherforcing can fail, and design a minimal planning
task where both the Transformer and the Mamba
architecture empirically fail in that manner —
remarkably, despite the task being straightforward to learn. We provide preliminary evidence
that this failure can be resolved when training
to predict multiple tokens in advance. We hope
this finding can ground future debates and inspire explorations beyond the next-token prediction paradigm. We make our code available under https://github.com/gregorbachmann/
Next-Token-Failures

Let us start by making more precise, what it means to say
that human-generated language, or problem-solving, does
not follow next-token prediction. When formalizing this,
we hit an immediate roadblock: isn’t every sequence generation task possible autoregressively? Put differently, an
optimist would say, every distribution over a sequence of
tokens can be captured by an appropriately sophisticated
next-token predictor simulating
the chain rule of probability
Q
i.e., P(r1 , r2 , . . .) = i P(ri |r1 . . . ri−1 ). Thus, the autoregressivity in our systems is not antithetical to learning
human language, after all.
Although this argument is compelling, a pessimist would
worry, realistically, even with minor imperfections in the
next-token predictor, the accuracy may break down spectacularly for long sequences (Kääriäinen, 2006; Ross &
Bagnell, 2010; LeCun, 2024; Dziri et al., 2024). Say, even if
every next-token error is as little as 0.01, the probability of
encountering an erroneous token exponentially compounds
along the way, and by the end of 200 tokens, blows up to
0.86.
This is a simple and powerful observation. Yet, this does not
completely capture the intuition that next-token predictors
may be poor planners. Crucially, this argument does not
carefully distinguish between the two types of next-token
prediction: inference-time autoregression (where the model
consumes its own previous outputs as inputs), and trainingtime teacher-forcing (Williams & Zipser, 1989) (where the
model is taught to predict token-by-token consuming all
previous ground truth tokens as inputs). Framed this way,
the compounding of errors only pinpoints a superficial failure to execute a plan during inference. It leaves open the
possibility that we may have still learned a near-perfect
next-token predictor; perhaps, with an appropriate post-hoc
wrapper that verifies and backtracks, we can elicit the right
plan without compounding errors.

1. Introduction
Long after its inception in the seminal work of Shannon
(1948; 1951), next-token prediction has made its way into
becoming a core part of the modern language model. But
despite its long list of achievements, there is a small but
growing belief that a next-token predicting model is merely
an impressive improv artist that cannot truly model human
thought. Humans, when navigating the world, meticulously
*

Equal contribution 1 ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 Google
Research, US. Correspondence to: Gregor Bachmann <gregorb@ethz.ch>, Vaishnavh Nagarajan <vaishnavh@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

