HarmonyDream: Task Harmonization Inside World Models

Haoyu Ma * 1 Jialong Wu * 1 Ningya Feng 1 Chenjun Xiao 2 Dong Li 2 Jianye Hao 2 3 Jianmin Wang 1
Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning efficiently to operate in environments with complex observations requires generalizing from past experiences. Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL, Sutton
(1990)) utilizing world models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018;
LeCun, 2022) offers a promising approach. In MBRL, the
agent learns behaviors by simulating trajectories based on
world model predictions. These imaginary rollouts can
reduce the need for real-environment interactions, thus improving the sample efficiency of model-based agents.

Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
holds the promise of sample-efficient learning by
utilizing a world model, which models how the
environment works and typically encompasses
components for two tasks: observation modeling and reward modeling. In this paper, through
a dedicated empirical investigation, we gain a
deeper understanding of the role each task plays
in world models and uncover the overlooked potential of sample-efficient MBRL by mitigating
the domination of either observation or reward
modeling. Our key insight is that while prevalent approaches of explicit MBRL attempt to restore abundant details of the environment via observation models, it is difficult due to the environment’s complexity and limited model capacity. On the other hand, reward models, while
dominating implicit MBRL and adept at learning compact task-centric dynamics, are inadequate for sample-efficient learning without richer
learning signals. Motivated by these insights and
discoveries, we propose a simple yet effective
approach, HarmonyDream, which automatically
adjusts loss coefficients to maintain task harmonization, i.e. a dynamic equilibrium between the
two tasks in world model learning. Our experiments show that the base MBRL method equipped
with HarmonyDream gains 10%−69% absolute
performance boosts on visual robotic tasks and
sets a new state-of-the-art result on the Atari
100K benchmark. Code is available at https:
//github.com/thuml/HarmonyDream.

Concretely, world models are designed to learn and predict two key components of dynamics (formally defined
in Sec. 2.1): how the environment transits and is observed
(i.e. the observation modeling task) and how the task has
been progressed (i.e. the reward modeling task) (Kaiser
et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2020; 2021). While observation
transitions and rewards in low-dimensional spaces can be
classically learned by separate models, for environments
with high-dimensional and partial observations, it is favorable for world models to learn both tasks from a shared
representation, a form of multi-task learning1 (Caruana,
1997), aiming to improve learning efficiency and generalization performance (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Laskin et al., 2020;
Yarats et al., 2021). However, to best exploit the benefits
of multi-task learning, it demands careful designs to weigh
the contribution of each task without allowing either one to
dominate (Misra et al., 2016; Kendall et al., 2018), which
naturally leads to the following question:
How do MBRL methods properly exploit the intrinsic
multi-task benefits within world model learning?
In this work, we take a unified multi-task view to revisit
world model learning in MBRL literature (Moerland et al.,
2023): Prevalent explicit MBRL approaches (Kaiser et al.,
2020; Hafner et al., 2021; Seo et al., 2022b), which is also
our primary focus, aim to learn an exact duplicate of the
environment by predicting each element (e.g., observations,
rewards, and terminal signals), which gives the agent access
to accurately learned transitions. However, learning to predict future observations can be difficult and inefficient since

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua
University. 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 3 College of Intelligence and
Computing, Tianjin University.
Haoyu Ma <mhy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Jialong Wu
<wujialong0229@gmail.com>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng
Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1
Here we refer to intrinsic multi-task learning inside world
models rather than multi-task policy learning for different rewards.

1

