REMEDI: Corrective Transformations for Improved Neural Entropy Estimation

Viktor Nilsson * 1 Anirban Samaddar * 2 Sandeep Madireddy 2 Pierre Nyquist 1 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Information theoretic quantities such as entropy, crossentropy, mutual information, relative entropy (KullbackLeibler divergence), and conditional entropy are abundant
in machine learning. Many learning algorithms are derived
from such quantities, and recent advances have revealed that
they can provide learning objectives on their own (Tishby
& Zaslavsky, 2015; Alemi et al., 2016), or in combination
with other terms (Sarra et al., 2021; Kingma & Welling,
2013). In some settings, an information theoretic objective
may reduce to a simple expression in practical machine
learning algorithms; for example: minimizing the forward
relative entropy R(P || Q) with respect to Q, having samples
{xi } ∼ P, can be achieved by minimizing the negative loglikelihood. However, these quantities are usually difficult
to estimate even in moderately high dimensions (Gao et al.,
2018).

Information theoretic quantities play a central
role in machine learning. The recent surge in the
complexity of data and models has increased the
demand for accurate estimation of these quantities. However, as the dimension grows the estimation presents significant challenges, with existing
methods struggling already in relatively low dimensions. To address this issue, in this work,
we introduce REMEDI for efficient and accurate
estimation of differential entropy, a fundamental information theoretic quantity. The approach
combines the minimization of the cross-entropy
for simple, adaptive base models and the estimation of their deviation, in terms of the relative
entropy, from the data density. Our approach
demonstrates improvement across a broad spectrum of estimation tasks, encompassing entropy
estimation on both synthetic and natural data. Further, we extend important theoretical consistency
results to a more generalized setting required by
our approach. We illustrate how the framework
can be naturally extended to information theoretic
supervised learning models, with a specific focus on the Information Bottleneck approach. It
is demonstrated that the method delivers better
accuracy compared to the existing methods in Information Bottleneck. In addition, we explore
a natural connection between REMEDI and generative modeling using rejection sampling and
Langevin dynamics.

In this work, we turn our attention toward the estimation
of the differential entropy (DE). This quantity appears in
many places throughout machine learning, such as reinforcement learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017), unsupervised
learning (Sarra et al., 2021), the Information Bottleneck
method (Alemi et al., 2016; Kolchinsky et al., 2019), and dimensionality reduction (Faivishevsky & Goldberger, 2008).
Often, differential entropy serves the role of something to
be maximized, perhaps under some constraints, such as in
the maximum entropy approaches (Jaynes, 1957), or the
Information Bottleneck method (Tishby et al., 2000; Tishby
& Zaslavsky, 2015). Therefore, it is advantageous that an estimator is differentiable with respect to the data, something
not true for many estimators, e.g., k-nearest neighbor-based
estimators. There exist kernel-based plug-in estimators that
are differentiable, however, they are prohibitively data inefficient in dimensions as low as 10 (see Chapter 20.3 in
(Wasserman, 2004)).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics, KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Mathematics
and Computer Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago IL, USA 3 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence to: Viktor Nilsson
<vikn@kth.se>.

Recent works (Schraudolph, 2004; Pichler et al., 2022),
have introduced gradient-based learning objectives as upper bounds to the differential entropy, in an extension of
classical kernel density estimation techniques (Rosenblatt,
1956; Parzen, 1962; Ahmad & Lin, 1976). However, these
estimators still lie in the class of plug-in estimators and are
affected by the data inefficiency in large dimensions, see
Sec. 3.2 and Appendix C.1.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

