Liouville Flow Importance Sampler

Yifeng Tian * 1 Nishant Panda 1 Yen Ting Lin * 1

Abstract

inference and model selection problems, for example in computational and systems biology (Hines, 2015; Wilkinson,
2007), astronomy (Sharma, 2017), and political sciences
(Jackman, 2000; McCartan & Imai, 2023).

We present the Liouville Flow Importance Sampler (LFIS), an innovative flow-based model for
generating samples from unnormalized density
functions. LFIS learns a time-dependent velocity field that deterministically transports samples
from a simple initial distribution to a complex
target distribution, guided by a prescribed path
of annealed distributions. The training of LFIS
utilizes a unique method that enforces the structure of a derived partial differential equation to
neural networks modeling velocity fields. By considering the neural velocity field as an importance
sampler, sample weights can be computed through
accumulating errors along the sample trajectories
driven by neural velocity fields, ensuring unbiased
and consistent estimation of statistical quantities.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of LFIS through
its application to a range of benchmark problems,
on many of which LFIS achieved state-of-the-art
performance.

1.1. Related Work
Numerous Monte Carlo (MC) techniques have been devised
to address this challenge over the past 70 years. Some notable examples of these MC methods include the landmark
Metropolis Markov chain MC (MCMC, (Metropolis et al.,
1953)), Hybrid or Hamiltonian MC (HMC, Duane et al.
(1987); Neal (2012)), and the Zig-Zag Sampler (Bierkens
et al., 2019). These approaches are often limited to lowdimensional problems due to slow convergence rate, and
problems with a single mode as the samplers are prone to
be trapped at a local mode. Annealed Importance Sampler (AIS, Neal (2001)) and Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC,
(Del Moral et al., 2006)) were developed for sampling challenging multi-modal distributions and are considered the
state-of-the-art MC methods for such problems. Variational
Inference (VI, Wainwright & Jordan (2008)) is an alternative approach, which turns the sampling problem into an
optimization one by fitting an easy-to-sample parametric
distribution to ν, often by minimizing the reverse (or exclusive) Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. The choice of the
reverse KL is commonly thought to be due to computational
convenience but can be validated by an information theoretical argument of optimal information processing of Bayes’
theorem (Zellner, 1988). For VI, it is popular to adopt
mean-field approximation (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008) or
a Normalizing Flow (VI-NF, Rezende & Mohamed (2015))
as the modeling parametric distribution. More recently,
a plethora of neural network (NN) based algorithms, for
example, neural network gradient HMC (Li et al., 2019),
Annealed Flow Transport Monte Carlo (AFTMC, Arbel et al.
(2021)), Path-Integral Sampler (PIS, Zhang & Chen (2022)),
adaptive MC with NF Gabrié et al. (2022), Continual Repeated AFTMC (CR-AFTMC, Matthews et al. (2022)), and
Denoising Diffusion Sampler (DDS, (Vargas et al., 2023a)).
For estimating the marginalized likelihood, simple MCMC
methods require augmented algorithms (e.g., Green (1995))
or additional processing of the derived samples (e.g., Robert
& Wraith (2009); Pajor (2017)). SIS and SMC can estimate the marginalized likelihood and are considered the

1. Background
We are interested in sampling a hard-to-sample distribution
ν in a continuous state space1 x ∈ RD , given its unnormalized probability density function ν̃(x) (assuming its
existence, i.e., ν is dominated by the Lebesgue measure)
up to a normalization constant Z. We are also interested in
estimating log Z, which is the log-marginal likelihood of a
model and is a useful quantity for Bayesian model selection
(Kass & Raftery, 1995; Green, 1995; Llorente et al., 2023).
This problem arises in vast scientific domains, including
statistical physics (Faulkner & Livingstone, 2023), molecular dynamics (Hénin et al., 2022), and diverse Bayesian
*
Equal contribution 1 Information Sciences Group (CCS-3),
Computational and Statistical Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA. Correspondence
to: Yifeng Tian <yifengtian@lanl.gov>, Yen Ting Lin <yentingl@lanl.gov>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
We can also consider a subspace x ∈ E ⊆ RD .

1

