On the Duality Between
Sharpness-Aware Minimization and Adversarial Training

Yihao Zhang 1 * Hangzhou He 1 * Jingyu Zhu 1 2 * Huanran Chen 3 Yifei Wang 4 Zeming Wei 1

Abstract

proposed. Adversarial training (AT) (Madry et al., 2017),
which adds adversarial perturbations to the training samples in the training loop, has been acknowledged as one of
the most effective adversarial defense paradigms (Athalye
et al., 2018). Despite this success, AT suffers from an intrinsic limitation that decreases the clean accuracy, leading
to a fundamental trade-off between accuracy and robustness (Tsipras et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). A critical
drawback of AT is that the perturbation of training samples
makes the training distribution deviate from the natural data
distribution.

Adversarial Training (AT), which adversarially
perturb the input samples during training, has
been acknowledged as one of the most effective defenses against adversarial attacks, yet suffers from inevitably decreased clean accuracy.
Instead of perturbing the samples, SharpnessAware Minimization (SAM) perturbs the model
weights during training to find a more flat loss
landscape and improve generalization. However,
as SAM is designed for better clean accuracy,
its effectiveness in enhancing adversarial robustness remains unexplored. In this work, considering the duality between SAM and AT, we investigate the adversarial robustness derived from
SAM. Intriguingly, we find that using SAM alone
can improve adversarial robustness. To understand this unexpected property of SAM, we first
provide empirical and theoretical insights into
how SAM can implicitly learn more robust features, and conduct comprehensive experiments to
show that SAM can improve adversarial robustness notably without sacrificing any clean accuracy, shedding light on the potential of SAM to
be a substitute for AT when accuracy comes at
a higher priority. Code is available at https:
//github.com/weizeming/SAM_AT.

Instead, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret
et al., 2020) perturbs model weights yet keeps using the
original samples during training. SAM is a novel training
framework that regularizes the sharpness of the loss landscape by weight perturbation to improve generalization ability. So far, SAM has achieved remarkable success in modern
machine learning (Bahri et al., 2021; Andriushchenko and
Flammarion, 2022; Chen et al., 2023b) and many of its
follow-up variants have been proposed (Kwon et al., 2021;
Du et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). However, as SAM
was originally designed for better natural generalization, its
impact on adversarial robustness remains unexplored.
In this paper, considering the duality between SAM and
AT, i.e. perturbing samples (AT) and perturbing weights
(SAM), we explore whether SAM can also achieve better adversarial robustness. Surprisingly, we find that using SAM
alone can notably improve adversarial robustness compared
to standard optimization methods like Adam, which is an
unexpected benefit of SAM. As illustrated in Table 1, SAM
can achieve both higher robust and clean accuracy than
standard training. Compared to the improvement in clean
accuracy, the enhancement of robust accuracy (evaluated by
AutoAttack (Croce and Hein, 2020b)) is significantly prominent (from 3.4% to 25.4%). By contrast, though AT can
exhibit better robustness, their decrease in natural accuracy
is unaffordable in practical deployment. Motivated by this
intriguing observation, we raise the two following questions
and attempt to answer them:

1. Introduction
The existence of adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Szegedy et al., 2013) has raised serious safety concerns on the deployment of deep neural networks (DNNs).
To defend against attacks of crafting adversarial examples,
a variety of defense methods (Papernot et al., 2016; Xie
et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2023a) has been
*

Equal contribution 1 Peking University 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Beijing Institute of Technology 4 MIT CSAIL.
Correspondence to: Zeming Wei <weizeming@stu.pku.edu.cn>.

(1) Why can SAM improve adversarial robustness, and
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

(2) Under what condition can SAM be deployed as a
substitution for AT.
1

