Cooperative Graph Neural Networks

Ben Finkelshtein 1 Xingyue Huang 1 Michael Bronstein 1 İsmail İlkan Ceylan 1

Abstract

The message-passing paradigm has been very influential in
graph ML, but it also comes with well-known limitations
related to the information flow on a graph, pertaining to
long-range dependencies (Dwivedi et al., 2022). In order to
receive information from k-hop neighbors, a network needs
at least k layers, which typically implies an exponential
growth of a node’s receptive field. The growing amount of
information needs then to be compressed into fixed-sized
node embeddings, possibly leading to information loss, referred to as over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021). Another
well-known limitation related the information flow is oversmoothing (Li et al., 2018): the node features can become
increasingly similar as the number of layers increases.

Graph neural networks are popular architectures
for graph machine learning, based on iterative
computation of node representations of an input
graph through a series of invariant transformations. A large class of graph neural networks
follow a standard message-passing paradigm: at
every layer, each node state is updated based on
an aggregate of messages from its neighborhood.
In this work, we propose a novel framework for
training graph neural networks, where every node
is viewed as a player that can choose to either ‘listen’, ‘broadcast’, ‘listen and broadcast’, or to ‘isolate’. The standard message propagation scheme
can then be viewed as a special case of this framework where every node ‘listens and broadcasts’ to
all neighbors. Our approach offers a more flexible
and dynamic message-passing paradigm, where
each node can determine its own strategy based on
their state, effectively exploring the graph topology while learning. We provide a theoretical analysis of the new message-passing scheme which is
further supported by an extensive empirical analysis on synthetic and real-world data.

Motivation. Our goal is to generalize the message-passing
scheme by allowing each node to decide how to propagate
information from or to its neighbors, thus enabling a more
flexible flow of information. Consider the example depicted
in Figure 1, where the top row shows the information flow
relative to the node u across three layers, and the bottom
row shows the information flow relative to the node v across
three layers. Node u listens to every neighbor in the first
layer, only to v in the second layer, and to nodes s and r
in the last layer. On the other hand, node v listens to node
w for the first two layers, and to node u in the last layer.
To realize this scenario, each node should be able to decide
whether or not to listen to a particular node at each layer: a
dynamic and asynchronous message-passing scheme, which
clearly falls outside of standard message-passing.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Gori
et al., 2005) are a class of architectures for learning on graphstructured data. Their success in various graph machine
learning (ML) tasks (Shlomi et al., 2021; Duvenaud et al.,
2015; Zitnik et al., 2018) has led to a surge of different architectures (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Veličković
et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017). The vast majority of
GNNs can be implemented through message-passing, where
the fundamental idea is to update each node’s representation
based on an aggregate of messages flowing from the node’s
neighbors (Gilmer et al., 2017).

Approach. To achieve this goal, we regard each node as a
player that can take the following actions in each layer:
• S TANDARD (S): Broadcast to neighbors that listen and

listen to neighbors that broadcast.
• L ISTEN (L): Listen to neighbors that broadcast.
• B ROADCAST (B): Broadcast to neighbors that listen.
• I SOLATE (I): Neither listen nor broadcast.

When all nodes perform the action S TANDARD, we recover
the standard message-passing. Conversely, having all the
nodes I SOLATE corresponds to removing all the edges from
the graph implying node-wise predictions. The interplay
between these actions and the ability to change them dynamically makes the overall approach richer and allows to
decouple the input graph from the computational one and
incorporate directionality into message-passing: a node can

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: name surname <{name.surname}@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

