Be Your Own Neighborhood: Detecting Adversarial Examples by the
Neighborhood Relations Built on Self-Supervised Learning

Zhiyuan He * 1 Yijun Yang * 1 Pin-Yu Chen 2 Qiang Xu 1 Tsung-Yi Ho 1

1. Introduction

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable
to Adversarial Examples (AEs), hindering their
use in safety-critical systems. In this paper, we
present B EYOND, an innovative AE detection
framework designed for reliable predictions. B E YOND identifies AEs by distinguishing the AE’s
abnormal relation with its augmented versions,
i.e. neighbors, from two prospects: representation
similarity and label consistency. An off-the-shelf
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) model is used to
extract the representation and predict the label
for its highly informative representation capacity
compared to supervised learning models. We
found clean samples maintain a high degree of
representation similarity and label consistency
relative to their neighbors, in contrast to AEs
which exhibit significant discrepancies. We
explain this observation and show that leveraging
this discrepancy B EYOND can accurately detect
AEs. Additionally, we develop a rigorous
justification for the effectiveness of B EYOND.
Furthermore, as a plug-and-play model, B EYOND
can easily cooperate with the Adversarial Trained
Classifier (ATC), achieving state-of-the-art
(SOTA) robustness accuracy. Experimental
results show that B EYOND outperforms baselines
by a large margin, especially under adaptive
attacks. Empowered by the robust relationship
built on SSL, we found that B EYOND outperforms baselines in terms of both detection
ability and speed. Project page: https://
huggingface.co/spaces/allenhzy/
Be-Your-Own-Neighborhood.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely adopted
in many fields due to their superior performance. However, their susceptibility to Adversarial Examples (AEs),
which can easily fool DNNs by adding some imperceptible adversarial perturbations, limits their deployment in
safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous driving (Cococcioni et al., 2020) and disease diagnosis (Kaissis et al.,
2020), where incorrect predictions can lead to catastrophic
economic and even loss of life.
Existing defensive strategies can be roughly categorized as
adversarial training, input purification (Mao et al., 2021),
and AE detection (Xu et al., 2017). Adversarial training
is known as the most effective defense technique (Croce
& Hein, 2020), but it brings degradation of accuracy and
additional training costs, which are unacceptable in some application scenarios. In contrast, input purification techniques
avoid these costs, but their defensive ability is limited, i.e.
easily defeated by adaptive attacks (Croce & Hein, 2020).
Recently, a large number of AE detection methods have
been proposed (Zuo & Zeng, 2021). Some methods detect
AE by interrogating the abnormal relationship between AE
and other samples. For example, Deep k-Nearest Neighbors (DkNN) (Papernot & McDaniel, 2018) compares the
DNN-extracted features of the input image with those of
its k nearest neighbors layer by layer to identify AEs, leading to a high inference time. Latent Neighborhood Graph
(LNG) (Abusnaina et al., 2021) represents the relationship
between the input sample and the reference sample as a
graph, whose nodes are embeddings extracted by DNN and
edges are built according to distances between the input
node and reference nodes, and train a graph neural network
to detect AEs.
Though more efficient than DkNN, LNG suffers from some
weaknesses: some AEs are required to build the graph, so
its detection performance relies on the reference AEs and
cannot effectively generalize to unseen attacks. More importantly, both DkNN and LNG can be bypassed by adaptive
attacks, in which the adversary has full knowledge of the
detection strategy.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin,
Hong Kong. yjyang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, qxu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk. 2 IBM Research, New York, USA.
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com.
Correspondence to: Zhiyuan He
<zyhe@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We observe that one cause for adversarial vulnerability is the
1

