EvTexture: Event-driven Texture Enhancement for Video Super-Resolution

Dachun Kai 1 Jiayao Lu 1 Yueyi Zhang 1 2 Xiaoyan Sun 1 2

Abstract
Event-based vision has drawn increasing attention due to its unique characteristics, such as high
temporal resolution and high dynamic range. It
has been used in video super-resolution (VSR)
recently to enhance the flow estimation and temporal alignment. Rather than for motion learning,
we propose in this paper the first VSR method
that utilizes event signals for texture enhancement. Our method, called EvTexture, leverages
high-frequency details of events to better recover
texture regions in VSR. In our EvTexture, a new
texture enhancement branch is presented. We
further introduce an iterative texture enhancement module to progressively explore the hightemporal-resolution event information for texture
restoration. This allows for gradual refinement
of texture regions across multiple iterations, leading to more accurate and rich high-resolution details. Experimental results show that our EvTexture achieves state-of-the-art performance on four
datasets. For the Vid4 dataset with rich textures,
our method can get up to 4.67dB gain compared
with recent event-based methods. Code: https:
//github.com/DachunKai/EvTexture.

Figure 1. Comparative results of VSR methods on the City clip
in Vid4 (Liu & Sun, 2013). It can be observed that current VSR
methods, with (Lu et al., 2023; Kai et al., 2023) or without event
signals (Chan et al., 2022), still suffer from blurry textures or jitter
effects, resulting in large errors in texture regions. In contrast, our
method can predict the texture regions successfully and greatly
reduce errors in the restored frames.

steiner et al., 2008) have been used in VSR (Jing et al., 2021;
Lu et al., 2023; Kai et al., 2023). Compared with standard
cameras, event cameras have very high temporal resolution
as well as high dynamic range (Gallego et al., 2020). They
thus can provide complementary motion information for
VSR. For instance, EGVSR (Lu et al., 2023) introduces a
temporal filter branch to explore the motion information
from events, such as edges and corners. EBVSR (Kai et al.,
2023) utilizes events to enhance the flow estimation and temporal alignment in VSR. However, as shown in Fig. 1, these
methods still suffer from large errors in texture regions.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims at restoring highresolution (HR) videos from their low-resolution (LR) counterparts. It has extensive applications in various domains
such as surveillance (Zhang et al., 2010), virtual reality (Liu
et al., 2020) and video enhancement (Xue et al., 2019).
Compared to single image super-resolution, VSR pays more
attention to modeling the temporal relationships between
frames, as it tries to predict missing details of the current
HR frame from other unaligned frames.

Texture restoration is a very challenging problem in VSR. It
is difficult to restore HR textural details from the corresponding LR ones. We notice that there are some attempts working on texture enhancement for image super-resolution (Cai
et al., 2022), while for VSR, most methods focus on addressing issues caused by large motion (Wang et al., 2019;
Lin et al., 2022) or occlusions (Chan et al., 2022). To our
best knowledge, little work has been presented on texture
restoration in VSR so far.

Recently, event signals captured by event cameras (Licht1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Institute of
Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center. Correspondence to: Yueyi Zhang <zhyuey@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

