Building Socially-Equitable Public Models

Yejia Liu 1 Jianyi Yang 1 Pengfei Li 1 Tongxin Li 2 Shaolei Ren 1

Abstract

utilization by diverse downstream agents for individual business goals (Yang et al., 2023). However, it is important to
note that exclusive reliance on prediction accuracy may not
be ideal when serving a diverse range of downstream agents,
each with unique business objectives. Consider a scenario
where a public model predicts disease outbreaks across different regions. While accuracy is pivotal, optimizing the
allocation of healthcare resources—ensuring sufficient medical supplies, personnel, and preventive measures—takes
precedence, based on the general prediction provided by the
public model.

Public models offer predictions to a variety of
downstream tasks and have played a crucial role
in various AI applications, showcasing their
proficiency in accurate predictions. However,
the exclusive emphasis on prediction accuracy
may not align with the diverse end objectives
of downstream agents. Recognizing the public
model’s predictions as a service, we advocate
for integrating the objectives of downstream
agents into the optimization process. Concretely,
to address performance disparities and foster
fairness among heterogeneous agents in training, we propose a novel Equitable Objective.
This objective, coupled with a policy gradient
algorithm, is crafted to train the public model to
produce a more equitable/uniform performance
distribution across downstream agents, each with
their unique concerns. Both theoretical analysis
and empirical case studies have proven the
effectiveness of our method in advancing performance equity across diverse downstream agents
utilizing the public model for their decisionmaking. Codes and datasets are released at
https://github.com/Ren-Research/
Socially-Equitable-Public-Models.

We therefore suggest taking into account the impact of a
public model’s prediction on downstream agents, rather than
solely focusing on minimizing prediction errors during training. A closely related topic is decision-focused learning,
which involves incorporating domain-specific constraints
and/or objectives into the learning algorithm (Johnson-Yu
et al., 2023; Wilder et al., 2020). However, the majority
of existing decision-focused learning works only address a
single task or agent, rendering them barely applicable to the
challenge faced by public models, which deal with diverse
downstream agents with their varied decision-making objectives (Mandi et al., 2023). Additionally, in the current
decision-focused learning framework, performance disparities can arise, with certain agents consistently facing inferior
outcomes. For instance, this may happen when some agents
have limited training data availability, while others have
access to abundant and various datasets.

1. Introduction

We view the prediction provided by a public model as a service for diverse downstream agents. As a service provider,
prioritizing accuracy is crucial, but ensuring high-quality
service for all users, given their diverse concerns, is even
more vital. Unfairly benefiting or disadvantaging model
performance on specific agents is unjust. While machine
learning fairness studies primarily concentrate on achieving
accuracy balance among protected groups with sensitive
characteristics (Barocas et al., 2023; Pessach & Shmueli,
2022), we introduce a different fairness perspective centered
on ensuring performance equity/uniformity across downstream agents with different decision processes. Recent
works have proposed a related concept referred to as the
“good-intent” fairness, primarily focused on preventing overfitting to any specific device in federated learning (Mohri
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). However, its scope is limited

Public models whose outputs are utilized by multiple agents
have become essential building blocks for multiple AI applications such as climate modeling and traffic prediction.
These models undergo training on extensive datasets and
are tailored for specific domains, making them highly effective in generating accurate predictions (Nguyen et al., 2023;
Bommasani et al., 2021; Shah et al., 2022). Their accessibility and availability to the public enable the widespread
1
University of California, Riverside, United States 2 The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Shaolei Ren <sren@ece.ucr.edu>, Yejia Liu
<yliu807@ucr.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

