Universal Consistency of Wide and Deep ReLU Neural Networks
and Minimax Optimal Convergence Rates for Kolmogorov-Donoho Optimal
Function Classes
Hyunouk Ko 1 Xiaoming Huo 1
E[g(X) ̸= Y ] − L∗ of a classifier g as a measure of its
performance.

Abstract
In this paper, we prove the universal consistency
of wide and deep ReLU neural network classifiers. We also give sufficient conditions for a
class of probability measures for which classifiers
based on neural networks achieve minimax optimal rates of convergence. The result applies to a
wide range of known function classes. In particular, while most previous works impose explicit
smoothness assumptions on the regression function, our framework encompasses more general
settings. The proposed neural networks are either the minimizers of the 0-1 loss that exhibit a
benign overfitting behavior.

The first classical result on classifiers based on neural networks is the paper (Faragó & Lugosi, 1993), which establishes two results. First, it shows that there exists a sequence
of 1-hidden layer sigmoidal 
neural 
network classifiers whose
widths grow in the order o logn n such that their excess
risks converge to 0 uniformly over all possible distributions,
i.e., they are universally consistent. Second, for distributions whose regression function belongs to the Barron space
(Barron, 1993), a wide class of functions for which shallow
neural networks enjoy dimension-free approximation rate,
it is shown that there exist neural network classifiers whose
1
excess risks converge at a uniform rate O(n− 4 ).
However, the first result has room for improvement because
it does not apply to deep or wide neural networks, and
the proposed classifier is computationally infeasible. The
second result on rates of convergence may be tightened in
that there is no indication of whether the rate is tight in such
a regime.

While the development of statistical theory for binary classification dates back to the 1970s and is well-summarized
in (Devroye et al., 2013) and (Boucheron et al., 2005),
a general theory explaining the generalizability of classifiers based on neural networks is far from complete.
The problem can be roughly formulated as follows. The
random vector (X, Y ) takes values in Rd × {0, 1}, and
we have n independent, identically distributed samples
{(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )}. The goal is to build a function
g : Rd → {0, 1} based on n samples such that the classification risk of g, E[g(X) ̸= Y ], is minimal. The function
η(x) = E[Y |X = x] is called the regression function. It is
well-known that the Bayes classifier defined by
(
1 if η(x) ≥ 12 ;
g ∗ (x) :=
0 otherwise

In practice, state-of-the-art neural networks have become
increasingly more complex with number of parameters employed scaling to the order of hundreds of trillions. A very
recent work (Radhakrishnan et al., 2023) studied the weak
consistency of infinitely wide and deep neural networks
using polynomial and sinusoidal activation functions, interpreting them as the neural tangent kernel (NTK) machines.
However, they leave the question of weak consistency, let
alone strong consistency, of finitely wide and deep neural
networks as an open problem (see Section 3 in their paper).
Our result answers this question and provides a theoretical guarantee that for an arbitrary distribution, a
computationally feasible sequence of classifiers based on
deep and wide neural networks is strongly consistent.

achieves the minimal classification risk, L∗ := E[g ∗ (X) ̸=
Y ]. Thus, it is natural to study the non-negative excess risk

A number of recent results study classification problems
with overparametrized deep neural networks. (Kim et al.,
2021) shows that in the classical regimes characterized by
Hölder-smoothness, neural networks that minimize the empirical risk of the hinge loss or logistic loss achieve competitive rates of convergence. (Bos & Schmidt-Hieber, 2022)

1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, United States.
Correspondence to: Hyunouk Ko <hko39@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

