Byzantine Resilient and Fast Federated Few-Shot Learning

Ankit Pratap Singh 1 Namrata Vaswani 1

Abstract

2021) studied a special case in which all the source vectors
for the different tasks are the same. It introduced a method
of moments estimator that is faster, but needs many more
samples; sample complexity grows as 1/ϵ2 .

This work introduces a Byzantine resilient solution for learning low-dimensional linear representation. Our main contribution is the development of a provably Byzantine-resilient AltGDmin algorithm for solving this problem in a
federated setting. We argue that our solution
is sample-efficient, fast, and communicationefficient. In solving this problem, we also introduce a novel secure solution to the federated subspace learning meta-problem that occurs in many
different applications.

In interesting parallel works (Nayer & Vaswani, 2023, on
arXiv since Feb. 2021; Collins, Hassani, Mokhtari, &
Shakkottai, 2021), a fast and communication-efficient GDbased algorithm, that was referred to as Alternating GD and
Minimization (AltGDmin) and FedRep respectively, was
introduced for solving the mathematical problem given in
(1), when the available number of training samples per task
is much lesser than the regression vector length. Followup work (Vaswani, 2024) improved the guarantees for AltGDmin while also simplifying the proof. AltGDmin and
FedRep algorithms are identical except for the initialization
step. AltGDmin uses a better initialization and hence also
has a better sample complexity by a factor of r. The latter
(FedRep) paper referred to the problem of (1) as multi-task
linear representation learning. The former (AltGDmin) paper used federated sketching, dynamic MRI (Babu, Lingala, & Vaswani, 2023) as motivating applications. It also
solved the phaseless generalization of (1) called low rank
phase retrieval. In older work (Nayer & Vaswani, 2021;
Nayer, Narayanamurthy, & Vaswani, 2020, 2019), an alternating minimization (AltMin) solution to this problem was
developed and analyzed as well. Since (1) is a special case
of this more general problem, this AltMin solution also
solves (1). All these works study the centralized setting or
the attack-free federated setting. Other somewhat related
works include (Shen, Ye, Kang, Hassani, & Shokri, 2023;
Tziotis, Shen, Pedarsani, Hassani, & Mokhtari, 2022). A
longer version of the mathematical problem being solved in
this work (Byzantine resilient low rank column-wise compressive sensing) is at (Singh & Vaswani, 2024).

1. Introduction
Multi-task representation learning refers to the problem of
jointly estimating the model parameters for a set of related tasks. This is typically done by learning a common
“representation” for all of their source vectors (feature vectors). This learned representation can then be used for solving the meta-learning or learning-to-learn problem: learning model parameters in a data-scarce environment. This
strategy is referred to as “few-shot” learning. In recent
work (Du, Hu, Kakade, Lee, & Lei, 2020), a very interesting low-dimensional linear representation was introduced
and the corresponding low rank matrix learning optimization problem was defined. However, (Du et al., 2020) assumed that this optimization problem (see eq. (1)), which
is non-convex, can be correctly solved. It is mentioned
that it should be possible to solve it by solving a nuclear
norm based convex relaxation of it. However, there are
no known guarantees to ensure that the solution to the relaxation is indeed also a solution of the original problem.
Moreover, convex relaxations are known to be very slow to
solve (compared with direct iterative solutions) (Jain, Kar,
et al., 2017;
√ Netrapalli, Jain, & Sanghavi, 2013): these need
order 1/ ϵ number of iterations to obtain an ϵ accurate
solution. In follow-up work, (Tripuraneni, Jin, & Jordan,

1.1. Contributions
We adapt the altGDmin algorithm described above to show
how it can solve the multi-task linear representation learning and few shot learning problems. Our main contribution is the development of a provably Byzantine-resilient
AltGDmin-based solution for solving this problem in a
federated setting. Our solution is communication-efficient
along with being fast and sample-efficient. In this setting,
resilience to adversarial attacks on some nodes is an impor-

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa
State University, Ames IA, USA. Correspondence to: Ankit
Pratap Singh <sankit@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

