SuDA: Support-based Domain Adaptation for Sim2Real Hinge Joint Tracking
with Flexible Sensors
Jiawei Fang 1 Haishan Song 1 Chengxu Zuo 1 Xiaoxia Gao 2 Xiaowei Chen 1 Shihui Guo 1 Yipeng Qin 3

Abstract
Flexible sensors hold promise for human motion
capture (MoCap), offering advantages such as
wearability, privacy preservation, and minimal
constraints on natural movement. However, existing flexible sensor based MoCap methods rely
on deep learning and necessitate large and diverse
labeled datasets for training. These data typically
need to be collected in MoCap studios with specialized equipment and substantial manual labor,
making them difficult and expensive to obtain
at scale. Thanks to the high-linearity of flexible
sensors, we address this challenge by proposing
a novel Sim2Real solution for hinge joint tracking based on domain adaptation, eliminating the
need for labeled data yet achieving comparable
accuracy to supervised learning. Our solution relies on a novel Support-based Domain Adaptation
method, namely SuDA, which aligns the supports
of the predictive functions rather than the instancedependent distributions between the source and
target domains. Extensive experimental results
show the effectiveness of our method and its superiority over state-of-the-art distribution-based
domain adaptation methods in our task.

Figure 1. (a) Our Sim2Real approach simulates flexible sensors to
predict joint angle in the real world. (b) Distribution Registration
registers the feature distributions Dist(P (xs )) and Dist(P (xt ))
of the source and target domains, which fails to match points of the
same label ys =yt when the two distributions are inherently different. In contrast, the proposed Support Registration registers the
function supports supp(fs ) and supp(ft ) that are independent of
the specific distributions, ensuring successful domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
Human motion capture (MoCap) has garnered significant
attention for its vast potential in comprehending human intentions and its capacity to control physical devices and
systems effectively (Yi et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023). As
an alternative to vision-based and inertial-based solutions,
flexible sensors are emerging as they offer the benefits of
bio-compatibility, high stretchability, lightweight, and easy

integration into clothing, enabling long-term monitoring of
human physical status (Zazoum et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2023a). Hence, there has been a growing demand to incorporate wearable flexible sensors into MoCap (Luo et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022b; Luo, 2023).

1

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Shanxi, China 3 School of Computer Science&Informatics,
Cardiff University, Wales, UK. Correspondence to: Shihui Guo
<guoshihui@xmu.edu.cn>.

Deep neural networks have become the leading methodology for flexible sensor-based MoCap (Mathis et al., 2020;
Zuo et al., 2023) due to their strengths in modeling the
complex relationships between sensor signals and motions.
However, the conflict between data-hungry deep neural networks and the costly, labor-intensive process of collecting
paired motion and sensor data poses a challenge in the real-

2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

