DoraemonGPT : Toward Understanding Dynamic Scenes
with Large Language Models (Exemplified as A Video Agent)

Zongxin Yang 1 Guikun Chen 1 Xiaodi Li 1 Wenguan Wang 1 Yi Yang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Based on the advancements in large language models
(LLMs) (OpenAI, 2021; Anil et al., 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023; OpenAI, 2023; Chiang et al., 2023), recent LLMdriven agents (Surı́s et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Gupta
& Kembhavi, 2023) have demonstrated promise in decomposing a complex image task into manageable subtasks and
solving them step-by-step. While static images have been
extensively studied, real-world environments are inherently
dynamic (Wu et al., 2021) and ever-changing (Smith et al.,
2022). Commonly, capturing dynamic scenes is a dataintensive procedure, usually processed by streaming static
images into videos. In turn, the spatial-temporal reasoning of videos is critical in real-life recognition, semantic
description, causal reasoning, etc.

Recent LLM-driven visual agents mainly focus
on solving image-based tasks, which limits their
ability to understand dynamic scenes, making it
far from real-life applications like guiding students in laboratory experiments and identifying
their mistakes. Hence, this paper explores DoraemonGPT, a comprehensive and conceptually
elegant system driven by LLMs to understand dynamic scenes. Considering the video modality
better reflects the ever-changing nature of realworld scenarios, we exemplify DoraemonGPT as
a video agent. Given a video with a question/task,
DoraemonGPT begins by converting the input
video into a symbolic memory that stores taskrelated attributes. This structured representation
allows for spatial-temporal querying and reasoning by well-designed sub-task tools, resulting in
concise intermediate results. Recognizing that
LLMs have limited internal knowledge when it
comes to specialized domains (e.g., analyzing the
scientific principles underlying experiments), we
incorporate plug-and-play tools to assess external knowledge and address tasks across different domains. Moreover, a novel LLM-driven
planner based on Monte Carlo Tree Search is
introduced to explore the large planning space
for scheduling various tools. The planner iteratively finds feasible solutions by backpropagating
the result’s reward, and multiple solutions can be
summarized into an improved final answer. We
extensively evaluate DoraemonGPT’s effectiveness on three benchmarks and several in-the-wild
scenarios. Project page: https://z-x-yang.
github.io/doraemon-gpt.

Toward understanding dynamic scenes, developing LLMdriven agents to handle videos is of great significance yet
involves grand challenges: i) Spatial-temporal Reasoning.
Reasoning about the relationships of instances is crucial for
task decomposing and decision-making. Such relationships
may be relevant to space (Santoro et al., 2017), time (Zhou
et al., 2018), or their spatial-temporal combination. ii)
Larger Planning Space. Compared to the image modality, high-level semantics about actions and their intentions
can typically only be inferred from temporal visual observations (Tapaswi et al., 2016). In other words, the inference
of temporal semantics is necessary and will enlarge the
search space of decomposing dynamic video tasks. iii) Limited Internal Knowledge. LLMs can not encode all the
knowledge required for understanding every video due to
the ever-changing nature of the real world and/or the lack
of learning on proprietary datasets (Peng et al., 2023a).
In light of the preceding discussions, we present DoraemonGPT, an intuitive yet versatile LLM-driven system compatible with various foundation models and applications.
Exemplified as a video agent, DoraemonGPT has three desirable abilities: First, collecting information regarding
the given task before reasoning. In DoraemonGPT, the decomposition of the given dynamic task is decided by the
agent-based reasoning of spatial-temporal relations, which
are inferred from informative attributes, such as instance

1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Yi Yang <yangyics@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

