Agent-Specific Effects:
A Causal Effect Propagation Analysis in Multi-Agent MDPs

Stelios Triantafyllou 1 Aleksa Sukovic 1 2 Debmalya Mandal

Abstract

†

3

Goran Radanovic 1

over a period of time, and make decisions or actions that are
interdependent. This, in turn, implies that the impact of an
agent’s action on the outcome depends on how other agents
respond to that action in subsequent periods. Thus, the interdependence between the agents’ actions poses challenges in
quantifying their causal contributions to the outcome, since
their effects are interleaved rather than isolated.

Establishing causal relationships between actions
and outcomes is fundamental for accountable
multi-agent decision-making. However, interpreting and quantifying agents’ contributions to such
relationships pose significant challenges. These
challenges are particularly prominent in the context of multi-agent sequential decision-making,
where the causal effect of an agent’s action on the
outcome depends on how other agents respond
to that action. In this paper, our objective is to
present a systematic approach for attributing the
causal effects of agents’ actions to the influence
they exert on other agents. Focusing on multiagent Markov decision processes, we introduce
agent-specific effects (ASE), a novel causal quantity that measures the effect of an agent’s action on
the outcome that propagates through other agents.
We then turn to the counterfactual counterpart of
ASE (cf-ASE), provide a sufficient set of conditions for identifying cf-ASE, and propose a practical sampling-based algorithm for estimating it. Finally, we experimentally evaluate the utility of cfASE through a simulation-based testbed, which
includes a sepsis management environment.

To illustrate these challenges, consider a canonical problem
setting where accountability is paramount: the sepsis treatment problem (Komorowski et al., 2018). In a multi-agent
variant of this problem, a clinician and an AI agent decide
on a series of treatments for an ICU patient over a period of
time. For example, the AI can function as the primary decision maker, suggesting treatments that can be overridden by
the clinician, who assumes a supervisory role. A simplified,
one-shot decision making instance of this problem setting
is depicted in Fig. 1 (left) through a causal graph. In this
setting, the AI agent starts by observing the patient state S0
and suggesting treatment A0 . Subsequently, the clinician
observes both S0 and A0 , and decides whether to override
the AI’s treatment or not. If the clinician overrides the AI,
the patient outcome Y is determined by S0 and the alternative treatment H0 suggested by the clinician. Otherwise, Y
is determined by state S0 and the AI’s treatment A0 .
Treatment E
H0

A0

H0

A0

1. Introduction
S0

Conducting post-hoc analysis on decisions and identifying
their causal contributions to the realized outcome represents
a cornerstone of accountable decision making. Such analysis can be particularly crucial in safety-critical applications,
where accountability is paramount. Often, these applications
involve multiple decision makers or agents, who interact

S0A

Y

S0

S0A

Y

Figure 1. The figure illustrates the sepsis treatment problem setting
over 1 time-step. Squares denote agents’ actions, A for AI and H
for clinician. Circles S are patient states, while S A include both
S and A, i.e., S A = (S, A). Y is the outcome. Edges that are
striked through represent deactivated edges. Exogenous arrows
(magenta) represent interventions on A0 that fix its value to the
action indicated. The graph on the right depicts a path-specific
effect of treatment E on Y .

†

Work done while at Max Planck Institute for Software Systems.
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbrücken, Germany 2 Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany 3 University of
Warwick, Department of Computer Science, UK. Correspondence
to: Stelios Triantafyllou <strianta@mpi-sws.org>.

1

Given the causal graph, we can utilize standard causal concepts to quantify the impact of the agents’ actions on the
outcome Y . Arguably, the most straightforward way of
doing so would be through the notion of total counterfac-

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

