Predicting and Interpreting Energy Barriers of Metallic Glasses with Graph
Neural Networks
Haoyu Li * 1 Shichang Zhang * 1 Longwen Tang 1 Mathieu Bauchy 1 Yizhou Sun 1

Abstract

Energy landscape viewpoint
High energy barrier

Metallic Glasses (MGs) are widely used materials
that are stronger than steel while being shapeable
as plastic. While understanding the structureproperty relationship of MGs remains a challenge
in materials science, studying their energy barriers (EBs) as an intermediary step shows promise.
In this work, we utilize Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) to model MGs and study EBs. We contribute a new dataset for EB prediction and a
novel Symmetrized GNN (SymGNN) model that
is E(3)-invariant in expectation. SymGNN handles invariance by aggregating over orthogonal
transformations of the graph structure. When
applied to EB prediction, SymGNN are more
accurate than molecular dynamics (MD) localsampling methods and other machine-learning
models. Compared to precise MD simulations,
SymGNN reduces the inference time on new MGs
from roughly 41 days to less than one second.
We apply explanation algorithms to reveal the relationship between structures and EBs. The structures that we identify through explanations match
the medium-range order (MRO) hypothesis and
possess unique topological properties. Our work
enables effective prediction and interpretation of
MG EBs, bolstering material science research. 1

Low mobility

High mobility
Low energy barrier

Dynamics
Dynamic arrest
Brittle fracture
…
Ductile fracture

Physical properties
Glass transition
Viscosity
…
Ductility

Figure 1. EBs represent mobility, which can further influence the
MG dynamics and their physical properties.

devices, and many more (Trexler & Thadhani, 2010). The
unique properties of MGs lie in their non-crystalline amorphous atomic structure, which sets them apart from the
crystalline structure found in traditional metals (Trexler &
Thadhani, 2010; Bansal & Doremus, 2013). Despite extensive research on MGs, the details of their structure-property
relationship are still not well understood (Starr et al., 2002;
Ding et al., 2014; Patinet et al., 2016; Cao et al., 2018).
One promising approach for studying the structure-property
relationship of MGs is through a special property called
Energy Barrier (EB). EBs describe the local roughness of
the energy landscape by comparing the average energy difference around an atom’s local neighbors. Many studies
have shown that understanding EBs can act as an important intermediary step for studying the MG physical properties (Debenedetti & Stillinger, 2001; Yu et al., 2012; Tang
et al., 2021). As shown in Figure 1, EBs represent mobility, which can influence the MG dynamics and further
their physical properties like glass transition and ductility (Berthier & Biroli, 2011; Kirchner et al., 2022). However,
the precise simulation of EBs is challenging and often requires time-consuming computation (Barkema & Mousseau,
1996; Mousseau et al., 2012; Jay et al., 2022). For example, even with a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster
and the advanced Activation-Relaxation Technique nouveau
(ARTn) (Cances et al., 2009), calculating EBs for an MG
system with 3,000 atoms can take 41 days.

1. Introduction
Metallic glasses (MGs) combine good properties of metals
and plastics in one material, making them stronger than
steel while being shapeable as plastic (Schroers et al., 2011).
Their extensive applications span various industries including aerospace, sports equipment, luxury goods, biomedical
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. Correspondence to: Haoyu Li <haoyuli02@ucla.edu>,
Shichang Zhang <shichang@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Code for this project is available at https://github.
com/haoyuli02/SymGNN

Given the usefulness and computational difficulty of EBs,
we explore machine learning (ML) approaches to efficiently
1

