Reweighted Solutions for Weighted Low Rank Approximation

David P. Woodruff 1 Taisuke Yasuda 1

Abstract

norm error

Weighted low rank approximation (WLRA) is an
important yet computationally challenging primitive with applications ranging from statistical analysis, model compression, and signal processing.
To cope with the NP-hardness of this problem,
prior work considers heuristics, bicriteria, or fixed
parameter tractable algorithms to solve this problem. In this work, we introduce a new relaxed solution to WLRA which outputs a matrix that is not
necessarily low rank, but can be stored using very
few parameters and gives provable approximation
guarantees when the weight matrix has low rank.
Our central idea is to use the weight matrix itself
to reweight a low rank solution, which gives an
extremely simple algorithm with remarkable empirical performance in applications to model compression and on synthetic datasets. Our algorithm
also gives nearly optimal communication complexity bounds for a natural distributed problem
associated with this problem, for which we show
matching communication lower bounds. Together,
our communication complexity bounds show that
the rank of the weight matrix provably parameterizes the communication complexity of WLRA.
We also obtain the first relative error guarantees
for feature selection with a weighted objective.

‖A − Ã‖2𝐹 :=

𝑛
𝑑
∑︁ ∑︁

|A𝑖,𝑗 − Ã𝑖,𝑗 |2 ,

𝑖=1 𝑗=1

where rank(Ã) ≤ 𝑘. This problem can be solved exactly
by the singular value decomposition (SVD), which can be
computed in polynomial time. We will write A𝑘 to denote
the optimal rank 𝑘 approximation to A in the Frobenius
norm, and we will write A−𝑘 := A − A𝑘 to denote the
residual error of this approximation.
While this simple choice often gives satisfactory results,
this loss function treats all entries of the matrix uniformly
when trying to fit Ã, which may not exactly align with the
practitioner’s desires if some of the entries are more crucial
to fit than others. If one additionally has such information
available in the form of non-negative weights W𝑖,𝑗 ≥ 0
that reflect some measure of importance of each of the
entries (𝑖, 𝑗), then this can be encoded in the loss function
by incorporating weights as
‖A − Ã‖2W,𝐹 :=

𝑛 ∑︁
𝑑
∑︁

2
W𝑖,𝑗
· |A𝑖,𝑗 − Ã𝑖,𝑗 |2 ,

𝑖=1 𝑗=1

where rank(Ã) ≤ 𝑘. This problem is known as the
weighted low rank approximation (WLRA) problem. We
write A ∘ B to denote the entrywise product for two matrices A and B, so we may also write
‖A− Ã‖2W,𝐹 := ‖W∘(A− Ã)‖2𝐹 = ‖W∘A−W∘ Ã‖2𝐹

1. Introduction
The approximation of matrices by matrices of lower rank has
been, and continues to be, one of the most intensely studied
and applied computational problems in statistics, machine
learning, and signal processing. The classical approach to
this problem is to approximate a matrix A ∈ R𝑛×𝑑 by a
rank 𝑘 matrix Ã ∈ R𝑛×𝑑 that minimizes the Frobenius

The incorporation of weights into the low rank approximation problem gives this computational problem an incredible
versatility for use in a long history of applications starting
with its use in factor analysis in the early statistical literature
(Young, 1941). A popular special case is the matrix completion problem (Rennie & Srebro, 2005; Candès & Tao, 2010;
Keshavan et al., 2010), where the weights W ∈ {0, 1}𝑛×𝑑
are binary and encode whether a given entry of A is observed or not. This primitive has been useful in the design
of recommender systems (Koren et al., 2009; Chen et al.,
2015; Lee et al., 2016), and has been famously applied in
the 2006 Netflix Prize problem. More generally, the weights
W can be used to reflect the variance or number of samples

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. Correspondence to: David
P. Woodruff <dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu>, Taisuke Yasuda
<taisukey@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 𝑠𝑡 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

