Efficient Error Certification for Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Francisco Eiras 1 Adel Bibi 1 Rudy Bunel 2 Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham 2 Philip H.S. Torr 1
M. Pawan Kumar 2

Abstract

mentioned challenge through physics-informed neural networks (PINN) (Raissi et al., 2019a; Sun et al., 2020; Pang
et al., 2019). For example, the Diffusion-Sorption equation – which has real-world applications in the modeling of
groundwater contaminant transport – takes 59.83s to solve
per inference point using a classical PDE solver, while inference in its PINN version from Takamoto et al. (2022) takes
only 2.7 × 10−3 s, a speed-up of more than 104 times.

Recent work provides promising evidence that
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINN) can
efficiently solve partial differential equations
(PDE). However, previous works have failed to
provide guarantees on the worst-case residual error of a PINN across the spatio-temporal domain
– a measure akin to the tolerance of numerical
solvers – focusing instead on point-wise comparisons between their solution and the ones obtained
by a solver on a set of inputs. In real-world applications, one cannot consider tests on a finite
set of points to be sufficient grounds for deployment, as the performance could be substantially
worse on a different set. To alleviate this issue,
we establish guaranteed error-based conditions
for PINNs over their continuous applicability domain. To verify the extent to which they hold,
we introduce ∂-CROWN: a general, efficient and
scalable post-training framework to bound PINN
residual errors. We demonstrate its effectiveness
in obtaining tight certificates by applying it to
two classically studied PINNs – Burgers’ and
Schrödinger’s equations –, and two more challenging ones with real-world applications – the
Allan-Cahn and Diffusion-Sorption equations.

The parameters of a PINN are estimated by minimizing
the residual of the given PDE, together with its initial and
boundary conditions, over a set of spatio-temporal training
inputs. Its accuracy is then empirically estimated by measuring the solution estimate over a set of discrete input points,
and (typically) comparing them to numerical PDE solvers.
In other words, most current work on PINNs provides no
certified error bounds applicable for every input within the
domain of the PDE.
While testing on a finite set of points provides a good initial signal on the accuracy of the PINN, such an approach
cannot be relied upon in practice, and error certification is
needed to understand the quality of the PINN trained (Hillebrecht & Unger, 2022). For example, by estimating the
maximum residual error of the Diffusion-Sorption PINN
from Takamoto et al. (2022) using 104 Monte Carlo samples across the domain we obtain an estimate of 1.1 × 10−3 ,
whereas the estimate using 106 samples is 21.09 – indicating the PINN has failed to learn a continuous function that
correctly maps to the solution of the underlying PDE. This
empirical difference shows the need for computing certified
error bounds to avoid deploying poorly trained PINNs.

1. Introduction
Accurately predicting the evolution of complex systems
through simulation is a difficult, yet necessary, process in
the physical sciences. Many of these systems are represented by partial differential equations (PDE) the solutions
of which, while well understood, pose a major computational challenge to solve at an appropriate spatio-temporal
resolution (Raissi et al., 2019a; Kochkov et al., 2020). Inspired by the success of machine learning in other domains, recent work has attempted to overcome the afore-

We introduce formal, error-based correctness conditions
for PINNs which require that the residual error is globally
upper bounded by a tolerance parameter, that is, that the
continuous function learned approximates the underlying
PDE solution across the domain. To compute this bound
and verify the correctness conditions, we build on recent
progress in neural network verification. Specifically, we
efficiently extend the CROWN framework (Zhang et al.,
2018) by deriving linear upper and lower bounds for the
various nonlinear terms that appear in PINNs, and devise a
novel bound propagation strategy for the task at hand.

1
University of Oxford 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
FE <eiras@robots.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Our contributions are threefold. (i) We formally define
1

