DITTO: Diffusion Inference-Time T -Optimization for Music Generation
Zachary Novack 1 2 * Julian McAuley 1 Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick 1 Nicholas J. Bryan 2

Abstract

ing results in general text-to-audio (TTA) generation (Liu
et al., 2023a;b; Huang et al., 2023b) and text-to-music
(TTM) generation (Hawthorne et al., 2022; Forsgren & Martiros, 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023a; Schneider
et al., 2023). These methods operate via pixel or latent diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) over spectrograms with genre,
mood, and/or keywords control articulated via text prompts.

We propose Diffusion Inference-Time T Optimization (DITTO), a general-purpose framework for controlling pre-trained text-to-music
diffusion models at inference-time via optimizing initial noise latents. Our method can be used
to optimize through any differentiable feature
matching loss to achieve a target (stylized) output
and leverages gradient checkpointing for memory
efficiency. We demonstrate a surprisingly widerange of applications for music generation including inpainting, outpainting, and looping as well
as intensity, melody, and musical structure control – all without ever fine-tuning the underlying
model. When we compare our approach against
related training, guidance, and optimizationbased methods, we find DITTO achieves state-ofthe-art performance on nearly all tasks, including
outperforming comparable approaches on controllability, audio quality, and computational
efficiency, thus opening the door for high-quality,
flexible, training-free control of diffusion models. Sound examples can be found at https:
//ditto-music.github.io/web/.

However, these text-conditioned approaches typically only
offer high-level control (e.g. style), motivating further work.
Current attempts to add more precise control (e.g. timevarying conditions) for TTM diffusion models are promising yet present their own tradeoffs. Finetuning-based methods like ControlNet (Wu et al., 2023a; Saharia et al., 2022a;
Zhang et al., 2023) require large-scale supervised training with labeled examples for each new control modality.
Inference-time methods that guide the diffusion sampling
process, on the other hand, struggle to achieve fine-grained
expressivity due to relying on approximations of the model
outputs during sampling (Levy et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023).
In order to achieve an expressive control paradigm for TTM
diffusion models that requires no supervised training and can
accept arbitrary control signals at inference-time, we propose DITTO: Diffusion Inference-Time T -Optimization.
DITTO optimizes the initial noise latents xT with respect
to an arbitrary differentiable feature matching loss across
any diffusion sampling process to control the model outputs,
and ensures efficient memory use via gradient checkpointing (Chen et al., 2016). Despite generally being considered
to encode little information (Song et al., 2020; Preechakul
et al., 2022), we show the power and precision the initial
noise latents have to control the diffusion process for a widevariety of applications in music creation, enabling musicallysalient feature control and high-quality audio editing. Compared to previous optimization-based works from outside
the audio domain (Wallace et al., 2023a), DITTO achieves
SOTA control while also being 2x as time and memory efficient. Overall, our contributions are:

1. Introduction
Large-scale diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) have emerged
as a leading paradigm for generative media, with strong results in diverse modalities such as text-to-image (TTI) generation (Rombach et al., 2022; Karras et al., 2022; Chen,
2023), video generation (Ho et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2023),
and 3D object generation (Watson et al., 2022; Poole et al.,
2022). Recently, there has been growing work in applying
image-domain methods to audio by treating the frequencydomain spectrograms of audio as images, producing promis-

• DITTO: a novel, training-free framework for controlling pre-trained TTM diffusion models that optimizes
the initial noise latents to control the model outputs.

⇤
Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.
University of California – San Diego 2 Adobe Research. Correspondence to: Zachary Novack <znovack@ucsd.edu>, Nicholas
J. Bryan <njb@ieee.org>.

1

• We leverage gradient checkpointing for memory efficiency without compromising the sampling process.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• Application of DITTO to multiple fine-grained time1

