Dirichlet Flow Matching with Applications to DNA Sequence Design

Hannes Stark * 1 Bowen Jing * 1 Chenyu Wang 1 Gabriele Corso 1
Bonnie Berger 1 2 Regina Barzilay 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract

more flexible design of iterative noising processes, which
have proven useful in generative modeling on non-euclidean
spaces such as compact Riemannian manifolds (Chen &
Lipman, 2023; Bose et al., 2023). However, existing formulations of flow matching have focused on continuous spaces
and have yet to treat discrete categorical data—a notable
shortcoming considering the many important applications
of discrete generative modeling such as text generation and
biological sequence design (Avdeyev et al., 2023).

Discrete diffusion or flow models could enable
faster and more controllable sequence generation
than autoregressive models. We show that naı̈ve
linear flow matching on the simplex is insufficient
toward this goal since it suffers from discontinuities in the training target and further pathologies. To overcome this, we develop Dirichlet flow
matching on the simplex based on mixtures of
Dirichlet distributions as probability paths. In
this framework, we derive a connection between
the mixtures’ scores and the flow’s vector field
that allows for classifier and classifier-free guidance. Further, we provide distilled Dirichlet flow
matching, which enables one-step sequence generation with minimal performance hits, resulting in
O(L) speedups compared to autoregressive models. On complex DNA sequence generation tasks,
we demonstrate superior performance compared
to all baselines in distributional metrics and in
achieving desired design targets for generated
sequences. Finally, we show that our classifierfree guidance approach improves unconditional
generation and is effective for generating DNA
that satisfies design targets. Code is available
at https://github.com/HannesStark/
dirichlet-flow-matching.

In this work, we introduce Dirichlet flow matching for generative modeling of discrete categorical data and sequences
over such data. We frame such modeling as a transport
problem between a uniform density over the probability
simplex and a finitely supported distribution over the vertices of the simplex. We then learn a continuous vector field
to parameterize this transport based on a conditional noising
process that generates a time-evolving Dirichlet distribution.
Naı̈vely, it may appear more straightforward to define a
noising process that linearly interpolates between data and
noise, as is the dominant approach in flow matching on Rn
(Liu et al., 2022; Lipman et al., 2022; Pooladian et al., 2023)
and which can be trivially adapted to the simplex. However,
we show that such an approach—which we call linear flow
matching—suffers from pathological behavior due to the
contracting support of the resulting conditional probability
paths. We carefully engineer Dirichlet FM to avoid these
shortcomings while retaining the advantages of flow matching by being significantly simpler—both computationally
and conceptually—than DDSM (Avdeyev et al., 2023), a
discrete diffusion model that also relaxes data onto the simplex. Thanks to these properties, we posit (and confirm) that
Dirichlet FM is significantly more fit for modeling complex
discrete distributions than either linear FM or DDSM.

1. Introduction
Flow matching (FM) is a generative modeling framework
that provides a simulation-free means of training continuous
normalizing flows (CNFs) between noise and data distributions (Lipman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Albergo &
Vanden-Eijnden, 2022). Such flow models can be viewed as
generalizing diffusion models (Song et al., 2021) to permit

Dirichlet FM is equipped with several features that showcase
its potential as a generative modeling framework. A key
aspect of modern frameworks such as diffusion is the ability
to implement guidance towards a target class or attribute
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2022). While
flow matching guidance has been explored for (diffusionlike) Gaussian noising processes in Rn (Dao et al., 2023;
Zheng et al., 2023), no general theory of flow matching
guidance is available. However, by deriving a relationship
between the score of a mixture of Dirichlets and the re-

*
Equal contribution 1 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Dept. of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Hannes Stark <hstark@mit.edu>,
Bowen Jing <bjing@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

