High-Dimensional Kernel Methods under Covariate Shift:
Data-Dependent Implicit Regularization

Yihang Chen 1 Fanghui Liu 2 Taiji Suzuki 3 4 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

The importance weighting (IW) (Shimodaira, 2000) is a
typical way to handle covariate shift. Let p and q be the
marginal distributions over the training and test covariates,
respectively, the IW method adopts their Radon-Nikodym
derivative as the importance weighting (IW) function, i.e.,
w(x) = dq(x)/dp(x). Hence, the IW function weights
the loss function, leading to an unbiased estimator of the
expected loss under the test distribution. Empirically, the
IW method has been widely used in machine learning (e.g.,
Huang et al., 2006; Sugiyama et al., 2008; Cortes et al.,
2010; Sugiyama et al., 2012; Fang et al., 2020) from linear
to kernel estimator as well as neural networks. Theoretically, the IW method can achieve nice statistical properties
(e.g., minimax rate) under certain settings for kernel ridge
regression (Ma et al., 2023; Gogolashvili et al., 2023).

This paper studies kernel ridge regression in high
dimensions under covariate shifts and analyzes
the role of importance re-weighting. We first derive the asymptotic expansion of high dimensional
kernels under covariate shifts. By a bias-variance
decomposition, we theoretically demonstrate that
the re-weighting strategy allows for decreasing
the variance. For bias, we analyze the regularization of the arbitrary or well-chosen scale, showing
that the bias can behave very differently under
different regularization scales. In our analysis,
the bias and variance can be characterized by the
spectral decay of a data-dependent regularized
kernel: the original kernel matrix associated with
an additional re-weighting matrix, and thus the
re-weighting strategy can be regarded as a datadependent regularization for better understanding.
Besides, our analysis provides asymptotic expansion of kernel functions/vectors under covariate
shift, which has its own interest.

However, recent work on high-capacity models, e.g., nonparametric and over-parameterized models1 , demonstrate
that, the IW strategy is not beneficial under certain settings, e.g., over-parameterized linear regression (Zhai et al.,
2023), k-nearest neighbors classifier (Kpotufe & Martinet,
2021) for interpolation under well-specified cases. Nevertheless, for some misspecified cases, the IW correction
is still needed for non-parametric kernel ridge regression
(Gogolashvili et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

We can see the separation in the effect of IW for low/highcapacity models under (mis)-specified settings. But how
the generalization result depends on the choice of model
capacities, and its interplay with the regularization level in
terms of bias-variance trade-off remains unclear. Intuitively,
the IW strategy obtains the unbiased estimation of the original empirical risk minimization, leading to a decreasing
variance to some extent; while the approximation between
the estimator and the target function will change, leading to
an increasing bias to some extent. As such, refined analyses
based on bias-variance trade-offs are required to understand
the following question:

In statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1999), the fundamental assumption is that the training and test data are drawn
from the same distribution. However, in real-world applications, test data may generated quite differently from the
training data. One of the most common situations is the
covariate shifts (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2007),
where the training and test distributions of inputs (covariates) are different.
1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland.
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, United
Kingdom. 3 Department of Mathematical Informatics, The University of Tokyo, Japan. 4 Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Fanghui Liu
<fanghui.liu@warwick.ac.uk>.

How does IW affect bias-variance trade-off in
high-capacity models?

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Over-parameterized models admit the fact that the number
of parameters is larger than the number of training data. Modern
neural networks belong to this setting.

1

