SF-DQN: Provable Knowledge Transfer using Successor Feature for Deep
Reinforcement Learning

Shuai Zhang 1 Heshan Devaka Fernando 2 Miao Liu 3 Keerthiram Murugesan 3 Songtao Lu 3 Pin-Yu Chen 3
Tianyi Chen 2 Meng Wang 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to train an agent
to perform a task within an environment in a desirable manner by allowing the agent to interact with the environment.
Here, the agent is guided towards the desirable behavior
by the rewards, and the optimal policy is derived from a
learned value function (Q-function) in selecting the best actions to maximize the immediate and future rewards. This
framework can effectively capture a wide array of realworld applications, such as gaming (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017), robotics (Kalashnikov et al., 2018), autonomous vehicles (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Schwarting et al., 2018), healthcare (Coronato et al., 2020), and natural language processing (Tenney et al., 2018). However,
RL agents often need numerous interactions with the environment to manage complex tasks, especially when RL is
equipped with deep neural networks (DNNs). For example,
AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017) required 29 million matches
and 5000 TPUs at a cost exceeding $35 million, which
is time-consuming and memory-intensive. Nevertheless,
many complex real-world problems can naturally decompose into multiple interrelated sub-problems, all sharing
the same environmental dynamics (Sutton et al., 1999; Bacon et al., 2017; Kulkarni et al., 2016a). In such scenarios, it becomes highly advantageous for an agent to harness
knowledge acquired from previous tasks to enhance its performance in tackling new but related challenges. This practice of leveraging knowledge from one task to improve performance in others is known as transfer learning (Lazaric,
2012; Taylor & Stone, 2009; Barreto et al., 2017).

This paper studies the transfer reinforcement
learning (RL) problem where multiple RL problems have different reward functions but share
the same underlying transition dynamics. In this
setting, the Q-function of each RL problem (task)
can be decomposed into a successor feature (SF)
and a reward mapping: the former characterizes
the transition dynamics, and the latter characterizes the task-specific reward function. This Qfunction decomposition, coupled with a policy
improvement operator known as generalized policy improvement (GPI), reduces the sample complexity of finding the optimal Q-function, and
thus the SF & GPI framework exhibits promising
empirical performance compared to traditional
RL methods like Q-learning. However, its theoretical foundations remain largely unestablished,
especially when learning the successor features
using deep neural networks (SF-DQN). This paper studies the provable knowledge transfer using SFs-DQN in transfer RL problems. We establish the first convergence analysis with provable generalization guarantees for SF-DQN with
GPI. The theory reveals that SF-DQN with GPI
outperforms conventional RL approaches, such
as deep Q-network, in terms of both faster convergence rate and better generalization. Numerical experiments on real and synthetic RL tasks
support the superior performance of SF-DQN &
GPI, aligning with our theoretical findings.

This paper focuses on an RL setting with learning multiple tasks, where each task is associated with a different reward function but shares the same environment. This setting naturally arises in many real-world applications such
as robotics (Yu et al., 2020). We consider exploring the
knowledge transfer among multiple tasks via the successor
feature (SF) framework (Barreto et al., 2017) which disentangles the environment dynamic from the reward function
at an incremental computational cost. The SF framework is
derived from successor representation (SR) (Dayan, 1993)
by introducing the value function approximation. Specifi-

1

Department of Data Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 2 Department of Electrical, Computer, and
Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy,
NY 3 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY. Correspondence to: Meng Wang
<wangm7@rpi.edu>, Shuai Zhang <sz457@njit.edu>, Miao Liu
<miao.liu1@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

