On a Neural Implementation of Brenier’s Polar Factorization

Nina Vesseron 1 Marco Cuturi 2 1
reshuffling in space is achieved by the measure-preserving
map M . This paper aims to provide a practical approach to
recover approximations of the potential u and vector-valued
map M using exclusively samples xi ∼ ρ and their associated images F (xi ). We also highlight how a reliable polar
factorization solver, coupled with an estimation of a stochastic generator that mimics the measure-valued inverse map
M −1 , can be used to study the gradient field of non-convex
landscapes. We consider, in particular, the case where the
field F of interest is the gradient, with respect to the parameters of a neural architecture, of a learning loss. Note that
the polar factorization theorem should not be confused with
the major theorem from optimal transport closely associated
with Brenier, which we recall in §2. That theorem states
that the Monge formulation of the optimal transport (OT)
problem, which seeks the push-forward map transporting a
measure onto another with the least mean displacements (as
measured with squared norms) is solved by the gradient of
a convex potential.

Abstract
In 1991, Brenier proved a theorem that generalizes the polar decomposition for square matrices
– factored as PSD × unitary – to any vector field
F : Rd → Rd . The theorem, known as the polar
factorization theorem, states that any field F can
be recovered as the composition of the gradient
of a convex function u with a measure-preserving
map M , namely F = ∇u ◦ M . We propose a
practical implementation of this far-reaching theoretical result, and explore possible uses within
machine learning. The theorem is closely related
to optimal transport (OT) theory, and we borrow
from recent advances in the field of neural optimal
transport to parameterize the potential u as an input convex neural network. The map M can be either evaluated pointwise using u∗ , the convex conjugate of u, through the identity M = ∇u∗ ◦ F ,
or learned as an auxiliary network. Because M
is, in general, not injective, we consider the additional task of estimating the ill-posed inverse
map that can approximate the pre-image measure
M −1 using a stochastic generator. We illustrate
possible applications of Brenier’s polar factorization to non-convex optimization problems, as well
as sampling of densities that are not log-concave.

Existing Implementations. Shortly after (Brenier, 1991),
Benamou and Brenier (1994) proposed a numerical approach to decompose a vector field, with an explicit Eulerian
(gridded) approach. Lagrangian approaches have been proposed by Gallouët and Mérigot (2018), while Mérigot and
Mirebeau (2016) use a semidiscrete OT formulation. Both
are used on low-dimensional manifolds as lower level subroutines to solve Euler’s equation for incompressible and
inviscid fluids (Arnold, 1966). More recently, Morel et al.
(2023) proposed to use Brenier’s insight to gradually refactor a normalizing flow as the gradient of a convex map,
a.k.a a Monge (1781) map, by applying measure-preserving
maps for the Gaussian distribution. Their approach does
not, however, rely on neural OT solvers, and focuses instead
on untangling an existing flow to turn it gradually into the
gradient of a convex potential.

1. Introduction
Brenier proved, through his seminal polar factorization theorem (1991), that any vector field can be decomposed into
two simpler elements: Given a reference measure ρ supported on Ω ⊂ Rd , For any F : Ω → Rd , there exists a convex potential u : Rd → R and a measure-preserving map
M : Ω → Ω (i.e. on has M♯ ρ = ρ), such that F = ∇u ◦ M .
The polar factorization theorem states that any vector field,
no matter how irregular, can be reshuffled to match that
of the gradient of a convex potential, and that this careful
1

Contributions. We propose in this work a neural implementation of the polar factorization theorem that leverages
recent advances in neural optimal transport. More precisely,

2

CREST-ENSAE, IP Paris Apple. Correspondence to:
Nina Vesseron <nina.vesseron@ensae.fr>, Marco Cuturi <cuturi@apple.com>.

• After introducing the polar factorization theorem, as well
as neural OT solvers, we show how the two blocks of
Brenier’s result can be recovered using input convex neural networks (ICNN) (Amos et al., 2017). We modify

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

