Learning to Continually Learn with the Bayesian Principle

Soochan Lee 1 Hyeonseong Jeon 1 Jaehyeon Son 1 Gunhee Kim 1

Abstract

general, CL is an NP-hard problem. This implies that building a universal CL algorithm is impossible as long as P̸=NP.
To effectively tackle CL, one should first narrow down a
domain and design a CL algorithm tailored to leverage a
domain-specific structure. Even humans possess specialized
CL abilities for specific tasks, such as learning new faces,
which may not be as effective for other tasks, such as memorizing random digits. This specialization results from the
evolutionary process that has optimized our CL abilities for
survival and reproduction.

In the present era of deep learning, continual
learning research is mainly focused on mitigating
forgetting when training a neural network with
stochastic gradient descent on a non-stationary
stream of data. On the other hand, in the more
classical literature of statistical machine learning,
many models have sequential Bayesian update
rules that yield the same learning outcome as
the batch training, i.e., they are completely immune to catastrophic forgetting. However, they
are often overly simple to model complex realworld data. In this work, we adopt the metalearning paradigm to combine the strong representational power of neural networks and simple
statistical models’ robustness to forgetting. In our
novel meta-continual learning framework, continual learning takes place only in statistical models
via ideal sequential Bayesian update rules, while
neural networks are meta-learned to bridge the
raw data and the statistical models. Since the
neural networks remain fixed during continual
learning, they are protected from catastrophic forgetting. This approach not only achieves significantly improved performance but also exhibits excellent scalability. Since our approach is domainagnostic and model-agnostic, it can be applied to
a wide range of problems and easily integrated
with existing model architectures.

From this perspective, meta-continual learning (MCL)
emerges as a highly promising avenue of research. Rather
than manually crafting CL algorithms based solely on human knowledge, MCL aims to meta-learn the CL ability in
a data-driven manner – learning to continually learn. Thus,
we can design a general MCL algorithm and feed domainspecific data to obtain a specialized CL algorithm. MCL can
be more advantageous in many practical scenarios, as it can
utilize a large-scale dataset to improve the CL ability before
deploying a CL agent, instead of learning from scratch.
MCL follows the bi-level optimization scheme of metalearning: in the inner loop, a model is continually trained by
a CL algorithm, while in the outer loop, the CL algorithm is
optimized across multiple CL episodes. Although stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been the primary learning
mechanism in deep learning, this bi-level scheme offers the
flexibility to combine neural networks with fundamentally
different learning mechanisms. Specifically, we can metatrain neural networks with SGD only in the outer loop and
adopt another update rule for CL in the inner loop.
In this context, the sequential Bayesian update stands out
as the most promising candidate, providing an ideal framework for updating a knowledge state. While there have
been a significant number of CL approaches inspired by
the Bayesian updates of the posterior of neural network
parameters (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016; Zenke et al., 2017;
Chaudhry et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018; Farquhar & Gal,
2019), they require various approximations to ensure computational tractability, which sets them apart from the ideal
Bayesian update. On the other hand, we bring the FisherDarmois-Koopman-Pitman theorem (Fisher, 1934; Darmois,
1935; Koopman, 1936; Pitman, 1936) into the scope to point
out that the exponential family is the only family of distri-

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL), the process of acquiring new
knowledge or skills without forgetting existing ones, is
an essential ability of intelligent agents. Despite recent
advances in deep learning, CL remains a significant challenge. Knoblauch et al. (2020) rigorously prove that, in
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Gunhee Kim <gunhee@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

