Feature Importance Disparities for Data Bias Investigations

Peter W Chang 1 Leor Fishman 2 Seth Neel 1

Abstract

naive. Over the last decade, an interdisciplinary body of
research has shown that machine learning algorithms can be
deeply biased in both subtle and direct ways (Barocas et al.,
2019), and has focused on developing countless techniques
to produce fairer models (Caton & Haas, 2023).

It is widely held that one cause of downstream
bias in classifiers is bias present in the training
data. Rectifying such biases may involve contextdependent interventions such as training separate
models on subgroups, removing features with bias
in the collection process, or even conducting realworld experiments to ascertain sources of bias.
Despite the need for such data bias investigations,
few automated methods exist to assist practitioners in these efforts. In this paper, we present one
such method that given a dataset X consisting of
protected and unprotected features, outcomes y,
and a regressor h that predicts y given X, outputs
a tuple (fj , g), with the following property: g corresponds to a subset of the training dataset (X, y),
such that the j th feature fj has much larger (or
smaller) influence in the subgroup g, than on the
dataset overall, which we call feature importance
disparity (FID). We show across 4 datasets and
4 common feature importance methods of broad
interest to the machine learning community that
we can efficiently find subgroups with large FID
values even over exponentially large subgroup
classes and in practice these groups correspond to
subgroups with potentially serious bias issues as
measured by standard fairness metrics.

One of the primary causes of model bias is bias inherent in
the training data, rather than an explicitly biased training
procedure. While the majority of work on fairness seeks
to remove bias by learning a fairer representation of the
data (Zemel et al., 2013) or by explicitly constraining the
downstream classifier to conform to a specific fairness notion (Hardt et al., 2016a; Agarwal et al., 2018b), fairness
notions have been shown to be brittle and often times contradictory (Dwork & Ilvento, 2018; Kleinberg et al., 2016).
More importantly, these approaches elide what could be a
more important question for the practitioner: What is the
source of bias in the training data, and what subgroups in
the data are being effected?
We call the process of answering this question a data bias
investigation (DBI), and in this paper we develop a technique to aid in a DBI by allowing an analyst to (efficiently
and provably) identify structured subsets of the training data
to focus their bias investigation. Prior work has typically
focused on identifying such subsets by finding subsets of the
training data that maximally violate a specific fairness criterion, which typically corresponds to the classifier having a
higher error rate on the group than on the population. We
take a very different approach; rather than optimizing for a
specific fairness notion, we find subgroups where a specific
feature in the data has out-sized impact in the subgroup,
relative to the population as a whole.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is rapidly becoming a more important,
yet more opaque part of our lives and decision making –
with increasingly high stakes use cases such as recidivism
analysis (Angwin et al., 2016), loan granting and terms
(Dastile et al., 2020) and child protective services (Keddell,
2019). One of the hopes of wide-scale ML deployment
has been that those algorithms might be free of our human
biases and imperfections. This hope was, unfortunately,

To build some intuition for why feature importance disparities, FID as we call them, might be a useful notion when
looking for dataset bias, consider the following example
from Cynthia Dwork, widely regarded as pioneer in the
field of algorithmic bias, in a 2015 in a New York Times
interview (Miller, 2015): Suppose we have a minority group
in which bright students are steered toward studying math,
and suppose that in the majority group bright students are
steered instead toward finance. An easy way to find good
students is to look for students studying finance, and if the
minority is small, this simple classification scheme could
find most of the bright students. But not only is it unfair

1

SAFR AI Lab, Harvard Business School & Kempner Institute,
Boston, MA 2 Harvard College, Cambridge, MA. Correspondence
to: Seth Neel <sethneel.ai@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

