Multi-Source Conformal Inference Under Distribution Shift
Yi Liu 1 Alexander W. Levis 2 Sharon-Lise Normand 3 Larry Han 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Conformal inference is a set of methods used to construct
distribution-free, nonparametric prediction intervals, for an
outcome Y on the basis of covariates X, with finite-sample
marginal coverage guarantees. The framework was first introduced by Vovk et al. (2005; 2009) and has since been extended to regression settings under covariate shift (Lei et al.,
2018; Tibshirani et al., 2019; Lei & Candès, 2021). Recently,
Yang et al. (2024) proposed robust prediction intervals under
covariate shift by revealing a connection with the missing
data literature, and appealing to modern semiparametric efficiency theory. However, Yang et al. (2024) assume only a
single data source such that the conditional outcome distribution Y | X—and therefore the conditional distribution of
conformal scores—is homogeneous. In general, conformal
prediction methods have focused on covariate shift while assuming that conditional outcome distributions are invariant
across environments (Peters et al., 2016). We note, however, that some work has studied label shift settings (e.g.,
Podkopaev & Ramdas (2021)), but this involves the analogously strong assumption that the distribution of X | Y is
homogeneous. We refer the reader to Barber et al. (2023)
and the extensive literature review therein for other works.

Recent years have experienced increasing utilization of complex machine learning models across
multiple sources of data to inform more generalizable decision-making. However, distribution
shifts across data sources and privacy concerns
related to sharing individual-level data, coupled
with a lack of uncertainty quantification from machine learning predictions, make it challenging
to achieve valid inferences in multi-source environments. In this paper, we consider the problem
of obtaining distribution-free prediction intervals
for a target population, leveraging multiple potentially biased data sources. We derive the efficient influence functions for the quantiles of unobserved outcomes in the target and source populations, and show that one can incorporate machine
learning prediction algorithms in the estimation of
nuisance functions while still achieving parametric rates of convergence to nominal coverage probabilities. Moreover, when conditional outcome
invariance is violated, we propose a data-adaptive
strategy to upweight informative data sources for
efficiency gain and downweight non-informative
data sources for bias reduction. We highlight the
robustness and efficiency of our proposals for a
variety of conformal scores and data-generating
mechanisms via extensive synthetic experiments.
Hospital length of stay prediction intervals for
pediatric patients undergoing a high-risk cardiac
surgical procedure between 2016-2022 in the U.S.
illustrate the utility of our methodology.

In reality, conditional outcome invariance is unlikely to
hold in the real world. In recent years, there has been a
huge increase in popularity in using large clinical research
networks that facilitate multi-center collaboration. One
goal with these networks is to leverage the multiple diverse data sources to mitigate issues related to small or
non-representative data, thereby increasing statistical power
for probing various scientific hypotheses. However, different clinical sites may be heterogeneous in terms of patient
populations, treatment practices, and patient outcomes. Furthermore, since individual-level data is protected by privacy
regulations such as HIPAA and GDPR, direct pooling of
data across sites is typically not feasible. Federated transfer
learning methods have been proposed as powerful tools for
integrating heterogeneous data (Duan et al., 2020a; Li et al.,
2023), and have been applied to yield robust point estimation of the effect of a treatment on a combined population
across sites (Xiong et al., 2023; Vo et al., 2022b), and for the
treatment effect on a specific target population (Han et al.,
2021; 2024; 2023; Vo et al., 2022a), while accounting for
data-sharing constraints and heterogeneity (i.e., covariate

1
North Carolina State University, Department of Statistics,
Raleigh, NC, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Department of
Statistics, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 Harvard Medical School, Department of Health Care Policy, Boston, MA, USA 4 Northeastern
University, Department of Health Sciences, Boston, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Larry Han <lar.han@northeastern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

