IW-GAE: Importance Weighted Group Accuracy Estimation for Improved
Calibration and Model Selection in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Taejong Joo 1 Diego Klabjan 1

Abstract

However, model calibration, which is about matching prediction confidence on a sample to its expected accuracy
(Dawid, 1982; Guo et al., 2017), remains challenging in
UDA due to the distribution shifts. Specifically, it is widely
known that state-of-the-art calibrated classifiers in the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) settings (Guo
et al., 2017; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017) begin to generate over-confident predictions in
the face of distributional shifts (Ovadia et al., 2019). Further,
Wang et al. (2020) show the discernible compromise in calibration performance as an offset against the enhancement
of the accuracy in the target domain.

Distribution shifts pose significant challenges for
model calibration and model selection tasks in
the unsupervised domain adaptation problem—a
scenario where the goal is to perform well in a
distribution shifted domain without labels. In this
work, we tackle difficulties coming from distribution shifts by developing a novel importance
weighted group accuracy estimator. Specifically,
we present a new perspective of addressing the
model calibration and model selection tasks by estimating the group accuracy. Then, we formulate
an optimization problem for finding an importance weight that leads to an accurate group accuracy estimation with theoretical analyses. Our
extensive experiments show that our approach improves state-of-the-art performances by 22% in
the model calibration task and 14% in the model
selection task.

Moreover, the model selection task in UDA remains challenging due to the scarcity of labeled target domain data
that are required to evaluate model performance. In the
i.i.d. settings, a standard approach for model selection is a
cross-validation method—constructing a hold-out dataset
for selecting the model that yields the best performance
on the hold-out dataset. While cross-validation provides
favorable statistical guarantees (Stone, 1977; Kohavi et al.,
1995), such guarantees falter in the presence of the distribution shifts due to the violation of the i.i.d. assumption.
In practice, it has also been observed that performances
of machine learning models measured in one domain have
significant discrepancies to their performances in another
distribution shifted domain (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019;
Ovadia et al., 2019; Recht et al., 2019). Therefore, applying model selection techniques in the i.i.d. settings to the
labeled source domain is suboptimal in the target domain.

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider a classification problem in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). UDA aims to transfer
knowledge from a source domain with ample labeled data
to enhance the performance in a target domain where labeled data is unavailable. In UDA, the source and target
domains have different data generating distributions, so the
core challenge is to transfer knowledge contained in the
labeled dataset in the source domain to the target domain
under the distribution shifts. Over the decades, significant
improvements in the transferability of accuracy from source
to target domains have been made, resulting in areas like
domain alignment (Ben-David et al., 2010; Zhang et al.,
2019) and self-training (Chen et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2021).

In this work, we simultaneously address these critical aspects in UDA from a new perspective of predicting a group
accuracy. Specifically, we partition predictions into a set of
groups and then estimate the group accuracy—the average
accuracy of predictions in a group. When the group accuracy estimate accurately represents the expected accuracy
of a model for samples in the group (e.g., group 1 in Figure 1(a)), using the group accuracy estimate as prediction
confidence induces a well-calibrated classifier. When the
average of the group accuracy estimates matches the mean
expected accuracy (e.g., two dotted lines in Figure 1(a) are
close to each other), it becomes a good model selection
criterion.

1
Department of Industrial Engineering & Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. Correspondence to: Taejong Joo <taejong.joo@northwestern.edu>, Diego
Klabjan <d-klabjan@northwestern.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

