Bagged Deep Image Prior for Recovering Images in the Presence of Speckle Noise

Xi Chen 1 Zhewen Hou 2 Christopher A. Metzler 3 Arian Maleki 2 Shirin Jalali 1
Here, Xo = diag(xo ), where xo ∈ Cn denotes the
complex-valued signal of interest. w ∈ Cn represents
speckle (or multiplicative) noise, where w1 , . . . , wn are in2
dependent and identically distributed (iid) CN (0, σw
In ),
m
and finally z ∈ C denotes the additive noise, often caused
by the sensors, is modeled as iid CN (0, σz2 ). In this paper,
we explore the scenario where m ≤ n, allowing imaging
systems to capture higher resolution images than constrained
by the number of sensors.1

Abstract
We investigate both the theoretical and algorithmic aspects of likelihood-based methods
for recovering a signal from multiple sets of
complex-valued measurements, referred to as
looks, affected by speckle (multiplicative) noise.
Our theoretical contributions include establishing
the first theoretical upper bound on the Mean
Squared Error (MSE) of the maximum likelihood
estimator under the deep image prior hypothesis.
Our results capture the dependence of MSE on
the number of parameters in the deep image
prior, the number of looks, the signal dimension,
and the number of measurements per look. On
the algorithmic side, we introduce the concept
of bagged Deep Image Prior (Bagged-DIP)
and integrate it with projected gradient descent.
Furthermore, we show how employing the
Newton-Schulz algorithm for calculating matrix
inverses within the iterations of projected
gradient descent reduces the computational
complexity of the algorithm. We show that this
method achieves state-of-the-art performance.
Code is available at https://github.
com/Computational-Imaging-RU/
Bagged-DIP-Speckle.

As is clear from (1), the multiplicative nature of the speckle
noise poses a challenge in extracting accurate information
from measurements, especially when the measurement matrix A is ill-conditioned. To alleviate this issue, many practical systems employ a technique known as multilook or
multishot (Argenti et al., 2013; Bate et al., 2022). Instead
of taking a single measurement of the image, multilook systems capture multiple measurements, aiming for each group
of measurements to have independent speckle and additive
noise. In an L look system, the measurements captured at
look ℓ, ℓ = 1, . . . , L, can be represented as
yℓ = AXo wℓ + zℓ ,
where, w1 , . . . , wL ∈ Cn and z1 , . . . , zL ∈ Cm denote the
indepdent speckle noise and additive noise vectors, respectively. In this model, we have assumed that the measurement
kernel A remains constant across the looks. This assumption
holds true in multilooking for several imaging systems, such
as when the sensors’ locations change slightly for different
looks.

1. Introduction

Since fully-developed noises are complex-valued Gaussian
and have uniform phases, the phase of xo cannot be recovered. Hence, the goal of a multilook system is to obtain a precise estimate of |xo | based on the L observations
{y1 , . . . , yL }, given the measurement matrix A. (Here, | · |
denotes the element-wise absolute value operation.) Therefore, since the phase of xo is not recoverable, in the rest of
the paper, we assume that xo is real-valued.

One of the most fundamental and challenging issues faced
by many coherent imaging systems is the presence of
speckle noise. An imaging system with “fully-developed”
speckle noise can be modeled as
y = AXo w + z.

(1)

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA 2 Department of Statistics,
Columbia University, NY, USA 3 Department of Computer Science,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. Correspondence
to: Shirin Jalali <shirin.jalali@rutgers.edu>.

A standard approach for estimating xo is to minimize the
negative log-likelihood function subject to the signal structure constraint. More precisely, in a constrained-likelihood-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Considering m < n for simpler imaging systems (with no
speckle noise) has led to the development of the fields of compressed sensing and compressive phase retrieval.

1

