Individual Contributions as Intrinsic Exploration Scaffolds for Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning

Xinran Li 1 Zifan Liu 1 Shibo Chen 1 Jun Zhang 1

Abstract

Dayong, 2005) and package logistics (Seuken & Zilberstein, 2007) to emergency response operations (Parker et al.,
2016) and robotic control systems (Swamy et al., 2020). The
multi-agent settings introduce unique challenges beyond the
single agent reinforcement learning (RL), such as the need
to address non-stationarity and partial observability (Yuan
et al., 2023a), as well as the complexities involved in credit
assignment (Foerster et al., 2018).

In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
effective exploration is critical, especially in
sparse reward environments. Although introducing global intrinsic rewards can foster exploration
in such settings, it often complicates credit assignment among agents. To address this difficulty, we propose Individual Contributions as intrinsic Exploration Scaffolds (ICES), a novel approach to motivate exploration by assessing each
agent’s contribution from a global view. In particular, ICES constructs exploration scaffolds with
Bayesian surprise, leveraging global transition
information during centralized training. These
scaffolds, used only in training, help to guide individual agents towards actions that significantly
impact the global latent state transitions. Additionally, ICES separates exploration policies from
exploitation policies, enabling the former to utilize privileged global information during training.
Extensive experiments on cooperative benchmark
tasks with sparse rewards, including Google Research Football (GRF) and StarCraft Multi-agent
Challenge (SMAC), demonstrate that ICES exhibits superior exploration capabilities compared
with baselines. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/LXXXXR/ICES.

Despite the progress made by state-of-the-art algorithms
like MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017), QMIX (Rashid et al.,
2020) and MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022), which leverage the centralized training decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm,
a significant limitation arises in environments with sparse
rewards. Sparse rewards, common in real-world applications, present a substantial challenge for policy exploration
as they provide limited guidance during training. Classical
exploration methods, such as ϵ-greedy, struggle in these
environments, primarily due to the exponentially growing
state space and the necessity for coordinated exploration
among agents (Liu et al., 2021). To address sparse rewards
in MARL, recent approaches have focused on augmenting extrinsic rewards with global intrinsic rewards. These
intrinsic rewards are typically designed to foster cooperation (Wang et al., 2019) or diversity (Li et al., 2021). While
showing promise, these methods suffer from one obstacle:
the non-stationary nature of intrinsic rewards during training (Burda et al., 2018) introduces additional complications
in credit assignment. Furthermore, balancing intrinsic and
extrinsic rewards often demands considerable tunning effort,
particularly in the absence of prior knowledge about the
extrinsic reward functions (Yuan et al., 2023b).

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently
gained significant interest in the research community, primarily due to its applicability across a diverse range of practical scenarios. Numerous real-world applications are multiagent in nature, ranging from resource allocation (Ying &

To address the aforementioned challenges and improve performance in MARL with sparse rewards, we propose a new
exploration method, named Individual Contribution as Intrinsic Exploration Scaffolds (ICES). The key idea is to
take advantage of the CTDE paradigm and utilize global
information available during the training to construct intrinsic scaffolds that guide multi-agent exploration. These
intrinsic scaffolds are specifically designed to encourage
individual actions that have a significant influence on the
underlying global latent state transitions, thus promoting
cooperative exploration without the need to learn intrinsic

1
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to: Shibo Chen <eeshibochen@ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

