A Fresh Take on Stale Embeddings:
Improving Dense Retriever Training with Corrector Networks

Nicholas Monath * 1 Will Grathwohl * 1 Michael Boratko 1 Rob Fergus 1 Andrew McCallum 1 Manzil Zaheer 1

Abstract

2019; Xiong et al., 2020), or reinforcement learning (DulacArnold et al., 2015; Gottipati et al., 2020). This approach,
often called a “dual encoder,” employs two separate deep
networks, one to map an input to a fixed dimensional vector,
another to map targets to the same vector space. We then
compute softmax logits as the inner product of an input
vector to each target vector (Gillick et al., 2019; Karpukhin
et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2020).

In dense retrieval, deep encoders provide embeddings for both inputs and targets, and the softmax
function is used to parameterize a distribution
over a large number of candidate targets (e.g., textual passages for information retrieval). Significant challenges arise in training such encoders
in the increasingly prevalent scenario of (1) a
large number of targets, (2) a computationally
expensive target encoder model, (3) cached target embeddings that are out-of-date due to ongoing training of target encoder parameters. This
paper presents a simple and highly scalable response to these challenges by training a small
parametric corrector network that adjusts stale
cached target embeddings, enabling an accurate
softmax approximation and thereby sampling of
up-to-date high scoring “hard negatives.” We theoretically investigate the generalization properties
of our proposed target corrector, relating the complexity of the network, staleness of cached representations, and the amount of training data. We
present experimental results on large benchmark
dense retrieval datasets as well as on QA with retrieval augmented language models. Our approach
matches state-of-the-art results even when no target embedding updates are made during training
beyond an initial cache from the unsupervised
pre-trained model, providing a 4-80x reduction in
re-embedding computational cost.

With the typical softmax cross-entropy loss, exact training
of the parameters of these two encoder networks would
involve using the current parameters to compute the logits for all targets, requiring running the target encoder on
all targets at every step of training. Of course, this far-tooburdensome approach is not used in practice. Instead, various approximations have been developed (Reddi et al., 2019;
Rawat et al., 2020; Lindgren et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2020;
Monath et al., 2023). The typical approximation computes
a truncated softmax on a sampled subset of targets. These
approaches store a cache of “stale” encoded representations
of targets and uses the stale, cached representations to draw
samples from the softmax-parameterized distribution during training (Lindgren et al., 2021; Izacard et al., 2022).
Previous work has used these stale representations amidst
other approximations such as index structures (Xiong et al.,
2020; Monath et al., 2023), kernel-methods (Rawat et al.,
2019), and focusing training on subsets of targets (Reddi
et al., 2019). However, inevitably, the staleness of the target
embeddings causes training regret.
In this work, we present a simple, general purpose method
for addressing staleness in softmax-parameterized categorical distributions that is scalable enough to be updated at
every step of training. Our approach improves upon an existing stale approximation using a learned target corrector
network. The target corrector network, inspired by recent
work on training continuous energy-based models (Han
et al., 2020; Grathwohl et al., 2020; 2021), is a small parametric model that accounts for the discrepancy between the
stale approximation and unnormalized logits from the true
distribution. By learning to improve upon the stale approximation, the target corrector network can be used to produce
a more accurate approximation to the target distribution. We
further extend beyond training large output space classifiers
to latent variable retrieval augmented language models.

1. Introduction
The softmax function, paired with deep neural encoder models, is often the parameterization of choice for discrete distributions over many targets such as in classification (Logeswaran et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2022), retrieval (Reddi et al.,
∗
Equal Contribution. Order determined by coin flip. 1 Google
DeepMind. Correspondence to: Will Grathwohl <wgrathwohl@google.com>, Nicholas Monath <nmonath@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

