Equivariant Deep Weight Space Alignment

Aviv Navon * 1 Aviv Shamsian * 1 Ethan Fetaya 1 Gal Chechik 1 2 Nadav Dym 3 Haggai Maron 3 2

Abstract

fore highly desirable to “align” networks - find optimal
permutations between the weight matrices of two networks.
Weight Alignment is critical to many tasks that involve
weight spaces. One key application is model merging and
editing (Ainsworth et al., 2022; Wortsman et al., 2022; Stoica et al., 2023; Ilharco et al., 2022), in which the weights
of two or more models are (linearly) combined into a single
model to improve their performance or enhance their capabilities. Weight alignment algorithms are also vital to the
study of the loss landscape of deep networks (Entezari et al.,
2022), a recent research direction that has gained increasing
attention. Moreover, weight alignment induces an invariant
distance function on the weight space that can be used for
clustering and visualization.

Permutation symmetries of deep networks make
basic operations like model merging and similarity estimation challenging. In many cases, aligning the weights of the networks, i.e., finding optimal permutations between their weights, is necessary. Unfortunately, weight alignment is an NPhard problem. Prior research has mainly focused
on solving relaxed versions of the alignment problem, leading to either time-consuming methods
or sub-optimal solutions. To accelerate the alignment process and improve its quality, we propose
a novel framework aimed at learning to solve the
weight alignment problem, which we name D EEP A LIGN. To that end, we first prove that weight
alignment adheres to two fundamental symmetries and then, propose a deep architecture that respects these symmetries. Notably, our framework
does not require any labeled data. We provide
a theoretical analysis of our approach and evaluate D EEP -A LIGN on several types of network
architectures and learning setups. Our experimental results indicate that a feed-forward pass with
D EEP -A LIGN produces better or equivalent alignments compared to those produced by current
optimization algorithms. Additionally, our alignments can be used as an effective initialization
for other methods, leading to improved solutions
with a significant speedup in convergence.

Since weight alignment is NP-hard (Ainsworth et al., 2022),
current approaches rely primarily on local optimization of
the alignment objective which is time-consuming and may
lead to suboptimal solutions. Therefore, identifying methods with faster run time and improved alignment quality
is an important research objective. A successful implementation of such methods would allow practitioners to
perform weight alignment in real time which is crucail for
several applications. One example of such an application
is federated learning setups where weight alignment can
improve convergence speed and model quality when models
are aligned before weight averaging is performed at each
global step (Wang et al., 2020a). Additionally, the ability to
align models in real-time is crucial for any task requiring the
computation of multiple alignments in a reasonable time,
including continual learning setups, weight space mixup
(Shamsian et al., 2023), or clustering weight space data.

1. Introduction

Following a large body of works that suggested learning to
solve combinatorial optimization problems using deep learning architectures (Khalil et al., 2017; Bengio et al., 2021;
Cappart et al., 2021), we propose the first learning-based
approach to weight alignment, called D EEP -A LIGN. D EEP A LIGN is a neural network with a specialized architecture
that is trained to predict high-quality weight alignments
for a given distribution of models. A major benefit of our
approach is that after a model has been trained, predicting
the alignment between two networks amounts to a simple
feed-forward pass through the network followed by an efficient projection step, as opposed to solving an optimization
problem in other methods.

The space of deep network weights has a complex structure since networks maintain their function under certain
permutations of their weights. This fact makes it hard to
perform simple operations over deep networks, such as
averaging their weights or estimating similarity. It is there*
1
Equal contribution
Bar-Ilan University 2 NVIDIA
Research 3 Technion.
Correspondence to:
Aviv
Navon
<aviv.navon@biu.ac.il>,
Aviv
Shamsian
<aviv.shamsian@biu.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

