Detecting and Identifying Selection Structure in Sequential Data

Yujia Zheng 1 Zeyu Tang 1 Yiwen Qiu 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 2 Kun Zhang 1 3

Abstract

generating process in various applications. For instance, in
composing music, composers are guided by specific artistic
goals or themes, leading them to selectively choose certain
patterns of musical combinations (as combinations of basic
elements) from their mind, thereby introducing dependencies among the basic elements in the music sequences
(Schoenberg et al., 1967). These intentional but unmeasured
selections, together with the contextual information, shape
the structure of the compositions. A comprehensive understanding of the selection structure is essential for uncovering
the underlying causal process and making use of it.

We argue that the selective inclusion of data points
based on latent objectives is common in practical
situations, such as music sequences. Since this
selection process often distorts statistical analysis,
previous work primarily views it as a bias to be
corrected and proposes various methods to mitigate its effect. However, while controlling this
bias is crucial, selection also offers an opportunity
to provide a deeper insight into the hidden generation process, as it is a fundamental mechanism
underlying what we observe. In particular, overlooking selection in sequential data can lead to
an incomplete or overcomplicated inductive bias
in modeling, such as assuming a universal autoregressive structure for all dependencies. Therefore,
rather than merely viewing it as a bias, we explore
the causal structure of selection in sequential data
to delve deeper into the complete causal process.
Specifically, we show that selection structure is
identifiable without any parametric assumptions
or interventional experiments. Moreover, even in
cases where selection variables coexist with latent
confounders, we still establish the nonparametric
identifiability under appropriate structural conditions. Meanwhile, we also propose a provably
correct algorithm to detect and identify selection
structures as well as other types of dependencies.
The framework has been validated empirically
on both synthetic data and real-world music.

In sequential data, the understanding of selection plays a
vital role. One essential question is whether selection leaves
unique data dependence patterns that cannot be well explained by direct causal relations or latent confounding.
Interestingly, as we will see in this paper, the answer is
yes. Consequently, overlooking selection in such data can
result in the introduction of incomplete or overcomplicated
dependence models for the data. For instance, due to the
sequential nature of the data, an autoregressive structure
is usually assumed for the entire sequence (Radford et al.,
2018), where each variable is considered primarily a function of its predecessors, perhaps with attention, and hence
might be overcomplicated. Even when latent variables are
incorporated to account for more complex dependencies,
treating them solely as confounders amounts to a restricted
generative view–as we will show, latent confounders and
latent selection are distinguishable based on observational
data, indicating their different footprints in the data. These
perspectives neglect the potential influence of latent selection structures, such as the possibility that some dependencies among observed variables in the data sequence are due
to a latent sampling criterion acting as the selection variable, rather than direct causal relations between variables.
Confusing selection with latent confounding or direct causal
relations can distort our understanding of the generative
process. Therefore, discovering and integrating selection
structure may be essential in the modeling of sequential
data, implementing a more veridical inductive bias.

1. Introduction
Selection arises from the preferential inclusion of certain
data points based on latent variables that are dependent
on some of the observed variables (Heckman, 1979). This
selection process not only introduces bias into statistical
inferences but is also a fundamental aspect of the data-

Previous research related to selection mainly focuses on
controlling the impact of selection in data for inference
or discovery (Spirtes et al., 1995; Hernán et al., 2004;
Zhang, 2008; Bareinboim et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2016;
Correa et al., 2019; Forré & Mooij, 2020; Versteeg et al.,

1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 MBZUAI.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

