DNCs Require More Planning Steps

Yara Shamshoum 1 Nitzan Hodos 1 Yuval Sieradzki 1 Assaf Schuster 1

Abstract

distribution of the training set. This can be attributed to
various factors such as sparse input distributions, outliers,
and edge cases. To address this issue and improve generalization, DNNs are now being trained on increasingly large
datasets. For instance, in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), dataset sizes can reach billions and trillions
of tokens (Kudugunta et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023).

Many recent works use machine learning models to solve various complex algorithmic problems. However, these models attempt to reach
a solution without considering the problem’s required computational complexity, which can be
detrimental to their ability to solve it correctly.
In this work we investigate the effect of computational time and memory on generalization of
implicit algorithmic solvers. To do so, we focus
on the Differentiable Neural Computer (DNC),
a general problem solver that also lets us reason
directly about its usage of time and memory. In
this work, we argue that the number of planning
steps the model is allowed to take, which we call
”planning budget”, is a constraint that can cause
the model to generalize poorly and hurt its ability to fully utilize its external memory. We evaluate our method on Graph Shortest Path, Convex
Hull, Graph MinCut and Associative Recall, and
show how the planning budget can drastically
change the behavior of the learned algorithm, in
terms of learned time complexity, training time,
stability and generalization to inputs larger than
those seen during training.

A potential solution to the issue of generalization lies in
algorithms. Algorithms are designed to solve a problem
for all possible cases rather than simply approximating a
function. Instead of learning to approximate a function, we
learn to generate an algorithm which consists of a series
of steps that modify the internal state, memory, or external interfaces to ultimately achieve the desired result. The
underlying assumption is that if a high-quality algorithm is
discovered, it will inherently generalize to all cases. We refer to this concept as Algorithmic Reasoning in this paper.
There are multiple examples of algorithmic reasoning,
which can be implemented in an explicit or an implicit
manner. In the explicit approach, the model’s task is to
output a description of the algorithm it has learned. Examples include AlphaTensor (Fawzi et al., 2022), in which
the model learns to find general matrix multiplication algorithms for various matrix sizes; code generation models
such as (Li et al., 2022), and Large Language Model (LLM)
that are able to generate a piece of code solving a task described in free text (Shinn et al., 2023).

1. Introduction

In the implicit approach, the processor learns to output actions that work for a specific input instance of the problem.
To run the algorithm, we must run the model. This way, the
model learns to perform the algorithm rather than describe
it; the model’s weights, internal representation space, and
architecture comprise the learned algorithm. Examples include (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2016; Veličković et al., 2020;
Kurach et al., 2016; Graves et al., 2014)

Over the past few years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
have made significant advancements in various fields, including computer vision, audio analysis and speech recognition, as well as generating art and text with human-like
accuracy. However, a major challenge still persists: the
ability to generalize to unseen inputs. When a DNN is
trained on a specific training set, its performance often
decreases when presented with inputs that are outside the

An important example of this approach is the Differentiable
Neural Computer model (Graves et al., 2016), which is the
focus of this work. In brief, the DNC is a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based on a differentiable implementation of a Turing Machine, extending previous work (Graves
et al., 2014). Featuring an LSTM with a memory matrix,
the DNC can model algorithms that interact with external
memory, handling tasks like copying, sorting, and graph

1

Department of Computer Science, Technion- Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Yara
Shamshoum <yara-sh@campus.technion.ac.il>, Nitzan Hodos
<hodosnitzan@campus.technion.ac.il>, Yuval Sieradzki <syuvsier@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024
by the author(s).

1

