Probabilistic Forecasting with Stochastic Interpolants and Föllmer Processes

Yifan Chen * 1 Mark Goldstein * 1 Mengjian Hua * 1
Michael S. Albergo 1 Nicholas M. Boffi 1
Eric Vanden-Eijnden 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Forecasting the future state of a dynamical system given
complete or partial information about the current state is a
ubiquitous problem across science and engineering, with diverse applications in climate modeling (Smagorinsky, 1963;
Palmer et al., 1993; Gneiting et al., 2005; Pathak et al.,
2022), fluid dynamics (Buaria & Sreenivasan, 2023), video
prediction (Oprea et al., 2020; Finn et al., 2016; Lee et al.,
2018), and extrapolation of time series data (Lim & Zohren,
2021; Masini et al., 2023). Forecasting can be performed
deterministically, whereby the goal is to compute a single
prediction for the future state (Giannakis et al., 2023), or
probabilistically, whereby the goal is to predict a distribution over future states consistent with the current information (Gneiting & Katzfuss, 2014). Probabilistic forecasting is the natural formulation when the underlying system
dynamics are stochastic, when the full system state cannot be measured, or when measurements are corrupted by
noise, as is the case for most real-world systems of interest.
Moreover, while deterministic forecasting appears to be a
simpler problem, recent works have uncovered difficulties
with deterministic forecasting methods when the underlying
dynamics are chaotic (Jiang et al., 2023).

We propose a framework for probabilistic forecasting of dynamical systems based on generative modeling. Given observations of the system state over time, we formulate the forecasting
problem as sampling from the conditional distribution of the future system state given its current
state. To this end, we leverage the framework
of stochastic interpolants, which facilitates the
construction of a generative model between an
arbitrary base distribution and the target. We design a fictitious, non-physical stochastic dynamics
that takes as initial condition the current system
state and produces as output a sample from the
target conditional distribution in finite time and
without bias. This process therefore maps a point
mass centered at the current state onto a probabilistic ensemble of forecasts. We prove that the
drift coefficient entering the stochastic differential equation (SDE) achieving this task is nonsingular, and that it can be learned efficiently by
square loss regression over the time-series data.
We show that the drift and the diffusion coefficients of this SDE can be adjusted after training,
and that a specific choice that minimizes the impact of the estimation error gives a Föllmer process. We highlight the utility of our approach
on several complex, high-dimensional forecasting
problems, including stochastically forced NavierStokes and video prediction on the KTH and
CLEVRER datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/interpolants/forecasting.

Motivated by the recent success of generative models built
upon dynamical transport of measure, such as score-based
diffusion (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020), flow matching
(Lipman et al., 2022), and stochastic interpolants (Albergo
& Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Albergo et al., 2023), here we
introduce a generative modeling approach for probabilistic
forecasting. This approach maps the current state of the
system onto the ensemble of possible future outcomes after
a fixed time lag. From a transport perspective, this requires
pushing a point mass measure onto a probability distribution with larger support. In what follows, we show that the
interpolant framework enables us to design an artificial dynamics that performs this task using a stochastic differential
equation. In practice, the drift fields entering the SDEs we
introduce can be learned via square loss regression. We
also show that the diffusion coefficient in these SDEs can
be tuned a-posteriori (i.e. without having to retrain a drift).
We show that a specific choice that minimizes the impact
of the estimation error recovers a Föllmer process (Föllmer,

*

Equal contribution 1 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Eric Vanden-Eijnden <eve2@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

