On Which Nodes Does GCN Fail? Enhancing GCN From the Node Perspective

Jincheng Huang 1 Jialie Shen 2 Xiaoshuang Shi 1 3 Xiaofeng Zhu 1 4

Abstract

of numerous advanced GCN models. These models not
only perform well in the field of graph mining but have also
achieved great success in different fields such as healthcare
(Li et al., 2020b; Sun et al., 2020b), recommender systems
(Fan et al., 2022; 2019), and natural language processing
(Wu et al., 2023; Malekzadeh et al., 2021).

The label smoothness assumption is at the core of
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs): nodes in
a local region have similar labels. Thus, GCN performs local feature smoothing operation to adhere
to this assumption. However, there exist some
nodes whose labels obtained by feature smoothing conflict with the label smoothness assumption.
We find that the label smoothness assumption and
the process of feature smoothing are both problematic on these nodes, and call these nodes out
of GCN’s control (OOC nodes). In this paper,
first, we design the corresponding algorithm to
locate the OOC nodes, then we summarize the
characteristics of OOC nodes that affect their representation learning, and based on their characteristics, we present DaGCN, an efficient framework
that can facilitate the OOC nodes. Extensive experiments verify the superiority of the proposed
method and demonstrate that current advanced
GCNs are improvements specifically on OOC
nodes; the remaining nodes under GCN’s control (UC nodes) are already optimally represented
by vanilla GCN on most datasets.

The success of GCN is primarily attributed to its smoothing
assumption: Connect nodes tend to have a high probability of sharing the same labels. (i.e., label smoothness assumption)(Zhang et al., 2021). Most of the advanced GCNs are built upon this assumption to enhance
the capabilities of GCN, which can be roughly divided into
two categories: GCN-smoothing based methods and GCNsmoothing enhanced methods. The GCN-smoothing based
methods utilize additional components to get a more robust and comprehensive representation based on GCN’s
smoothing operation. For example, Graph Contrastive
Learning methods (Liu et al., 2022b) generally utilizes GCNsmoothing operation as the encoders to learn the invariance
of the representation, AM-GCN (Wang et al., 2020) uses
multiple GCN-smoothing operation for different channels
to enhance the GCN’s capability of fusing topological structures and node features substantially. The GCN-smoothing
enhanced methods aim to improve the smoothing operation
to ensure the node obtains richer and more appropriate information. For example, APPNP (Gasteiger et al., 2018),
DAGNN (Liu et al., 2020), and GCNII (Chen et al., 2020)
increase the GCN smoothing range while mitigating oversmoothing (Li et al., 2018) for each node through various
residual techniques.

1. Introduction
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2017) exhibit a remarkable capacity to handle graph data.
Therefore, in recent years, many researchers have drawn inspiration from GCNs (Du et al., 2022; Gasteiger et al., 2018;
Chen et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022a; Huang
et al., 2023a; Yang et al., 2024), leading to the development

Although previous GCNs have achieved promising results
by using feature smoothing operation to adhere to label
smoothness assumption, a fundamental question remains
unexplored: Do all nodes equally benefit from it? Specifically, GCN propagates features on the graph so that the
features of connected nodes are similar (i.e., feature smoothing operation). Following this, GCNs utilize known labels to
guide the classification process. Given that connected nodes
exhibit similar features post feature smoothing, it is implicitly assumed that nodes near those with known labels should
share the same labels (i.e., label smoothness assumption).
Suppose the labels predicted through the feature smoothing operation align with the label smoothness assumption,
such nodes meet the expectations of the GCN framework,

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Department of Computer Science, City, University of London, London, United Kingdom 3 Sichuan Artificial Intelligence
Research Institute, Yibin, China 4 Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: X. Zhu
<seanzhuxf@gmail.com>, X. Shi <xsshi2013@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

