Expert Proximity as Surrogate Rewards for
Single Demonstration Imitation Learning

Chia-Cheng Chiang * 1 Li-Cheng Lan * 2 Wei-Fang Sun 3 Chien Feng 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 2 Chun-Yi Lee 1

Abstract

multiple demonstrations are available (Ho & Ermon, 2016;
Fu et al., 2020). Both settings allow interactions with the environment during training but lack access to the ground truth
reward function, online human feedback, or prior knowledge acquired from analogous tasks. Single-demo IL is a
practical paradigm for addressing real-world challenges, as
collecting a large number of expert demonstrations is often
expensive and sometimes not even feasible, especially in
applications such as autonomous robots. Consider the training of a surgical robot (Ou & Tavakoli, 2023). In situations
where certain surgical procedures are extremely rare, it is
possible that only a single expert surgeon’s demonstration is
available. Similarly, in the context of training an agent for
vehicle control (Scheel et al., 2022), unique scenarios such
as stabilizing the vehicle during a tire blowout, navigating
icy roads, or avoiding collisions with objects may have only
one or very few demonstrations available. Another example
is cooking tutorials on YouTube, where YouTubers typically
demonstrate the cooking process only once. As a result, a
robotic agent learning from a single-demonstration setting
encounters similar challenges in these domains. However,
many IL methods, such as behavior cloning (BC) and most
basic inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) methods, face
limitations when only a single demonstration is available.
BC tends to overfit when few expert demonstrations are
provided. For basic IRL methods, the scarcity of expert
demonstrations can typically result in a sparse reward situation, which may lead to relatively limited training signals
for the agent. This issue of reward sparsity becomes even
more pronounced in high-dimensional, continuous environments with randomly initialized positions. In light of these,
developing an effective and robust learning mechanism that
operates solely with a single demonstration is of considerable importance. Unfortunately, although a few previous
methods (Dadashi et al., 2021; Freund et al., 2023) exist
that can be utilized to address few-demonstration IL, single
demo IL remains relatively unexplored and offers opportunities for further advancing contemporary IL approaches.

In this paper, we focus on single-demonstration
imitation learning (IL), a practical approach for
real-world applications where acquiring multiple expert demonstrations is costly or infeasible
and the ground truth reward function is not available. In contrast to typical IL settings with multiple demonstrations, single-demonstration IL involves an agent having access to only one expert
trajectory. We highlight the issue of sparse reward signals in this setting and propose to mitigate this issue through our proposed Transition
Discriminator-based IL (TDIL) method. TDIL is
an IRL method designed to address reward sparsity by introducing a denser surrogate reward function that considers environmental dynamics. This
surrogate reward function encourages the agent
to navigate towards states that are proximal to
expert states. In practice, TDIL trains a transition discriminator to differentiate between valid
and non-valid transitions in a given environment
to compute the surrogate rewards. The experiments demonstrate that TDIL outperforms existing IL approaches and achieves expert-level performance in the single-demonstration IL setting
across five widely adopted MuJoCo benchmarks
as well as the “Adroit Door” robotic environment.

1. Introduction
Single-demonstration imitation learning (or simply “singledemo IL” hereafter) is characterized by an agent having
access to only one expert demonstration (i.e., a single expert
trajectory). This contrasts with typical IL settings, where
*
Equal contribution 1 ELSA Lab, Department of Computer
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. 3 NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA
Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Chun-Yi
Lee <cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw>.

To confront the single-demo IL paradigm, this study proposes an IRL method with a denser reward function, termed
Transition Discriminator-based IL (TDIL). TDIL increases
the density of obtainable reward signals in the IRL setting
while accounting for environmental dynamics to ensure rea-

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

