OpenMoE: An Early Effort on Open Mixture-of-Experts Language Models

Fuzhao Xue 1 Zian Zheng 1 Yao Fu 2 Jinjie Ni 1 Zangwei Zheng 1 Wangchunshu Zhou 3 Yang You 1

Abstract

2022), and has even become a part of our daily lives through
chatbot applications such as ChatGPT, Bard, and Copilot.
However, LLMs are computationally expensive in both training and inference. As LLMs become increasingly prevalent, enhancing their performance without proportionally
increasing computational resources is a critical challenge.
In response to this challenge, Riquelme et al. (2021); Fedus et al. (2021) proposed the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) to
scale up the trainable parameters of the transformer with little additional computation overhead. Recent advancements
in MoE-based language models, such as GLaM (Du et al.,
2022) and ST-MoE (Zoph et al., 2022) have demonstrated
superior performance in various tasks. However, before the
release of OpenMoE, there were few open-sourced MoE
language models trained with trillion-level diverse datasets.

To help the open-source community have a better understanding of Mixture-of-Experts (MoE)
based large language models (LLMs), we train
and release OpenMoE, a series of fully opensourced and reproducible decoder-only MoE
LLMs, ranging from 650M to 34B parameters
and trained on up to over 1T tokens. Our investigation confirms that MoE-based LLMs can offer
a more favorable cost-effectiveness trade-off than
dense LLMs, highlighting the potential effectiveness for future LLM development.
One more important contribution of this study is
an in-depth analysis of the routing mechanisms
within our OpenMoE models, leading to three significant findings: Context-Independent Specialization, Early Routing Learning, and Drop-towardsthe-End. We discovered that routing decisions in
MoE models are predominantly based on token
IDs, with minimal context relevance. The tokento-expert assignments are determined early in the
pre-training phase and remain largely unchanged.
This imperfect routing can result in performance
degradation, particularly in sequential tasks like
multi-turn conversations, where tokens appearing
later in a sequence are more likely to be dropped.
Finally, we rethink our design based on the abovementioned observations and analysis. To facilitate
future MoE LLM development, we propose potential strategies for mitigating the issues we found
and further improving off-the-shelf MoE LLM
designs.

In this work, we set forth three primary goals: (1) To offer a first-attempt solution in detail for training a decoderonly MoE model within the existing framework of training
LLMs. (2) To perform an in-depth analysis of the MoE
routing mechanisms, thereby providing the research community with deeper insights into the behaviors and potential
limitations of MoE-based LLMs. (3) To pave the way for future MoE LLM development. Through this early endeavor,
we aim to stimulate and accelerate the growth of the opensource MoE community.
Releasing OpenMoE. First, we release OpenMoE, a series of open-sourced MoE-based LLMs, including: (1)
OpenMoE-Base/16E: a small model with 0.65B parameters for debugging purposes. 16E means 16 experts
per MoE layer; (2) OpenMoE-8B/32E: this variant features 8B parameters in total, activating around 2B parameters per token in Transformer blocks, and is pre-trained
on over 1 trillion tokens; (3) OpenMoE-8B/32E-Chat, a
chat version of OpenMoE-8B/32E, fine-tuned with a 100K
subset of the WildChat (Anonymous, 2024) dataset; (4)
OpenMoE-34B/32E: a larger scale model, activating 6B
parameters per token in Transformer blocks and trained
with 200B tokens, serving as a testament to the scalability of our approach. Detailed configuration can be found
in Appendix F Our OpenMoE-8B/32E models achieved
comparable performance with OpenLLaMA-3B (Geng &
Liu, 2023) and TinyLLaMA-1.1B (Zhang et al., 2024), two
dense open LLMs used higher training cost. Notably, On
the MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023), OpenMoE-8B/32E-

1. Introduction
Large Language Model (LLM) has exhibited remarkable performance on various NLP tasks (Raffel et al., 2020; Li et al.,
1

National University of Singapore 2 University of Edinburgh 3 ETH Zurich.
Correspondence to: Fuzhao Xue
<f.xue@u.nus.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

