FreeBind: Free Lunch in Unified Multimodal Space via Knowledge Fusion

Zehan Wang * 1 2 Ziang Zhang * 1 Xize Cheng 1 Rongjie Huang 1 Luping Liu 1 Zhenhui Ye 1 Haifeng Huang 1
Yang Zhao 3 Tao Jin 1 Peng Gao 2 Zhou Zhao 1 2

Abstract
Unified multi-model representation spaces are the
foundation of multimodal understanding and generation. However, the billions of model parameters and catastrophic forgetting problems make it
challenging to further enhance pre-trained unified
spaces. In this work, we propose FreeBind, an
idea that treats multimodal representation spaces
as basic units, and freely augments pre-trained
unified space by integrating knowledge from extra expert spaces via “space bonds”. Specifically,
we introduce two kinds of basic space bonds: 1)
Space Displacement Bond and 2) Space Combination Bond. Based on these basic bonds, we
design Complex Sequential & Parallel Bonds
to effectively integrate multiple spaces simultaneously. Benefiting from the modularization concept, we further propose a coarse-to-fine customized inference strategy to flexibly adjust the
enhanced unified space for different purposes.
Experimentally, we bind ImageBind with extra
image-text and audio-text expert spaces, resulting
in three main variants: ImageBind++, InternVLIB
and InternVLIB ++. These resulting spaces outperform ImageBind on 5 audio-image-text downstream tasks across 9 datasets. Moreover, via customized inference, it even surpasses the advanced
audio-text and image-text expert spaces. Our
code and checkpoints are released at https://
github.com/zehanwang01/FreeBind

Figure 1. High-level overview of FreeBind. We propose two basic
kinds of space bonds: space displacement bond and space combination bond, to efficiently augment unified space by integrating
knowledge of extra expert spaces.

et al., 2022; 2023b; Xue et al., 2023a;b; Liu et al., 2023b).
As an important foundation for multimodal understanding (Liu et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2023b;
Huang et al., 2023a; Han et al., 2023) and generation (Huang
et al., 2023b; Tang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023a; Rombach
et al., 2022; Podell et al., 2023), a unified multimodal space
is crucial for artificial general intelligence.
Existing advanced unified multimodal representation
space (Zhu et al., 2023a; Girdhar et al., 2023; Zhou et al.,
2023) are built on billion-level data and parameters. Learning such a unified space demands exceedingly costly computational resources, and further enhancing the pre-trained
space often requires huge training resources or faces the
catastrophic forgetting problem. These challenges limit the
further development of unified multimodal representation.

1. Introduction
Unified multimodal representation aims to learn a semantically shared representation space for many modalities (such
as audio, image, language and 3D point cloud) (Girdhar
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Guzhov et al., 2022; Wu

In this paper, we propose FreeBind, an efficient knowledge
fusion scheme to enhance pre-trained unified space. Specifically, we propose to bind unified space (i.e., space for many
modalities) with expert space (i.e., space focus on single
modalities pair) via two basic “space bonds”:

*

1
Equal contribution
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai
3
AI Lab ByteDance.
Correspondence to: Zhou Zhao
<zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn>.

1) Space Displacement Bond. We align the unified space
to the expert space to inherit all the knowledge of the expert
space. However, remapping the entire unified space compromises the knowledge of unified space. Additionally, when

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

