Clustered Federated Learning via Gradient-based Partitioning

Heasung Kim 1 Hyeji Kim 1 Gustavo de Veciana 1

Abstract

When dealing with heterogeneous local datasets, the training
of a shared global model for all clients may not yield optimal
results. To address this issue, researchers have proposed
model personalization techniques (Kulkarni et al., 2020)
that involve clients collaboratively learning a global model
and then fine-tuning it to each client’s data (Fallah et al.,
2020; Singhal et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2017; Wang et al.,
2019; Yu et al., 2020). However, in real-world scenarios,
the effectiveness of fine-tuning may be limited by the small
size of clients’ local datasets. Moreover, the use of a shared
large backbone model across clients may be impractical in
scenarios where one wishes to obtain lightweight models,
e.g., for IoT devices, or when clients lack common features.

Clustered Federated Learning (CFL) is a promising distributed learning framework that addresses
data heterogeneity issues across multiple clients
by grouping clients and providing a shared generalized model for each group. However, under
privacy-preserving federated learning protocols
where there is no direct sharing of clients’ local
datasets, existing approaches often fail to find optimal client groupings resulting in sub-optimal
performance. In this paper, we propose a novel
CFL algorithm that achieves robust clustering and
learning performance. Conceptually, our algorithm groups clients that exhibit similarity in their
model updates by periodically accumulating and
clustering the gradients that clients compute for
various models. The proposed algorithm is shown
to achieve a near-optimal error rate for stochastic
convergence to optimal models under mild conditions. We present a detailed analysis of the algorithm along with an evaluation on several CFL
benchmarks demonstrating that it outperforms existing approaches in terms of convergence speed,
clustering accuracy, and task performance.

The Clustered Federated Learning (CFL) framework (Sattler et al., 2020; Mansour et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2020)
can effectively address these issues by clustering/grouping
clients to share a few models, thus creating models tailored
for each cluster, rather than one personalized to each client.
CFL promotes cooperation among clients with shared local distributions only rather than aggregating all the clients,
resulting in more accurate lightweight models.
While CFL has the potential to deliver tremendous advantages, algorithmic developments have proved to be remarkably challenging due to the need to jointly cluster and train
over distributed data. Recent theoretically grounded CFL
algorithms group clients based on the models which currently provide each the best performance (Ghosh et al., 2020;
Mansour et al., 2020), or recursively perform bipartitioning
when clients’ gradients differ on a converged global model
(Sattler et al., 2020). Unfortunately, the state-of-the-art CFL
algorithms face difficulties in various relevant settings including e.g., linear regression tasks (See 5.1). This raises
the following question:

1. Introduction
The exploitation of distributed data via privacy preserving
cooperative learning algorithms is one of the foundational
challenges of modern machine learning. In this regard,
substantial attention has been given to Federated Learning
(FL), a distributed learning framework that provides a degree
of data privacy by only sharing information about locally
trained models versus raw data (McMahan et al., 2017).
Indeed FL has proved to be widely successful for training
one global model for multiple local machines (Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Niknam et al., 2020; Rieke
et al., 2020).

“What are statistically well-founded and empirically reliable
features that could be used for clustering clients during FL
training with limited access to raw datasets and how should
clustering be performed?”
In this paper, we provide an answer to this question and propose a new class of robust CFL algorithms that can handle
the abovementioned challenges. The main contributions of

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Heasung
Kim <heasung.kim@utexas.edu>.

Source code: https://github.com/Heasung-Kim/clusteredfederated-learning-via-gradient-based-partitioning

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

