A Hierarchical Adaptive Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning Framework
for Multiplier Circuit Design

Zhihai Wang 1 Jie Wang 1 Dongsheng Zuo 2 Yunjie Ji 1 Xilin Xia 1 Yuzhe Ma 2 Jianye Hao 3 4
Mingxuan Yuan 3 Yongdong Zhang 1 Feng Wu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Multiplier design—which aims to explore a large
combinatorial design space to simultaneously optimize multiple conflicting objectives—is a fundamental problem in the integrated circuits industry. Although traditional approaches tackle the
multi-objective multiplier optimization problem
by manually designed heuristics, reinforcement
learning (RL) offers a promising approach to discover high-speed and area-efficient multipliers.
However, the existing RL-based methods struggle
to find Pareto-optimal circuit designs for all possible preferences, i.e., weights over objectives, in
a sample-efficient manner. To address this challenge, we propose a novel hierarchical adaptive
(HAVE) multi-task reinforcement learning framework. The hierarchical framework consists of a
meta-agent to generate diverse multiplier preferences, and an adaptive multi-task agent to collaboratively optimize multipliers conditioned on the
dynamic preferences given by the meta-agent. To
the best of our knowledge, HAVE is the first to
well approximate Pareto-optimal circuit designs
for the entire preference space with high sample efficiency. Experiments on multipliers across
a wide range of input widths demonstrate that
HAVE significantly Pareto-dominates state-of-theart approaches, achieving up to 28% larger hypervolume. Moreover, experiments demonstrate that
multipliers designed by HAVE can well generalize to large-scale computation-intensive circuits.

Arithmetic logic circuits are the most elementary building
blocks in many real-world circuits, such as the central processing units and graphics processing units (Holdsworth,
1987; Das et al., 2019). The multiplication operation is one
of the most fundamental and frequently used arithmetic operations in many computation-intensive applications, such as
deep neural networks (DNNs), digital signal processors, and
microprocessors (Hashemian, 2002; Elguibaly, 2000; Zuo
et al., 2023). In particular, the multiplication operation accounts for more than 90% of all operations in many popular
DNNs, including ResNet (He et al., 2016), ViT (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021), and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). Therefore,
designing high-speed and area-efficient multipliers is critical for boosting the performance of computation-intensive
applications, especially for DNN accelerators.

This work was done when Zhihai Wang was an intern at
Huawei. 1 CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS &
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception
and Cognition, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microelectronics Thrust, Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou) 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 4 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University.
Correspondence to: Jie Wang <jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn>.

However, the existing RL-based methods (Roy et al., 2021;
Zuo et al., 2023) struggle to find Pareto-optimal circuit
designs for all possible preferences (i.e., weights over objectives) in a sample-efficient manner due to the following
reasons. First, they circumvent the multi-objective property,
and use scalarized objectives weighted by predetermined
preferences to train many individual agents for optimizing multipliers. This strictly limits the knowledge sharing
among different but related optimization problems. Second,
they struggle to sufficiently explore the large design space,

However, multiplier design is a challenging combinatorial
optimization problem with multiple conflicting objectives,
which can be extremely hard to solve due to its N P-hard
nature (Hillar & Lim, 2013; Song et al., 2022). To optimize
multipliers, many traditional approaches rely on manually
designed heuristics to minimize the analytical evaluation
metrics such as circuit size (Roy et al., 2021). However, they
can exhibit poor performance subsequent to synthesis due to
the significant gap between their analytical evaluation metrics and physical synthesis metrics (Roy et al., 2021; Zuo
et al., 2023). To bridge this gap, recent approaches (Roy
et al., 2021; Song et al., 2022; Zuo et al., 2023) use reinforcement learning (RL) to optimize circuits with synthesis
in the loop, which offers a promising avenue for designing
high-speed and area-efficient circuits.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

