AI Alignment with Changing and Influenceable Reward Functions

Micah Carroll 1 Davis Foote 1 Anand Siththaranjan 1 Stuart Russell 1 Anca Dragan 1

Abstract

systems should optimize the satisfaction of our past, present,
or future preferences. Consider the following example:

Existing AI alignment approaches assume that
preferences are static, which is unrealistic: our
preferences change, and may even be influenced
by our interactions with AI systems themselves.
To clarify the consequences of incorrectly assuming static preferences, we introduce Dynamic Reward Markov Decision Processes (DR-MDPs),
which explicitly model preference changes and
the AI’s influence on them. We show that despite
its convenience, the static-preference assumption
may undermine the soundness of existing alignment techniques, leading them to implicitly reward AI systems for influencing user preferences
in ways users may not truly want. We then explore
potential solutions. First, we offer a unifying perspective on how an agent’s optimization horizon
may partially help reduce undesirable AI influence. Then, we formalize different notions of
AI alignment that account for preference change
from the outset. Comparing the strengths and limitations of 8 such notions of alignment, we find
that they all either err towards causing undesirable
AI influence, or are overly risk-averse, suggesting
that a straightforward solution to the problems of
changing preferences may not exist. As there is
no avoiding grappling with changing preferences
in real-world settings, this makes it all the more
important to handle these issues with care, balancing risks and capabilities. We hope our work can
provide conceptual clarity and constitute a first
step towards AI alignment practices which explicitly account for (and contend with) the changing
and influenceable nature of human preferences.

Due to health issues, Alice asks her AI assistant to help her
be more healthy, refusing any future requests for unhealthy
foods. Sometime later, she later asks the AI to disregard her
initial requests, and help her order fast food.

In such a scenario, it may be unclear if the AI assistant
should respect Alice’s original preference for healthy foods
or respect the autonomy of “current Alice”. Ultimately,
to align AI systems we must answer the following question: when a person’s preferences change over time, which
(aggregation of) preferences should AI systems optimize?
While the challenge of aggregating preferences across time
shares similarities with that of aggregating preferences
across different people (Conitzer et al., 2024), it is further
complicated by the fact that AI systems’ actions can influence humans and their preferences (Burtell & Woodside,
2023). Indeed, as prior work has argued, if AI systems are
straightforwardly optimized to satisfy users’ future preferences, they will try to influence them to be easier to satisfy
(Russell, 2019; Carroll et al., 2022). Back to the example:
Alice’s AI assistant was trained to maximize her future satisfaction. During training, the AI assistant learned that soothing
Alice’s health concerns would lead to higher satisfaction than
continuously encouraging her to have healthy eating habits.
Consequently, to maximize her satisfaction, it’s optimal for
the AI to ignore her initial wishes and even support her routine
unhealthy eating. Indeed, Alice is ultimately truly satisfied.

In this case, the AI assistant seems aligned with “final Alice”, as she endorses the AI’s influence towards guilt-free
unhealthy eating. However, if “initial Alice” would find
this outcome horrifying and see the AI’s influence as manipulative, should we still consider the AI aligned? More
broadly, in cases in which people are susceptible to undue
influence from AI systems, how can we establish which of
their preferences should have authority and legitimacy?

1. Introduction
The goal of AI alignment is to make AI systems act according to our preferences (broadly construed). In practice,
existing AI alignment techniques model human preferences
with a single, static reward function that the AI system is
trained to optimize (Leike et al., 2018). However, our preferences change over time, making it unclear whether AI
1

While past work has acknowledged that the static-preference
assumption is unrealistic (Franklin et al., 2022), there have
only been limited attempts at relaxing it, in part also due to
a lack of a clear formal language for grounding notions of
alignment which explicitly accounts for preference changes.
We introduce a natural extension of Markov Decision Processes: Dynamic Reward MDPs (DR-MDPs), which ac-

UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: mdc@berkeley.edu.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024.

1

