Spectral Phase Transition and Optimal PCA in Block-Structured Spiked Models

Pierre Mergny 1 Justin Ko 2 3 Florent Krzakala 1

Abstract

mance of the inference depends on the noise level. Yet in
practice, datasets are inherently structured and the exploration of inhomogeneity plays a pivotal role in unraveling
their complexities. A prototypical model to study this phenomenon is to improve the aforementioned spiked Wigner
model by introducing a block structure in the noise, a model
which has been recently introduced in a series of papers
(Behne & Reeves, 2022; Alberici et al., 2021a; 2022; Guionnet et al., 2022) and that arises in many different learning
contexts such as community detection (Behne & Reeves,
2022; Guionnet et al., 2022), deep Boltzmann machines
(Alberici et al., 2021b), or the dense limit of the celebrated
degree-corrected stochastic block model (Guionnet et al.,
2022; Karrer & Newman, 2011).

We discuss the inhomogeneous spiked Wigner
model, a theoretical framework recently introduced to study structured noise in various learning
scenarios, through the prism of random matrix theory, with a specific focus on its spectral properties.
Our primary objective is to find an optimal spectral method and to extend the celebrated (Baik
et al., 2005) (BBP) phase transition criterion —
well-known in the homogeneous case— to our
inhomogeneous, block-structured, Wigner model.
We provide a thorough rigorous analysis of a transformed matrix and show that the transition for the
appearance of 1) an outlier outside the bulk of
the limiting spectral distribution and 2) a positive overlap between the associated eigenvector
and the signal, occurs precisely at the optimal
threshold, making the proposed spectral method
optimal within the class of iterative methods for
the inhomogeneous Wigner problem.

Our goal in this paper is to apply rigorous random matrix theory to such “inhomogenous” spiked models, and to provide
an optimal reconstruction method from a spectral algorithm,
to generalize the seminal work of (Baik et al., 2005) (BBP)
to inhomogenous matrices.
Settings and open questions — The model is defined in
practice by multiplying the Wigner matrix by a varianceprofile matrix, namely one would like to infer in the highdimensional setting N ≫ 1, the underlying signal x ∈ RN
from the noisy matrix observation:
r


1
xx⊤ + H ⊙ ∆⊙1/2 ,
Y =
(1)
N

1. Introduction
The statistical challenge of inferring a low-dimensional signal from a noisy, high-dimensional observation is ubiquitous
across statistics, probability, and machine learning. Spiked
random matrix models have recently gained extensive interest, serving as a valuable platform for exploring this issue
(Donoho & Johnstone, 1995; Péché, 2014; Lesieur et al.,
2017). A prominent example is the spiked Wigner model,
where a rank one matrix is observed through a componentwise homogeneous noise, that has been studied extensively
in random matrix theory (Baik et al., 2005).

where ∆ is a block-constant matrix, ⊙ denotes the
Hadamard product (A ⊙ B)ij = Aij Bij , A⊙α is the
Hadamard power ((A⊙α )ij = Aα
ij ) and H is a real-valued
symmetric matrix with independent Gaussian entries of unit
variance above the diagonal. The precise assumptions on x
and ∆ are postponed to the next section.

Most models, with the spiked Wigner model at the forefront, have focused however on scenarios where the noise
is “homogeneous”, aiming to understand how the perfor-

The study of the inhomogeneous model of Eq. (1) from a
Bayes-optimal point of view has been performed in a series
of work in the asymptotic limit N → ∞ in (Guionnet et al.,
2022; Behne & Reeves, 2022; Chen & Xia, 2022; Chen
et al., 2021) who characterized the fundamental informationtheoretic limit of reconstruction in this model. Recently
(Pak et al., 2023) discussed algorithmic performances of the
Approximate Message Passage (AMP in short) algorithm
introduced in particular a simpler variant of this algorithm

1
IdePHICS laboratory, École Fédérale Polytechnique de Lausanne, Switzerland 2 Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo, Canada 3 UMPA, ENS Lyon, France.
Correspondence to: Pierre Mergny <mergny.pierre@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

