Optimal bounds for ℓp sensitivity sampling via ℓ2 augmentation

Alexander Munteanu 1 Simon Omlor 2 3

Abstract

1. Introduction

Data subsampling is one of the most natural methods to approximate a massively large data set by
a small representative proxy. In particular, sensitivity sampling received a lot of attention, which
samples points proportional to an individual importance measure called sensitivity. This framework reduces in very general settings the size of
data to roughly the VC dimension d times the total
sensitivity S while providing strong (1 ± ε) guarantees on the quality of approximation. The recent
work of Woodruff & Yasuda (2023c) improved
substantially over the general Õ(ε−2 Sd) bound
for the important problem of ℓp subspace embeddings to Õ(ε−2 S2/p ) for p ∈ [1, 2]. Their result was subsumed by an earlier Õ(ε−2 Sd1−p/2 )
bound which was implicitly given in the work of
Chen & Derezinski (2021). We show that their
result is tight when sampling according to plain ℓp
sensitivities. We observe that by augmenting the
ℓp sensitivities by ℓ2 sensitivities, we obtain better bounds improving over the aforementioned results to optimal linear Õ(ε−2 (S+d)) = Õ(ε−2 d)
sampling complexity for all p ∈ [1, 2]. In particular, this resolves an open question of Woodruff
& Yasuda (2023c) in the affirmative for p ∈ [1, 2]
and brings sensitivity subsampling into the regime
that was previously only known to be possible using Lewis weights (Cohen & Peng, 2015). As an
application of our main result, we also obtain an
Õ(ε−2 µd) sensitivity sampling bound for logistic regression, where µ is a natural complexity
measure for this problem. This improves over the
previous Õ(ε−2 µ2 d) bound of Mai et al. (2021)
which was based on Lewis weights subsampling.

Massive data sets have become ubiquitous in recent years
and standard machine learning approaches reach the limits
of tractability when these large data need to be analyzed.
Given a data matrix A ∈ Rn×d where the number of data
points exceeds the number of features by a large margin,
i.e., n ≫ d, a popular approach to address the computational limitations is to subsample the data (Munteanu, 2023).
While uniform sampling is widely used in practice, it can be
associated with large loss of approximation accuracy for various machine learning models. Thus, a lot of work has been
dedicated to the design of importance sampling schemes, to
subsample points proportional to some sort of importance
measure for the contribution of individual points, such that
important points become more likely to be in the sample,
while less important or redundant points are sampled with
lower probability (Munteanu & Schwiegelshohn, 2018).

Equal contribution 1 Dortmund Data Science Center, Faculties of Statistics and Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany 2 Faculty of Statistics, TU Dortmund
University, Dortmund, Germany 3 Lamarr-Institute for Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Dortmund, Germany. Correspondence to: Alexander Munteanu <alexander.munteanu@tudortmund.de>, Simon Omlor <simon.omlor@tu-dortmund.de>.

i∈S

General setting. The arguably most general and popular importance sampling approach is called the sensitivity
framework (Feldman & Langberg, 2011; Feldman et al.,
2020). It aims at approximating functions applied to data
that can be expressed in the following way: consider an individual non-negative loss function hi : Ω → R≥0 for each
row vector ai , i ∈ [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} of the data matrix
A, more precisely we set hi (x) = h(ai x) for some function
h : R → R≥0 . The problem we consider is approximating
X
f (x) :=
hi (x)
(1)
i∈[n]

over all x in the domain Ω, by subsampling and reweighting
the individual contributions. Formally, we obtain S ⊂ [n]
with |S| ≪ n, and wi > 0 for all i ∈ S and define
X
f˜(x) :=
wi hi (x)
(2)

*

to be the surrogate loss, that given an approximation parameter ε ∈ (0, 1) should be a pointwise (1 ± ε)-approximation
for the original loss function. More specifically, we require
that
∀x ∈ Ω : f˜(x) = (1 ± ε)f (x).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

(3)

The surrogate function (2) can then be used in downstream
machine learning tasks, such as optimization, with very little
1

