Byzantine-Robust Federated Learning:
Impact of Client Subsampling and Local Updates

Youssef Allouah∗ 1 Sadegh Farhadkhani∗ 1 Rachid Guerraoui∗ 1
Nirupam Gupta∗ 1 Rafael Pinot∗ 2 Geovani Rizk∗ 1 Sasha Voitovych∗ 3
∗

Alphabetical order

1. Introduction

Abstract
The possibility of adversarial (a.k.a., Byzantine)
clients makes federated learning (FL) prone to arbitrary manipulation. The natural approach to robustify FL against adversarial clients is to replace
the simple averaging operation at the server in the
standard FedAvg algorithm by a robust averaging
rule. While a significant amount of work has been
devoted to studying the convergence of federated
robust averaging (which we denote by FedRo),
prior work has largely ignored the impact of client
subsampling and local steps, two fundamental
FL characteristics. While client subsampling increases the effective fraction of Byzantine clients,
local steps increase the drift between the local
updates computed by honest (i.e., non-Byzantine)
clients. Consequently, a careless deployment of
FedRo could yield poor performance. We validate this observation by presenting an in-depth
analysis of FedRo tightly analyzing the impact of
client subsampling and local steps. Specifically,
we present a sufficient condition on client subsampling for nearly-optimal convergence of FedRo
(for smooth non-convex loss). Also, we show
that the rate of improvement in learning accuracy
diminishes with respect to the number of clients
subsampled, as soon as the sample size exceeds
a threshold value. Interestingly, we also observe
that under a careful choice of step-sizes, the learning error due to Byzantine clients decreases with
the number of local steps. We validate our theory
by experiments on the FEMNIST and CIFAR-10
image classification tasks.

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a prominent
machine-learning scheme since its inception by McMahan
et al. (2017), thanks to its ability to train a model without
centrally storing the training data (Kairouz et al., 2021). In
FL, the training data is distributed across multiple machines,
referred to as clients. The training procedure is coordinated
by a central server that iteratively queries the clients on
their local training data. The clients do not share their raw
data with the server, hence reducing the risk of privacy infringement of training data usually present in traditional
centralized schemes. The most common algorithm to train
machine learning models in a federated manner is federated
averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017). In short, at
every round, the server holds a model that is broadcasted to
a subset of clients, selected at random. Then, each selected
client executes several steps of local updates using their
local data and sends the resulting model back to the server.
Upon receiving local models from the selected clients, the
server averages them to update the global model.
However, training over decentralized data makes FL algorithms, such as FedAvg, quite vulnerable to adversarial,
a.k.a., Byzantine (Lamport et al., 1982), clients that could
sabotage the learning by sending arbitrarily bad local model
updates. The problem of robustness to Byzantine clients in
FL (and distributed learning at large) has received significant
attention in the past (Blanchard et al., 2017; Data & Diggavi,
2021; Farhadkhani et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2022;
Gupta et al., 2023; Gorbunov et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023;
Allouah et al., 2023; Guerraoui et al., 2023). The general
idea for imparting robustness to an FL algorithm consists
in replacing the averaging operation of the algorithm with
a robust aggregation rule, basically seeking to filter out
outliers. However, most previous works study the simplified FL setting where the server queries all clients, in every
round, and each client only performs a single local update
step. As of now, it remains unclear whether these results
could readily apply to the standard FL setting (McMahan
et al., 2017) where the server only queries a small subset

1

EPFL, 2 Sorbonne Université, LPSM 3 University of Toronto.
Correspondence to: Sadegh Farhadkhani
<sadegh.farhadkhani@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

