Fine-grained Local Sensitivity Analysis of Standard Dot-Product Self-Attention

Aaron Havens 1 Alexandre Araujo 2 Huan Zhang 1 Bin Hu 1

Abstract

such as large language models (LLM) (Brown et al., 2020;
Bubeck et al., 2023) and vision transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). However, unlike
traditional neural network building blocks such as convolutional layers, whose structures and behaviors are well
understood, the self-attention mechanism has more involved
mathematical properties. For example, for a simple convolutional layer, it is well known that its operator norm is
bounded (Sedghi et al., 2019), and convolution is a Lipschitz operation that always produces bounded outputs given
bounded inputs (Delattre et al., 2023). However, for the popular dot-product self-attention mechanism, existing work
has shown that they are surprisingly, not (globally) Lipschitz (Kim et al., 2021). The lack of Lipschitzness indicates
that dot-product self-attention can theoretically be very sensitive to its input, which can impede stable learning (Qi
et al., 2023) and lead to poor robustness (Zhou et al., 2022;
Cisse et al., 2017). Although several architectures have been
proposed to amend the popular dot-product attention mechanism to achieve Lipschitzness and bounded sensitivity (Kim
et al., 2021; Dasoulas et al., 2021; Qi et al., 2023), none
of them are popular in large-scale networks deployed in
production, and it is still an open challenge to understand
why the non-Lipschitz dot-product attention mechanism can
work well in practice.

Self-attention has been widely used in various
machine learning models, such as vision transformers. The standard dot-product self-attention
is arguably the most popular structure, and there
is a growing interest in understanding the mathematical properties of such attention mechanisms.
This paper presents a fine-grained local sensitivity analysis of the standard dot-product selfattention, leading to new non-vacuous certified
robustness results for vision transformers. Despite the well-known fact that dot-product selfattention is not (globally) Lipschitz, we develop
new theoretical analysis of Local Fine-grained
Attention Sensitivity (LoFAST) quantifying the
effect of input feature perturbations on the attention output. Our analysis reveals that the local
sensitivity of dot-product self-attention to ℓ2 perturbations can actually be controlled by several
key quantities associated with the attention weight
matrices and the unperturbed input. We empirically validate our theoretical findings by computing non-vacuous certified ℓ2 -robustness for vision
transformers on CIFAR-10 and SVHN datasets.
The code for LoFAST is available at https:
//github.com/AaronHavens/LoFAST.

In this work, instead of amending the network structure to
achieve bounded sensitivity, we aim to analyze the local
sensitivity of the unmodified dot-product attention mechanism directly. Despite being non-Lipschitz, local sensitivity of the unmodified self-attention mechanism is actually
sufficient for inducing certified robustness (Proposition 1).
Built upon this observation, we derived novel analytical
bounds for the local sensitivity of dot-product self-attention
using tools from optimization and matrix theory. Our key
result (Theorem 1) deciphers a few key quantities associated with the sensitivity of the dot-product self-attention
operation, related to the attention weight matrix and their
inputs. Our theorem can be easily interpreted, and gives us
insights on how to control the local sensitivity of a Transformer. In particular, we found that the local sensitivity
of the self-attention layer is directly related to the norm
of its input, thus theoretically explaining the necessity of
using layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) in the popular
Transformer architecture (Xiong et al., 2020). In addition,

1. Introduction
The self-attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014;
Vaswani et al., 2017) has become a major building block
in many modern deep learning-based systems, achieving
state-of-the-art performance in various applications such as
vision and natural language processing. In particular, dotproduct self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) is one of the
most popular architectures used by many best-performing
networks such as the well-known Transformer architecture
and its variants, and has enabled successful applications
1

ECE & CSL, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
ECE, New York University. Correspondence to: Aaron Havens
<ahavens2@illinois.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

