Fine-tuning Reinforcement Learning Models is Secretly a Forgetting Mitigation
Problem
Maciej Wołczyk * 1 Bartłomiej Cupiał * 1 2 Mateusz Ostaszewski 3 Michał Bortkiewicz 3 Michał Zaj ˛
ac 4
5
126
1267
Razvan Pascanu Łukasz Kuciński
Piotr Miłoś

Abstract

tasks, including natural language processing (Chung et al.,
2022), computer vision (Sandler et al., 2022), automatic
speech recognition (Zhang et al., 2022), and cheminformatics (Chithrananda et al., 2020). These successes are
predominantly evident in supervised and self-supervised
learning domains. However, achievements of comparable
significance have not yet fully found their way to reinforcement learning (RL) (Wulfmeier et al., 2023).

Fine-tuning is a widespread technique that allows
practitioners to transfer pre-trained capabilities,
as recently showcased by the successful applications of foundation models. However, fine-tuning
reinforcement learning (RL) models remains a
challenge. This work conceptualizes one specific cause of poor transfer, accentuated in the
RL setting by the interplay between actions and
observations: forgetting of pre-trained capabilities. Namely, a model deteriorates on the state
subspace of the downstream task not visited in the
initial phase of fine-tuning, on which the model
behaved well due to pre-training. This way, we
lose the anticipated transfer benefits. We identify
conditions when this problem occurs, showing
that it is common and, in many cases, catastrophic.
Through a detailed empirical analysis of the challenging NetHack and Montezuma’s Revenge environments, we show that standard knowledge retention techniques mitigate the problem and thus
allow us to take full advantage of the pre-trained
capabilities. In particular, in NetHack, we achieve
a new state-of-the-art for neural models, improving the previous best score from 5K to over 10K
points in the Human Monk scenario.

In this study, we explore the challenges and solutions for
effectively transferring knowledge from a pre-trained model
to a downstream task in the context of RL fine-tuning. We
find that the interplay between actions and observations in
RL leads to a changing visitation of states during the finetuning process with catastrophic consequences. Intuitively,
the agent may lose pre-trained abilities in parts of the downstream task not covered in early fine-tuning, diminishing the
expected transfer benefits.
We refer to this issue as forgetting of pre-trained capabilities
(FPC). We identify two important instances of FPC: state
coverage gap and imperfect cloning gap, illustrated in Figure 1 and defined in Section 2. We show empirically that the
problem is severe, as these instances are often encountered
in practice, leading to poor transfer to downstream tasks.
These findings are in contrast to the conventional wisdom
that emerged from the supervised learning setting, where
the data distribution is i.i.d. and forgetting is not a factor if
one cares only about the performance on the downstream
task; see (Wulfmeier et al., 2023, Sec 3.5) and (Radford
et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning neural networks is a widespread technique
in deep learning for knowledge transfer between datasets
(Yosinski et al., 2014; Girshick et al., 2014). Its effectiveness has recently been showcased by spectacular successes
in the deployment of foundation models in downstream

Finally, we show that phrasing state coverage gap and imperfect cloning gap as instances of forgetting is meaningful
as typical retention techniques (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Rebuffi et al., 2017; Wołczyk et al., 2021) can alleviate these
problems. We demonstrate this effect on NetHack, Montezuma’s Revenge, and tasks built out of Meta-World, an
environment simulating tasks for robotic arms. Applying
knowledge retention enhances the fine-tuning performance
on all environments and leads to a 2x improvement in the
state-of-art results for neural models on NetHack. Further
analysis shows that forgetting of pre-trained capabilities is
at the heart of the problem, as vanilla fine-tuning rapidly

*

Equal contribution 1 IDEAS NCBR 2 University of Warsaw 3 Warsaw University of Technology 4 Jagiellonian University
5
Google DeepMind 6 Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy
of Sciences 7 deepsense.ai. Correspondence to: Maciej Wołczyk
<maciej.wolczyk@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

