Out of the Ordinary: Spectrally Adapting Regression for Covariate Shift

Benjamin Eyre 1 Elliot Creager 2 3 David Madras 4 Vardan Papyan 3 5 Richard Zemel 1

Abstract

systems. For instance, datasets from the WILDS benchmark
(Koh et al., 2021) provide real-world case studies suggesting that poor performance at the subpopulation level can
have dire consequences in crucial applications such as monitoring toxicity of online discussions, or tumor detection
from medical images. Furthermore, DeGrave et al. (2021)
demonstrated that models trained to detect COVID-19 from
chest X-Rays performed worse when evaluated on data gathered from hospitals that were not represented in the training
distribution. Unfortunately, poor out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization remains a key obstacle to broadly deploying
ML models in a safe and reliable way.

Designing deep neural network classifiers that
perform robustly on distributions differing from
the available training data is an active area of
machine learning research. However, out-ofdistribution generalization for regression—the
analogous problem for modeling continuous
targets—remains relatively unexplored. To tackle
this problem, we return to first principles and
analyze how the closed-form solution for Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression is sensitive
to covariate shift. We characterize the out-ofdistribution risk of the OLS model in terms of
the eigenspectrum decomposition of the source
and target data. We then use this insight to propose a method called Spectral Adapted Regressor (SpAR) for adapting the weights of the last
layer of a pre-trained neural regression model
to perform better on input data originating from
a different distribution. We demonstrate how
this lightweight spectral adaptation procedure can
improve out-of-distribution performance for synthetic and real-world datasets.

While work towards remedying these OOD performance
issues has been focused on classification, predicting continuous targets under distribution shift has received less
attention. In this paper, we present a lightweight method
for updating the weights of a pre-trained regression model
(typically a neural network, in which case only the final layer is updated). This method is motivated by a
theoretical analysis that yields a concrete reason, which
we call Spectral Inflation, to explain why regressors may
fail under covariate shift, a specific form of distribution
shift. Through experiments on synthetic, tabular, and image data, we show that our novel post-processing method
consistently improves the OOD performance of regression
models. We release the code for these experiments at
https://github.com/btleyre/spar.

1. Introduction
Despite their groundbreaking benchmark performance on
many tasks—from image recognition and natural language
understanding to disease detection (Balagopalan et al., 2020;
Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019)—deep neural
networks (DNNs) tend to underperform when confronted
with data that is dissimilar to their training data (Geirhos
et al., 2020; D’Amour et al., 2022; Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Koh et al., 2021).

2. Background
Distribution shift problems involve training on inputs X and
target labels Y sampled from P (X, Y ), then evaluating the
resulting model on a distinct distribution Q(X, Y ). Several
learning frameworks consider different forms of distribution
shift, depending on the structure of P and the degree of
prior knowledge about Q that is available. Within this work,
we assume access to a set of unlabelled examples from the
target distribution Q.

Understanding and addressing distribution shift is critical
for the real-world deployment of machine learning (ML)
1
Columbia University, New York, USA 2 University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada 3 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 4 Google
Research 5 University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Benjamin Eyre <beneyre@cs.columbia.edu>.

We also assume the distribution shift is due to covariate shift,
where the conditional distribution over the evaluation data
Q(Y |X) is equal to the conditional distribution over the
training data P (Y |X), but the input marginals P (X) and
Q(X) differ. This broadly studied assumption (Sugiyama
et al., 2007; Gretton et al., 2009; Ruan et al., 2022) states

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

