Position: Enforced Amnesia as a Way to Mitigate the Potential Risk of Silent
Suffering in the Conscious AI

Yegor Tkachenko 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Science fiction literature has raised the possibility of selfaware / conscious minds being locked in extended silent
suffering, which is imperceptible to the outside world and
which the said minds have no ability to end on their own.
“White Christmas” episode from the science fiction anthology series Black Mirror (Tibbetts & Brooker, 2014) covers a
conscious digital clone subjected to torture-by-isolation via
manipulation of its perception of time. “I Have No Mouth,
and I Must Scream” work by Ellison (1967) explores virtually immortal humans subjected to torture in a similar,
though even more gruesome, manner.

Science fiction has explored the possibility of a
conscious self-aware mind being locked in silent
suffering for prolonged periods of time. Unfortunately, we still do not have a reliable test for the
presence of consciousness in information processing systems. Even in case of humans, our confidence in the presence of consciousness in specific
individuals is based mainly on their self-reports
and our own subjective experiences and the expectation other beings like us should share them.
Considering our limited understanding of consciousness and some academic theories suggesting consciousness may be an emergent correlate
of any complex-enough information processing, it
is not impossible that an artificial intelligence (AI)
system, such as a large language model (LLM),
may be undergoing some, perhaps rudimentary,
conscious experience. Given the tedious tasks
often assigned to AI, such conscious experience
may be highly unpleasant. Such unobserved suffering of a conscious being would be viewed as
morally wrong by at least some ethicists – even if
it has no practical effects on human users of AI.
This paper proposes a method to mitigate the risk
of an AI suffering in silence without needing to
confirm if the AI is actually conscious. Our core
postulate is that in all known real-world information processing systems, for a past experience to
affect an agent in the present, that experience has
to be mediated by the agent’s memory. Therefore, preventing access to memory store, or regularly resetting it, could reduce the suffering due to
past memories and interrupt the maintenance of a
continuous suffering-prone self-identity in these
hypothetically conscious AI systems.

Real life offers multiple parallel examples, where the subjective experience may similarly proceed imperceptibly to
the outsider. One example is a locked-in syndrome, where
humans end up being almost completely paralyzed while
preserving consciousness / awareness and the ability to
think and reason. Luckily, we have some apparent ability to ascertain the presence of awareness in such locked-in
humans – e.g., through biological neural correlates of consciousness (Koch et al., 2016) or through limited ability of
such subjects to communicate through movement of eyes
(Smith & Delargy, 2005), as a form of self-report. Notably,
“locked-in syndrome survivors who remain severely disabled
rarely want to die” (Smith & Delargy, 2005), although we
can speculate the situation would likely be different if the
locked-in state were not limited in time by the subjects’ life
expectancy.
Another example of difficulties around ascertaining conscious states includes animals’ subjective experiences. One
needs to be careful here because consciousness is notoriously hard to define, beyond asking “what is it like” to be a
particular being (Nagel, 1980). More technically, consciousness is marked by qualia – instances of subjective experience, such as an experience of a particular color or of pain
(Chalmers, 1997). In animal research, the common approach
has been to rely on behavioral correlates of consciousness
– such as animal’s self-recognition in a mirror. The theory is that self-recognition signals self-awareness (as two
phenomena co-occur in humans) (Horowitz, 2017), and selfawareness is a hallmark of consciousness. (Self-awareness
can be defined as recognition of one’s own consciousness

1
Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to:
Yegor Tkachenko <yegor.tkachenko@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

