Federated Representation Learning in the Under-Parameterized Regime

Renpu Liu 1 Cong Shen 2 Jing Yang 1

Abstract

of various ML tasks such as meta-learning (Tripuraneni
et al., 2021), multi-task learning (Wang et al., 2016a), and
few-shot learning (Du et al., 2020).

Federated representation learning (FRL) is a popular personalized federated learning (FL) framework where clients work together to train a common representation while retaining their personalized heads. Existing studies, however, largely focus on the over-parameterized regime. In this paper, we make the initial efforts to investigate FRL
in the under-parameterized regime, where the FL
model is insufficient to express the variations in
all ground-truth models. We propose a novel
FRL algorithm FLUTE, and theoretically characterize its sample complexity and convergence
rate for linear models in the under-parameterized
regime. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first FRL algorithm with provable performance
guarantees in this regime. FLUTE features a dataindependent random initialization and a carefully
designed objective function that aids the distillation of subspace spanned by the global optimal
representation from the misaligned local representations. On the technical side, we bridge lowrank matrix approximation techniques with the
FL analysis, which may be of broad interest. We
also extend FLUTE beyond linear representations.
Experimental results demonstrate that FLUTE outperforms state-of-the-art FRL solutions in both
synthetic and real-world tasks.

Recently, representation learning has been introduced to the
federated learning (FL) framework to cope with the heterogeneous local datasets at participating clients (Liang et al.,
2020). In the FL setting, it often assumes that all clients
share a common representation, which works in conjunction
with personalized local heads to realize personalized prediction while harnessing the collective training power (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Collins et al., 2021; Zhong et al.,
2022; Shen et al., 2023).
Existing theoretical analysis of representation learning usually assumes the adopted model is over-parameterized to
almost fit the ground-truth model (Tripuraneni et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2016a). While this may be valid for expressive models like Deep Neural Networks (He et al.,
2016; Liu et al., 2017) or Large Language Models (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023), it may be too restrictive
for FL on resource-constrained devices, as adopting overparameterized models in such a framework faces several
significant challenges, as elaborated below.
• Computation limitation. In FL, edge devices like
smartphones and Internet of Things (IoT) devices often have limited memory and lack computational power,
which are not capable of either storing or training overparameterized models (Wang et al., 2019; He et al., 2020;
Kairouz et al., 2021)1 .
• Communication overhead. In FL, the clients need to
communicate updated model information with the server
frequently. It thus becomes prohibitive to transmit a huge
number of model updates for devices operating with limited communication energy and bandwidth.
• Privacy concern. Existing works show that excessively
expressive models may “memorize” relevant information
from local datasets, increasing the model’s susceptibility
to reconstruction attacks (Hitaj et al., 2017; Melis et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020) or membership
inference (Tan et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
In the development of machine learning (ML), the role of
representation learning has become increasingly essential. It
transforms raw data into meaningful features, reveals hidden
patterns and insights in data, and facilitates efficient learning
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA, USA 2 Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. Correspondence to: Jing Yang
<yangjing@psu.edu>.

1

For example, two of the widely adopted neural network models suitable for IoT or embedded devices, MobileNetV3 (Howard
et al., 2019) and EfficientNet-B0 (Tan & Le, 2019), only have a
few million parameters and, as an example, typically process at
most a few GFLOPS in a Raspberry Pi 4 (Ju et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

