Causal Inference out of Control:
Estimating Performativity without Treatment Randomization

Gary Cheng∗ 1 Moritz Hardt 2 Celestine Mendler-Dünner 2 3

Abstract

tions that firms, researchers, and regulators ask about digital
platforms (Barberá et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2022b). These
questions all examine the capacity of a digital platform’s
algorithmic action to influence users, an effect referred to
as performativity (Perdomo et al., 2020).

Regulators and academics are increasingly interested in the causal effect that algorithmic actions
of a digital platform have on user consumption.
In pursuit of estimating this effect from observational data, we identify a set of assumptions
that permit causal identifiability without assuming randomized platform actions. Our results
are applicable to platforms that rely on machinelearning-powered predictions and leverage knowledge from historical data. The key novelty of our
approach is to explicitly model the dynamics of
consumption over time, exploiting the repeated
interaction of digital platforms with their participants to prove our identifiability results. By viewing the platform as a controller acting on a dynamical system, we can show that exogenous variation
in consumption and appropriately responsive algorithmic control actions are sufficient for identifying the causal effect of interest. We complement
our claims with an analysis of ready-to-use finite
sample estimators and empirical investigations.
More broadly, our results deriving identifiability
conditions tailored to digital platform settings illustrate a fruitful interplay of control theory and
causal inference.

Estimating performativity is a causal inference problem
where the treatment corresponds to the algorithmic
action taken by the platform and the outcome variable
corresponds to user behavior. We focus on consumption
as the user variable of interest and aim to measure how
much algorithmic actions of platforms impact consumption.
Treatment effect estimation from observational data is
challenging in such algorithmic systems because actions
are typically driven by observations of past consumption.
This feedback loop couples actions and consumption,
introducing confounding. The corresponding causal graph
is illustrated in Figure 1(a) where u corresponds to the
platform action, x to user consumption, and z denotes
the confounding set containing all relevant past platform
actions and consumption data. The presence of confounding
means that we cannot determine whether the correlations
between u and x should be attributed to performativity of
the actions u or to the common cause z.
Injecting independent variation into the platform action u—
for example, via A/B testing—is sufficient to resolve such
confounding. However, randomized experiments may be
ethically fraught (Kramer et al., 2014; PNAS, 2014), technically challenging to implement, or prohibitively expensive.
Moreover, external investigators often do not have the ability to experimentally intervene in the practices of a platform.
For these reasons, we focus this work around observational
causal inference and ask: under what conditions can observational designs lead to valid inferences of performativity?

1. Introduction
How much do advertisements decrease screen time? Do
algorithmic recommendations increase consumption of inflammatory content? Does exposure to diverse news sources
mitigate political polarization? These are just a few ques-

Typically, observational designs build on the premise that
there is sufficient variation in the treatment in order to resolve confounding (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Imbens,
2004). In the context of Figure 1(a), this means that we
need to assume overlap between u and z—i.e., all strata of
the treatment u have positive probability of selection for any
possible realization of the confounding set z.

∗

Work done during internship at the Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen. 1 Stanford University Department of Electrical Engineering 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, and Tübingen AI Center 3 ELLIS
Institute Tübingen. Correspondence to: Gary Cheng <chenggar@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

At the outset, this assumption seems hard to reconcile with

1

