Do Language Models Exhibit the Same Cognitive Biases in Problem Solving
as Human Learners?
Andreas Opedal * 1 2 Alessandro Stolfo * 1 Haruki Shirakami 1 Ying Jiao 3
Ryan Cotterell 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 1 2 Abulhair Saparov 4 Mrinmaya Sachan 1

Abstract
There is increasing interest in employing large language models (LLMs) as cognitive models. For
such purposes, it is central to understand which
properties of human cognition are well-modeled
by LLMs, and which are not. In this work, we
study the biases of LLMs in relation to those
known in children when solving arithmetic word
problems. Surveying the learning science literature, we posit that the problem-solving process
can be split into three distinct steps: text comprehension, solution planning and solution execution.
We construct tests for each one in order to understand whether current LLMs display the same
cognitive biases as children in these steps. We
generate a novel set of word problems for each
of these tests, using a neuro-symbolic approach
that enables fine-grained control over the problem features. We find evidence that LLMs, with
and without instruction-tuning, exhibit humanlike biases in both the text-comprehension and
the solution-planning steps of the solving process,
but not in the final step, in which the arithmetic
expressions are executed to obtain the answer.

Figure 1. A three-step model of the cognitive process involved in
solving math word problems. We study whether LLMs exhibit
similar biases as human children along each step of this process.

study of human learning without the high cost of data
collection from human subjects, which can lead to a better
understanding of human learning and, therefore, improved
learning outcomes (VanLehn et al., 1994). Several recent
articles have already employed LLMs as models of students
(Macina et al., 2023; Nguyen et al., 2023). However, for
such modeling to be meaningful, it is imperative that the
student model is consistent with actual student behavior.
Yet, that is not always the case: Many existing student
models fail to validate faithfulness to realistic classroom
scenarios (Käser and Alexandron, 2023). Importantly, an
LLM that models the problem-solving process of children
should also make similar mistakes as children, i.e., it should
mimic the cognitive biases that are salient in children
during problem-solving. Given that LLMs may be trained
predominantly on data generated by adults, it is not obvious
that they would exhibit child-like behavior.

https://github.com/eth-lre/
solving-biases

1. Introduction
There is active discussion around large pretrained language
models (LLMs) as plausible cognitive models (Mahowald
et al., 2023), e.g., in terms of language acquisition (Warstadt
and Bowman, 2022), decision making (Aher et al., 2023)
and political orientation (Argyle et al., 2023). In the
context of education, cognitive modeling enables the

In this paper, we study whether LLMs are subject to similar biases as children when solving arithmetic math word
problems.1 These problems are interesting because they are
conceptually simple, and yet, require several distinct skills
to solve (Stern, 1993). A learner needs to understand the
situation described, relate it to arithmetic equations, and

*
Equal contribution 1 ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems 3 KU Leuven 4 New York University. Correspondence to: Andreas Opedal <andreas.opedal@inf.ethz.ch>,
Alessandro Stolfo <alessandro.stolfo@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Related studies have compared LLM biases to human ones
on the task of syllogistic reasoning (Ando et al., 2023; Dasgupta
et al., 2023; Eisape et al., 2024). These are discussed in §7.

1

