Improved Modelling of Federated Datasets using
Mixtures-of-Dirichlet-Multinomials

Jonathan Scott 1 2 Áine Cahill 2

Abstract

cations in a range of settings, including on mobile devices
(Hard et al., 2018; Ramaswamy et al., 2019; Granqvist et al.,
2020) as well as in healthcare (Brisimi et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2019; Rieke et al., 2020). Despite this, FL poses a multitude of challenges. These include: statistical and systems
heterogeneity, high communication costs, high latency, low
client compute and scheduling difficulties that arise from
practical restrictions, such as a device needing to be charging and not in use to participate in training (Kairouz et al.,
2021). This makes on device training not only technically
challenging but also significantly more time consuming than
standard centralized training. This effect is compounded by
the fact that in most modern machine learning pipelines we
do not train a model just once, but rather many times, to
select the right architecture, optimization algorithm, hyperparameters (HP) etc. Running large scale model selection
and HP tuning on real clients in a federated network is often
infeasible, making it difficult to obtain good performance.

In practice, training using federated learning can
be orders of magnitude slower than standard centralized training. This severely limits the amount
of experimentation and tuning that can be done,
making it challenging to obtain good performance
on a given task. Server-side proxy data can be
used to run training simulations, for instance for
hyperparameter tuning. This can greatly speed up
the training pipeline by reducing the number of
tuning runs to be performed overall on the true
clients. However, it is challenging to ensure that
these simulations accurately reflect the dynamics of the real federated training. In particular,
the proxy data used for simulations often comes
as a single centralized dataset without a partition
into distinct clients, and partitioning this data in
a naive way can lead to simulations that poorly
reflect real federated training. In this paper we address the challenge of how to partition centralized
data in a way that reflects the statistical heterogeneity of the true federated clients. We propose
a fully federated, theoretically justified, algorithm
that efficiently learns the distribution of the true
clients and observe improved server-side simulations when using the inferred distribution to create
simulated clients from the centralized data.

One way to address this issue is using simulations on the
server. For instance, to select good model hyperparameters, which are then used directly in live training, thereby
avoiding expensive HP tuning in the true federated network.
This is possible because, in practice, it is common for the
server to have some related proxy data that can be used to
simulate the real federated training. For instance this could
be public data from some related task, data from a particular sub-sample of consenting clients, or client data with
certain sensitive features removed. Usually, however, the
server-side data come without a client identifier, that is to
say, it is a single central dataset with no natural partitioning
into distinct FL clients. The question then arises how to
use these data to create simulations that actually match the
dynamics of live training. The naive approach would be to
create clients from the proxy data by simply sub-sampling
the data points in an IID fashion. However, this approach
can fail to capture client data distribution heterogeneity and
it is a well documented fact in FL that clients having nonIID data has a significant effect on FL training dynamics
(Zhao et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020a;b).

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a machine learning paradigm in which a (possibly very large)
number of data holding devices, called clients, collaborate
with a central server to train a model while keeping their
data private and stored on device. FL has become the default
for training on distributed private data with successful appli*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Science and Technology
Austria (ISTA) 2 Apple. Correspondence to: Jonathan Scott
<jonathan.scott@ist.ac.at>.

In this paper we address the challenge of partitioning centralized data in a way that reflects the statistical heterogeneity of the true FL clients. The goal being to use this
partition to run server-side federated training simulations,

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

