SMaRt: Improving GANs with Score Matching Regularity

Mengfei Xia 1 2 Yujun Shen 3 Ceyuan Yang 4 Ran Yi 5 Wenping Wang 6 Yong-Jin Liu† 1

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) usually
struggle in learning from highly diverse data,
whose underlying manifold is complex. In this
work, we revisit the mathematical foundations
of GANs, and theoretically reveal that the native
adversarial loss for GAN training is insufficient to
fix the problem of subsets with positive Lebesgue
measure of the generated data manifold lying out
of the real data manifold. Instead, we find that
score matching serves as a promising solution to
this issue thanks to its capability of persistently
pushing the generated data points towards the real
data manifold. We thereby propose to improve
the optimization of GANs with score matching
regularity (SMaRt). Regarding the empirical
evidences, we first design a toy example to show
that training GANs by the aid of a ground-truth
score function can help reproduce the real data
distribution more accurately, and then confirm
that our approach can consistently boost the
synthesis performance of various state-of-the-art
GANs on real-world datasets with pre-trained
diffusion models acting as the approximate score
function. For instance, when training Aurora on
the ImageNet 64 × 64 dataset, we manage to
improve FID from 8.87 to 7.11, on par with the
performance of one-step consistency model. Code
is available at https://github.com/thuxmf/SMaRt.

Figure 1. Motivation scheme of SMaRt. Red and blue surfaces
denote the generated and real data manifolds, respectively. The
positive-Lebesgue-measure subset of out-of-manifold generated
samples leads to non-optimal constant generator loss, annihilating
the gradient for generator. However, the proposed score matching
regularity (Lscore in Eq. (10)) provides complementary guidance,
urging such a subset to move towards the real data manifold. In
this case, generator loss regains to exert effective guidance aiding
the generator distribution to converge to the real distribution.

et al., 2023). It is well recognized that, recent generative
models, such as DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021), GigaGAN (Kang et al.,
2023), and Aurora (Zhu et al., 2023b), have achieved
unprecedented capability improvement of high-resolution
image generation, among which, diffusion probabilistic
models (DPMs) are the most prominent. DPMs leverage the
diffusion and denoising processes. Their intrinsic intricate
knowledge of data distribution and strong capability to scale
up, make DPMs the most successful and potential options
for generative modeling. The other paradigm now dominant,
generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Brock et al., 2019), introduce an implicit modeling.
Despite enabling expeditious generation, GANs are usually
criticized for unsatisfactory visual quality and limited
diversity when compared with DPMs, making GANs
seem to be falling from grace on image generation tasks.
However, GAN remains a worthy tool considering its
good performance on single-domain datasets (e.g., human
faces) (Karras et al., 2020; 2021) and its interpretable latent
space (Shen et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2023a).

1. Introduction
During the last period, deep generative models have made
significant improvements in a variety of domains, such
as data generation (Karras et al., 2020; 2021; Ho et al.,
2020; Song et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Karras
et al., 2022) and image editing (Shen et al., 2019; Shen &
Zhou, 2020; Zhu et al., 2023a; Meng et al., 2022; Couairon
1

Tsinghua University 2 BNRist 3 Ant Group 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 6 Texas A&M University.
Correspondence to: Yong-Jin Liu <liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

In this work, we dig into the mathematical foundations of
GANs and reveal the necessary and sufficient conditions of
optimality of generator loss. We argue in Theorem 3.1 that
positive-Lebesgue-measure difference sets of generated data
manifold over real data manifold lead to constant but nonoptimal generator loss, which annihilates the gradient and

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

