Adaptive Robust Learning using Latent Bernoulli Variables

Aleksandr Karakulev 1 Dave Zachariah∗ 1 Prashant Singh∗ 1 2

Abstract

or labeling, or even malicious attacks. Further, the corrupting distribution q(z) is typically unknown, and the level
of corruption ε, difficult to determine. Equation (2) used
herein follows the well-known Huber contamination model
from the robust statistics literature (Huber, 2011; Maronna
et al., 2019).

We present an adaptive approach for robust learning from corrupted training sets. We identify corrupted and non-corrupted samples with
latent Bernoulli variables and thus formulate
the learning problem as maximization of the
likelihood where latent variables are marginalized. The resulting problem is solved via variational inference, using an efficient ExpectationMaximization based method. The proposed approach improves over the state-of-the-art by automatically inferring the corruption level, while
adding minimal computational overhead. We
demonstrate our robust learning method and its
parameter-free nature on a wide variety of machine learning tasks including online learning and
deep learning where it adapts to different levels
of noise and maintains high prediction accuracy.

Existing approaches require an estimation of the noise structure or the corruption level ε. This imposes restrictions on
using these methods in settings where such pre-processing
becomes impractical, e.g., in online learning, wherein the
assumption about ε needs to be optimized in continuously arriving data. In Figure 1, we show an example: the accuracy
of binary classification trained on data that is continuously
collected from the HAR dataset (Helou, 2023), and subsequently corrupted with varying number of randomly flipped
labels in each batch (details in Section 4.2).

1. Introduction
Several statistical learning problems are formulated as estimation of parameters θ ∈ Θ of a probabilistic
model by
Qn
maximizing its likelihood function i=1 p(zi |θ) given n
independent observations Z = {zi }ni=1 , zi ∼ p(z). By
defining the loss function as the negative log-likelihood
ℓθ (z) = − ln p(z|θ), one can equivalently solve
θML = arg max
θ∈Θ

n
Y
i=1

p(zi |θ) = arg min
θ∈Θ

n
X

Figure 1: Classification of online streaming data with varying number of corrupted labels. Adaptive nature of our
approach (RLVI) allows for automatic identification of outliers when learning from batches of data with different ε.
Our method is robust and thus has higher accuracy than the
standard stochastic optimization of the likelihood (SGD).

ℓθ (zi ). (1)

i=1

However, real-world data is often corrupted: samples arise
from the true distribution p(z) and a corrupting source q(z),
zi ∼ (1 − ε)p(z) + εq(z),

(2)
Contribution. This paper presents a principled approach
for robust learning from corrupted data that is

leading to a suboptimal solution θML . In this contaminated
mixture, corrupted samples z ∼ q(z) may result from inaccurate measurements, errors or oversight in data acquisition

• widely applicable given any likelihood function,

*

Co-senior authors 1 Uppsala University, Sweden 2 Science
for Life Laboratory, Sweden. Correspondence to: Aleksandr
Karakulev <aleksandr.karakulev@it.uu.se>.

• robust against a wide class of contamination sources,
• adaptable and tuning-parameter free,

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

• scalable for large data sets and deep learning models.
1

