FedSC: Provable Federated Self-supervised Learning
with Spectral Contrastive Objective over Non-i.i.d. Data

Shusen Jing 1 Anlan Yu 2 Shuai Zhang 3 Songyang Zhang 4

Abstract

which data similarity can be measured by simple metrics,
such as cosine and Euclidean distances, with unlabeled data
(Chen et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021; Grill et al., 2020;
He et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2021;
HaoChen et al., 2021). On top of the foundation model
trained with SSL, a simple linear layer, also known as linear
probe, is sufficient to perform well on a wide range of downstream tasks with minimal labeled data. Resulting from
its high label efficiency, SSL has been adopted in a variety
of applications, such as natural language processing (He
et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020) and computer vision (Ravi
& Larochelle, 2016; Hu et al., 2021).

Recent efforts have been made to integrate selfsupervised learning (SSL) with the framework of
federated learning (FL). One unique challenge
of federated self-supervised learning (FedSSL)
is that the global objective of FedSSL usually
does not equal the weighted sum of local SSL objectives. Consequently, conventional approaches,
such as federated averaging (FedAvg), fail to precisely minimize the FedSSL global objective, often resulting in suboptimal performance, especially when data is non-i.i.d.. To fill this gap,
we propose a provable FedSSL algorithm, named
FedSC, based on the spectral contrastive objective. In FedSC, clients share correlation matrices of data representations in addition to model
weights periodically, which enables inter-client
contrast of data samples in addition to intra-client
contrast and contraction, resulting in improved
quality of data representations. Differential privacy (DP) protection is deployed to control the
additional privacy leakage on local datasets when
correlation matrices are shared. We also provide
theoretical analysis on the convergence and extra
privacy leakage. The experimental results validate
the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.

However, SSL algorithms are often executed on massive
amounts of unlabeled data that may be dispersed across
various locations. Moreover, the progressively tightening
privacy-protection regulations frequently inhibit the centralization of data. Within this context, the federated learning
(FL) framework is often favored, wherein a central server
can learn from private data located on clients without the
data being shared directly (McMahan et al., 2017; Stich,
2018; Li et al., 2019).
Despite the extensive study and theoretical guarantees
(Stich, 2018; Li et al., 2019) associated with conventional
FL, its generalization to incorporate with SSL is not straightforward. The fundamental challenge arises from the fact
that, unlike FL within supervised learning, the global objective of FedSSL usually does not equal the weighted sum
of local SSL objectives. Consequently, conventional FL
approaches, e.g. federated averaging (FedAvg), can not
minimize the exact global objective of FedSSL especially
when data is non-independent and identically distributed
(non-i.i.d.). From the perspective of contrastive learning,
FedAvg only contrasts data samples within the same client
(intra-client) rather than those across different clients (interclient). Therefore, the learned representation might not be
as effective at distinguishing inter-client data samples as it
is with intra-client data samples.

1. Introduction
As a type of unsupervised learning, self-supervised learning
(SSL) aims to learn a structured representation space, in
1

Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA 3 Department of Data Science, New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, USA
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, Louisiana, USA. Correspondence to: Shusen Jing <shusen.jing@ucsf.edu>, Songyang Zhang
<songyang.zhang@louisiana.edu>.

Although recent works on FedSSL have shown great numerical success (Zhuang et al., 2021; 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023; Han et al., 2022), the majority of them either overlook
previously mentioned challenge or fail to offer a theoretical
analysis. FedU (Zhuang et al., 2021) and FedEMA (Zhuang

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

