Activation-Descent Regularization for Input Optimization of ReLU Networks

Hongzhan Yu 1 Sicun Gao 1

Abstract

However, this approach can be problematic, especially when
dealing with ReLU networks, as the ReLU activation function is discontinuous and non-differentiable, resulting in a
gradient of zero for all negative pre-activation values. This
means that the steepest descent direction only accounts for
descent within the decision boundaries of a specific ReLU
activation pattern. In deep neural networks with a large
number of activation patterns, the region of inputs for each
pattern is typically small. As a result, following the gradient
direction can lead to the input jumping over to a different
activation pattern with vastly different numerical properties,
resulting in significant deviation from the desired objective
direction, even if the step sizes are chosen to be very small.

We present a new approach for input optimization
of ReLU networks that explicitly takes into account the effect of changes in activation patterns.
We analyze local optimization steps in both the
input space and the space of activation patterns
to propose methods with superior local descent
properties. To accomplish this, we convert the
discrete space of activation patterns into differentiable representations and propose regularization
terms that improve each descent step. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed input-optimization methods for improving the state-of-the-art in various areas, such as
adversarial learning, generative modeling, and reinforcement learning.

We develop new methods for input optimization that take
into account the impact of changes in activation patterns on
the output. To accomplish this, we adopt a dual perspective
by considering the local optimization steps both from the
input space and the space of activation patterns. We convert
the original discrete space of activation patterns into differentiable representations to obtain descent directions in the
activation pattern space that can be continuously tuned. This
allows us to introduce new regularization terms for local
descent in the input space that encourages the input change
to be aligned with the descent directions in the activation
space. We then form the Lagrangian of the original objective with the regularizers and perform primal-dual descent.
The overall procedures can thus achieve better local descent
properties than gradient descent and also various forms of
randomly perturbed gradient methods.

1. Introduction
Many problems in deep learning involves optimizing the
inputs of neural networks, instead of the model parameters. Examples include finding effective adversarial attacks (Madry et al., 2017; Wong & Kolter, 2018; Ilyas
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022), optimizing latent variables in generative models (Bojanowski et al.,
2017; Zadeh et al., 2019), finding actions that maximizes
Q-values in reinforcement learning (Lillicrap et al., 2015;
Fujimoto et al., 2018; 2019), and verification of neural networks (Bunel et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Shi et al.,
2023). Such input optimization problems typically involve
lower-dimensional problems than the standard parameter
optimization problem in network training, but the loss landscapes can be more complex with a stronger need for dealing
with the combinatorial nature of it (Agrawal et al., 2019;
Gurumurthy et al., 2021).

Through our experiments1 , we show that the proposed methods can significantly improve input optimization. We use
benchmarks from several applications, such as optimizing
adversarial attacks to neural image classifiers, reconstructing
target images with generative models, and deep reinforcement learning with better action selection.

The standard approach for input optimization is to follow the
gradient of the objective function over the input variables.

2. Related Work
Input optimization in deep learning. Many problems in
deep learning can be formulated as input optimization problems. One canonical application is to construct adversarial
attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2017; Wong

1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University
of California San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Hongzhan Yu
<hoy021@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

1

Codes are available at github.com/hoy021/ADR-GD.

