Self-Correcting Self-Consuming Loops for Generative Model Training

Nate Gillman 1 Michael Freeman 1 Daksh Aggarwal 1 Chia-Hong Hsu 1
Calvin Luo 1 Yonglong Tian 2 Chen Sun 1 2

Abstract
As synthetic data becomes higher quality and proliferates on the internet, machine learning models are increasingly trained on a mix of humanand machine-generated data. Despite the successful stories of using synthetic data for representation learning, using synthetic data for generative model training creates “self-consuming
loops” which may lead to training instability or
even collapse, unless certain conditions are met.
Our paper aims to stabilize self-consuming generative model training. Our theoretical results
demonstrate that by introducing an idealized correction function, which maps a data point to be
more likely under the true data distribution, selfconsuming loops can be made exponentially more
stable. We then propose self-correction functions,
which rely on expert knowledge (e.g. the laws of
physics programmed in a simulator), and aim to
approximate the idealized corrector automatically
and at scale. We empirically validate the effectiveness of self-correcting self-consuming loops on
the challenging human motion synthesis task, and
observe that it successfully avoids model collapse,
even when the ratio of synthetic data to real data
is as high as 100%.

Figure 1. What happens after iteratively training a text-conditioned
generative model for human motion synthesis for 50 generations?
We simulate a self-consuming loop by creating synthetic data with
the latest generative model, and mixing them with the original data
to continue training the next generative model. We observe that
by self-correcting the synthetic data with a physics simulator, the
model can successfully avoid collapse and generate high-quality
human motion. Faded poses represent poses from further back in
time. Our paper provides theoretical and empirical justification for
the self-correcting self-consuming loop.

1. Introduction
Generative models have been used to synthesize training
data for various learning tasks, to varying degrees of success. For example, for the tasks of image classification and
contrastive representation learning, recent work (Azizi et al.,
2023; Tian et al., 2023) finds that using data synthesized
from generative models rivals using real data. Unfortunately,
there is a gloomier outlook when attempting to generalize
this framework to generative model training.

On one hand, there is evidence to suggest that training a
generative model with its own outputs in a self-consuming
manner will lead to collapse (Alemohammad et al., 2024).
For example, after 50 iterations of self-consuming training, a
human motion diffusion model (Tevet et al., 2023) collapses
and fails to follow the text prompts or the laws of physics
(see the two examples on the left of Figure 1).

1

Brown University 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence
to: Nate Gillman <nate_gillman@brown.edu>, Chen Sun
<chensun@brown.edu>.

On the other hand, evidence suggests that such a framework
could avoid collapse, but only when a “moderate” amount
of synthetic data is used (Bertrand et al., 2024). Worse
still, this self-consuming scenario might happen without us

st

Proceedings of the 41 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the authors.

1

