Energy-Guided Diffusion Sampling for Offline-to-Online Reinforcement
Learning

Xu-Hui Liu * 1 Tian-Shuo Liu * 1 2 Shengyi Jiang 3 Ruifeng Chen 1 2 Zhilong Zhang 1 2 Xinwei Chen 2
Yang Yu 1 2

Abstract

comotion skill learning (Peng et al., 2020; Haarnoja et al.,
2018) and operations research (Hubbs et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2023c; 2024; Ling et al., 2024). Notably, RL methods, including online (Mnih et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2024) and offline (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2022; Jia et al., 2024) ones, have
been employed to achieve superior performance. However,
online RL methods often demand extensive data collection
through interacting with the environment, a process that can
be time-consuming or risky. In contrast, offline RL methods
utilize pre-existing datasets to train a new policy, avoiding
the need for resource-intensive online interactions but often
suffering from suboptimality due to limited data.

Combining offline and online reinforcement learning (RL) techniques is indeed crucial for achieving efficient and safe learning where data acquisition is expensive. Existing methods replay
offline data directly in the online phase, resulting in a significant challenge of data distribution shift and subsequently causing inefficiency
in online fine-tuning. To address this issue,
we introduce an innovative approach, Energyguided DIffusion Sampling (EDIS), which utilizes a diffusion model to extract prior knowledge from the offline dataset and employs energy functions to distill this knowledge for enhanced data generation in the online phase. The
theoretical analysis demonstrates that EDIS exhibits reduced suboptimality compared to solely
utilizing online data or directly reusing offline
data. EDIS is a plug-in approach and can be
combined with existing methods in offline-toonline RL setting. By implementing EDIS to
off-the-shelf methods Cal-QL and IQL, we observe a notable 20% average improvement in
empirical performance on MuJoCo, AntMaze,
and Adroit environments. Code is available at
https://github.com/liuxhym/EDIS.

To mitigate the challenges incurred due to data limitations in
online and offline RL, researchers have proposed the offlineto-online setting, aiming to overcome the cost of online
interaction and the suboptimality inherent in offline learning. In this setting, the agent undergoes two learning phases:
first, it learns from an offline dataset, and then it fine-tunes
through a limited number of online interactions (Lee et al.,
2021; Kostrikov et al., 2022; Nakamoto et al., 2023). After
the offline phase, value functions or policies are derived and
used to initialize the online phase. Therefore, the algorithm
can utilize prior knowledge in the offline dataset to help
reduce the cost of the online phase. However, a significant
drawback in this paradigm arises from the incomplete utilization of the offline dataset, as the information extracted is
limited to the pre-trained policy.

1. Introduction

While previous works have effectively addressed the performance drop because of the objective mismatch of the
two-stage learning in offline-to-online settings (Nakamoto
et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2021; Nair et al., 2020), the incomplete utilization of the prior knowledge in the offline dataset
remains an unexplored challenge. Some studies directly
replayed samples in the online phase for data augmentation (Lee et al., 2021), leading to performance improvements. Nevertheless, this approach neglects the distribution
shift issue, as the data distribution in the offline dataset
may differ from that induced by the current policy. Distribution shift has shown adverse effects even in off-policy
reinforcement learning (Sinha et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021),

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018)
has demonstrated remarkable efficacy in diverse decisionmaking tasks, such as sequential recommendation systems (Wang et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018), robotic lo*
Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China & School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 2 Polixir Technologies 3 Department of Computer Science, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Correspondence to: Yang Yu
<yuy@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

