Mean-field Underdamped Langevin Dynamics and its Spacetime Discretization

Qiang Fu 1 Ashia Wilson 2

Abstract

theoretical developments. Hu et al. (2019), for example,
show that MLD finds EMO solutions asymptotically when
problems can be expressed as optimizing a convex functional. If in addition, the EMO satisfies a uniform logarithmic Sobolev inequality, several studies have established
that this convergence occurs exponentially quickly (Chizat,
2022; Nitanda et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). However,
implementing MLD is not a straightforward task; to arrive
at a practical algorithm requires both spatial and temporal
discretizations of the dynamics. Nitanda et al. (2022) study
a time-discretization of MLD by extending an interpolation argument introduced by Vempala & Wibisono (2019)
to a non-linear Fokker-Planck equation. They establish a
non-asymptotic rate of convergence for the discrete-time
process. Chen et al. (2022) study a space-discretization consisting of a finite-particle approximation to the density of
MLD (referred to as a finite-particle system) and show the
finite-particle system finds the solution to the EMO problem exponentially fast, with a bias related to the number
of particles. More practically, Suzuki et al. (2023) analyze
a spacetime discretization of the MLD and establish the
non-asymptotic convergence of the resulting algorithm to
a biased limit related to both the number of particles used
and stepsize. Their analysis applies to several important
learning problems and improves the results of the standard
gradient Langevin dynamics.

We propose a new method called the N-particle
underdamped Langevin algorithm for optimizing
a special class of non-linear functionals defined
over the space of probability measures. Examples
of problems with this formulation include training mean-field neural networks, maximum mean
discrepancy minimization and kernel Stein discrepancy minimization. Our algorithm is based
on a novel spacetime discretization of the meanfield underdamped Langevin dynamics, for which
we provide a new, fast mixing guarantee. In addition, we demonstrate that our algorithm converges
globally in total variation distance, bridging the
theoretical gap between the dynamics and its practical implementation.

1. Introduction
The mean-field Langevin dynamics (MLD) has recently
received renewed interest due to its connection to gradientbased techniques used in supervised learning problems such
as training neural networks in a limiting regime (Mei et al.,
2018). Several recent works have focused on the theoretical characterizations of the convergence properties of MLD
in particular (Hu et al., 2019; Chizat, 2022; Nitanda et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2022; Claisse et al., 2023; Suzuki et al.,
2023). More generally, MLD can be used to solve problems
that can be posed as an entropy regularized mean-field optimization (EMO) problem. Other examples of such problems
include density estimation via maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) minimization (Gretton et al., 2006; Arbel et al.,
2019; Chizat, 2022; Suzuki et al., 2023) and sampling via
kernel Stein discrepancy (KSD) minimization (Liu et al.,
2016; Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Suzuki et al., 2023).

A natural candidate method for finding solutions to EMO
problems faster is the mean-field underdamped Langevin
dynamics (MULD). MULD resemble several techniques
for adding momentum to gradient descent in optimization,
many of which are known to result in provably faster convergence in a variety of settings (Nesterov, 1983; Wilson et al.,
2016; Laborde & Oberman, 2020; Hinder et al., 2020; Fu
et al., 2023; Srinivasan & Wilson, 2022). Moreover, training
neural networks using momentum-based gradient descent
is considered effective in several applications (Sutskever
et al., 2013; Kingma & Ba, 2014; Ruder, 2016). Kazeykina
et al. (2020) and Chen et al. (2023) confirm that a naive
spacetime discretization of MULD has impressive empirical
performance when compared to a naive discretization of
the MLD on applications such as training mean-field neural
networks.

The MLD has also been the subject of a number of recent
1
Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to:
Qiang Fu <qiang.fu@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

Chen et al. (2023) introduce a space-discretization of MULD
consisting of a finite particle approximation to the density
1

