Investigating Pre-Training Objectives for Generalization
in Vision-Based Reinforcement Learning

Donghu Kim * 1 Hojoon Lee * 1 Kyungmin Lee * 1 Dongyoon Hwang 1 Jaegul Choo 1

Abstract

10M transitions

Recently, various pre-training methods have been
introduced in vision-based Reinforcement Learning (RL). However, their generalization ability
remains unclear due to evaluations being limited
to in-distribution environments and non-unified
experimental setups. To address this, we introduce the Atari Pre-training Benchmark (AtariPB), which pre-trains a ResNet-50 model on
10 million transitions from 50 Atari games and
evaluates it across diverse environment distributions. Our experiments show that pre-training
objectives focused on learning task-agnostic features (e.g., identifying objects and understanding temporal dynamics) enhance generalization
across different environments. In contrast, objectives focused on learning task-specific knowledge (e.g., identifying agents and fitting reward
functions) improve performance in environments
similar to the pre-training dataset but not in
varied ones. We publicize our codes, datasets,
and model checkpoints at https://github.
com/dojeon-ai/Atari-PB.

ID

Near-OOD

MAE, BC, ⋯ ,CQL

Far-OOD

Pre-trained
Model

Figure 1: Overview of Atari-PB. The ResNet-50-based
model is pre-trained from 10M interactions with a given
pre-training algorithm. The pre-trained model is then evaluated by fine-tuning to In-Distribution (ID), Near-Out-ofDistribution (Near-OOD), and Far-Out-of-Distribution (FarOOD) environments.

Image-based methods, for instance, focus on extracting spatial characteristics such as object sizes and shapes (Laskin
et al., 2020b; Seo et al., 2023a). In contrast, video-based approaches delve into the temporal dynamics of environments
like objects’ movement and direction (Schwarzer et al.,
2020b; Nair et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2023). Those learning from demonstrations prioritize extracting task-relevant
features, distinguishing agents from irrelevant elements like
backgrounds (Pomerleau, 1991; Christiano et al., 2016; Islam et al., 2022). Finally, trajectory-based methods further
concentrate on learning task-specific features by estimating
the rewards associated with different states and actions (Kumar et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Fujimoto et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
The pretrain-then-finetune approach has become a standard
practice in computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP), renowned for its robust generalization across
diverse tasks (He et al., 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023). In visionbased Reinforcement Learning (RL), this approach is now
gaining attraction as well (Levine et al., 2020; Yang et al.,
2023), driven by the increasing availability of large-scale
offline datasets (Grauman et al., 2022; Padalkar et al., 2023).

Despite their advancements, the generalization capabilities
of these methods remain underexplored as evaluations are
typically confined to environments akin to their pre-training
datasets (Schwarzer et al., 2021b; Lee et al., 2023). Several studies have probed the generalization ability of the
agents by changing visual and task attributes, such as object colors (Hansen & Wang, 2021), shapes (Yuan et al.,
2023), and physics (Taiga et al., 2022). Yet, these variations are relatively minor and may not sufficiently mirror

In vision-based RL, various pre-training methods are designed to capture unique features from different data types.
*
Equal contribution 1 KAIST. Correspondence to: Donghu Kim
<quagmire@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

