Image Search with Text Feedback by Visiolinguistic Attention Learning
Yanbei Chen*

Shaogang Gong

Queen Mary University of London

Queen Mary University of London

Amazon

yanbei.chen@qmul.ac.uk

s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

bazzanil@amazon.com

Loris Bazzani

Abstract
Image search with text feedback has promising impacts
in various real-world applications, such as e-commerce and
internet search. Given a reference image and text feedback
from user, the goal is to retrieve images that not only resemble the input image, but also change certain aspects in
accordance with the given text. This is a challenging task as
it requires the synergistic understanding of both image and
text. In this work, we tackle this task by a novel Visiolinguistic Attention Learning (VAL) framework. Specifically,
we propose a composite transformer that can be seamlessly
plugged in a CNN to selectively preserve and transform the
visual features conditioned on language semantics. By inserting multiple composite transformers at varying depths,
VAL is incentive to encapsulate the multi-granular visiolinguistic information, thus yielding an expressive representation for effective image search. We conduct comprehensive evaluation on three datasets: Fashion200k, Shoes and
FashionIQ. Extensive experiments show our model exceeds
existing approaches on all datasets, demonstrating consistent superiority in coping with various text feedbacks, including attribute-like and natural language descriptions.

1. Introduction
Image search is a fundamental task in computer vision.
It has been serving as the cornerstone in a wide range of
application domains, such as internet search [42], fashion
retrieval [34], face recognition [57] and product identification [44]. The most prevalent paradigms in image search
take either image or text as the input query to search for
items of interest, commonly known as image-to-image [15]
and text-to-image matching [12]. However, an intrinsic
downside of these paradigms lies in the infeasibility to refine the retrieved items tailored to users’ intentions, especially when users cannot precisely describe their intentions
by a single image or with all the keywords.
To overcome the aforementioned limitation, different
user interactive signals have been explored over the past two
decades [61]. The basic idea is to incorporate user feedback
* Work partially done during an internship with Amazon.

…

(a)
I want a similar one but
change black to pink.

…

(b)
I want it to has a light
floral pattern.

Figure 1. Given a reference image and user text as input, we consider the task of retrieving new images that resemble the reference
image while changing certain aspects as specified by text. The text
generally describes the visual content to refine in reference image,
such as (a) a concrete attribute or (b) more abstract properties.

to refine or discover image items retrieved by the system
[52, 81, 70, 11, 45, 28, 27, 18, 79, 2, 39, 16, 48, 75, 17].
Most of these interactions are delivered in the form of text,
describing certain attributes [18, 79, 2] or relative attributes
[45, 28, 75] to refine or modify upon a reference image.
More recently, natural language feedback [17] is introduced
as a more flexible way to convey user’s intention for interactive image search. Despite having great potential value
in practice, incorporating various types of text feedback for
image search still remains understudied.
In this work, we investigate the task of image search with
text feedback, which entitles user to interact with the system
by selecting a reference image and providing additional text
to refine or modify the retrieval results. Unlike the prior
works that mostly focus on one type of text feedback, we
consider the more general form of text, which can be either
attribute-like description, or natural language expression.
This poses a more challenging multimodal learning problem that requires the synergistic understanding of both visual and linguistic contents at different granularities – the
given text may convey multi-granular semantics, ranging
from a concrete attribute to highly abstract visual properties (Fig. 1). As a task lying at the intersection of vision and
language, image search with text feedback, however, differs
13001

