Deblurring by Realistic Blurring
Kaihao Zhang1 Wenhan Luo2 Yiran Zhong1,4 Lin Ma2 Björn Stenger3 Wei Liu2 Hongdong Li1,4
1
Australian National University 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Rakuten Institute of Technology 4 ACRV

Abstract
𝑇

Existing deep learning methods for image deblurring
typically train models using pairs of sharp images and their
blurred counterparts. However, synthetically blurring images do not necessarily model the genuine blurring process
in real-world scenarios with sufficient accuracy. To address
this problem, we propose a new method which combines
two GAN models, i.e., a learning-to-Blur GAN (BGAN) and
learning-to-DeBlur GAN (DBGAN), in order to learn a better model for image deblurring by primarily learning how
to blur images. The first model, BGAN, learns how to blur
sharp images with unpaired sharp and blurry image sets,
and then guides the second model, DBGAN, to learn how
to correctly deblur such images. In order to reduce the discrepancy between real blur and synthesized blur, a relativistic blur loss is leveraged. As an additional contribution, this
paper also introduces a Real-World Blurred Image (RWBI)
dataset including diverse blurry images. Our experiments
show that the proposed method achieves consistently superior quantitative performance as well as higher perceptual
quality on both the newly proposed dataset and the public
GOPRO dataset.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is a classic problem in low-level computer vision, and it remains an active topic in the vision research community. Given a blurred image, which is corrupted by some unknown blur kernel or a spatially variant
kernel, the task of (blind) image deblurring is to recover the
sharp version of the original image, by reducing or removing the undesirable blur in the blurred image. Traditional
deblurring methods handle this problem via estimating a
blur kernel, through which a sharp version of the blurred
input image can be recovered. Often, special characteristics
of the blur kernel are assumed, and natural image priors are
exploited in the deblurring process [5, 7, 22, 40, 41]. However, estimating the optimal blur kernel is a difficult task
and can therefore impair the overall performance.
Recently, deep learning methods, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have been applied to

න 𝐼𝑡
𝑡=0

real
blurry image

Domain Gap
𝑀

I0

…

It

…

෍ 𝐼𝑡
𝑡=1

IM

synthetic
blurry image

(a)

synthetic blurry image
noise

BGAN_G
Content Gap Reduction

sharp image

RBL

RWBI
Domain Gap Reduction

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The differences between real and synthetic blurry images; (b) an illustration of learning to blur. Sharp images and random noises are fed into the BGAN G model to generate realistic
blurry images via the RBL loss and the RWBI dataset.

tackle this task and obtained a remarkable success, e.g.,
[21, 33, 36, 42]. Existing deep learning methods focus on
training deblurring models using paired blurry and sharp
images. For example, Nah et al. [21] propose a multiscale loss function to implement a coarse-to-fine processing pipeline. Tao et al. [36] and Gao et al. [6] improve
the work by using shared network weights among different
scales, achieving state-of-the-art performance.
However, many common effects are not adequately captured by the current deep learning models in the following
sense. First, since in real-world scenarios, an image is captured during a time window (i.e., the exposure duration),
the blurred image is in fact the integration of multi-frame

2737

