High-dimensional Convolutional Networks for Geometric Pattern Recognition
Christopher Choy
Stanford University

Junha Lee
POSTECH

René Ranftl
Intel Labs

Abstract
Many problems in science and engineering can be formulated in terms of geometric patterns in high-dimensional
spaces. We present high-dimensional convolutional networks (ConvNets) for pattern recognition problems that
arise in the context of geometric registration. We first study
the effectiveness of convolutional networks in detecting linear subspaces in high-dimensional spaces with up to 32 dimensions: much higher dimensionality than prior applications of ConvNets. We then apply high-dimensional ConvNets to 3D registration under rigid motions and image
correspondence estimation. Experiments indicate that our
high-dimensional ConvNets outperform prior approaches
that relied on deep networks based on global pooling operators.

1. Introduction
Finding structure in noisy data is a general problem that
arises in many different disciplines. For example, robust
linear regression requires finding a pattern (line, plane) in
noisy data. 3D registration of point clouds requires the identification of veridical correspondences in the presence of
spurious ones [6]. Structure from motion (SfM) pipelines
use verification based on prescribed geometric models to
filter spurious image matches [38]. A variety of such applications can benefit from improved methods for the detection
of geometric structures in noisy data.
Such detection is challenging. Data points that belong
to the sought-after structure often constitute only a small
fraction, while the majority are outliers. Various algorithms have been proposed over the years to cope with noisy
data [3, 9, 14, 19, 20, 32, 36, 39], but they are usually specific to a subset of problems.
Recent works have advocated for using deep networks [33, 46, 49] to learn robust models to classify geometric structures in the presence of outliers. Deep networks offer significant flexibility and the promise to replace
hand-crafted algorithms and heuristics by models learned
directly from data. However, due to the unstructured nature of the data in geometric problems, existing works have
treated such data as unordered sets, and relied on network

Jaesik Park
POSTECH

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

architectures based predominantly on global pooling operators and multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) [31, 47]. Such
network architectures lack the capacity to model local geometric structures and do not leverage the nature of the data,
which is often embedded in a (high-dimensional) metric
space and has a meaningful geometric structure.
In this work, we introduce a novel type of deep convolutional network that can operate in high dimensions. Our
network takes a sparse tensor as input and employs highdimensional convolutions as the fundamental operator. The
distinguishing characteristic of our approach is that it is able
to effectively leverage local neighborhood relations together
with global context even for high-dimensional data. Our
network is fully-convolutional, translation-invariant, and incorporates best practices from the development of ConvNets for two-dimensional image analysis [16, 21, 34].
To demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of our
approach, we tackle various geometric pattern recognition
problems. We begin with the diagnostic setting of linear
subspace detection and show that our construction is effective in high-dimensional spaces and at low signal-to-noise
ratios. We then apply the presented construction to geometric pattern recognition problems that arise in computer vision, including registration of three-dimensional point sets
under rigid motion (a 6D problem) and correspondence estimation between images under epipolar constraints (a 4D
problem). In both settings, the problem is made difficult by
the presence of outliers.
Our experiments indicate that the presented construction
can reliably detect geometric patterns in high-dimensional
data that is heavily contaminated by noise. It can operate in regimes where existing algorithms break down.
Our approach significantly improves 3D registration performance when combined with standard approaches for
3D point cloud alignment [6, 37, 51, 52]. The presented
high-dimensional convolutional network also outperforms
state-of-the-art methods for correspondence estimation between images [46, 49]. All networks and training scripts
are available at https://github.com/chrischoy/
HighDimConvNets.
111227

