Learning Event-Based Motion Deblurring
∗

†

Zhe Jiang 1,2 Yu Zhang* 1,3 Dongqing Zou1 Jimmy Ren1 Jiancheng Lv2 Yebin Liu3
1
SenseTime Research 2 Sichuan University 3 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Recovering sharp video sequence from a motion-blurred
image is highly ill-posed due to the significant loss of motion information in the blurring process. For event-based
cameras, however, fast motion can be captured as events at
high time rate, raising new opportunities to exploring effective solutions. In this paper, we start from a sequential formulation of event-based motion deblurring, then show how
its optimization can be unfolded with a novel end-to-end
deep architecture. The proposed architecture is a convolutional recurrent neural network that integrates visual and
temporal knowledge of both global and local scales in principled manner. To further improve the reconstruction, we
propose a differentiable directional event filtering module
to effectively extract rich boundary prior from the stream
of events. We conduct extensive experiments on the synthetic GoPro dataset and a large newly introduced dataset
captured by a DAVIS240C camera. The proposed approach
achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction quality, and generalizes better to handling real-world motion blur.

1. Introduction
Motion blur happens commonly due to the exposure time
required by modern camera sensors, during which scenes
are recorded at different time stamps and accumulated into
averaged (blurred) signal. The inverse problem called deblurring, which unravels the underlying scene dynamics behind a motion-blurred image and generates a sequence of
sharp recovery of the scene, is still challenging in computer
vision. While simple motion patterns (e.g. camera shake)
have been well modelled [29, 22, 6, 8, 47, 12, 51, 2], formulating more sophisticated motion patterns in real world,
however, is much more difﬁcult.
To model general motion blur, recent deep learning approaches propose to recover a blurred image by observing
lots of sharp images and their blurred versions [42, 11, 52,
25, 15, 43]. Despite their success in certain scenarios, they
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Jiang Zhe is interned with
SenseTime Research.
† Correspondence should be addressed to: zhangyulb@gmail.com

(b) Associated Events

(a) Blurred Image

(c) Zhang et al.

(d) Pan et al.

(e) Our result

Figure 1. Motivation of our approach. A severe motion-blurred image (a) is difﬁcult to deblur by observing its ambiguous appearance
only even with state-of-the-art deep architecture [50] (c). Though
events (b) provide dense temporal cues, the physical reconstruction approach [31] still presents unaddressed blur due to the noisiness of events (d). The proposed deep motion deblurring learns to
recover plausible details from imperfect image and events (e).

may fail reconstructing the scene plausibly for severe motion blur (e.g. Fig. 1), which is common for handheld, vehicle or drone-equipped cameras. In this case, hallucinating
the scene details is hardly possible due to the signiﬁcant loss
of temporal order and visual information.
Instead of purely relying on computational architectures,
this work adopts event-based cameras to alleviate this problem at data capture stage. Event cameras are biologically inspired sensors adept at recording the change of pixel intensities (called events) with microsecond accuracy and very
low power consumption. The hybrid model of such sensors
(e.g. [5]) allows the events being temporally calibrated with
the image. As a result, such data naturally encodes dense
temporal information that can facilitate motion deblurring.
As shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), although the image undergoes signiﬁcant blur, the accompanying events are temporally dense and reveal clear moving pattern of the scene.
Despite the high potential of event-based motion deblurring, a critical issue is that events are lossy and noisy signals
triggered only if pixel intensity changes up to certain threshold that can vary with the change of scene conditions [35].
Such discrete and inconsistent sampling makes textures and
13320

