Exploring Spatial-Temporal Multi-Frequency Analysis for High-Fidelity and
Temporal-Consistency Video Prediction
Beibei Jin1,2 , Yu Hu ∗1,2 , Qiankun Tang1,2 , Jingyu Niu1,2 , Zhiping Shi3 , Yinhe Han1,2 , and Xiaowei Li1,2
1

Research Center for Intelligent Computing Systems, State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jinbeibei, huyu, tangqiankun, niujingyu17b, yinhes, lxw}@ict.ac.cn
3
Capital Normal University
shizp@cnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video prediction is a pixel-wise dense prediction task to
infer future frames based on past frames. Missing appearance details and motion blur are still two major problems
for current models, leading to image distortion and temporal inconsistency. We point out the necessity of exploring multi-frequency analysis to deal with the two problems.
Inspired by the frequency band decomposition characteristic of Human Vision System (HVS), we propose a video
prediction network based on multi-level wavelet analysis
to uniformly deal with spatial and temporal information.
Specifically, multi-level spatial discrete wavelet transform
decomposes each video frame into anisotropic sub-bands
with multiple frequencies, helping to enrich structural information and reserve fine details. On the other hand, multilevel temporal discrete wavelet transform which operates
on time axis decomposes the frame sequence into sub-band
groups of different frequencies to accurately capture multifrequency motions under a fixed frame rate. Extensive experiments on diverse datasets demonstrate that our model
shows significant improvements on fidelity and temporal
consistency over the state-of-the-art works. Source code
and videos are available at https://github.com/
Bei-Jin/STMFANet.

∗ Corresponding author: Yu Hu, huyu@ict.ac.cn. This work is supported in part by the National Key RD Program of China under grant No.
2018AAA0102701, in part by the Science and Technology on Space Intelligent Control Laboratory under grant No. HTKJ2019KL502003, and
in part by the Innovation Project of Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences under grant No. 20186090.

Figure 1. A comparison of long-term prediction on a KTH [34]
motion sequence. Our model generates predictions with higher
fidelity and temporal consistency than the state-of-the-art methods,
SAVP [22] and VarNet [19]. In the other two methods’ predictions,
the person gradually blurs to distortion and runs out of the image
too fast or too slowly, which is inconsistent to the ground truth.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised video prediction has attracted more and
more attention in the research community and AI companies. It aims at predicting upcoming future frames based
on the observation of previous frames. This looking-ahead
ability has a broad application prospect on video surveillance [11], robotic systems [12] and autonomous vehicles [48]. However, building an accurate predictive model
still remains challenging because it requires to master not
only the visual abstraction model of different objects but
also the evolution of various motions over time. Many recent deep learning methods [22, 47, 36, 3, 40, 39, 44, 21]
have brought about great development on the video prediction task. However, there still exists a clear gap between
their predictions and the ground-truth (GT), as shown in
Figure 1. The predictions of the compared methods suffer
from deficient retention of high-frequency details and insuf-

4554

