Google Landmarks Dataset v2
A Large-Scale Benchmark for Instance-Level Recognition and Retrieval
Tobias Weyand ∗

André Araujo ∗
Bingyi Cao
Google Research, USA

Jack Sim

{weyand,andrearaujo,bingyi,jacksim}@google.com

Abstract
While image retrieval and instance recognition techniques
are progressing rapidly, there is a need for challenging
datasets to accurately measure their performance – while
posing novel challenges that are relevant for practical applications. We introduce the Google Landmarks Dataset
v2 (GLDv2), a new benchmark for large-scale, fine-grained
instance recognition and image retrieval in the domain of
human-made and natural landmarks. GLDv2 is the largest
such dataset to date by a large margin, including over 5M
images and 200k distinct instance labels. Its test set consists
of 118k images with ground truth annotations for both the retrieval and recognition tasks. The ground truth construction
involved over 800 hours of human annotator work. Our new
dataset has several challenging properties inspired by realworld applications that previous datasets did not consider:
An extremely long-tailed class distribution, a large fraction
of out-of-domain test photos and large intra-class variability. The dataset is sourced from Wikimedia Commons, the
world’s largest crowdsourced collection of landmark photos.
We provide baseline results for both recognition and retrieval
tasks based on state-of-the-art methods as well as competitive results from a public challenge. We further demonstrate
the suitability of the dataset for transfer learning by showing
that image embeddings trained on it achieve competitive
retrieval performance on independent datasets. The dataset
images, ground-truth and metric scoring code are available
at https://github.com/cvdfoundation/google-landmark.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval and instance recognition are fundamental
research topics which have been studied for decades. The
task of image retrieval [42, 29, 22, 44] is to rank images in an
index set w.r.t. their relevance to a query image. The task of
instance recognition [31, 16, 38] is to identify which specific
instance of an object class (e.g. the instance “Mona Lisa” of
the object class “painting”) is shown in a query image.
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1: The Google Landmarks Dataset v2 contains a variety of natural
and human-made landmarks from around the world. Since the class distribution is very long-tailed, the dataset contains a large number of lesser-known
local landmarks.1

As techniques for both tasks have evolved, approaches
have become more robust and scalable and are starting to
“solve” early datasets. Moreover, while increasingly largescale classification datasets like ImageNet [48], COCO [37]
and OpenImages [35] have established themselves as standard benchmarks, image retrieval is still commonly evaluated
on very small datasets. For example, the original Oxford5k
[42] and Paris6k [43] datasets that were released in 2007
and 2008, respectively, have only 55 query images of 11
instances each, but are still widely used today. Because both
datasets only contain images from a single city, results may
not generalize to larger-scale settings.
Many existing datasets also do not present real-world
challenges. For instance, a landmark recognition system that
is applied in a generic visual search app will be queried with
a large fraction of non-landmark queries, like animals, plants,
or products, which it is not expected to yield any results for.
Yet, most instance recognition datasets have only “on-topic”
queries and do not measure the false-positive rate on out-ofdomain queries. Therefore, larger, more challenging datasets
are necessary to fairly benchmark these techniques while
providing enough challenges to motivate further research.
A possible reason that small-scale datasets have been the
1 Photo attributions, top to bottom, left to right: 1 by fyepo, CC-BY, 2

by C24winagain, CC-BY-SA, 3 by AwOiSoAk KaOsIoWa, CC-BY-SA, 4
by Jud McCranie, CC-BY-SA; 5 by Shi.fachuang, CC-BY-SA; 6 by Nhi
Dang, CC-BY.

12575

