Set-Constrained Viterbi for Set-Supervised Action Segmentation
Jun Li
Oregon State University

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University

liju2@oregonstate.edu

sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper is about weakly supervised action segmentation, where the ground truth specifies only a set of actions
present in a training video, but not their true temporal ordering. Prior work typically uses a classifier that independently labels video frames for generating the pseudo ground
truth, and multiple instance learning for training the classifier. We extend this framework by specifying an HMM,
which accounts for co-occurrences of action classes and
their temporal lengths, and by explicitly training the HMM
on a Viterbi-based loss. Our first contribution is the formulation of a new set-constrained Viterbi algorithm (SCV).
Given a video, the SCV generates the MAP action segmentation that satisfies the ground truth. This prediction is used
as a framewise pseudo ground truth in our HMM training.
Our second contribution in training is a new regularization of feature affinities between training videos that share
the same action classes. Evaluation on action segmentation and alignment on the Breakfast, MPII Cooking2, Hollywood Extended datasets demonstrates our significant performance improvement for the two tasks over prior work.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses action segmentation by labeling
video frames with action classes under set-level weak supervision in training. Set-supervised training means that the
ground truth specifies only a set of actions present in a training video. Their temporal ordering and the number of their
occurrences remain unknown. This is an important problem
arising from the proliferation of big video datasets where
providing detailed annotations of a temporal ordering of actions is prohibitively expensive. One example application is
action segmentation of videos that have been retrieved from
a dataset based on word captions [6, 20], where the captions
do not describe temporal relationships of actions.
There is scant work on this problem. Related work [16]
combines a frame-wise classifier with a Hidden Markov
Model (HMM). The classifier assigns action scores to all
frames, and the HMM models a grammar and temporal

lengths of actions. However, their HMM and classifier are
not jointly learned, and performance is significantly below
that of counterpart approaches with access to ground-truth
temporal ordering of actions in training [13].
In this paper, we also adopt an HMM model that is
grounded on a fully-connected two-layer neural network
which extracts frame features and scores label assignments
to frames. Our HMM models temporal extents and cooccurrence of actions. We jointly train the HMM and neural
network on a maximum posterior probability (MAP) action
assignment to frames that satisfy the set-level ground truth
of a training video. We expect that the inferred MAP action
sequence is more optimal for joint training than the pseudo
ground truth generated independently for each frame as in
[16]. We cast this MAP inference as a set-constrained structured prediction of action labels such that every label from
the ground-truth action set appears at least once in the MAP
prediction. This problem has been shown to be NP-hard [1].
Therefore, our main novelty is an efficient approximation of
this NP-hard problem for our set-supervised training.
Fig. 1 illustrates our two contributions. First, we propose an efficient Set Constrained Viterbi (SCV) algorithm
for the MAP inference on training videos. Our SCV consists of two steps. In the first step, we run the Viterbi algorithm for inferring a MAP action assignment to frames,
where the predicted actions are restricted to appear in the
ground-truth set. When our initial prediction is missing
some actions from the ground truth, we proceed to our second step that sequentially flips the predicted labels of lowest scoring video segments into the missing labels, so as to
minimally decrease the assignment’s posterior probability.
This is done until the predicted sequence contains all actions
from the ground truth. While this second step could alternatively use a more principled algorithm for enforcing the
ground-truth constraint (e.g., Markov Chain Monte Carlo
sampling), such an alternative would be significantly more
complex and hence poorly justified.
Our second contribution is that we specify a new regularization of our set-supervised learning. This regularization is
aimed at our two-layer neural network for extracting frame
features. The regularization enforces that frame features are
110820

