Disparity-Aware Domain Adaptation in Stereo Image Restoration
Bo Yan ∗, Chenxi Ma, Bahetiyaer Bare, Weimin Tan
Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University

Steven Hoi
Salesforce Research Asia
Singapore Management University
shoi@salesforce.com

{byan, cxma17, bahtiyarbari16, wmtan14}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Under stereo settings, the problems of disparity estimation, stereo magnification and stereo-view synthesis have
gathered wide attention. However, the limited image quality brings non-negligible difficulties in developing related
applications and becomes the main bottleneck of stereo images. To the best of our knowledge, stereo image restoration is rarely studied. Towards this end, this paper analyses
how to effectively explore disparity information, and proposes a unified stereo image restoration framework. The
proposed framework explicitly learn the inherent pixel correspondence between stereo views and restores stereo image with the cross-view information at image and feature
level. A Feature Modulation Dense Block (FMDB) is introduced to adaptively insert disparity prior throughout the whole network. The experiments in terms of efficiency, objective and perceptual quality, and the accuracy of depth estimation demonstrates the superiority of the proposed framework on various stereo image restoration tasks.

1. Introduction
With the rising interest in virtual and augmentation reality, stereo images are widely investigated in multiple computer vision fields from stereo magnification, stereo matching to depth estimation. In practice, the stereo images always suffer from various degradations. Unlike the active
situation in other stereo image-related studies, the researches devoted to enhance the quality and practicality of stereo
images are rarely mentioned. Hence, stereo image restoration is a promising study for its ability to release the inherent quality limitation of the degraded stereo images in
research and applications.
An alternative solution to enhance stereo images is using
single image restoration methods, which only exerts spatial statistics inside a degraded view and ignores the per∗ This work was supported by NSFC (Grant No.: 61772137).

Figure 1: The ×4 SR results on image “C0007” from FlyingThings3D. Compared to the state-of-the-art SISR (EDSR [11]), reference based SR (SRNTT [22]), video SR
(DUF [6]), and stereo SR (StereoSR [5], PASSRnet [18])
works, the proposed approach synthesizes finer texture and
restores accurate details without bringing in distortions.
pixel registration between different views. So, restoring
each image independently limits the performance, especially when predicting some details which are lost in one view
but may exist in another view. Another way is multi-frame
or video restoration methods, which extend the time dimension and utilize the supplementary information between adjacent frames. However, different from video captured at
one viewpoint and different time points, the stereo image
corresponds to different viewpoints at the same time. The
pixel offsets in video and stereo images are caused by movement and parallax respectively, which makes the correlation
in video differ from that in a stereo pair. The referencebased image restoration method is also not suitable to stereo
images, e.g. RefSR [22] super-resolves a low-resolution (LR) image with the help of high-resolution (HR) references.
However the HR reference is difficult to obtain. As shown
in Figure 1, the above methods are restricted to a planar
scene and not fully applicable to stereo scene.
From the stereo imaging process illustrated in Figure 2,
these two views contain similar contents and serve as a reference to each other. The parallax refers to the inherent corresponding relationships between two views and provides
sub-pixel offsets information, which is relative to pixel-wise
4321
13179

