ARShadowGAN: Shadow Generative Adversarial Network for Augmented
Reality in Single Light Scenes
Daquan Liu1 , Chengjiang Long2∗, Hongpan Zhang1 , Hanning Yu1 , Xinzhi Dong1 , Chunxia Xiao1,3,4∗
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
Kitware Inc., Clifton Park, NY, USA
3
National Engineering Research Center For Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
chengjiang.long@kitware.com, {daquanliu,zhanghp,fishaning,dongxz97,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generating virtual object shadows consistent with the
real-world environment shading effects is important but
challenging in computer vision and augmented reality applications. To address this problem, we propose an end-toend Generative Adversarial Network for shadow generation
named ARShadowGAN for augmented reality in single light
scenes. Our ARShadowGAN makes full use of attention
mechanism and is able to directly model the mapping relation between the virtual object shadow and the real-world
environment without any explicit estimation of the illumination and 3D geometric information. In addition, we collect
an image set which provides rich clues for shadow generation and construct a dataset for training and evaluating our
proposed ARShadowGAN. The extensive experimental results show that our proposed ARShadowGAN is capable of
directly generating plausible virtual object shadows in single light scenes. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/ldq9526/ARShadowGAN .

1. Introduction
Augmented reality (AR) technology seamlessly integrates virtual objects with real-world scenes. It has broad
application prospects in the fields of medical science, education and entertainment. In a synthetic AR image, the
shadow of the virtual object directly reflects the illumination consistency between the virtual object and the realworld environment, which greatly affects the sense of reality. Therefore, it is very critical to generate the virtual object shadow and ensure it consistent with illumination constraints for high-quality AR applications.
Automatically generating shadows for inserted virtual
∗ This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and Chunxia Xiao.

Figure 1. An example of casting virtual shadow for an inserted
object in a single light scene. From left to right: the original image,
the synthetic image without the virtual object shadow, the virtual
object mask and the image with virtual object shadows.

objects is extremely challenging. Previous methods are
based on inverse rendering [32] and their performances
highly depend on the quality of the estimated geometry, illumination, reflectance and material properties. However,
such an inverse rendering problem is very expensive and
challenging in practice. What’s worse, any inaccurate estimation may result in unreasonable virtual shadows. We
aim to explore a mapping relationship between the virtual
object shadow and the real-world environment in the AR
setting without explicit inverse rendering. A shadow image dataset with clues to AR shadow generation in each image is desired for training and evaluating the performance of
AR shadow generation. However, existing shadow-related
datasets like SBU [41], SRD [38], and ISTD [44] , contain
pairs of shadow image and corresponding shadow-free image, but most of the shadows lack occluders and almost all
shadows are removed in shadow-free images. Such shadow
datasets do not provide sufficient clues to generate shadows.
Therefore, it is necessary to construct a new shadow dataset
for AR applications.
In this work, we construct a large-scale AR shadow image dataset named Shadow-AR dataset where each raw image contains occluders, corresponding shadows and inserted
3D objects from public available datasets like ShapeNet [3].
We first annotate the real-world shadows and their corresponding occluders, and then determine the illumination
and geometric information with camera and lighting cal-

8139

