TITAN: Future Forecast using Action Priors
Srikanth Malla

Behzad Dariush
Honda Research Institute USA

Chiho Choi

{smalla, bdariush, cchoi}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of predicting the future trajectory of scene agents from egocentric views obtained from a
moving platform. This problem is important in a variety of
domains, particularly for autonomous systems making reactive or strategic decisions in navigation. In an attempt to
address this problem, we introduce TITAN (Trajectory Inference using Targeted Action priors Network), a new model
that incorporates prior positions, actions, and context to
forecast future trajectory of agents and future ego-motion.
In the absence of an appropriate dataset for this task, we
created the TITAN dataset that consists of 700 labeled
video-clips (with odometry) captured from a moving vehicle on highly interactive urban traffic scenes in Tokyo. Our
dataset includes 50 labels including vehicle states and actions, pedestrian age groups, and targeted pedestrian action
attributes that are organized hierarchically corresponding to atomic, simple/complex-contextual, transportive, and
communicative actions. To evaluate our model, we conducted extensive experiments on the TITAN dataset, revealing significant performance improvement against baselines
and state-of-the-art algorithms. We also report promising results from our Agent Importance Mechanism (AIM),
a module which provides insight into assessment of perceived risk by calculating the relative influence of each
agent on the future ego-trajectory. The dataset is available
at https://usa.honda-ri.com/titan

1. Introduction
The ability to forecast future trajectory of agents (individuals, vehicles, cyclists, etc.) is paramount in developing navigation strategies in a range of applications including motion planning and decision making for autonomous
and cooperative (shared autonomy) systems. We know from
observation that the human visual system possesses an uncanny ability to forecast behavior using various cues such
as experience, context, relations, and social norms. For example, when immersed in a crowded driving scene, we are
able to reasonably estimate the intent, future actions, and

Predicted future location or
trajectory with uncertainty
Stationary
Participant
Moving
Participant
Ego-motion
ego-vehicle

Figure 1. Our goal is to predict the future trajectory of agents from
egocentric views obtained from a moving platform. We hypothesize that prior actions (and implicit intentions) play an important
role in future trajectory forecast. To this end, we develop a model
that incorporates prior positions, actions, and context to forecast
future trajectory of agents and future ego-motion. This figure is a
conceptual illustration that typifies navigation of ego-vehicle in an
urban scene, and how prior actions/intentions and context play an
important role in future trajectory forecast. We seek to also identify agents (depicted by the red bounding box) that influence future
ego-motion through an Agent Importance Mechanism (AIM) .

future location of the traffic participants in the next few seconds. This is undoubtedly attributed to years of prior experience and observations of interactions among humans and
other participants in the scene. To reach such human level
ability to forecast behavior is part of the quest for visual
intelligence and the holy grail of autonomous navigation,
requiring new algorithms, models, and datasets.
In the domain of behavior prediction, this paper considers the problem of future trajectory forecast from egocentric
views obtained from a mobile platform such as a vehicle in
a road scene. This problem is important for autonomous
agents to assess risks or to plan ahead when making reactive or strategic decisions in navigation. Several recently
reported models that predict trajectories incorporate social

11186

