Forward and Backward Information Retention
for Accurate Binary Neural Networks
Haotong Qin1 , Ruihao Gong1 , Xianglong Liu1,2 , Mingzhu Shen1 , Ziran Wei4 , Fengwei Yu3 , Jingkuan Song5
1
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University
3
SenseTime Research 4 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
5
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
∗

{qinhaotong, gongruihao, xlliu}@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn, lavieenrosesmz@outlook.com,
yufengwei@sensetime.com, {weiziran125, jingkuan.song}@gmail.com

Abstract
Weight and activation binarization is an effective approach to deep neural network compression and can accelerate the inference by leveraging bitwise operations. Although
many binarization methods have improved the accuracy of
the model by minimizing the quantization error in forward
propagation, there remains a noticeable performance gap
between the binarized model and the full-precision one. Our
empirical study indicates that the quantization brings information loss in both forward and backward propagation,
which is the bottleneck of training accurate binary neural networks. To address these issues, we propose an Information
Retention Network (IR-Net) to retain the information that
consists in the forward activations and backward gradients.
IR-Net mainly relies on two technical contributions: (1)
Libra Parameter Binarization (Libra-PB): simultaneously
minimizing both quantization error and information loss of
parameters by balanced and standardized weights in forward
propagation; (2) Error Decay Estimator (EDE): minimizing
the information loss of gradients by gradually approximating
the sign function in backward propagation, jointly considering the updating ability and accurate gradients. We are
the ﬁrst to investigate both forward and backward processes
of binary networks from the uniﬁed information perspective,
which provides new insight into the mechanism of network
binarization. Comprehensive experiments with various network structures on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets manifest that the proposed IR-Net can consistently outperform
state-of-the-art quantization methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), especially convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), have been well demonstrated in a
∗ Corresponding author

wide variety of computer vision applications such as image
classiﬁcation [30, 46, 47, 49, 50, 56, 63, 53], object detection [17, 16, 42, 45, 34] and semantic segmentation [15, 65].
Traditional CNNs are usually with massive parameters and
high computational complexity for the requirement of high
accuracy. Consequently, deploying the most advanced deep
CNN models requires expensive storage and computing resources, which largely limits the applications of DNNs on
portable devices such as mobile phones and cameras. Binary
neural networks are appealing to the community for their tiny
storage usage and efﬁcient inference [10, 52, 37, 64, 55, 19],
which results from the binarization of both weights and activations and the efﬁcient convolution implemented by bitwise
operations. Although much progress has been made on binarizing DNNs, the existing quantization methods remains a
signiﬁcant drop of accuracy compared with the full-precision
counterparts [14, 39, 2, 28, 57, 48, 9, 40, 43].
The performance degradation of binary neural networks
is mainly caused by the limited representation ability and
discreteness of binarization, which results in severe information loss in both forward and backward propagation. In
the forward propagation, when the activations and weights
are restricted to two values, the model’s diversity sharply
decreases, while the diversity is proved to be the key of
pursuing high accuracy of neural networks [54]. Two approaches are widely used to increase the diversity of neural
networks: increasing the number of neurons or increasing
the diversity of feature maps. For example, Bi-Real Net [38]
is targeted at the latter by adding on a full-precision shortcut to the quantized activations, which achieves signiﬁcant
performance improvement. However, with the additional
ﬂoating-point add operation, Bi-Real Net inevitably faces
worse efﬁciency than vanilla binary neural networks.
The diversity implies the ability to carry enough information during the forward propagation, meanwhile, accurate

2250

