Local Context Normalization: Revisiting Local Normalization
Anthony Ortiz ∗1, 4 , Caleb Robinson3, 4 , Dan Morris2 , Olac Fuentes1 , Christopher Kiekintveld1 , Md
Mahmudulla Hassan1 , and Nebojsa Jojic †2
1

The University of Texas at El Paso
2
Microsoft Research
3
Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Microsoft AI for Good Research Lab

Abstract
Normalization layers have been shown to improve convergence in deep neural networks, and even add useful inductive biases. In many vision applications the local spatial context of the features is important, but most common normalization schemes including Group Normalization (GN), Instance Normalization (IN), and Layer Normalization (LN) normalize over the entire spatial dimension of
a feature. This can wash out important signals and degrade
performance. For example, in applications that use satellite imagery, input images can be arbitrarily large; consequently, it is nonsensical to normalize over the entire area.
Positional Normalization (PN), on the other hand, only normalizes over a single spatial position at a time. A natural
compromise is to normalize features by local context, while
also taking into account group level information. In this paper, we propose Local Context Normalization (LCN): a normalization layer where every feature is normalized based on
a window around it and the filters in its group. We propose
an algorithmic solution to make LCN efficient for arbitrary
window sizes, even if every point in the image has a unique
window. LCN outperforms its Batch Normalization (BN),
GN, IN, and LN counterparts for object detection, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation applications in
several benchmark datasets, while keeping performance independent of the batch size and facilitating transfer learning.

1. Introduction
A variety of neural network normalization layers have
been proposed in the literature to aid in convergence and
∗ Work partially done while author was interning at Microsoft Research
† Correspondence: jojic@microsoft.com, anthonymlortiz@gmail.com

sometimes even add desirable inductive bias.
Batch Normalization (BN) is a subtractive and divisive
feature normalization scheme widely used in deep learning
architectures [12]. Recent research has shown that BN facilitates convergence of very deep learning architectures by
smoothing the optimization landscape [32]. BN normalizes
the features by the mean and variance computed within a
mini-batch. Using the batch dimension while calculating
the normalization statistics has two main drawbacks:
• Small batch sizes affect model performance because
the mean and variance estimates are less accurate.
• Batches might not exist during inference, so the mean
and variance are pre-computed from the training set
and used during inference. Therefore, changes in the
target data distribution lead to issues while performing
transfer learning, since the model assumes the statistics
of the original training set [27].
To address both of these issues, Group Normalization
(GN) was recently proposed by Wu and He [40]. GN divides channels into groups and normalizes the features by
using the statistics within each group. GN does not exploit
the batch dimension so the computation is independent of
batch sizes and model performance does not degrade when
the batch size is reduced. GN shows competitive performance with respect to BN when the batch size is small; consequently, GN is being quickly adopted for computer vision
tasks like segmentation and video classification, since batch
sizes are often restricted for those applications. When the
batch size is sufficiently large, BN still outperforms GN.
BN, GN, IN, and LN all perform “global” normalization
where spatial information is not exploited, and all features
are normalized by a common mean and variance value. We
argue that for the aforementioned applications, local context matters. To incorporate this intuition we propose Lo111276

