Learning Rank-1 Diffractive Optics for
Single-shot High Dynamic Range Imaging
Qilin Sun1

Ethan Tseng2
1

Qiang Fu1

KAUST

2

Wolfgang Heidrich1

Felix Heide2

Princeton University

Abstract

for low-contrast scenes, while struggling for high-contrast
scenes at night with both low- and high-flux scene content.

High-dynamic range (HDR) imaging is an essential
imaging modality for a wide range of applications in uncontrolled environments, including autonomous driving,
robotics, and mobile phone cameras. However, existing HDR techniques in commodity devices struggle with
dynamic scenes due to multi-shot acquisition and postprocessing time, e.g. mobile phone burst photography, making such approaches unsuitable for real-time applications.
In this work, we propose a method for snapshot HDR imaging by learning an optical HDR encoding in a single image
which maps saturated highlights into neighboring unsaturated areas using a diffractive optical element (DOE). We
propose a novel rank-1 parameterization of the DOE which
drastically reduces the optical search space while allowing
us to efficiently encode high-frequency detail. We propose a
reconstruction network tailored to this rank-1 parametrization for the recovery of clipped information from the encoded measurements. The proposed end-to-end framework
is validated through simulation and real-world experiments
and improves the PSNR by more than 7 dB over state-ofthe-art end-to-end designs.

Although existing HDR imaging methods in widely deployed consumer smartphone devices [20, 45, 23] successfully overcome this limitation by acquiring bursts of captures, the combined capture and processing time of multiple
seconds [20] is prohibitive for many applications in robotics
and autonomous driving that demand real-time feeds.

1. Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) imaging has become a commodity imaging technique as evident by its applications
across many domains, including mobile consumer photography, robotics, drones, surveillance, content capture for
display, driver assistance systems, and autonomous driving.
The pixels in conventional CMOS and CCD image sensors
act as potential wells that saturate when the well capacity
is reached. Unlike film, which provides a gradual compression of high intensities, digital image sensors thus suffer
from a hard cutoff at some peak intensity, so that information about the saturated bright regions is irrevocably lost.
By reducing the exposure time, brighter regions can be recovered, but at the cost of under-exposing, i.e., reducing
signal photons in darker image regions. As a result, single
captures of conventional sensors provide high fidelity only

Faster multi-capture imaging methods [6, 56, 42], relying on only 2-3 low-dynamic range exposures and hardware
exposure fusion, fail for higher dynamic scenes typical in
automotive and robotics applications. As an alternative,
emerging sensor designs multiplex exposures on the sensor [48, 64, 46], however, at the cost of spatial resolution
required for spectral or spatial information. Optical splitting methods using multiple sensors [62] are often not practical in an application due to their cost and footprint. To
tackle this issue, a line of recent work explores the hallucination of HDR images [9, 12] from single low-dynamic
range (LDR) captures. These methods can only rely on semantic context but no measurement signal to recover the
clipped HDR regions. In an alternative direction, Rouf et
al. [55] proposed a hand-crafted star filter attachment to optically encode lost information by spreading out saturated
highlights to nearby regions. Unfortunately, their approach
only achieves low image quality far below that of recent
hallucination approaches.
In this work, we revisit this idea, but by learning an
optical HDR encoding in an end-to-end optimization. To
this end, we jointly design the optical point spread function
(PSF) together with the inverse reconstruction method, i.e.,
the post-capture processing that recovers the latent HDR
scene from the input measurement, which we formulate as
an (RAW-)image-to-image neural network. However, we
found that applying existing end-to-end methods [60, 43]
easily finds a local minimum of the vast design space, parameterized by an unconstrained diffractive phase plate optic. Instead, we parameterize the diffractive element in the
proposed optical design with a rank-1 phase pattern. This
constrained PSF design spaces makes allows us to tailor the

1386

