Semi-Supervised Semantic Image Segmentation with Self-correcting Networks
Mostafa S. Ibrahim∗
Simon Fraser University

Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA

Mani Ranjbar
Sportlogiq

William G. Macready
Sanctuary AI

msibrahi@sfu.ca

avahdat@nvidia.com

mani@sportlogiq.com

wgm@sanctuary.ai

Abstract
Building a large image dataset with high-quality object
masks for semantic segmentation is costly and time consuming. In this paper, we introduce a principled semisupervised framework that only uses a small set of fully supervised images (having semantic segmentation labels and
box labels) and a set of images with only object bounding box labels (we call it the weak set). Our framework
trains the primary segmentation model with the aid of an
ancillary model that generates initial segmentation labels
for the weak set and a self-correction module that improves
the generated labels during training using the increasingly
accurate primary model. We introduce two variants of
the self-correction module using either linear or convolutional functions. Experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012
and Cityscape datasets show that our models trained with
a small fully supervised set perform similar to, or better
than, models trained with a large fully supervised set while
requiring ∼7x less annotation effort.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
successful in many computer vision tasks including image
classification [28, 19, 76], object detection [45, 34, 43], semantic segmentation [4, 71, 9], action recognition [14, 25,
49, 55], and facial landmark localization [53, 69, 75]. However, the common prerequisite for all these successes is the
availability of large training corpora of labeled images. Of
these tasks, semantic image segmentation is one of the most
costly tasks in terms of data annotation. For example, drawing a segmentation annotation on an object is on average
∼8x slower than drawing a bounding box and ∼78x slower
than labeling the presence of objects in images [5]. As a
result, most image segmentation datasets are orders of magnitude smaller than image-classification datasets.
In this paper, we mitigate the data demands of semantic
segmentation with a semi-supervised method that leverages
cheap object bounding box labels in training. This approach
∗ Work done while interning at D-Wave Systems

reduces the data annotation requirements at the cost of requiring inference of the mask label for an object within a
bounding box.
Current state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods typically rely on hand-crafted heuristics to infer an object mask
inside a bounding box [41, 12, 26]. In contrast, we propose a principled framework that trains semantic segmentation models in a semi-supervised setting using a small
set of fully supervised images (with semantic object masks
and bounding boxes) and a weak set of images (with only
bounding box annotations). The fully supervised set is first
used to train an ancillary segmentation model that predicts
object masks on the weak set. Using this augmented data a
primary segmentation model is trained. This primary segmentation model is probabilistic to accommodate the uncertainty of the mask labels generated by the ancillary model.
Training is formulated so that the labels supplied to the primary model are refined during training from the initial ancillary mask labels to more accurate labels obtained from
the primary model itself as it improves. Hence, we call
our framework a self-correcting segmentation model as it
improves the weakly supervised labels based on its current
probabilistic model of object masks.
We propose two approaches to the self-correction mechanism. Firstly, inspired by Vahdat [56], we use a function that linearly combines the ancillary and model predictions. We show that this simple and effective approach
is the natural result of minimizing a weighted KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence from a distribution over segmentation labels to both the ancillary and primary models. However, this approach requires defining a weight whose optimal value should change during training. With this motivation, we develop a second adaptive self-correction mechanism. We use CNNs to learn how to combine the ancillary
and primary models to predict a segmentation on a weak set
of images. This approach eliminates the need for a weighting schedule.
Experiments on the PASCAL VOC and Cityscapes
datasets show that our models trained with a small portion
of fully supervised set achieve a performance comparable
to (and in some cases better than) the models trained with
112715

