Fine-Grained Generalized Zero-Shot Learning via
Dense Attribute-Based Attention
Dat Huynh
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

huynh.dat@husky.neu.edu

eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of fine-grained generalized zeroshot recognition of visually similar classes without training
images for some classes. We propose a dense attributebased attention mechanism that for each attribute focuses
on the most relevant image regions, obtaining attributebased features. Instead of aligning a global feature vector of an image with its associated class semantic vector,
we propose an attribute embedding technique that aligns
each attribute-based feature with its attribute semantic vector. Hence, we compute a vector of attribute scores, for
the presence of each attribute in an image, whose similarity
with the true class semantic vector is maximized. Moreover,
we adjust each attribute score using an attention mechanism over attributes to better capture the discriminative
power of different attributes. To tackle the challenge of
bias towards seen classes during testing, we propose a new
self-calibration loss that adjusts the probability of unseen
classes to account for the training bias. We conduct experiments on three popular datasets of CUB, SUN and AWA2 as
well as the large-scale DeepFashion dataset, showing that
our model significantly improves the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition, which is to classify categories
that are visually very similar, is an important yet challenging task with a wide range of applications from fashion industry, e.g., recognition of different types of shoe or cloth
[1, 2, 3], to face recognition [4, 5, 6] and environmental conservation, e.g., recognizing endangered species of birds or
plants [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. However, training fine-grained
classification systems is challenging, as collecting training
samples from every class requires costly annotations by domain experts to distinguish between similar classes, e.g.,
‘Parakeet Auklet’ and ‘Least Auklet’ bird species, see Figure 3. As a result, training samples often follow a long-tail
distribution [13, 14], where many classes have few or no
training samples. In this work, we aim to generalize finegrained recognition to new classes without training samples

Figure 1: Traditional zero-shot classification (top) compresses
visual features to perform global embedding with class semantic descriptions, hence, not efficiently capturing fine-grained discriminative visual information. Our method (bottom) finds local
discriminative regions through dense attribute-based attention and
individually embeds each attribute-based feature with the attribute
semantic description, allowing for knowledge transfer to unseen
classes while preserving all fine-grained details.

via capturing and transferring fine-grained knowledge from
seen to unseen classes without overfitting on seen classes.
Although fine-grained classification has achieved remarkable performance by using feature pooling [15, 16, 9]
and discriminative region localization [11, 7, 3, 1, 12, 2]
techniques, it cannot generalize to unseen classes, as it requires training samples from every class, and cannot leverage auxiliary information such as class semantic vectors,
which is fundamental for transferring knowledge to unseen
classes. With the need for costly training data, conventional
fine-grained classification methods cannot scale to a large
number of classes. However, fine-grained classes can often
be described in terms of attributes that are common among
classes. Thus, effectively using these semantic descriptions
to transfer knowledge among classes can significantly reduce the amount of annotations for training.
Zero-shot classification, on the other hand, leverages
auxiliary information in the form of class semantic descriptions to generalize to unseen classes [17, 18, 19, 20]. A
large group of existing work learns an embedding function
14483

