Action Modifiers: Learning from Adverbs in Instructional Videos
Hazel Doughty1
1

Ivan Laptev2

University of Bristol

2

Walterio Mayol-Cuevas1,3

Inria, École Normale Supérieure

Dima Damen1
3

Amazon

Abstract
We present a method to learn a representation for adverbs from instructional videos using weak supervision from
the accompanying narrations. Key to our method is the fact
that the visual representation of the adverb is highly dependant on the action to which it applies, although the same
adverb will modify multiple actions in a similar way. For
instance, while ‘spread quickly’ and ‘mix quickly’ will look
dissimilar, we can learn a common representation that allows us to recognize both, among other actions.
We formulate this as an embedding problem, and
use scaled dot-product attention to learn from weaklysupervised video narrations. We jointly learn adverbs as invertible transformations operating on the embedding space,
so as to add or remove the effect of the adverb. As there is
no prior work on weakly supervised learning of adverbs,
we gather paired action-adverb annotations from a subset
of the HowTo100M dataset for 6 adverbs: quickly/slowly,
finely/coarsely, and partially/completely. Our method outperforms all baselines for video-to-adverb retrieval with
a performance of 0.719 mAP. We also demonstrate our
model’s ability to attend to the relevant video parts in order to determine the adverb for a given action.

1. Introduction
Instructional videos are a popular type of media watched
by millions of people around the world to learn new skills.
Several previous works aimed to learn the key steps necessary to complete the task from these videos [1, 30, 45, 62].
However, identifying the steps, or their order, is not all one
needs to perform the task well; some steps need to be performed in a certain way to achieve the desired outcome.
Take for example the task of making a meringue. An expert
would assure you it is critical to add the sugar gradually and
avoid over-beating by folding the mixture gently.
This is related to recent efforts on assessing the performance of daily tasks [10, 11, 26], however, these works do
not assess individual actions or identify whether they have
been performed as recommended by, say, a recipe. As in

Figure 1. We learn a joint video-text embedding space from instructional videos and accompanying action-adverb pairs in the
narration. Within this space, we learn adverbs as action modifiers
— that is transformations which modify the action’s embedding.

the example before, steps with such caveats are often indicated by adverbs describing how actions should be performed. These adverbs (e.g. quickly, gently, ...) generalize
to different actions and modify the manner of an action. We
thus learn these as action modifiers (Fig. 1).
To learn action modifiers for a variety of tasks and actions, we utilize the online resource of instructional videos
with accompanying narrations. However, this form of supervision is weak and noisy. Not only are the narrations
just roughly aligned with the actions in the video, but often
the narrated actions may not be captured in the video altogether. For example, a YouTube instructional video might
be narrated as “pour in the cream quickly” but the visuals
only show the cream already added. In this case the video
would not be useful to learn the adverb ‘quickly’.
As the main contribution of this paper, we propose the

868

