Regularization on Spatio-Temporally Smoothed Feature for Action Recognition
Jinhyung Kim1∗, † Seunghwan Cha2† Dongyoon Wee3 Soonmin Bae3 Junmo Kim1
1
KAIST 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Clova AI, NAVER Corp.

Abstract

80
Low-freq.
High-freq.

60
accuracy (%)

Deep neural networks for video action recognition frequently require 3D convolutional filters and often encounter
overfitting due to a larger number of parameters. In this paper, we propose Random Mean Scaling (RMS), a simple and
effective regularization method, to relieve the overfitting
problem in 3D residual networks. The key idea of RMS is to
randomly vary the magnitude of low-frequency components
of the feature to regularize the model. The low-frequency
component can be derived by a spatio-temporal mean on
the local patch of a feature. We present that selective regularization on this locally smoothed feature makes a model
handle the low-frequency and high-frequency component
distinctively, resulting in performance improvement. RMS
can enhance a model with little additional computation only
during training, similar to other regularization methods.
RMS also can be incorporated into typical training process without any bells and whistles. Experimental results
show the improvement in generalization performance on a
popular action recognition datasets demonstrating the effectiveness of RMS as a regularization technique, compared
to other state-of-the-art regularization methods.

40

20

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

scaling factor

Figure 1: High-frequency information of the feature
is more important for action recognition. Accuracy
changes over the scaling factor which modulates the magnitude of the low-freq. (circle marker) or high-freq. (triangle marker) components in the feature. While one component is scaled, the other component remains unchanged.
Mean filter extracts low-freq. components from the feature
and the remainder is high-freq. components. The validation
accuracy drops more quickly when high-freq. components
are perturbed. Using 3D ResNet (SlowOnly-34) trained on
Mini-Kinetics validation dataset without freq. scaling.

1. Introduction
Overfitting is one of the long lasting and practical problems that deep neural networks have been confronted with.
The problem can be more fatal in the field of video action recognition where 3D convolutional neural networks
(3D ConvNet) [22, 7, 1] have become a popular approach
for encoding spatio-temporal representation since they often have immense number of parameters. Moreover, 3D
ConvNets often suffer from overfitting even on recent largescale datasets, e.g. Kinetics [12]. There have been several
approaches to address this problem by proposing more efficient network architectures [24, 26, 17, 4, 2].
Perturbation based regularization on the input space
[30, 3, 29] and on the feature space [10, 5, 27] is another
widely studied approach to alleviate the overfitting prob∗ Correspondence to kkjh0723@kaist.ac.kr
† This work is partly done during an internship at Clova AI.

lem. One advantage of such methods is that they can be
incorporated into existing models to enhance their generalization capability with little or no additional computation.
In particular, [10, 5, 27] have studied the effect of perturbation on feature extensively. A perturbation is given by
multiplication of a random scalar to a feature. Although
they have given a lot of intuition for regularization, they
have overlooked the direction to perturb, where our question starts from.
In order to describe direction to perturb more clearly,
let us consider a feature vector, xt,i,j ∈ RC , at each
spatio-temporal position, t, i, and j, in a feature map,
x ∈ RC×T ×H×W , where C, T , H, and W are channel,
time, height, and width respectively. We drop the position
index of vectors in the following for the convenience. In
this regard, direction to perturb means the direction of a
vector to be multiplied by a random scalar, resulting in the
112103

