Counting Out Time: Class Agnostic Video Repetition Counting in the Wild
Debidatta Dwibedi 1 , Yusuf Aytar 2 , Jonathan Tompson 1 , Pierre Sermanet 1 , and Andrew Zisserman 2
1

Google Research 2 DeepMind

{debidatta, yusufaytar, tompson, sermanet, zisserman}@google.com

1. Introduction
Picture the most mundane of scenes – a person eating by
themselves in a cafe. They might be stirring sugar in their
coffee while chewing their food, and tapping their feet to
the background music. This person is doing at least three
periodic activities in parallel. Repeating actions and processes are ubiquitous in our daily lives. These range from
organic cycles, such as heart beats and breathing, through
programming and manufacturing, to planetary cycles like
the day-night cycle and seasons. Thus the need for recognizing repetitions in videos is pervasive, and a system that
is able to identify and count repetitions in video will benefit
any perceptual system that aims to observe and understand
our world for an extended period of time.
Repetitions are also interesting for the following reasons:
(1) there is usually an intent or a driving cause behind something happening multiple times; (2) the same event can be

Encoder
Per Frame
Embeddings
Self-similarity
matrix

Period
Predictor

We present an approach for estimating the period with
which an action is repeated in a video. The crux of the approach lies in constraining the period prediction module to
use temporal self-similarity as an intermediate representation bottleneck that allows generalization to unseen repetitions in videos in the wild. We train this model, called
RepNet, with a synthetic dataset that is generated from a
large unlabeled video collection by sampling short clips of
varying lengths and repeating them with different periods
and counts. This combination of synthetic data and a powerful yet constrained model, allows us to predict periods
in a class-agnostic fashion. Our model substantially exceeds the state of the art performance on existing periodicity (PERTUBE) and repetition counting (QUVA) benchmarks. We also collect a new challenging dataset called
Countix (∼90 times larger than existing datasets) which
captures the challenges of repetition counting in real-world
videos. Project webpage: https://sites.google.
com/view/repnet.

Video
Frames

Video

Abstract

Period Length Predictor
Periodicity Predictor

7

1

8

8

8

2

3

4

Per Frame Period Length Prediction
Per Frame Periodicity Prediction

RepNet

Figure 1: We present RepNet, which leverages a temporal selfsimilarity matrix as an intermediate layer to predict the period
length and periodicity of each frame in the video.

observed again but with slight variations; (3) there may be
gradual changes in the scene as a result of these repetitions;
(4) they provide us with unambiguous action units, a subsequence in the action that can be segmented in time (for
example if you are chopping an onion, the action unit is
the manipulation action that is repeated to produce additional slices). Due to the above reasons, any agent interacting with the world would benefit greatly from such a system. Furthermore, repetition counting is pertinent for many
computer vision applications; such as counting the number
of times an exercise was done, measurement of biological
events (like heartbeats), etc.
Yet research in periodic video understanding has been
limited, potentially due to the lack of a large scale labeled
video repetition dataset. In contrast, for action recognition
there are large scale datasets, like Kinetics [21], but their
collection at large scale is enabled by the availability of
keywords/text associated with the videos. Unfortunately it
is rare for videos to be labeled with annotations related to
110387

