DeepLPF: Deep Local Parametric Filters for Image Enhancement
Sean Moran1 , Pierre Marza∗,1,2 , Steven McDonagh1 , Sarah Parisot1,3 , Gregory Slabaugh1
sean.j.moran@gmail.com, pierre.marza@gmail.com,
{steven.mcdonagh, sarah.parisot, gregory.slabaugh} @huawei.com,
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

2

INSA Lyon

3

Mila Montréal

Abstract
Digital artists often improve the aesthetic quality of digital photographs through manual retouching. Beyond global
adjustments, professional image editing programs provide
local adjustment tools operating on specific parts of an image. Options include parametric (graduated, radial filters)
and unconstrained brush tools. These highly expressive
tools enable a diverse set of local image enhancements.
However, their use can be time consuming, and requires
artistic capability. State-of-the-art automated image enhancement approaches typically focus on learning pixellevel or global enhancements. The former can be noisy and
lack interpretability, while the latter can fail to capture finegrained adjustments. In this paper, we introduce a novel
approach to automatically enhance images using learned
spatially local filters of three different types (Elliptical Filter, Graduated Filter, Polynomial Filter). We introduce a
deep neural network, dubbed Deep Local Parametric Filters
(DeepLPF), which regresses the parameters of these spatially localized filters that are then automatically applied
to enhance the image. DeepLPF provides a natural form
of model regularization and enables interpretable, intuitive
adjustments that lead to visually pleasing results. We report on multiple benchmarks and show that DeepLPF produces state-of-the-art performance on two variants of the
MIT-Adobe 5k [3] dataset, often using a fraction of the parameters required for competing methods.

1. Introduction
Digital photography has progressed dramatically in recent years due to sustained improvements in camera sensors and image signal processing pipelines. Yet despite this
progress, captured photographs may still lack quality due
to varying factors including scene condition, poor illumination, or photographer skill. Human image retouchers often
*Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

Figure 1: DeepLPF for parametric local image enhancement. Left: Examples of estimated filters. Right: The
produced output images. Top: Adjustment of the image red
channel with a single Elliptical Filter. Bottom: Adjustment
of the image red channel with a single Graduated Filter.

improve the aesthetic quality of digital photographs through
manual adjustments. Professional-grade software (e.g. Photoshop, Lightroom) allows application of a variety of modifications through both interactive and semi-automated tools.
In addition to elementary global adjustments such as
contrast enhancement and brightening, advanced editing
functionality is also available through local image adjustments, such as the examples shown in Fig 1. However, manual enhancement remains challenging for non-experts who
may lack appropriate skills, time, or aesthetic judgment to
improve their images effectively.
These observations motivate the development of fully

12826

