Cascaded Deep Monocular 3D Human Pose Estimation with Evolutionary
Training Data
Shichao Li1 , Lei Ke1 , Kevin Pratama1 , Yu-Wing Tai2 , Chi-Keung Tang1 , Kwang-Ting Cheng1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Tencent

Abstract
End-to-end deep representation learning has achieved
remarkable accuracy for monocular 3D human pose estimation, yet these models may fail for unseen poses with limited and fixed training data. This paper proposes a novel
data augmentation method that: (1) is scalable for synthesizing massive amount of training data (over 8 million
valid 3D human poses with corresponding 2D projections)
for training 2D-to-3D networks, (2) can effectively reduce
dataset bias. Our method evolves a limited dataset to synthesize unseen 3D human skeletons based on a hierarchical human representation and heuristics inspired by prior
knowledge. Extensive experiments show that our approach
not only achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on the largest
public benchmark, but also generalizes significantly better
to unseen and rare poses. Relevant files and tools are available at the project website12 .

Input Image

Li et al.

Before Evolution (Ours)

After Evolution (Ours)

Figure 1: Model trained on the evolved training data generalizes better than [25] to unseen inputs.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose from RGB images is critical for applications such as action recognition [32] and
human-computer interaction, yet it is challenging due to
lack of depth information and large variation in human
poses, camera viewpoints and appearances. Since the
introduction of large-scale motion capture (MC) datasets
[56, 20], learning-based methods and especially deep representation learning have gained increasing momentum in
3D pose estimation. Thanks to their representation learning power, deep models have achieved unprecedented high
accuracy [43, 41, 28, 34, 32, 60].
Despite their success, deep models are data-hungry and
vulnerable to the limitation of data collection. This problem is more severe for 3D pose estimation due to two factors. First, collecting accurate 3D pose annotation for RGB
images is expensive and time-consuming. Second, the collected training data is usually biased towards indoor envi1 https://github.com/Nicholasli1995/EvoSkeleton
2 The arxiv version will present future updates if any.

ronment and selected daily actions. Deep models can easily
exploit these bias but fail for unseen cases in unconstrained
environments. This fact has been validated by recent works
[69, 66, 25, 64] where cross-dataset inference demonstrated
poor generalization of models trained with biased data.
To cope with the domain shift of appearance for 3D
pose estimation, recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep models adopt the two-stage architecture [68, 13, 14]. The first
stage locates 2D human key-points from appearance information, while the second stage lifts the 2D joints into 3D
skeleton employing geometric information. Since 2D pose
annotations are easier to obtain, extra in-the-wild images
can be used to train the first stage model, which effectively
reduces the bias towards indoor images during data collection. However, the second stage 2D-to-3D model can still be
negatively influenced by geometric data bias, yet not studied before. We focus on this problem in this work and our
research questions are: are our 2D-to-3D deep networks influenced by data bias? If yes, how can we improve network

6173

