One Man’s Trash is Another Man’s Treasure:
Resisting Adversarial Examples by Adversarial Examples
Chang Xiao
Changxi Zheng
Columbia University
New York, 10027
{chang,cxz}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Modern image classification systems are often built
on deep neural networks, which suffer from adversarial
examples—images with deliberately crafted, imperceptible
noise to mislead the network’s classification. To defend
against adversarial examples, a plausible idea is to obfuscate the network’s gradient with respect to the input image.
This general idea has inspired a long line of defense methods.
Yet, almost all of them have proven vulnerable.
We revisit this seemingly flawed idea from a radically
different perspective. We embrace the omnipresence of adversarial examples and the numerical procedure of crafting
them, and turn this harmful attacking process into a useful
defense mechanism. Our defense method is conceptually
simple: before feeding an input image for classification,
transform it by finding an adversarial example on a pretrained external model. We evaluate our method against a
wide range of possible attacks. On both CIFAR-10 and Tiny
ImageNet datasets, our method is significantly more robust
than state-of-the-art methods. Particularly, in comparison to
adversarial training, our method offers lower training cost
as well as stronger robustness.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have vastly improved the performance of image classification systems. Yet they are prone
to adversarial examples. Those are natural images with deliberately crafted, imperceptible noise, aiming to mislead
the network’s decision entirely [5, 41]. In numerous applications, from face recognition authorization to autonomous
cars [36, 43], the vulnerability caused by adversarial examples gives rise to serious security concerns and presses for
efficient defense mechanisms.
The defense, unfortunately, remains grim. Recent studies [34, 45, 12] suggest that the prevalence of adversarial
examples may be an inherent property of high-dimensional
natural data distributions. Facing this intrinsic difficulty of
eliminating adversarial examples, a plausible thought is to
conceal them—making them hard to find. Indeed, a long

Bird
Input image

Adversarially
transformed image

Figure 1. A simple and effective defense mechanism. Given an
input image, our defense method first transforms it through the process of crafting adversarial examples on a pre-trained simple model
fb , deliberately adding strong adversarial noise. The transformed
image is then fed into another model fa for classification. The
same pipeline is applied in both training and inference.

line of works aims to obfuscate the network model’s gradient
with respect to its input [50, 14, 49, 7, 39, 33], motivated by
the fact that the gradient information is essential for crafting
adversarial examples: the gradient indicates how to perturb
the input to alter the network’s decision.
Yet, almost all these gradient obfuscation based defenses
have proven vulnerable. In their recent seminal work, Athalye et al. [2] presented a suite of strategies for estimating
network gradients in the presence of gradient obfuscation.
Adversarial examples crafted by their method have successfully fooled many existing defense models, some of which
even yield 0% accuracy under their attack.
We revisit the idea of gradient obfuscation but take a
radically different approach. Instead of expelling adversarial
examples, we embrace them. Instead of obstructing the way
of finding adversarial examples on a model, we exploit it to
strengthen the robustness of another model.
Our defense is conceptually simple: before feeding an input image to a classification model, we transform it through
the process of finding adversarial examples on an external
model. Mathematically, if we use f (x) to denote the model
that classifies an input image x, our defense model is expressed as f (g(x)), where g(·) represents the process of
finding an adversarial example near x on a pre-trained external model (see Fig. 1).
1412

