Learning Identity-Invariant Motion Representations
for Cross-ID Face Reenactment

1

Po-Hsiang Huang1 , Fu-En Yang1 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{r06942138, r07942077, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Human face reenactment aims at transferring motion
patterns from one face (from a source-domain video) to another (in the target domain with the identity of interest).
While recent works report impressive results, they are not
able to handle multiple identities in a unified model. In this
paper, we propose a unique network of CrossID-GAN to
perform multi-ID face reenactment. Given a source-domain
video with extracted facial landmarks and a target-domain
image, our CrossID-GAN learns the identity-invariant motion patterns via the extracted landmarks and such information to produce the videos whose ID matches that of the
target domain. Both supervised and unsupervised settings
are proposed to train and guide our model during training.
Our qualitative/quantitative results confirm the robustness
and effectiveness of our model, with ablation studies confirming our network design.

1. Introduction
Video retargeting aims at transferring motion patterns of
video from a source-domain video to another in the target
domain of interest, while the content (e.g., face identity or
body shape) of the latter remains unchanged. For example,
converting the blooming process across distinct flowers, or
adapting pose and expression from one person to another,
can be considered as examples of video retargeting. Due to
a wide range of applications such as virtual reality and film
production, transferring motion/expression of face videos
are of particular interest. With the focus of retargeting face
videos, one typically refer to this task as face reenactment.
To tackle the task of face reenactment, existing approaches
typically apply predefined parametric 3D models to represent human faces. Although exhibiting promising ability
in describing inner faces [17] [16], movement of the human head might not be sufficiently modeled. Moreover,
such methods might not be able to describe subtle move-

Figure 1. Illustration of our CrossID-GAN for face reenactment.
By encoding a sequence of facial landmarks from a source-domain
video, we transform a target-domain image (of a different identity)
with motion patterns associated with those of the source domain,
while the identity of the target-domain is preserved.

ments of human faces. Thus, a large amount of effort and
delicacy designs of complex parametric fitting would be required. With the recent advances of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3], which shows great potential in
producing realistic images, many GAN-based methods have
been proposed as alternatives to 3D parametric models. For
example, CycleGAN [26] and RecycleGAN [1] are among
well-known data-driven GAN models for human face reenactment. However, such methods only support 1-to-1 mapping between two face identities. In other words, one needs
to train a face reenactment model for each pair of persons.
Therefore, its extension of multiple persons with unseen
motion would be the limitation.
On the other hand, another group of researchers incorporate facial landmarks/face boundary, which provide direct

7084

