Attention-Aware Multi-View Stereo
Keyang Luo1 , Tao Guan1,3 , Lili Ju2 , Yuesong Wang1 , Zhuo Chen1 , Yawei Luo1 *
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, China
2
University of South Carolina, USA 3 Farsee2 Technology Ltd, China
{kyluo, qd gt, yuesongw, cz 007, royalvane}@hust.edu.cn, ju@math.sc.edu

Abstract
Multi-view stereo is a crucial task in computer vision,
that requires accurate and robust photo-consistency among
input images for depth estimation. Recent studies have
shown that learning-based feature matching and confidence
regularization can play a vital role in this task. Nevertheless, how to design good matching confidence volumes
as well as effective regularizers for them are still under
in-depth study. In this paper, we propose an attentionaware deep neural network “AttMVS” for learning multiview stereo. In particular, we propose a novel attentionenhanced matching confidence volume, that combines the
raw pixel-wise matching confidence from the extracted perceptual features with the contextual information of local
scenes, to improve the matching robustness. Furthermore, we develop an attention-guided regularization module, which consists of multilevel ray fusion modules, to hierarchically aggregate and regularize the matching confidence volume into a latent depth probability volume. Experimental results show that our approach achieves the best
overall performance on the DTU dataset and the intermediate sequences of Tanks & Temples benchmark over many
state-of-the-art MVS algorithms.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is one of the essential topics in computer vision, which aims to recover a 3D scene
surface from a group of calibrated 2D images and estimated camera parameters. With the great success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in various visual tasks
such as semantic segmentation [27, 26], optical flow estimation [14] and stereo matching [6], learning-based MVS
methods [16, 41, 25] have been introduced to promote the
quality of reconstructed 3D models. A striking characteristic of learning-based MVS methods is that they make use of
vector-valued photo-consistency metrics of corresponding
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Multi-view 3D reconstruction of the Family scene from
the Tanks and Temples dataset [20]. (a) The reference image; (b)
the inferred depth map from AttMVS; (c) the improved depth map
based on (b); (d) the recovered 3D model.

pixels among input images, while conventional MVS methods are usually based on scalar-valued metrics, such as the
zero-normalized cross-correlation (ZNCC) [9].
Vector-valued metrics potentially can provide richer
matching information for reconstructing high-quality 3D
models, but how to fully utilize the perceptual features
learned from the images to construct a good matching confidence volume (MCV) is one of the major problems faced
by learning-based MVS methods. MVSNet [41] and PMVSNet [25] use pure photo-consistency information to
generate MCVs. However, the feature matching results
from different channels are usually not of the same importance since the captured scenes could be significantly different across channels. Inspired by the fact that attention
mechanism has achieved great success in natural language
processing [36] and visual tasks [12, 8], in this work we
combine the photo-consistency information and the contextual information of local scene to construct an attentionenhanced MCV, in which the importance of the matching
information from different channels is adaptively adjusted.
Another major problem faced by learning-based MVS
methods is how to effectively aggregate and regularize the

1590

