Deep Semantic Clustering by Partition Confidence Maximisation
Jiabo Huang
Queen Mary University of London

Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London

jiabo.huang@qmul.ac.uk

s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Xiatian Zhu
University of Surrey
xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
By simultaneously learning visual features and data
grouping, deep clustering has shown impressive ability to
deal with unsupervised learning for structure analysis of
high-dimensional visual data. Existing deep clustering
methods typically rely on local learning constraints based
on inter-sample relations and/or self-estimated pseudo labels. This is susceptible to the inevitable errors distributed
in the neighbourhoods and suffers from error-propagation
during training. In this work, we propose to solve this problem by learning the most confident clustering solution from
all the possible separations, based on the observation that
assigning samples from the same semantic categories into
different clusters will reduce both the intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster diversity, i.e. lower partition confidence. Specifically, we introduce a novel deep clustering
method named PartItion Confidence mAximisation (PICA).
It is established on the idea of learning the most semantically plausible data separation, in which all clusters can be
mapped to the ground-truth classes one-to-one, by maximising the “global” partition confidence of clustering solution.
This is realised by introducing a differentiable partition uncertainty index and its stochastic approximation as well as a
principled objective loss function that minimises such index,
all of which together enables a direct adoption of the conventional deep networks and mini-batch based model training. Extensive experiments on six widely-adopted clustering
benchmarks demonstrate our model’s performance superiority over a wide range of the state-of-the-art approaches.
The code is available online.

1. Introduction
As one of the most fundamental problems in machine
learning, clustering has drawn extensive attention in a wide
range of computer vision fields [5, 1, 25, 31] where the

ground-truth labels are hard to acquire. Earlier clustering
algorithms [32, 43, 38] are usually limited when dealing
with high-dimensional imagery data due to the absence of
discriminative visual representations [21, 22]. As a recent
effort to solve this problem, deep clustering [19] is proposed to jointly optimise the objectives of representation
learning and clustering with the help of the deep learning
techniques [12, 30]. Although conducting cluster analysis
with learnable representations holds the potential to benefit
clustering on unlabelled data, how to improve the semantic
plausibility of these clusters remains an open problem.
Recent deep clustering models either iteratively estimate
cluster assignment and/or inter-sample relations which are
then used as hypotheses in supervising the learning of deep
neural networks [44, 6, 7, 50], or used in conjunction with
clustering constraints [24, 16, 23]. In ideal cases, such
alternation-learning methods can approach the performance
of supervised models not the least benefiting from their
robustness against noisy labels [18]. Nevertheless, they
are susceptible to error-propagation as the process of alternating cluster assignment and representation learning is
staged between two learning objectives and any error in
local neighbourhoods is accumulated during this alternation (Fig. 1(a)). On the other hand, there are a few simultaneous learning methods that learn both the representation and clusters at the same time without explicit stages
of cluster assignment and/or inter-sample relations estimation [24, 23]. They usually train with some pretext tasks that
lead to unsatisfying solutions. Although such methods can
avoid mostly the problem of error-propagation, they suffer
from ambiguous learning constraints due to vague connection between the training supervision and clustering objective. Without global solution-level guidance to select from
all the possible separations, the resulted clusters are usually
semantically less plausible.
In this work, we propose a deep clustering method
called PartItion Confidence mAximisation (PICA). Whilst
18849

