Interpretable and Accurate Fine-grained Recognition via Region Grouping
Zixuan Huang1
Yin Li2,1
1
Department of Computer Sciences, 2 Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics
University of Wisconsin–Madison
{zhuang356, yin.li}@wisc.edu

Abstract
We present an interpretable deep model for fine-grained
visual recognition. At the core of our method lies the integration of region-based part discovery and attribution
within a deep neural network. Our model is trained using image-level object labels, and provides an interpretation of its results via the segmentation of object parts and
the identification of their contributions towards classification. To facilitate the learning of object parts without direct
supervision, we explore a simple prior of the occurrence
of object parts. We demonstrate that this prior, when combined with our region-based part discovery and attribution,
leads to an interpretable model that remains highly accurate. Our model is evaluated on major fine-grained recognition datasets, including CUB-200 [55], CelebA [36] and
iNaturalist [54]. Our results compares favourably to stateof-the-art methods on classification tasks, and outperforms
previous approaches on the localization of object parts.

1. Introduction
Deep models are tremendously successful for visual
recognition, yet their results are oftentimes hard to explain.
Consider the examples in Fig. 1. Why does a deep model
recognize the bird as “Yellow-headed Blackbird” or consider the person “Smiling”? While the interpretation of a
model can happen at multiple facets, we believe that at least
one way of explaining the model is to segment meaningful
regions of object parts (e.g., the eyes, mouth, cheek, forehead and neck of a face), and further identify their contributions towards the decision (e.g., the mouth region is more
discriminative for smiling). How can we design an interpretable deep model that learns to discover object parts and
estimate their importance for visual recognition?
It turns out that part discovery, i.e., learning object parts
without explicit supervision of part annotations, is by itself
a challenging problem. As a baby step, we focus on the task
of fine-grained recognition, where the parts belonging to the
same super category share common visual patterns. For ex-

Yellow-headed
Blackbird

Smiling

Input Image

Part Assignment Map

Part Attention Map

Figure 1. Why does a deep model recognize the bird as “Yellowheaded Blackbird” or consider the person “Smiling”? We present
an interpretable deep model for fine-grained recognition. Given
an input image (left), our model is able to segment object parts
(middle) and identify their contributions (right) for the decision.
Results are from our model trained using only image-level labels.

ample, most of the tails of birds has a similar shape. Our key
observation is that features from a convolutional network
can be used to group pixels into a set of visually coherent
regions [28, 25], from which a subset of discriminative segments can be selected for recognition [33, 32, 11]. With
only object labels as the guidance, we hope that the grouping will help to find visually distinct parts, and the selection
process will identify their contributions for classification.
A major challenge for our region-based part discovery is
that there is no explicit supervisory signal to define part regions. Therefore, prior knowledge about object parts must
be incorporated to facilitate the learning. A core innovation
of our work is the exploration of a simple prior about object
parts: given a single image, the occurrence of a part follows
a Beta distribution, i.e., the head of a bird is likely to occur
in most bird images. Surprisingly, we demonstrate that this
simple prior, when combined with our region-based part
discovery, leads to the identification of meaningful object
parts. More importantly, the result interpretable deep model
remains highly accurate. Several recent methods have been
developed for discovering parts in fine-grained classification, yet none of them considered the prior we use.

8662

