Video Object Grounding using Semantic Roles in Language Description

1

Arka Sadhu1
Kan Chen2
University of Southern California
{asadhu|nevatia}@usc.edu

Ram Nevatia1
2
Facebook Inc.

kanchen18@fb.com

Abstract

Query: The man passes a ball to a group of kids
Arg0

We explore the task of Video Object Grounding (VOG),
which grounds objects in videos referred to in natural language descriptions. Previous methods apply image grounding based algorithms to address VOG, fail to explore the
object relation information and suffer from limited generalization. Here, we investigate the role of object relations
in VOG and propose a novel framework VOGNet to encode
multi-modal object relations via self-attention with relative
position encoding. To evaluate VOGNet, we propose novel
contrasting sampling methods to generate more challenging grounding input samples, and construct a new dataset
called ActivityNet-SRL (ASRL) based on existing caption
and grounding datasets. Experiments on ASRL validate the
need of encoding object relations in VOG, and our VOGNet
outperforms competitive baselines by a significant margin.

Verb

Arg1

Arg2

(a) localize individual queries: “man”, “ball”, “kids”

(b) localize the spatio-temporal tube from query uniquely identifying it
(“man passing the ball”)

1. Introduction
Grounding objects in images [7, 67, 68] and videos
[8, 27, 76] from natural language queries is a fundamental task at the intersection of Vision and Language. It is
a building block for downstream grounded vision+language
tasks such as Grounded-VQA [14,31,32,74,77], GroundedCaptioning [35–37, 75] and Grounded Navigation [22].
In this work, we address the task of Video Object
Grounding (VOG): given a video and its natural language
description we aim to localize each referred object. Different from prior VOG methods on finding objects from query
mentions [76] or distinguishing spatio-temporal tubes from
a referring expression [8], we formulate VOG as localizing only the specific referred objects in the query. Prior
work has focused on attending to each object in isolation;
our formulation additionally requires incorporating objectobject relations in both time and space. Figure 1 illustrates
the key differences.
Despite the importance of associating natural language
descriptions with objects in videos, VOG has remained relatively unexplored due to two practical requirements: (i)

(c) localize only the referred objects in the query
(“man”, “ball”, “group of kids”)

Figure 1. Illustration of different formulations of VOG when the
same query and video frames are used. (a) [76] treats each query
word independently and doesn’t distinguish between different instances of the same object. (b) [8] makes this distinction using
independent spatio-temporal tubes. Ours (c) involves localizing
only those objects which are being referenced in the query and
requires additional disambiguation using object relations.

a large-scale video dataset with object-level annotations,
(ii) the videos should contain multiple instances of the
same object category so making a distinction among them
becomes necessary. Recently, [75] released ActivityNetEntities dataset which contains bounding box annotations
relating the noun-phrases of the video descriptions [29]
to the corresponding objects instances in ActivityNet [4]
videos. Despite its scale, a majority of the videos in ActivityNet contain single instances of various objects. For instance, in Figure 1 “ball” can be localized simply using an
object detection system such as FasterRCNN [47] without

10417

