Total3DUnderstanding: Joint Layout, Object Pose and Mesh Reconstruction
for Indoor Scenes from a Single Image
Yinyu Nie1,2,3,† , Xiaoguang Han2,3,∗ , Shihui Guo4 , Yujian Zheng2,3 , Jian Chang1 , Jian Jun Zhang1
1
Bournemouth University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 4 Xiamen University

Abstract
Semantic reconstruction of indoor scenes refers to both
scene understanding and object reconstruction. Existing
works either address one part of this problem or focus on
independent objects. In this paper, we bridge the gap between understanding and reconstruction, and propose an
end-to-end solution to jointly reconstruct room layout, object bounding boxes and meshes from a single image. Instead of separately resolving scene understanding and object reconstruction, our method builds upon a holistic scene
context and proposes a coarse-to-fine hierarchy with three
components: 1. room layout with camera pose; 2. 3D object bounding boxes; 3. object meshes. We argue that understanding the context of each component can assist the
task of parsing the others, which enables joint understanding and reconstruction. The experiments on the SUN RGBD and Pix3D datasets demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms existing methods in indoor layout estimation, 3D object detection and mesh reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Semantic reconstruction from an indoor image shows its
unique importance in applications such as interior design
and real estate. In recent years, this topic has received
a rocketing interest from researchers in both computer vision and graphics communities. However, the inherent ambiguity in depth perception, the clutter and complexity of
real-world environments make it still challenging to fully
recover the scene context (both semantics and geometry)
merely from a single image.
Previous works have attempted to address it via various
approaches. Scene understanding methods [38, 14, 3] obtain room layout and 3D bounding boxes of indoor objects
without shape details. Scene-level reconstruction methods
recover object shapes using contextual knowledge (room
† Work done during visiting CUHKSZ and SRIBD.
∗ Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

Figure 1: From a single image (left), we simultaneously
predict the contextual knowledge including room layout,
camera pose, and 3D object bounding boxes (middle) and
reconstruct object meshes (right).

layout and object locations) for scene reconstruction, but
most methods currently adopt depth or voxel representations [39, 22, 46, 19]. Voxel-grid presents better shape description than boxes, but its resolution is still limited, and
the improvement of voxel quality exponentially increases
the computational cost, which is more obvious in scenelevel reconstruction. Mesh-retrieval methods [17, 15, 16]
improve the shape quality in scene reconstruction using a
3D model retrieval module. As these approaches require iterations of rendering or model search, the mesh similarity
and time efficiency depend on the size of the model repository and raise further concerns. Object-wise mesh reconstruction exhibits the advantages in both efficiency and accuracy [50, 10, 30, 18, 9], where the target mesh is end-toend predicted in its own object-centric coordinate system.
For scene-level mesh reconstruction, predicting objects as
isolated instances may not produce ideal results given the
challenges of object alignment, occlusion relations and miscellaneous image background. Although Mesh R-CNN [9]
is capable of predicting meshes for multiple objects from an
image, its object-wise approach still ignores scene understanding and suffers from the artifacts of mesh generation
on cubified voxels. So far, to the best of authors’ knowledge, few works take into account both mesh reconstruction
1 55

