Sub-frame Appearance and 6D Pose Estimation of Fast Moving Objects
Denys Rozumnyi3,1

Jan Kotera2

Filip Šroubek2

Jiřı́ Matas1

denysr@inf.ethz.ch

kotera@utia.cas.cz

sroubekf@utia.cas.cz

matas@fel.cvut.cz

1

Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
3
Czech Academy of Sciences, UTIA, Prague, Czech Republic
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

2

Input Video

TbD-NC

Piece-wise
Deblatting

6-DOF Trajectory

Object snapshots
shape & appearance

3D position &
angular velocity

2D trajectory

Figure 1: Estimation of appearance, shape and 6D pose (3D position and rotation) of fast moving objects. The input video
and 2D trajectories estimated by Non-Causal Tracking by Deblatting, TbD-NC [14], are processed by the proposed piecewise deblatting that generates, with sub-frame temporal resolution, the object appearance and shape (snapshots), from which
the complete 6-DOF trajectory is estimated.

Abstract
We propose a novel method that tracks fast moving objects, mainly non-uniform spherical, in full 6 degrees of
freedom, estimating simultaneously their 3D motion trajectory, 3D pose and object appearance changes with a time
step that is a fraction of the video frame exposure time.
The sub-frame object localization and appearance estimation allows realistic temporal super-resolution and precise
shape estimation. The method, called TbD-3D (Tracking by
Deblatting in 3D) relies on a novel reconstruction algorithm
which solves a piece-wise deblurring and matting problem.
The 3D rotation is estimated by minimizing the reprojection
error. As a second contribution, we present a new challenging dataset with fast moving objects that change their
appearance and distance to the camera. High-speed camera recordings with zero lag between frame exposures were
used to generate videos with different frame rates annotated
with ground-truth trajectory and pose.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking encompasses a broad class of problems
that have received significant interest [7, 8]. Current state-

of-the-art methods employ a range of techniques, such as
deep Siamese networks [9, 18] and discriminative correlation filters [20, 12]. The standard output of tracking methods is a 2D bounding box, either axis aligned or rotated.
Video segmentation methods output precise segmentation
masks [22, 21].
Recently, fast moving objects (FMOs) have been introduced as one of the problems in tracking [15]. Such objects
are recorded as blurred streaks. They are common in sport
videos and many other scenarios, such as videos of falling
objects, hailstorm and flying insects, or more specialized
ones, e.g. visual navigation of microrobots in a magnetic
field. To avoid FMOs and the related phenomena, one can
use high-speed cameras operating at high frame rates, e.g.
240 fps or more. However, this brings additional requirements on resources, such as data transfer bandwidth and
storage. When capturing such objects, camera settings have
to be considered a priori before video acquisition.
The blurred trace of an object encodes information about
its velocity, shape and appearance. Estimating these quantities should be thus in principle possible even from more
affordable cameras with 30 fps, but it is a challenging task
as the problem is heavily ill-posed. As shown in [15], standard tracking methods do not perform well on FMOs.

6778

