SSRNet: Scalable 3D Surface Reconstruction Network
Zhenxing Mi †
Yiming Luo †
Wenbing Tao ∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-spectral Information Processing
School of Artifical Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{m201772503, yiming luo, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing learning-based surface reconstruction methods
from point clouds are still facing challenges in terms of
scalability and preservation of details on large-scale point
clouds. In this paper, we propose the SSRNet, a novel scalable learning-based method for surface reconstruction. The
proposed SSRNet constructs local geometry-aware features
for octree vertices and designs a scalable reconstruction
pipeline, which not only greatly enhances the predication
accuracy of the relative position between the vertices and
the implicit surface facilitating the surface reconstruction
quality, but also allows dividing the point cloud and octree
vertices and processing different parts in parallel for superior scalability on large-scale point clouds with millions of
points. Moreover, SSRNet demonstrates outstanding generalization capability and only needs several surface data
for training, much less than other learning-based reconstruction methods, which can effectively avoid overfitting.
The trained model of SSRNet on one dataset can be directly
used on other datasets with superior performance. Finally,
the time consumption with SSRNet on a large-scale point
cloud is acceptable and competitive. To our knowledge, the
proposed SSRNet is the first to really bring a convincing solution to the scalability issue of the learning-based surface
reconstruction methods, and is an important step to make
learning-based methods competitive with respect to geometry processing methods on real-world and challenging data.
Experiments show that our method achieves a breakthrough
in scalability and quality compared with state-of-the-art
learning-based methods.

1. Introduction
Point cloud is an important and widely used representation for 3D data. Surface reconstruction from point clouds
(SRPC) has been well studied in computer graphics. A lot
† Equal contribution
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. 2D example of surface reconstruction methods using implicit function. Yellow dots represent points in point cloud. Red
dots represent vertices outside the implicit surface. Blue dots represent vertices inside the implicit surface. According to the implicit function value on vertices, the MC method finds the intersections (green ×) of the grid lines and the implicit surface and
then connects these intersections to extract a surface (green line).

of geometric reconstruction methods have been proposed
[7, 4, 30, 15, 13, 11, 14, 2]. A commonly used pipeline in
geometric reconstruction methods first computes an implicit
function on a 3D grid [7, 14]. Then the Marching Cubes
(MC) [17] is applied to extract an isosurface from the 3D
grid through implicit function values. The grid is usually
an adaptive octree. The intersection of two grid lines in an
octree is named as octree vertex. Specifically, the implicit
function can be an indicator function that indicates whether
the vertices are inside or outside the implicit surface. That
is, a surface reconstruction problem can be seen as a binary
classification problem for octree vertices (See Figure 1).
In real-world reconstruction tasks, point clouds are
mainly acquired by scanners or Multi-View Stereo (MVS)
methods [26, 31] and are usually dense with more than
millions of points and with complex topologies, which
bring great challenges to surface reconstruction. With
the development of deep learning, a variety of learningbased surface reconstruction methods have been proposed
[8, 24, 16, 10, 19, 20]. However, there are still problems for
them to reconstruct real-world point clouds for four reasons.
1) The network architectures and output representations
of these learning-based methods usually force the learningbased methods to consider all the points at once. Therefore,
they can not allow dividing input data and processing dif-

970

