Open Compound Domain Adaptation
Ziwei Liu1∗ Zhongqi Miao2∗
Xingang Pan1
Xiaohang Zhan1
Dahua Lin1
Stella X. Yu2
Boqing Gong3
2
3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
UC Berkeley / ICSI
Google Inc.
https://liuziwei7.github.io/projects/CompoundDomain.html

Abstract
A typical domain adaptation approach is to adapt models trained on the annotated data in a source domain (e.g.,
sunny weather) for achieving high performance on the test
data in a target domain (e.g., rainy weather). Whether the
target contains a single homogeneous domain or multiple
heterogeneous domains, existing works always assume that
there exist clear distinctions between the domains, which
is often not true in practice (e.g., changes in weather).
We study an open compound domain adaptation (OCDA)
problem, in which the target is a compound of multiple
homogeneous domains without domain labels, reflecting
realistic data collection from mixed and novel situations.
We propose a new approach based on two technical insights
into OCDA: 1) a curriculum domain adaptation strategy
to bootstrap generalization across domains in a datadriven self-organizing fashion and 2) a memory module to
increase the model’s agility towards novel domains. Our
experiments on digit classification, facial expression recognition, semantic segmentation, and reinforcement learning
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning can achieve competitive performance for a visual task when the test data is drawn from
the same underlying distribution as the training data. This
assumption, unfortunately, often does not hold in reality,
e.g., the test data may contain the same class of objects
as the training data but different backgrounds, poses, and
appearances [39, 44].
The goal of domain adaptation is to adapt the model
learned on the training data to the test data of a different
distribution [39, 32, 11]. Such a distributional gap is
often formulated as a shift between discrete concepts of
well defined data domains, e.g., images collected in sunny
weather versus those in rainy weather. Though domain
generalization [22, 20] and latent domain adaptation [15,
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Open compound domain adaptation. Unlike
existing domain adaptation which assumes clear distinctions between discrete domains (cf. the examples in gray
frames), our compound target domain is a combination of
multiple traditionally homogeneous domains without any
domain labels. We also allow novel domains to show up
at the inference time.
10] have attempted to tackle complex target domains, most
existing works usually assume that there is a known clear
distinction between domains [11, 7, 46, 28, 40].
Such a known and clear distinction between domains
is hard to define in practice, e.g., test images could be
collected in mixed, continually varying, and sometimes
never seen weather conditions. With numerous factors
jointly contributing to data variance, it becomes implausible
to separate data into discrete domains.
We propose to study open compound domain adaptation
(OCDA), a continuous and more realistic setting for domain

12406

