Meta-Transfer Learning for Zero-Shot Super-Resolution
Jae Woong Soh
Sunwoo Cho
Nam Ik Cho
Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{soh90815, etoo33}@ispl.snu.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown dramatic improvements in single image super-resolution (SISR)
by using large-scale external samples. Despite their remarkable performance based on the external dataset, they
cannot exploit internal information within a specific image. Another problem is that they are applicable only
to the specific condition of data that they are supervised.
For instance, the low-resolution (LR) image should be
a “bicubic” downsampled noise-free image from a highresolution (HR) one. To address both issues, zero-shot
super-resolution (ZSSR) has been proposed for flexible internal learning. However, they require thousands of gradient updates, i.e., long inference time. In this paper,
we present Meta-Transfer Learning for Zero-Shot SuperResolution (MZSR), which leverages ZSSR. Precisely, it is
based on finding a generic initial parameter that is suitable
for internal learning. Thus, we can exploit both external
and internal information, where one single gradient update
can yield quite considerable results. (See Figure 1). With
our method, the network can quickly adapt to a given image
condition. In this respect, our method can be applied to a
large spectrum of image conditions within a fast adaptation
process.

1. Introduction
SISR, which is to find a plausible HR image from its
counterpart LR image, is a long-standing problem in lowlevel vision area. Recently, the remarkable success of CNNs
brought attention to the research community, and hence numerous CNN-based SISR methods have exhibited large performance leap [15, 17, 21, 47, 2, 45, 36, 20, 12, 13]. Most
of the recent state-of-the-art (SotA) CNN-based methods
are based on a large number of external training dataset
and self-supervised settings with known degradation model,
e.g., “bicubic” downsampling. Impressively, the recent
SotA CNNs show significant PSNR gains compared to the
conventional large size of models for the noise-free “bicubic” downsampling condition. However, in real-world sit-

(a) LR

(b) ZSSR [34]
2,850 updates

(c) Fine-tuning
2,000 updates

(d) MZSR (Ours)
One update

Figure 1: Super-resolved results (×2) of “img050” in Urban100 [14]. The blur kernel of the LR image is an isotropic
Gaussian kernel with width 2.0. Result of (c) is fine-tuned
from a pre-trained model. Our MZSR outperforms other
methods within just one single gradient descent update.

uations, when the LR image has distant statistics in downsampling kernels and noises, the recent methods produce
undesirable artifacts and show inferior results due to the domain gap. Moreover, their number of parameters and memory overheads are usually too large to be used in real appli-

3516

