Dynamic Fluid Surface Reconstruction Using Deep Neural Network
Simron Thapa
Nianyi Li
Jinwei Ye
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
{sthapa5, nli5, jinweiye}@lsu.edu

Abstract
Recovering the dynamic fluid surface is a long-standing
challenging problem in computer vision. Most existing
image-based methods require multiple views or a dedicated
imaging system. Here we present a learning-based singleimage approach for 3D fluid surface reconstruction. Specifically, we design a deep neural network that estimates the
depth and normal maps of a fluid surface by analyzing the
refractive distortion of a reference background pattern. Due
to the dynamic nature of fluid surfaces, our network uses
recurrent layers that carry temporal information from previous frames to achieve spatio-temporally consistent reconstruction given a video input. Due to the lack of fluid data,
we synthesize a large fluid dataset using physics-based fluid
modeling and rendering techniques for network training
and validation. Through experiments on simulated and real
captured fluid images, we demonstrate that our proposed
deep neural network trained on our fluid dataset can recover dynamic 3D fluid surfaces with high accuracy.

1. Introduction
Dynamic fluid phenomena are common in our environment. Accurate 3D reconstruction of the fluid surface helps
advance our understanding of the presence and dynamics
of the fluid phenomena and thus benefits many scientific
and engineering fields ranging from hydraulics and hydrodynamics [5, 20] to 3D animation and visualization [13].
However, it is difficult to tackle this problem with nonintrusive image-based methods as the captured images are
often severely distorted by the refraction of light that happens at the fluid-air interface. This is because to extract
invariant and reliable image features under distortion is
highly challenging. Further, the dynamic nature of fluid
flow makes this problem even more challenging as we need
to recover a sequence of 3D surfaces that are consistent both
spatially and temporally to represent the fluid motion.
Classical image-based methods for recovering the 3D
fluid surface typically place a known pattern at the bottom
of the fluid body and use a single or multiple cameras to

Figure 1. Our dynamic fluid surface reconstruction scheme. Given
a sequence of refraction images captured through the dynamic
fluid and the original reference pattern, we develop a deep neural
network to recover spatio-temporally consistent 3D fluid surfaces.

capture the reference pattern through the fluid flow. Pattern
distortions over time or among multiple viewpoints are analyzed for 3D fluid surface reconstruction. Since a single
viewpoint is under-constrained, single image-based methods often impose additional surface assumptions (e.g., planarity [3, 6, 14], integrability[42, 43], and known average
height [29, 32] etc.). Otherwise, dedicated imaging systems
or special optics (e.g., Bokode [43] and light field probe
[21, 42]) need to be used. Multi-view approaches rely on the
photo-consistency among different viewpoints to perform
3D reconstruction. The seminal work of Morris and Kutulakos [29] extends the traditional two-view geometry to
refractive medium with single deflection assumption. Camera arrays [10] are further adopted for more robust and accurate reconstruction. As being heavily dependent on the acquisition system, these classical methods usually use costly
equipment that requires much effort to build and calibrate.
Applications of these methods are thus limited.
In this paper, we present a learning-based approach for
reconstructing the 3D fluid surface from a single refraction
image. Following the setting similar to the classical methods, we take refraction image of a reference pattern through
the fluid from a top-down view. We design a deep neural
network that takes the refraction image as input and gener-

21

