Style Normalization and Restitution for Generalizable Person Re-identification
Xin Jin1∗
1

Cuiling Lan2†

University of Science and Technology of China

Wenjun Zeng2
2

Zhibo Chen1†

Li Zhang3

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China

3

University of Oxford

jinxustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn lz@robots.ox.ac.uk

Domain Gaps

Abstract
Existing fully-supervised person re-identification (ReID)
methods usually suffer from poor generalization capability caused by domain gaps. The key to solving this problem lies in filtering out identity-irrelevant interference and
learning domain-invariant person representations. In this
paper, we aim to design a generalizable person ReID framework which trains a model on source domains yet is able to
generalize/perform well on target domains. To achieve this
goal, we propose a simple yet effective Style Normalization
and Restitution (SNR) module. Specifically, we filter out
style variations (e.g., illumination, color contrast) by Instance Normalization (IN). However, such a process inevitably removes discriminative information. We propose
to distill identity-relevant feature from the removed information and restitute it to the network to ensure high discrimination. For better disentanglement, we enforce a dual
causality loss constraint in SNR to encourage the separation of identity-relevant features and identity-irrelevant features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the strong generalization capability of our framework. Our models empowered by the SNR modules significantly outperform the
state-of-the-art domain generalization approaches on multiple widely-used person ReID benchmarks, and also show
superiority on unsupervised domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at matching/identifying a specific person across cameras, times, and
locations. It facilitates many applications and has attracted
a lot of attention.
Abundant approaches have been proposed for supervised
person ReID, where a model is trained and tested on different splits of the same dataset [51, 38, 54, 8, 34, 53, 18, 17].
They typically focus on addressing the challenge of geometric misalignment among images caused by diversity
of poses/viewpoints. In general, they perform well on the
∗ This work was done when Xin Jin was an intern at Microsoft Research
Asia.
† Corresponding Author.

……
illumination

hue

contrast

saturation

quality

……
……

Identity-relevant

Style Normalization

Identity-irrelevant

……
ReID-guided Style Restitution

……

Figure 1: Illustration of motivation and our idea. Person
images captured from different cameras and environments
present style variations which result in domain gaps. We
use style normalization (with Instance Normalization) to alleviate style variations. However, this also results in the loss
of some discriminative (identity-relevant) information. We
propose to further restitute such information from the residual of the original information and the normalized information for generalizable and discriminative person ReID.
trained dataset but suffer from signicant performance degradation (poor generalization capability) when testing on a
previously unseen dataset. There are usually style discrepancies across domains/datasets which hinder the achievement of high generalization capability. Figure 1 shows
some example images1 from different ReID datasets. The
person images are captured by different cameras under different environments (e.g., lighting, seasons). They present a
large style discrepancy in terms of illumination, hue, color
contrast and saturation, quality/resolution, etc. For a ReID
1 All faces in the images are masked for anonymization.

3143

