IMRAM: Iterative Matching with Recurrent Attention Memory
for Cross-Modal Image-Text Retrieval∗
Hui Chen1 , Guiguang Ding1* , Xudong Liu2 , Zijia Lin3 , Ji Liu4 , Jungong Han5
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Kwai Ads Platform; 3 Microsoft Research
4
Kwai Seattle AI Lab, Kwai FeDA Lab, Kwai AI Platform
5
WMG Data Science, University of Warwick
{jichenhui2012, ji.liu.uwisc, jungonghan77}@gmail.com
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, liuxudong@kuaishou.com, zijlin@microsoft.com

Abstract
Enabling bi-directional retrieval of images and texts is
important for understanding the correspondence between
vision and language. Existing methods leverage the attention mechanism to explore such correspondence in a finegrained manner. However, most of them consider all semantics equally and thus align them uniformly, regardless
of their diverse complexities. In fact, semantics are diverse
(i.e. involving different kinds of semantic concepts), and
humans usually follow a latent structure to combine them
into understandable languages. It may be difficult to optimally capture such sophisticated correspondences in existing methods. In this paper, to address such a deficiency,
we propose an Iterative Matching with Recurrent Attention
Memory (IMRAM) method, in which correspondences between images and texts are captured with multiple steps of
alignments. Specifically, we introduce an iterative matching scheme to explore such fine-grained correspondence
progressively. A memory distillation unit is used to refine
alignment knowledge from early steps to later ones. Experiment results on three benchmark datasets, i.e. Flickr8K,
Flickr30K, and MS COCO, show that our IMRAM achieves
state-of-the-art performance, well demonstrating its effectiveness. Experiments on a practical business advertisement dataset, named KWAI-AD, further validates the applicability of our method in practical scenarios.

1. Introduction
Due to the explosive increase of multimedia data from
social media and web applications, enabling bi-directional
∗ This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Nos. U1936202, 61925107). Corresponding author: Guiguang
Ding

cross-modal image-text retrieval is in great demand and has
become prevalent in both academia and industry. Meanwhile, this task is challenging because it requires to understand not only the content of images and texts but also their
inter-modal correspondence.
In recent years, a large number of researches have been
proposed and achieved great progress. Early works attempted to directly map the information of images and texts
into a common latent embedding space. For example, Wang
et al. [26] adopted a deep network with two branches to, respectively, map images and texts into an embedding space.
However, these works coarsely capture the correspondence
between modalities and thus are unable to depict the finegrained interactions between vision and language.
To gain a deeper understanding of such fine-grained correspondences, recent researches further explored the attention mechanism for cross-modal image-text retrieval.
Karpathy et al. [11] extracted features of fragments for each
image and text (i.e. image regions and text words), and
proposed a dense alignment between each fragment pair.
Lee et al. [13] proposed a stacked cross attention model,
in which attention was used to align each fragment with all
fragments from another modality. It can neatly discover the
fine-grained correspondence and thus achieves state-of-theart performance on several benchmark datasets.
However, due to the large heterogeneity gap between images and texts, existing attention-based models, e.g. [13],
may not well seize the optimal pairwise relationships
among a number of region-word fragments pairs. Actually, semantics are complicated, because they are diverse
(i.e. composed by different kinds of semantic concepts with
different meanings, such as objects (e.g. nouns), attributes
(e.g. adjectives) and relations (e.g. verbs)). And there generally exist strong correlations among different concepts,
e.g. relational terms (e.g. verbs) usually indicate relation4321
12655

