ReDA:Reinforced Differentiable Attribute for 3D Face Reconstruction
Wenbin Zhu

HsiangTao Wu

Zeyu Chen Noranart Vesdapunt
Microsoft Cloud and AI

Baoyuan Wang

{wenzh,musclewu,zech,noves,baoyuanw}@microsoft.com

Figure 1: A few RGB-based 3D face reconstruction results by our proposed ReDA framework.

Abstract
The key challenge for 3D face shape reconstruction is
to build the correct dense face correspondence between the
deformable mesh and the single input image. Given the illposed nature, previous works heavily rely on prior knowledge (such as 3DMM [2]) to reduce depth ambiguity. Although impressive result has been made recently [42, 14, 8],
there is still a large room to improve the correspondence so
that projected face shape better aligns with the silhouette
of each face region (i.e, eye, mouth, nose, cheek, etc.) on
the image. To further reduce the ambiguities, we present
a novel framework called “Reinforced Differentiable Attributes” (“ReDA”) which is more general and effective
than previous Differentiable Rendering (“DR”). Specifically, we first extend from color to more broad attributes,
including the depth and the face parsing mask. Secondly,
unlike the previous Z-buffer rendering, we make the rendering to be more differentiable through a set of convolution
operations with multi-scale kernel sizes. In the meanwhile,
to make “ReDA” to be more successful for 3D face reconstruction, we further introduce a new free-form deformation layer that sits on top of 3DMM to enjoy both the prior
knowledge and out-of-space modeling. Both techniques can
be easily integrated into existing 3D face reconstruction
pipeline. Extensive experiments on both RGB and RGB-D
datasets show that our approach outperforms prior arts.

1. Introduction
3D face shape reconstruction has been a hot research
topic in both computer vision and graphics literature. Huge
progress has been made in the past decade driven by a vast
variety of important applications, such as face recognition

[3, 24], face reenactment and visual dubbing [43, 33, 21],
avatar creation and animation [29, 17, 6] and etc. Despite the impressive progress, face reconstruction is still an
ill-posed problem for monocular images due to the depth
ambiguity [38] and the albedo illumination ambiguity[9].
Given the nature of insufficient constraint, methods in previous works heavily rely on prior knowledge, such as 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM) [2] or multi-linear tensor model
[48, 5] to get a reasonable shape. Nevertheless, the key remaining challenge is to build a better dense correspondence
between the input image and the deformable mesh.
The most popular way of reconstructing 3D face
shape from single image is to use “Analysis-by-Synthesis”
paradigm [2, 34, 43, 42, 41, 40, 46, 47] to minimize the visual difference between the input and the 2D synthesis of an
estimated 3D face through a simplified image formulation
model. A typical pixel-wise photo-metric loss is employed
for the optimization. After convergence, each pixel will be
assigned to a UV position of the template mesh. Hence,
“Analysis-by-Synthesis” can be considered as an implicit
way of building dense correspondence. Another typical
way is to learn explicit dense correspondence first by directly regressing the per-pixel UV position[15] (or equivalent flow [51]), based upon which to fit the 3D face model
afterwards. To achieve this, however, one has to use 3DMM
fitting[52, 34] to get the ground-truth and then train the regression model through supervised learning [51, 15]. In either case, better correspondence means more accurate 3D
reconstruction.
However, there still exist three fundamental issues in all
the previous works. First, the capacity of the 3DMM significantly limits the representation power to support diverse
geometry variations. Some works [15, 11] propose to directly learn dense correspondence through UV and claim
14958

