Learning Memory-guided Normality for Anomaly Detection
Hyunjong Park∗
Jongyoun Noh∗
Bumsub Ham†
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
We address the problem of anomaly detection, that is,
detecting anomalous events in a video sequence. Anomaly
detection methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) typically leverage proxy tasks, such as reconstructing input video frames, to learn models describing normality without seeing anomalous samples at training time, and quantify the extent of abnormalities using the
reconstruction error at test time. The main drawbacks of
these approaches are that they do not consider the diversity
of normal patterns explicitly, and the powerful representation capacity of CNNs allows to reconstruct abnormal video
frames. To address this problem, we present an unsupervised learning approach to anomaly detection that considers the diversity of normal patterns explicitly, while lessening the representation capacity of CNNs. To this end, we
propose to use a memory module with a new update scheme
where items in the memory record prototypical patterns
of normal data. We also present novel feature compactness and separateness losses to train the memory, boosting
the discriminative power of both memory items and deeply
learned features from normal data. Experimental results on
standard benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach, which outperforms the state of the
art.

1. Introduction
The problem of detecting abnormal events in video sequences, e.g., vehicles on sidewalks, has attracted significant attention over the last decade, which is particularly
important for surveillance and fault detection systems. It
is extremely challenging for a number of reasons: First,
anomalous events are determined differently according to
circumstances. Namely, the same activity could be normal
or abnormal (e.g., holding a knife in the kitchen or in the
park). Manually annotating anomalous events is in this context labor intensive. Second, collecting anomalous datasets
requires a lot of effort, as anomalous events rarely happen
in real-life situations. Anomaly detection is thus typically
deemed to be an unsupervised learning problem, aiming at
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Distributions of features and memory items of our model
on CUHK Avenue [24]. The features and items are shown in points
and stars, respectively. The points with the same color are mapped
to the same item. The items in the memory capture diverse and
prototypical patterns of normal data. The features are highly discriminative and similar image patches are clustered well. (Best
viewed in color.)

learning a model describing normality without anomalous
samples. At test time, events and activities not described by
the model are then considered as anomalies.
There are many attempts to model normality in video sequences using unsupervised learning approaches. At training time, given normal video frames as inputs, they typically extract feature representations and try to reconstruct
the inputs again. The video frames of large reconstruction
errors are then treated as anomalies at test time. This assumes that abnormal samples are not reconstructed well, as
the models have never seen them during training. Recent
methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
exploit an autoencoder (AE) [1, 17]. The powerful representation capacity of CNNs allows to extract better feature representations. The CNN features from abnormal
frames, on the other hand, are likely to be reconstructed
by combining those of normal ones [22, 8]. In this case,
abnormal frames have low reconstruction errors, often oc-

14372

