Which is Plagiarism: Fashion Image Retrieval based on Regional
Representation for Design Protection
Yining Lang1 , Yuan He1 , Fan Yang1 , Jianfeng Dong2,3 , Hui Xue1 ∗
Alibaba Group1 , Zhejiang Gongshang Univresity2 ,
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies3

Abstract
With the rapid growth of e-commerce and the popularity
of online shopping, fashion retrieval has received considerable attention in the computer vision community. Different from the existing works that mainly focus on identical
or similar fashion item retrieval, in this paper, we aim to
study the plagiarized clothes retrieval which is somewhat
ignored in the academic community while itself has great
application value. One of the key challenges is that plagiarized clothes are usually modified in a certain region
on the original design to escape the supervision by traditional retrieval methods. To relieve it, we propose a novel network named Plagiarized-Search-Net (PS-Net) based
on regional representation, where we utilize the landmarks
to guide the learning of regional representations and compare fashion items region by region. Besides, we propose
a new dataset named Plagiarized Fashion for plagiarized
clothes retrieval, which provides a meaningful complement
to the existing fashion retrieval field. Experiments on Plagiarized Fashion dataset verify that our approach is superior to other instance-level counterparts for plagiarized
clothes retrieval, showing a promising result for original
design protection. Moreover, our PS-Net can also be adapted to traditional fashion retrieval and landmark estimation
tasks and achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the
DeepFashion and DeepFashion2 datasets.

1. Introduction
Fashion-related works have attracted increasing attention, due to the boom of online shopping in these years. The
rapid growth of deep learning-based approaches further enhances the ability of fashion image classification [30, 34],
fashion landmark detection [39, 27], and fashion retrieval
[45, 4, 49, 31]. The traditional clothes retrieval methods
[26, 16] typically perform similarity learning in the entire
instance of clothes without any focus, which is easily interfered by irrelevant features. The recent clothes retrieval
∗ Corresponding Author: Hui Xue (hui.xueh@alibaba-inc.com).

Figure 1. Examples for identical, similar, and plagiarized clothes
with respect to the original item.

methods [2, 4, 20, 49] learn the attribute representations to
guide the retrieval, thus improve the performance.
Different from the exiting methods [26, 45, 2, 4, 49] typically aim to retrieve visually similar or identical clothes, we
focus on a novel problem of plagiarized clothes retrieval.
The plagiarized clothes retrieval is somewhat ignored in the
academic community, while it has great application value in
the industry. The similar clothes retrieval task is somewhat
similar to the plagiarized clothes retrieval task, as some retrieved similar items may be plagiarized one. However,
plagiarized items are not always very similar to the original fashion items. As shown in Figure 1, the plagiarized
item is relatively more dissimilar than the similar item with
the original one. Hence, the retrieved target of both tasks
is different. Moreover, in the plagiarized clothes retrieval
task, the ground-truth images may be in a different category
with the original item (a long-sleeved T-shirt and a shortsleeved T-shirt in the example). But in the similar or identical clothes retrieval task, they are usually in the same category. It also shows that the plagiarized clothes retrieval task
is more challenging.
Actually, plagiarized clothes are very complicated and
appear in a wide variety of forms. For example, an item
which only plagiarizes the design of a certain part can
be considered as plagiarism or an item which completely
copies another item without any authorization, etc. Moreover, the form of plagiarized clothes is dynamic, as illegal businesses continue to update their plagiarized ways.
Therefore, it is difficult to use a uniform definition to include all plagiarized types. As the first work for plagiarized clothes retrieval task, we initially define the plagia12595

