SynSin: End-to-end View Synthesis from a Single Image
Olivia Wiles1∗
1

Georgia Gkioxari2

University of Oxford

2

Richard Szeliski3

Facebook AI Research

3

Facebook

Justin Johnson2,4
4

University of Michigan

Figure 1: End-to-end view synthesis. Given a single RGB image (red), SynSin generates images of the scene at new
viewpoints (blue). SynSin predicts a 3D point cloud, which is projected onto new views using our differentiable renderer; the
rendered point cloud is passed to a GAN to synthesise the output image. SynSin is trained end-to-end, without 3D supervision.

Abstract
View synthesis allows for the generation of new views of
a scene given one or more images. This is challenging; it
requires comprehensively understanding the 3D scene from
images. As a result, current methods typically use multiple
images, train on ground-truth depth, or are limited to synthetic data. We propose a novel end-to-end model for this
task using a single image at test time; it is trained on real
images without any ground-truth 3D information. To this
end, we introduce a novel differentiable point cloud renderer that is used to transform a latent 3D point cloud of
features into the target view. The projected features are decoded by our refinement network to inpaint missing regions
and generate a realistic output image. The 3D component
inside of our generative model allows for interpretable manipulation of the latent feature space at test time, e.g. we can
animate trajectories from a single image. Additionally, we
can generate high resolution images and generalise to other
input resolutions. We outperform baselines and prior work
on the Matterport, Replica, and RealEstate10K datasets.

1. Introduction
Given an image of a scene, as in Fig. 1 (top-left), what
would one see when turning left or walking forward? We
Project page: www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜ow/synsin.html.
∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

can reason that the window and the wall will extend to the
left and more chairs will appear to the right. The task of
novel view synthesis addresses these questions: given a
view of a scene, the aim is to generate images of the scene
from new viewpoints. This task has wide applications in
image editing, animating still photographs or viewing RGB
images in 3D. To unlock these applications for any input
image, our goal is to perform view synthesis in complex,
real-world scenes using only a single input image.
View synthesis is challenging, as it requires comprehensive scene understanding. Specifically, successful view
synthesis requires understanding both the 3D structure and
the semantics of the input image. Modelling 3D structure
is important for capturing the relative motion of visible
objects under a view transform. For example in Fig. 1
(bottom-left), the sink is closer than the shower and thus
shifts more as we change viewpoints. Understanding semantics is necessary for synthesising plausible completions
of partially visible objects, e.g. the chair in Fig. 1 (top-left).
One way to overcome these challenges is to relax
the single-image constraint and use multiple views to
reconstruct 3D scene geometry [12, 15, 51, 76]. This also
simplifies semantic modelling, as fewer positions will be
occluded from all views. Recent methods [56, 68, 74] can
be extremely effective even for complex real-world scenes.
However the assumption of multiple views severely limits
their applicability, since the vast majority of images are not
accompanied by views from other angles.
17467

