Neural Networks Are More Productive Teachers Than Human Raters:
Active Mixup for Data-Efficient Knowledge Distillation from a Blackbox Model
Dongdong Wang 1∗ Yandong Li 1∗ Liqiang Wang1 Boqing Gong2
1
University of Central Florida 2 Google
{daniel.wang, liyandong}@Knights.ucf.edu

Abstract
We study how to train a student deep neural network
for visual recognition by distilling knowledge from a blackbox teacher model in a data-efficient manner. Progress
on this problem can significantly reduce the dependence
on large-scale datasets for learning high-performing visual recognition models. There are two major challenges.
One is that the number of queries into the teacher model
should be minimized to save computational and/or financial costs. The other is that the number of images used
for the knowledge distillation should be small; otherwise,
it violates our expectation of reducing the dependence on
large-scale datasets. To tackle these challenges, we propose an approach that blends mixup and active learning.
The former effectively augments the few unlabeled images
by a big pool of synthetic images sampled from the convex
hull of the original images, and the latter actively chooses
from the pool hard examples for the student neural network
and query their labels from the teacher model. We validate
our approach with extensive experiments.

lwang@cs.ucf.edu

bgong@google.com

Rater

(a)

…

Web

Million of Images

Flower
Child

…

Millions of labels

Vendor
ML Model

Blackbox

User
(b)
100 – 1000
Images

100K Synthesized
Images

Mix-up

10K
Query Images

Active
Learning

10K Labels

Student
Model

Figure 1. Data-efficient blackbox knowledge distillation. Given a
blackbox teacher model and a small set of unlabeled images, we
propose to employ mixup [49] and active learning [28] to train a
high-performing student neural network in a data-efficient manner
(b) so that we do not need to re-do the heavy and expensive data
curation used to train the teacher model (a).

1. Introduction
Data curation is one of the most important steps for
learning high-performing visual recognition models. However, it is often tedious and sometimes daunting to collect
large-scale relevant data that have sufficient coverage of
the inference-time scenarios. Additionally, labeling the collected data is time-consuming and costly.
Given a new task, how can we learn a high-quality machine learning model in a more data-efficient manner? We
believe the answer varies depending on specific application
scenarios. In this paper, we focus on the case that there exists a blackbox teacher model whose capability covers our
task of interest. Indeed, there are many high-performing
generic visual recognition models available as Web-based
∗ Equal contribution.

APIs, in our smart devices, or even as an obsolete model
built by ourselves some while ago. The challenge is, however, we often have limited knowledge about their specifics,
e.g., not knowing the exact network architecture or weights.
Moreover, it could be computationally and/or financially
expensive to query the models and read out their outputs
for a large-scale dataset.
To this end, we study how to distill a blackbox teacher
model for visual recognition into a student neural network
in a data-efficient manner. Our objective is three-fold. First
of all, we would like the distilled student network to perform well as the teacher model as possible at the inference
time. Besides, we try to minimize the number of queries to
the blackbox teacher model to save costs. Finally, we also
shall use as a small number of examples as possible to save
11498

