Augmenting Colonoscopy using Extended and Directional CycleGAN
for Lossy Image Translation
Shawn Mathew1∗
1

Saad Nadeem2∗

Stony Brook University

Sruti Kumari1
2

Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

{shawmathew,srkumari,ari}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Colorectal cancer screening modalities, such as optical
colonoscopy (OC) and virtual colonoscopy (VC), are critical for diagnosing and ultimately removing polyps (precursors of colon cancer). The non-invasive VC is normally
used to inspect a 3D reconstructed colon (from CT scans)
for polyps and if found, the OC procedure is performed
to physically traverse the colon via endoscope and remove
these polyps. In this paper, we present a deep learning
framework, Extended and Directional CycleGAN, for lossy
unpaired image-to-image translation between OC and VC
to augment OC video sequences with scale-consistent depth
information from VC, and augment VC with patient-specific
textures, color and specular highlights from OC (e.g, for
realistic polyp synthesis). Both OC and VC contain structural information, but it is obscured in OC by additional
patient-specific texture and specular highlights, hence making the translation from OC to VC lossy. The existing CycleGAN approaches do not handle lossy transformations. To
address this shortcoming, we introduce an extended cycle
consistency loss, which compares the geometric structures
from OC in the VC domain. This loss removes the need for
the CycleGAN to embed OC information in the VC domain.
To handle a stronger removal of the textures and lighting, a
Directional Discriminator is introduced to differentiate the
direction of translation (by creating paired information for
the discriminator), as opposed to the standard CycleGAN
which is direction-agnostic. Combining the extended cycle consistency loss and the Directional Discriminator, we
show state-of-the-art results on scale-consistent depth inference for phantom, textured VC and for real polyp and
normal colon video sequences. We also present results for
realistic pendunculated and flat polyp synthesis from bumps
introduced in 3D VC models.

* Equal Contribution

Arie Kaufman1
nadeems@mskcc.org

1. Introduction
Colon cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers with 1.8 million new cases (and subsequent
750,000 deaths) reported worldwide every year [1]. Optical colonoscopy (OC) is the most prevalent colon cancer screening procedure. In this invasive procedure, polyps
(precursors of colon cancer) can be found and removed using an endoscope. In contrast, virtual colonoscopy (VC) is
a non-invasive screening procedure where the colon is 3D
reconstructed from computed tomography (CT) scans and
inspected for polyps with a virtual flythrough (simulating
the OC endoscope traversal). Due to its non-invasive, inexpensive, and low-risk (no sedation required) nature, VC
is becoming a commonplace tool for colon cancer screening. In fact, the US Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal
Cancer recommends VC screenings every 5 years and OC
every 10 years for average-risk patients above the age of 50
[22].
Both VC and OC provide complementary information.
OC endoscope videos are comprised of individual frames
capturing complex real-time dynamics of the colon with important texture information (e.g., veins, blood clots, stool,
etc). VC, on the other hand, provides complete 3D geometric information of the colon including polyps. This
complementary nature of OC and VC motivates our current work to find ways of translating information between
these two modalities. The geometric information from VC
images can aid in 3D reconstruction and surface coverage
(percentage of colon inspected) during the OC procedure;
lower the surface coverage higher the polyp miss rate. Inferring scale-consistent depth maps for given OC video sequences enables 3D reconstruction through established simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithms
[23, 25], which can help deduce the surface coverage during
OC. Augmenting VC with texture and specular highlights
from OC can be used to generate realistic virtual training
simulators for gastroenterologists as well as realistic polyps.
Shin et al. [24] have presented a method to produce polyps
from edge maps and binary polyp masks. This generates re-

4696

