ABCNet: Real-time Scene Text Spotting with Adaptive Bezier-Curve Network∗
Yuliang Liu‡† , Hao Chen† , Chunhua Shen† , Tong He† , Lianwen Jin‡ , Liangwei Wang⋄
‡
South China University of Technology † University of Adelaide, Australia ⋄ Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Scene text detection and recognition has received increasing research attention. Existing methods can be
roughly categorized into two groups: character-based
and segmentation-based. These methods either are costly for character annotation or need to maintain a complex
pipeline, which is often not suitable for real-time applications. Here we address the problem by proposing the Adaptive Bezier-Curve Network (ABCNet). Our contributions
are three-fold: 1) For the first time, we adaptively fit oriented or curved text by a parameterized Bezier curve. 2)
We design a novel BezierAlign layer for extracting accurate convolution features of a text instance with arbitrary
shapes, significantly improving the precision compared with
previous methods. 3) Compared with standard bounding
box detection, our Bezier curve detection introduces negligible computation overhead, resulting in superiority of our
method in both efficiency and accuracy.
Experiments on oriented or curved benchmark datasets,
namely Total-Text and CTW1500, demonstrate that ABCNet
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy, meanwhile significantly
improving the speed. In particular, on Total-Text, our realtime version is over 10 times faster than recent state-of-theart methods with a competitive recognition accuracy.
Code is available at https:// git.io/ AdelaiDet.

(a) Segmentation-based method.

(b) Our proposed ABCNet.

Figure 1. Segmentation-based results are easily affected by nearby text. The nonparametric non-structured segmentation results make them very difficult to align features for the subsequent recognition branch. Segmentation-based results usually need
complex post-processing, hampering efficiency. Benefiting from
the parameterized Bezier curve representation, our ABCNet can
produce structured detection regions and thus the BezierAlign
sampling process can be used for naturally connecting the recognition branch.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection and recognition has received increasing attention due to its numerous applications in computer vision. Despite tremendous progress has been made
recently [10, 42, 28, 36, 27, 43, 45, 41, 46, 14], detecting and recognizing text in the wild remains largely unsolved due to its diversity patterns in sizes, aspect ratios,
font styles, perspective distortion, and shapes. Although
the emergence of deep learning has significantly improved
the performance of the task of scene text spotting, a considerable gap still exists in current methods for real-world
∗ YL and HC contributed equally to this work. This work was done
when Yuliang Liu was visiting The University of Adelaide. CS is the corresponding author, e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

applications, especially in terms of efficiency.
Recently, many end-to-end methods [31, 37, 34, 24, 44,
21] have significantly improved the performance of oriented or curved scene text spotting. However, these methods
either use segmentation-based approaches that maintain a
complex pipeline or require a large amount of expensive
character-level annotations. In addition, almost all of these
methods are slow in inference, hampering the deployment
to real-time applications. Thus, our motivation is to design
a simple yet effective end-to-end framework for spotting oriented or curved scene text in images [4, 27], which ensures
fast inference time while achieving an on par or even better
performance compared with state-of-the-art methods.
19809

