Through the Looking Glass: Neural 3D Reconstruction of Transparent Shapes
Zhengqin Li∗ Yu-Ying Yeh* Manmohan Chandraker
University of California, San Diego
{zhl378, yuyeh, mkchandraker}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recovering the 3D shape of transparent objects using a
small number of unconstrained natural images is an ill-posed
problem. Complex light paths induced by refraction and reflection have prevented both traditional and deep multiview
stereo from solving this challenge. We propose a physicallybased network to recover 3D shape of transparent objects
using a few images acquired with a mobile phone camera,
under a known but arbitrary environment map. Our novel
contributions include a normal representation that enables
the network to model complex light transport through local
computation, a rendering layer that models refractions and
reflections, a cost volume specifically designed for normal refinement of transparent shapes and a feature mapping based
on predicted normals for 3D point cloud reconstruction. We
render a synthetic dataset to encourage the model to learn
refractive light transport across different views. Our experiments show successful recovery of high-quality 3D geometry
for complex transparent shapes using as few as 5-12 natural
images. Code and data will be publicly released.

1. Introduction
Transparent objects abound in real-world environments,
thus, their reconstruction from images has several applications such as 3D modeling and augmented reality. However,
their visual appearance is far more complex than that of
opaque objects, due to complex light paths with both refractions and reflections. This makes image-based reconstruction of transparent objects extremely ill-posed, since only
highly convoluted intensities of an environment map are
observed. In this paper, we propose that data-driven priors
learned by a deep network that models the physical basis of
image formation can solve the problem of transparent shape
reconstruction using a few natural images acquired with a
commodity mobile phone camera.
While physically-based networks have been proposed to
solve inverse problems for opaque objects [25], the complexity of light paths is higher for transparent shapes and
small changes in shape can manifest as severely non-local
changes in appearance. However, the physical basis of image
formation for transparent objects is well-known – refraction
∗ These two authors contributed equally

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. We present a novel physically-based deep network for
image-based reconstruction of transparent objects with a small
number of views. (a) An input photograph of a real transparent
object captured under unconstrained conditions (1 of 10 images).
(b) and (c): The reconstructed shape rendered under the same view
with transparent and white diffuse material. (d) The reconstructed
shape rendered under a novel view and environment map.

at the interface is governed by Snell’s law, the relative fraction of reflection is determined by Fresnel’s equations and
total internal reflection occurs when the angle of incidence
at the interface to a medium with lower refractive index is
below critical angle. These properties have been used to
delineate theoretical conditions on reconstruction of transparent shapes [23], as well as acquire high-quality shapes
under controlled settings [46, 52]. In contrast, we propose to
leverage this knowledge of image formation within a deep
network to reconstruct transparent shapes using relatively
unconstrained images under arbitrary environment maps.
Specifically, we use a small number of views of a glass
object with known refractive index, observed under a known
but arbitrary environment map, using a mobile phone camera. Note that this is a significantly less restricted setting
compared to most prior works that require dark room environments, projector-camera setups or controlled acquisition
of a large number of images. Starting with a visual hull
construction, we propose a novel in-network differentiable
rendering layer that models refractive light paths up to two
bounces to refine surface normals corresponding to a backprojected ray at both the front and back of the object, along
with a mask to identify regions where total internal reflection
11262

