Learning in the Frequency Domain
Kai Xu1,2∗
Yuhao Wang1
1

Minghai Qin1
Yen-Kuang Chen1
2

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in computer vision tasks. Existing neural networks
mainly operate in the spatial domain with fixed input sizes.
For practical applications, images are usually large and
have to be downsampled to the predetermined input size
of neural networks. Even though the downsampling operations reduce computation and the required communication
bandwidth, it removes both redundant and salient information obliviously, which results in accuracy degradation. Inspired by digital signal processing theories, we analyze the
spectral bias from the frequency perspective and propose a
learning-based frequency selection method to identify the
trivial frequency components which can be removed without accuracy loss. The proposed method of learning in the
frequency domain leverages identical structures of the wellknown neural networks, such as ResNet-50, MobileNetV2,
and Mask R-CNN, while accepting the frequency-domain
information as the input. Experiment results show that
learning in the frequency domain with static channel selection can achieve higher accuracy than the conventional
spatial downsampling approach and meanwhile further reduce the input data size. Specifically for ImageNet classification with the same input size, the proposed method
achieves 1.60% and 0.63% top-1 accuracy improvements
on ResNet-50 and MobileNetV2, respectively. Even with
half input size, the proposed method still improves the top-1
accuracy on ResNet-50 by 1.42%. In addition, we observe
a 0.8% average precision improvement on Mask R-CNN for
instance segmentation on the COCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have revolutionized the computer vision community because of their exceptional performance on various tasks such as image classification [1, 2], object detection [3, 4], and semantic segmentation [5, 6]. Constrained by the computing resources
∗ Work partially done during an internship at Alibaba.

Fei Sun1
Fengbo Ren2

Arizona State University

and memory limitations, most CNN models only accept
RGB images at low resolutions (e.g., 224 ⇥ 224). However, images produced by modern cameras are usually much
larger. For example, the high definition (HD) resolution images (1920⇥1080) are considered relatively small by modern standards. Even the average image resolution in the
ImageNet dataset [7] is 482⇥415, which is roughly four
times the size accepted by most CNN models. Therefore,
a large portion of real-world images are aggressively downsized to 224⇥224 to meet the input requirement of classification networks. However, image downsizing inevitably
incurs information loss and accuracy degradation [8]. Prior
works [9, 10] aim to reduce information loss by learning
task-aware downsizing networks. However, those networks
are task-specific and require additional computation, which
are not favorable in practical applications. In this paper, we
propose to reshape the high-resolution images in the frequency domain, i.e., discrete cosine transform (DCT) domain 1 , rather than resizing them in the spatial domain,
and then feed the reshaped DCT coefficients to CNN models for inference. Our method requires little modification
to the existing CNN models that take RGB images as input. Thus, it is a universal replacement for the routine data
pre-processing pipelines. We demonstrate that our method
achieves higher accuracy in image classification, object detection, and instance segmentation tasks than the conventional RGB-based methods with an equal or smaller input
data size. The proposed method leads to a direct reduction
in the required inter-chip communication bandwidth that is
often a bottleneck in modern deep learning inference systems, i.e., the computational throughput of rapidly evolving
AI accelerators/GPUs is becoming increasingly higher than
the data loading throughput of CPUs, as shown in Figure 1.
Inspired by the observation that human visual system
(HVS) has unequal sensitivity to different frequency components [11], we analyze the image classification, detection and segmentation task in the frequency domain and
find that CNN models are more sensitive to low-frequency
channels than the high-frequency channels, which coincides
1 We interchangeably use the terms frequency domain and DCT domain
in the context of this paper.

4321
1740

