Your Local GAN:
Designing Two Dimensional Local Attention Mechanisms for Generative Models
Giannis Daras
National Technical University of Athens

Augustus Odena
Google Brain

Han Zhang
Google Brain

daras.giannhs@gmail.com

augustusodena@google.com

zhanghan@google.com

Alexandros G. Dimakis
UT Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new local sparse attention layer that preserves two-dimensional geometry and locality. We show
that by just replacing the dense attention layer of SAGAN
with our construction, we obtain very significant FID, Inception score and pure visual improvements. FID score
is improved from 18.65 to 15.94 on ImageNet, keeping all
other parameters the same. The sparse attention patterns
that we propose for our new layer are designed using a
novel information theoretic criterion that uses information
flow graphs.
We also present a novel way to invert Generative Adversarial Networks with attention. Our method uses the attention layer of the discriminator to create an innovative loss
function. This allows us to visualize the newly introduced
attention heads and show that they indeed capture interesting aspects of two-dimensional geometry of real images.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks [10] are making significant progress on modeling and generating natural images [25, 3]. Transposed convolutional layers are a fundmamental architectural component since they capture spatial
invariance, a key property of natural images [18, 15, 26].
The central limitation (e.g. as argued in [25]) is that convolutions fail to model complex geometries and long-distance
dependencies – the canonical example is generating dogs
with fewer or more than four legs.
To compensate for this limitation, attention layers [24]
have been introduced in deep generative models [25, 3].
Attention enables the modeling of long range spatial dependencies in a single layer which automatically finds correlated parts of the image even if they are far apart. First

introduced in SAGAN [25] and further improved in BigGAN [3], attention layers have led to some of the best
known GANs currently available.
Attention layers have a few limitations. The first is that
they are computationally inefficient: Standard dense attention requires memory and time complexity that scales
quadratically in the size of the input. Second, dense attention layers are statistically inefficient: A significant number
of training samples is required to train attention layers, a
problem that becomes more pronounced when multiple attention heads or layers are introduced [5]. Statistical inefficiency also stems from the fact that dense attention does
not benefit from locality, since most dependencies in images
relate to nearby neighborhoods of pixels. Recent work indicates that most attention layer heads learn to attend mainly
to local neighborhoods [23].
To mitigate these limitations, sparse attention layers
were recently introduced in Sparse Transformers [5]. In that
paper, different types of sparse attention kernels were introduced and used to obtain excellent results for images, text
and audio data. They key observation we make is that the
patterns that were introduced in Sparse Transformers are
actually designed for one-dimensional data, such as textsequences. Sparse Transformers [5] were applied to images by reshaping tensors in a way that significantly distorts distances of the two-dimensional grid of image pixels. Therefore, local sparse attention kernels introduced in
Sparse Transformers fail to capture image locality.
Our Contributions:
• We introduce a new local sparse attention layer that
preserves two-dimensional image locality and can support good information flow through attention steps.
• To design our attention patterns we use the information
theoretic framework of Information Flow 3 Graphs [8].
This quantifies how information can flow through mul114531

