SAL: Sign Agnostic Learning of Shapes from Raw Data
Matan Atzmon and Yaron Lipman
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

Figure 1: We introduce SAL: Sign Agnostic Learning for learning shapes directly from raw data, such as triangle soups (left
in each gray pair; back-faces are in red). Right in each gray pair - the surface reconstruction by SAL of test raw scans; in
gold - SAL latent space interpolation between adjacent gray shapes. Raw scans are from the D-Faust dataset [7].

Abstract
Recently, neural networks have been used as implicit representations for surface reconstruction, modelling,
learning, and generation. So far, training neural networks
to be implicit representations of surfaces required training
data sampled from a ground-truth signed implicit functions
such as signed distance or occupancy functions, which are
notoriously hard to compute.
In this paper we introduce Sign Agnostic Learning
(SAL), a deep learning approach for learning implicit shape
representations directly from raw, unsigned geometric data,
such as point clouds and triangle soups.
We have tested SAL on the challenging problem of surface reconstruction from an un-oriented point cloud, as well
as end-to-end human shape space learning directly from
raw scans dataset, and achieved state of the art reconstructions compared to current approaches. We believe SAL
opens the door to many geometric deep learning applications with real-world data, alleviating the usual painstaking, often manual pre-process.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks have been used to reconstruct, learn and generate 3D surfaces. There are two
main approaches: parametric [19, 4, 40, 15] and implicit
[12, 30, 28, 2, 14, 17]. In the parametric approach neu-

ral nets are used as parameterization mappings, while the
implicit approach represents surfaces as zero level-sets of
neural networks:

S = x ∈ R3 | f (x; θ) = 0 ,
(1)

where f : R3 × Rm → R is a neural network, e.g., multilayer perceptron (MLP). The benefit in using neural networks as implicit representations to surfaces stems from
their flexibility and approximation power (e.g., Theorem 1
in [2]) as well as their efficient optimization and generalization properties.
So far, neural implicit surface representations were
mostly learned using a regression-type loss, requiring data
samples from a ground-truth implicit representation of the
surface, such as a signed distance function [30] or an occupancy function [12, 28]. Unfortunately, for the common
raw form of acquired 3D data X ⊂ R3 , i.e., a point cloud
or a triangle soup1 , no such data is readily available and
computing an implicit ground-truth representation for the
underlying surface is a notoriously difficult task [5].
In this paper we advocate Sign Agnostic Learning (SAL),
defined by a family of loss functions that can be used directly with raw (unsigned) geometric data X and produce
signed implicit representations of surfaces. An important
application for SAL is in generative models such as variational auto-encoders [24], learning shape spaces directly
1 A triangle soup is a collection of triangles in space, not necessarily
consistently oriented or a manifold.

12565

