Noisier2Noise: Learning to Denoise from Unpaired Noisy Data
Nick Moran, Dan Schmidt, Yu Zhong, Patrick Coady
Algorithmic Systems Group, Analog Devices
125 Summer Street, Boston MA
{nicholas.moran,daniel.schmidt,yu.zhong,patrick.coady}@analog.com

Abstract
We present a method for training a neural network to
perform image denoising without access to clean training examples or access to paired noisy training examples.
Our method requires only a single noisy realization of each
training example and a statistical model of the noise distribution, and is applicable to a wide variety of noise models,
including spatially structured noise. Our model produces
results which are competitive with other learned methods
which require richer training data, and outperforms traditional non-learned denoising methods. We present derivations of our method for arbitrary additive noise, an improvement specific to Gaussian additive noise, and an extension to multiplicative Bernoulli noise.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have proven to be powerful tools for many image processing tasks, including
denoising[13], inpainting[18], and domain translation[5].
Such networks are typically trained using pairs of inputs and
ground-truth target outputs, but there also exist training algorithms which remove the need for ground-truth targets. In
the standard formulation of the image denoising task, a network takes as input a noisy image, and produces an estimate
of the corresponding clean image. A loss function compares
this estimate to the true clean image, providing a supervised
learning signal which is used to update the weights of the
network. However, there exist many domains in which it is
difficult or impossible to collect true clean images, due to
limitations of imaging technology, limited illumination, or
a variety of other reasons. In such cases, we would like to
be able to train a network to perform denoising without it
ever having access to a clean image.
We propose a training algorithm which requires only a
single noisy realization of each training image, no clean images, and a statistical model of the noise distribution. Our
method builds on the Noise2Noise algorithm [11], which
also removes the requirement of clean training targets, but

Figure 1. Examples of our method (right side) removing Gaussian
noise (left side) with σ = 0.05 (top), 0.1 (middle), and 0.2 (bottom). σ values are relative to a [0, 1] scale of pixel intensities.

requires two independent noisy realizations of each training image. At a high level, our method is to generate a
synthetic noise sample from our statistical model, add it to
the already noisy image, and ask the network to predict the
original noisy image from this doubly-noisy image. Intuitively, the network will be unable to distinguish the original
noise from the additional synthetic noise, and can minimize
its loss by predicting that half of the observed noise at each
pixel was present in the source image, and the other half was
added synthetically. Thus, it will learn to output an image
which is halfway between the doubly-noisy input and the
unseen true clean image. We can then obtain an estimate of
the clean image with a simple manipulation.
4321
12064

