A Spatiotemporal Volumetric Interpolation Network for 4D Dynamic Medical
Image
Yuyu Guo1,2 , Lei Bi2 , Euijoon Ahn2 , Dagan Feng2 , Qian Wang1* , and Jinman Kim2*
1

Institute for Medical Imaging Technology, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China
2
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia

{yu.guo, wang.qian}@sjtu.edu.cn, {lei.bi, euijoon.ahn, dagan.feng, jinman.kim}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Dynamic medical images are often limited in its application due to the large radiation doses and longer image scanning and reconstruction times. Existing methods attempt
to reduce the volume samples in the dynamic sequence by
interpolating the volumes between the acquired samples.
However, these methods are limited to either 2D images
and/or are unable to support large but periodic variations
in the functional motion between the image volume samples.
In this paper, we present a spatiotemporal volumetric interpolation network (SVIN) designed for 4D dynamic medical
images. SVIN introduces dual networks: the first is the spatiotemporal motion network that leverages the 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) for unsupervised parametric volumetric registration to derive spatiotemporal motion
field from a pair of image volumes; the second is the sequential volumetric interpolation network, which uses the
derived motion field to interpolate image volumes, together
with a new regression-based module to characterize the periodic motion cycles in functional organ structures. We also
introduce an adaptive multi-scale architecture to capture
the volumetric large anatomy motions. Experimental results
demonstrated that our SVIN outperformed state-of-the-art
temporal medical interpolation methods and natural video
interpolation method that has been extended to support volumetric images. Code is available at 1 .

1. Introduction
Dynamic medical imaging modalities enable the examination of functional and mechanical properties of the human body and are used for clinical applications, e.g., four1 https://github.com/guoyu-niubility/SVIN

dimensional (4D) computed tomography (CT) for respiratory organ motion modelling [33], 4D magnetic resonance
(MR) imaging for functional heart analysis [9], and 4D ultrasound (US) for echocardiography analysis [40]. These
4D modalities have high spatial (volumetric) and temporal
(time sequence) sampling rate to capture the periodic motion cycles of organ activities, and this information is used
for clinical decision making. However, the acquisition of
these dynamic images requires larger radiation doses which
may cause harm to humans, and longer image scanning and
reconstruction times; these factors limit the use of 4D imaging modalities to broader clinical applications [32, 10].

Figure 1. The cardiac motions in two-time phases: End-Systole
(ES) and End-Diastole (ED). The red bounding boxes highlight the
heart structure. All images are shown in transaxial views, cropped
in varying scales, to enlarge the heart.

To mitigate these factors, reducing the temporal sampling has been widely employed but this compromises valuable temporal information [23, 15]. In these approaches, the
intermediary temporal frames can be used to improve visual
inspection, quantitative modelling (e.g., dynamic motion

4726

