Hierarchical Graph Attention Network for Visual Relationship Detection
Li Mi, Zhenzhong Chen∗
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{milirs,zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) aims to describe
the relationship between two objects by providing a structural triplet shown as <subject-predicate-object>. Existing
graph-based methods mainly represent the relationships by
an object-level graph, which ignores to model the tripletlevel dependencies. In this work, a Hierarchical Graph
Attention Network (HGAT) is proposed to capture the dependencies on both object-level and triplet-level. Objectlevel graph aims to capture the interactions between objects, while the triplet-level graph models the dependencies
among relation triplets. In addition, prior knowledge and
attention mechanism are introduced to fix the redundant or
missing edges on graphs that are constructed according to
spatial correlation. With these approaches, nodes are allowed to attend over their spatial and semantic neighborhoods’ features based on the visual or semantic feature correlation. Experimental results on the well-known VG and
VRD datasets demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual relationship detection serves as a middle-level
task to bridge the gap between low-level image recognition
task, such as object detection [24, 9], and high level image understanding tasks, such as image captioning[1], visual question answering[45, 15], visual reasoning [27] and
scene graph generation [19, 43]. Based on single object detection, visual relationship detection aims to accurately
localize a pair of objects and determine the predicate between them by providing several structural, comprehensive
triplets, shown as <subject-predicate-object>.
Previous methods on VRD focus on modelling the relationship between a pair of objects independently, which
ignore the global context information of an image scene.
Recently, graph structures [2, 10] are introduced to capture
the context information by an object-level graph where the
∗ Corresponding author: Zhenzhong Chen.

Object-level Graph

Triplet-level Graph

Figure 1. The illustration of the proposed Hierarchical Graph Attention Network (HGAT). The object-level graph captures the interactions among objects while the triplet-level graph models the
interactions among relation triplets explicitly.

nodes denote objects and edges represent predicates. However, long-dependencies on triplet-level are excluded. The
long dependencies among triplets serve as important context information for VRD. For example, some triplets are
more likely to co-occur with each other even if they do not
contain the same objects: <person-ride-bike> is more likely to be associated with <car-on-street> than <elephanton-grass>. Such dependencies among triplets cannot be
modeled explicitly by object-level graph. To address this
problem, a Hierarchical Graph Attention Network (HGAT)
is proposed to model the dependencies on both object-level
and triplet-level. As is shown in Figure 1, the task of predicting relation triplets is divided into two stages: objectlevel reasoning and triplet-level reasoning. The model joints
the information to give a final prediction.
In addition, constructing the graph only based on spatial correlation brings some inappropriate edges, such as
redundant edges or missing edges. For example, the two
people in Figure 2 (a) are next to each other, resulting in
a redundant edge (e.g. <person1-wearing-jacket2>) when
establishing the graph. Another example in Figure 2 (b)
shows a missing edge between pairwise objects (e.g. <boylooking at-kite>). Because the distance between the two
bounding boxes exceeds the threshold, the edge between
these two bounding boxes will be considered non-existent.
Furthermore, since the graph structure is fixed in the existing method, the errors in the original graph structure will be
113886

