Retina-like Visual Image Reconstruction via Spiking Neural Model
Lin Zhu1,2

Siwei Dong1 JianingLi1,2 Tiejun Huang1 Yonghong Tian1,2,∗
Peking University1 Pengcheng Laboratory2

{linzhu,swdong,lijianing,tjhuang,yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The high-sensitivity vision of primates, including humans, is mediated by a small retinal region called the fovea. As
a novel bio-inspired vision sensor, spike camera mimics the
fovea to record the nature scenes by continuous-time spikes
instead of frame-based manner. However, reconstructing
visual images from the spikes remains to be a challenge.
In this paper, we design a retina-like visual image reconstruction framework, which is flexible in reconstructing full
texture of natural scenes from the totally new spike data.
Specifically, the proposed architecture consists of motion
local excitation layer, spike refining layer and visual reconstruction layer motivated by bio-realistic leaky integrate
and fire (LIF) neurons and synapse connection with spiketiming-dependent plasticity (STDP) rules. This approach
may represent a major shift from conventional frame-based
vision to the continuous-time retina-like vision, owning to
the advantages of high temporal resolution and low power consumption. To test the performance, a spike dataset
is constructed which is recorded by the spike camera. The
experimental results show that the proposed approach is extremely effective in reconstructing the visual image in both
normal and high speed scenes, while achieving high dynamic range and high image quality.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving, wearable computing, unmanned
aerial vehicles, are typical emerging real-time applications which require rapid reaction in vision processing [19].
Conventional cameras compress the video data in the exposure time into one frame, and the temporal changes in
that time will be lost [11]. When performing image analysis tasks such as detecting or tracking an object, these consecutive frames have to be compared to recover temporal
changes, which is computationally expensive and is difficult to achieve satisfactory results [21].
If we turn attention to the human vision, the visual sam-

pling is quite different from that of a digital camera. There
is no concept of frames or pictures in human vision. Although the mechanism of human vision is too complicated
to be fully understood, the physical structures and the signal
processing in human retina give us some hints and inspirations. Among them, the dynamic vision sensor (DVS) is the
most well-recognized [8, 1]. In DVS, each pixel responds independently to the changes of luminance intensity by
generating asynchronous spikes. This mechanism is similar to the periphery of the retina, which is sensitive only
to moving objects. The temporal redundancy of the output
spikes is natively reduced, however, it is not able to reconstruct the visual images as the conventional camera does.
Although there are some hybrid sensors combing DVS and
conventional image sensor (DAVIS) [5], or adding an extra
photo-measurement circuit (ATIS [23], CeleX [13]), there
exists motion mismatch since the difference of the sampling
time resolution.
To solve the problem of capturing visual texture while
maintaining the continuous-time signal, researchers designed a class of time-based sensors to make each pixel
mimics the behaviour of an integrate-and-fire neuron and
works asynchronously [2, 6, 16]. Instead of choosing a
fixed integration time for all pixels like a conventional camera, the time-based sensor ensures that each pixel selects
its own optimal integration time to achieve a high dynamic range and an improved signal-to-noise ratio. This kind
of sensor enables the reconstruction of visual textures in a
frame-free manner. Using a time window or the inter-spike
interval, the image texture can be reconstructed [6].
Recently, [28] proposed a fovea-like sampling method
(FSM) which falls into the category of time-based sensors. Compared to previous time-based sensors, this sensor
namely spike camera is with high spatial (250 × 400) and
temporal resolutions (40000 Hz), which is suitable to deal
with high-speed vision tasks [28]. However, the previous
reconstruction algorithms [6, 28] will suffer the problem of
low contrast or blur in complex environments. Therefore,
how to flexibly use the time-continuous spike information
is a key problem of high-quality image reconstruction.
In this paper, we propose a new retina-like visual im-

∗ Corresponding author.

1438

