LT-Net: Label Transfer by Learning Reversible Voxel-wise Correspondence for
One-shot Medical Image Segmentation
Shuxin Wang∗ 1,2 , Shilei Cao∗ 2 , Dong Wei∗ 2 , Renzhen Wang4 , Kai Ma2 ,
Liansheng Wang† 1 , Deyu Meng3,4 and Yefeng Zheng† 2
1

Xiamen University 2 Jarvis Lab, Tencent
3
Macau University of Science and Technology 4 Xi’an Jiaotong University
sxwang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lswang@xmu.edu.cn, {eliasslcao, donwei, kylekma, yefengzheng}@tencent.com,
wrzhen@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Precise segmentation of medical images delineates different anatomical structures and abnormal tissues throughout the body, which can be utilized for clinical diagnosis,
treatment planning, etc. With sufficient well-annotated data,
∗ Equal contributions. Shuxin Wang contributed to this work during an
internship at Tencent.
† Corresponding authors.
1 We follow Zhao et al. [44] to use the phrase “one-shot” for its generalized meaning that only one exemplar annotation is needed for the proposed
model to learn to segment medical images.

Transfer

Reversed
Transfer

Original

Cycle-consistency

Atlas

Reversed
Correspondence

Label

Atlas

Correspondence

Label

We introduce a one-shot segmentation method to alleviate the burden of manual annotation for medical images.
The main idea is to treat one-shot segmentation as a classical atlas-based segmentation problem,1 where voxel-wise
correspondence from the atlas to the unlabelled data is
learned. Subsequently, segmentation label of the atlas can
be transferred to the unlabelled data with the learned correspondence. However, since ground truth correspondence
between images is usually unavailable, the learning system
must be well-supervised to avoid mode collapse and convergence failure. To overcome this difficulty, we resort to
the forward-backward consistency, which is widely used in
correspondence problems, and additionally learn the backward correspondences from the warped atlases back to the
original atlas. This cycle-correspondence learning design
enables a variety of extra, cycle-consistency-based supervision signals to make the training process stable, while also
boost the performance. We demonstrate the superiority of
our method over both deep learning-based one-shot segmentation methods and a classical multi-atlas segmentation
method via thorough experiments.

Unlabeld data

Reconstructed

Figure 1: We tackle the one-shot medical image segmentation problem by resorting to the concept of classical atlas-based segmentation, where voxel-wise correspondence from the atlas to the unlabelled data is learned. In addition, we innovatively learn the backward correspondences
from the warped atlases back to the original atlas to provide
cycle-consistency-based supervision.
deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) achieved
ground-breaking performance in such segmentation tasks
[34, 31, 19]. However, obtaining 3D annotations of medical images for fully supervised training of DCNNs is laborintensive and error-prone. Therefore, DCNN-based segmentation methods that require only one or few examples
of annotation for training are highly desirable to enable efficient development and deployment of practical solutions.
The lack of large-scale real-world annotations is a longstanding problem in medical image segmentation. Before
the era of deep learning, a large body of literatures on medical image segmentation focused on the atlas-based segmentation [6, 33, 27, 28, 41, 7]. The key idea is that one or more
labelled reference volumes (i.e., atlas) are non-rigidly registered [6, 33] to a target volume, or provided to learn patchwise corresponding relationship [41, 7] with the target volume, and then the labels of the atlases are propagated to the

9162

