Learning to Discriminate Information for Online Action Detection
Hyunjun Eun1,4 *

Jinyoung Moon2

Jongyoul Park2

Chanho Jung3

Changick Kim1

1
2

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI)
3
4
Hanbat National University
SK Telecom

Abstract
From a streaming video, online action detection aims to
identify actions in the present. For this task, previous methods use recurrent networks to model the temporal sequence
of current action frames. However, these methods overlook
the fact that an input image sequence includes background
and irrelevant actions as well as the action of interest. For
online action detection, in this paper, we propose a novel
recurrent unit to explicitly discriminate the information relevant to an ongoing action from others. Our unit, named
Information Discrimination Unit (IDU), decides whether to
accumulate input information based on its relevance to the
current action. This enables our recurrent network with
IDU to learn a more discriminative representation for identifying ongoing actions. In experiments on two benchmark
datasets, TVSeries and THUMOS-14, the proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin. Moreover, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our recurrent unit by conducting comprehensive ablation studies.

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection [3, 20, 31, 34, 35] has been
widely studied in an offline setting, which allows making
a decision for the detection after fully observing a long
untrimmed video. This is called offline action detection.
In contrast, online action detection aims to identify ongoing
actions from streaming videos, at every moment in time.
This task is useful for many real-world applications (e.g.,
autonomous driving [18], robot assistants [19], and surveillance systems [16, 25]).
Recent methods [7, 32] for online action detection
mostly employ recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with recurrent units (e.g., long short-term memory (LSTM) [14]
and gated recurrent unit (GRU) [4]) for modeling the temporal sequence of an ongoing action. They introduce ad* Work done during a Ph.D. student at KAIST.

Figure 1. Comparison between GRU [4] and Information Discrimination Unit (IDU) which is proposed for our online action detection system. Our IDU extends GRU with two novel components, a
mechanism utilizing current information (blue lines) and an early
embedding module (red dash boxes). First, reset and update modules in our IDU additionally takes the current information (i.e.,
x0 ), which enables to consider whether the past information (i.e,
ht−1 and xt ) are relevant to an ongoing action such as x0 . Second,
the early embedding module is introduced to consider the relation
between high-level features for both information.

ditional modules to learn a discriminative representation.
However, these methods overlook the fact that the given
input video contains not only the ongoing action but irrelevant actions and background. Specifically, the recurrent
unit accumulates the input information without explicitly
considering its relevance to the current action, and thus the
learned representation would be less discriminative. Note
that, in the task of detecting actions online, ignoring such a
characteristic of streaming videos makes the problem more
challenging [8].

809

