Selective Transfer with Reinforced Transfer Network for Partial Domain
Adaptation
Zhihong Chen, Chao Chen, Zhaowei Cheng, Boyuan Jiang, Ke Fang, Xinyu Jin
Institue of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
{zhihongchen,chench,chengzhaowei,byjiang,ke-fang,jinxy}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
One crucial aspect of partial domain adaptation (PDA)
is how to select the relevant source samples in the shared
classes for knowledge transfer. Previous PDA methods
tackle this problem by re-weighting the source samples
based on their high-level information (deep features). However, since the domain shift between source and target domains, only using the deep features for sample selection is
defective. We argue that it is more reasonable to additionally exploit the pixel-level information for PDA problem, as
the appearance difference between outlier source classes
and target classes is significantly large. In this paper, we
propose a reinforced transfer network (RTNet), which utilizes both high-level and pixel-level information for PDA
problem. Our RTNet is composed of a reinforced data selector (RDS) based on reinforcement learning (RL), which
filters out the outlier source samples, and a domain adaptation model which minimizes the domain discrepancy in
the shared label space. Specifically, in the RDS, we design
a novel reward based on the reconstruct errors of selected
source samples on the target generator, which introduces
the pixel-level information to guide the learning of RDS.
Besides, we develope a state containing high-level information, which used by the RDS for sample selection. The
proposed RDS is a general module, which can be easily integrated into existing DA models to make them fit the PDA
situation. Extensive experiments indicate that RTNet can
achieve state-of-the-art performance for PDA tasks on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive performance in a variety of applications. However, when applied
to related but different domains, the generalization ability
of the learned model may be severely degraded due to the
harmful effects of the domain shift [3]. Re-collecting labeled data from the coming new domain is prohibitive be-

Source samples

Target samples

Classifier

Filter out based on selector

(a) Domain adaptation methods

(b) Proposed RTNet

Figure 1: (a) Negative transfer is triggered by mismatch. (b)
Negative transfer is mitigated by filtering out outlier classes.

cause of the huge cost of data annotation. Domain adaptation (DA) techniques solve such a problem by transferring knowledge from a source domain with rich labeled data
to a target domain where labels are scarce or unavailable.
These DA methods learn domain-invariant features by moment matching [18, 25, 9] or adversarial training [26, 12].
Previous DA methods generally assume that the source
and target domains have shared label space, i.e., the category set of the source domain is consistent with that of the
target domain. However, in real applications, it is usually
formidable to find a relevant source domain with identical
label space as the target domain. Thus, a more realistic scenario is partial domain adaptation (PDA) [4], which relaxes
the constraint that source and target domains share the same
label space and assumes that the unknown target label space
is a subset of the source label space. In such a scenario,
as shown in Figure 1a, existing DA methods force an error
match between the outlier source class (blue triangle) and
the unrelated target class (red square) by aligning the whole
source domain with the target domain. As a result, the negative transfer may be triggered due to the mismatch. Negative transfer is a dilemma that the transfer model performs
even worse than the non-adaptation (NoA) model [21].
Several approaches have been proposed to solve the PDA

12706

