On the Acceleration of Deep Learning Model Parallelism with Staleness
An Xu1 , Zhouyuan Huo1 , and Heng Huang∗1,2
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
{an.xu, zhouyuan.huo, heng.huang}@pitt.edu

Abstract
Training the deep convolutional neural network for computer vision problems is slow and inefficient, especially
when it is large and distributed across multiple devices. The
inefficiency is caused by the backpropagation algorithm’s
forward locking, backward locking, and update locking
problems. Existing solutions for acceleration either can
only handle one locking problem or lead to severe accuracy loss or memory inefficiency. Moreover, none of them
consider the straggler problem among devices. In this paper, we propose Layer-wise Staleness and a novel efficient
training algorithm, Diversely Stale Parameters (DSP), to
address these challenges. We also analyze the convergence
of DSP with two popular gradient-based methods and prove
that both of them are guaranteed to converge to critical
points for non-convex problems. Finally, extensive experimental results on training deep learning models demonstrate that our proposed DSP algorithm can achieve significant training speedup with stronger robustness than compared methods.

1. Introduction
The deep convolutional neural network is an important
method for solving computer vision problems such as classification, object detection, etc. However, as the neural networks get deeper and larger [8, 17, 10, 31, 34, 24], the required expensive training time has become the bottleneck.
Data parallelism [33, 23, 3] and model parallelism [22, 20]
are two standard parallelism techniques to utilize multiple
devices for efficient training.
The data parallelism for efficient distributed training has
been well studied and implemented in existing libraries
∗ Corresponding Author. This work was partially supported by U.S.
NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, IIS 1845666, IIS 1852606, IIS 1838627,
IIS 1837956.

[1, 4, 12, 35, 14, 16], but the model parallelism is still underexplored. In this paper, we focus on the model parallelism,
where the deep neural network (DNN) benefits from being
split onto multiple devices. But the resource utilization of
standard model parallelism can be very low. The backpropagation algorithm [29, 21] typically requires two phases to
update the model in each training step: the forward pass
and backward pass. But the sequential propagation of activation and error gradient leads to backward locking and
forward locking [18] respectively because of the computation dependencies between layers. The update locking [18]
exists as the backward pass will not start until the forward
pass has completed. This sequential execution keeps a device inefficiently waiting for the activation input and error
gradient.
Several works have been proposed to address these locking issues (Figure 1). [18] uses Decoupled Neural Interfaces
(DNI) to predict the error gradient via auxiliary networks,
so that a layer uses the synthetic gradient and needs not to
wait for the error gradient. [27] lets hidden layers receive
error information directly from the output layer. However,
these methods can not converge when dealing with very
deep neural networks. [2] proposes layer-wise decoupled
greedy learning (DGL), which introduces an auxiliary classifier for each block of layers so that a block updates its
parameters according to its own classifier. But the objective
function of DGL based on greedy local predictions can be
very different from the original model. GPipe [11] proposes
pipeline parallelism and divides each mini-batch into microbatches, which can be regarded as a combination of model
parallelism and data parallelism. However, the forward and
backward lockings of the micro-batch still exist, and the update locking is not addressed because GPipe waits for the
whole forward and backward pass to finish before updating
the parameters. [15] proposes Decoupled Parallel Backpropagation (DDG), which divides the DNN into blocks
and removes the backward locking by storing delayed error gradient and intermediate activations at each block. But

2088

