CurricularFace: Adaptive Curriculum Learning Loss for Deep Face Recognition
Yuge Huang† Yuhan Wang§ Ying Tai†∗ Xiaoming Liu‡
Pengcheng Shen† Shaoxin Li†∗ Jilin Li† Feiyue Huang†
†
§
‡
Youtu Lab, Tencent
Zhejiang University
Michigan State University
†

{yugehuang, yingtai, quantshen, darwinli, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com
§

wang_yuhan@zju.edu.cn, ‡ liuxm@cse.msu.edu

https://github.com/HuangYG123/CurricularFace

Abstract
As an emerging topic in face recognition, designing
margin-based loss functions can increase the feature margin between different classes for enhanced discriminability. More recently, the idea of mining-based strategies is
adopted to emphasize the misclassified samples, achieving
promising results. However, during the entire training process, the prior methods either do not explicitly emphasize
the sample based on its importance that renders the hard
samples not fully exploited; or explicitly emphasize the effects of semi-hard/hard samples even at the early training
stage that may lead to convergence issue. In this work, we
propose a novel Adaptive Curriculum Learning loss (CurricularFace) that embeds the idea of curriculum learning
into the loss function to achieve a novel training strategy for
deep face recognition, which mainly addresses easy samples in the early training stage and hard ones in the later
stage. Specifically, our CurricularFace adaptively adjusts
the relative importance of easy and hard samples during
different training stages. In each stage, different samples
are assigned with different importance according to their
corresponding difficultness. Extensive experimental results
on popular benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our
CurricularFace over the state-of-the-art competitors.

1. Introduction
The success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
on face recognition can be mainly credited to: enormous
training data, network architectures, and loss functions. Recently, designing effective loss functions that enhance discriminative power is pivotal for training deep face CNNs.
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) face recognition methods mainly adopt softmax-based classification loss. Since
the learned features with the original softmax is not suf∗ denotes Ying Tai and Shaoxin Li are corresponding authors.

Later Stage

Early Stage

Harder

Hard

Harder

Hard

Figure 1. Different training strategies for modulating negative
cosine similarities of hard samples (i.e., the mis-classified samples) in ArcFace [8], MV-Arc-Softmax [31] and our CurricularFace. Left: The modulation coefficients I(t, cos θj ) for negative
cosine similarities of hard samples in different methods, where t
is an adaptively estimated parameter and θj denotes the angle between the hard sample and the non-ground truth j-class center.
Right: The corresponding hard samples’ negative cosine similarities N (t, cos θj ) = I(t, cos θj ) cos θj +c after modulation, where
c indicates a constant. On one hand, during early training stage
(e.g., t is close to 0), hard sample’s negative cosine similarities are
usually reduced, and thus leads to smaller hard sample loss than
the original one. Therefore, easier samples are relatively emphasized; during later training stage (e.g., t is close to 1), the hard
sample’s negative cosine similarities are enhanced, and thus leads
to larger hard sample loss. On the other hand, in the same training
stage, we modulate the hard samples’ negative cosine similarities
with cos θj . Specifically, the smaller the angle θj is, the larger
the modulation coefficient should be.

ficiently discriminative for the practical face recognition
problem [14], which means that the testing identities are
usually disjoint from the training set, several margin-based
variants have been proposed to enhance features’ discriminative power. For example, explicit margin, i.e., CosFace [30], Sphereface [14], ArcFace [8], and implicit margin, i.e., Adacos [38], supplement the original softmax
function to enforce greater intra-class compactness and
inter-class discrepancy, which result in more discriminate
features. However, these margin-based loss functions do
not explicitly emphasize each sample according to its im15901

