Select to Better Learn: Fast and Accurate Deep Learning using Data Selection
from Nonlinear Manifolds
Mohsen Joneidi∗ , Saeed Vahidian† , Ashkan Esmaeili∗ , Weijia Wang† , Nazanin Rahnavard∗ , Bill Lin† ,
and Mubarak Shah#
∗

University of Central Florida, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering

University of California, San Diego, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Central Florida, Center for Research in Computer Vision
Few-shot learning

Labels of selected samples are
propagated thorough the network

Training pairs on the Train Dataset

Selected samples whose combination
approximate the rest of images

The summarized graph facilitates
detecting communities and their elites

…

Siamese NN
Training

1

0

1

0

Training on closed-set using all data and
selecting representatives for each class

Selecting the most informative representatives
from every class of Test Dataset

Trained
Siamese NN

noise

G

Generator

D

fake/
real

discriminator

Full graph

Selected vertices and
detected communities

Open-set identification

Closed-Set

Graph-based selection

Multi-view and multi-expression of
face images are redundant

Selected Samples

Training GAN on reduced data

test image from
Dataset 2

Classifying test images
based on selected
representatives

Open-set

#

+ Representatives

†

Labeling open-set using the trained
classifier and scoring each data based on
representatives of their assigned class

Figure 1: Several deep learning applications of our proposed data selection algorithms discussed in this paper.

Abstract
Finding a small subset of data whose linear combination
spans other data points, also called column subset selection
problem (CSSP), is an important open problem in computer
science with many applications in computer vision and deep
learning such as the ones shown in Fig. 1. There are some
studies that solve CSSP in a polynomial time complexity
w.r.t. the size of the original dataset. A simple and efficient selection algorithm with a linear complexity order, referred to as spectrum pursuit (SP), is proposed that pursuits
spectral components of the dataset using available sample
points. The proposed non-greedy algorithm aims to iteratively find K data samples whose span is close to that of the
first K spectral components of entire data. SP has no parameter to be fine tuned and this desirable property makes
it problem-independent. The simplicity of SP enables us to
extend the underlying linear model to more complex models
such as nonlinear manifolds and graph-based models. The
nonlinear extension of SP is introduced as kernel-SP (KSP).
The superiority of the proposed algorithms is demonstrated
in a wide range of applications.

1. Introduction
Processing M data samples, each including N features,
is not feasible for of most the systems, when M is a very
large number. Therefore, it is crucial to select a small subset of K << M data from the entire set such that the selected data can capture the underlying properties or structure of the entire data. This way, complex systems such as
deep learning (DL) networks can operate on the informative
selected data rather than the redundant entire data. Randomly selecting K out of M data, while computationally
simple, is inefficient in many cases, since non-informative
or redundant instances may be among the selected ones. On
the other hand, the optimal selection of data for a specific
task involves solving an NP-hard problem [2]. For example, finding an optimal subset of data to be employed in
training
a DL network, with the best performance, requires

M
K number of trial and errors, which is not tractable. It is
essential to define a versatile objective function and to develop a method that efficiently selects the K samples that
optimize the function. Let us assume the M data samples
are organized as the columns of a matrix A ∈ RN ×M . The
following is a general purpose cost function for subset se-

7819

