Inter-Task Association Critic for Cross-Resolution Person Re-Identification
Zhiyi Cheng
Queen Mary University of London

Qi Dong
Queen Mary University of London

z.cheng@qmul.ac.uk

q.dong@qmul.ac.uk

Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London

Xiatian Zhu
Vision Semantics Limited, London, UK

s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

eddy.zhuxt@gmail.com

Abstract

Gallery ID 1

Person images captured by unconstrained surveillance
cameras often have low resolutions (LR). This causes the
resolution mismatch problem when matched against the
high-resolution (HR) gallery images, negatively affecting
the performance of person re-identification (re-id). An effective approach is to leverage image super-resolution (SR)
along with person re-id in a joint learning manner. However, this scheme is limited due to dramatically more difficult gradients backpropagation during training. In this
paper, we introduce a novel model training regularisation
method, called Inter-Task Association Critic (INTACT), to
address this fundamental problem. Specifically, INTACT
discovers the underlying association knowledge between
image SR and person re-id, and leverages it as an extra
learning constraint for enhancing the compatibility of SR
model with person re-id in HR image space. This is realised
by parameterising the association constraint which enables
it to be automatically learned from the training data. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of INTACT over
the state-of-the-art approaches on the cross-resolution re-id
task using five standard person re-id datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims to match the identity information in the images captured by disjoint surveillance camera views [13]. Most existing methods assume
that the probe and gallery images have similar and sufficiently high resolutions. However, due to unconstrained
distances between cameras and pedestrians, person images
are often captured at various resolutions. This resolution
mismatch issue brings about significant challenges to re-id.
As low-resolution (LR) images contain much less identity
detail information than high-resolution (HR) images, directly matching them across resolutions leads to substantial

Query ID 1

SR
Feature Space
of LR Images
Feature Space
of HR Images

Query ID 2

Gallery ID 2
Figure 1. Illustration of cross-resolution person re-identification.
Resolution mismatch between the low-resolution (LR) query images and the high-resolution (HR) gallery images causes unaligned
feature distributions and finally inferior identity matching performance. One effective solution is using an image super-resolution
(SR) model to enhance the resolution of LR query images for alleviating the distribution discrepancy with HR gallery images.

performance drop [16, 26]. For example, a standard person
re-id model [12] can suffer up to 19.2% Rank-1 rate drop
when applied to cross-resolution person re-id [26].
A number of cross-resolution re-id methods have been
developed for addressing the resolution mismatch problem [7, 16, 26, 40]. They are generally in two categories: (1)
Learning resolution-invariant representation [7] and (2) Exploiting image super-resolution (SR) [16, 40]. The first category aims at learning a feature representation space shared
by LR and HR images, but tends to lose fine-grained discriminative details due to being absent in LR images. The
second category can solve this limitation often by adopting a multi-task joint learning framework which cascades
12605

