Controllable Person Image Synthesis with Attribute-Decomposed GAN
Yifang Men1 , Yiming Mao2 , Yuning Jiang2 , Wei-Ying Ma2 , Zhouhui Lian1∗
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
Bytedance AI Lab

Abstract
This paper introduces the Attribute-Decomposed GAN, a
novel generative model for controllable person image synthesis, which can produce realistic person images with desired human attributes (e.g., pose, head, upper clothes and
pants) provided in various source inputs. The core idea of
the proposed model is to embed human attributes into the
latent space as independent codes and thus achieve flexible
and continuous control of attributes via mixing and interpolation operations in explicit style representations. Specifically, a new architecture consisting of two encoding pathways with style block connections is proposed to decompose
the original hard mapping into multiple more accessible
subtasks. In source pathway, we further extract component
layouts with an off-the-shelf human parser and feed them
into a shared global texture encoder for decomposed latent
codes. This strategy allows for the synthesis of more realistic output images and automatic separation of un-annotated
attributes. Experimental results demonstrate the proposed
method’s superiority over the state of the art in pose transfer and its effectiveness in the brand-new task of component
attribute transfer.

1. Introduction
Person image synthesis (PIS), a challenging problem in
areas of Computer Vision and Computer Graphics, has huge
potential applications for image editing, movie making, person re-identification (Re-ID), virtual clothes try-on and so
on. An essential task of this topic is pose-guided image
generation [23, 24, 9, 33], rendering the photo-realistic images of people in arbitrary poses, which has become a new
hot topic in the community. Actually, not only poses but
also many other valuable human attributes can be used to
guide the synthesis process.
In this paper, we propose a brand-new task that aims
at synthesizing person images with controllable human attributes, including pose and component attributes such as
head, upper clothes and pants. As depicted in Figure 1,
users are allowed to input multiple source person images
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

Generated images with editable style codes

Controllable Person Image Synthesis
Pose Code
Pose Attribute
(keypoints)

Style Code

base

Component Attributes
upper clothes
head

Pose source Target pose Source 1 Source 2

Source 3

pants

Source 4

Figure 1: Controllable person image synthesis with desired
human attributes provided by multiple source images. Human attributes including pose and component attributes are
embedded into the latent space as the pose code and decomposed style code. Target person images can be generated in
user control with the editable style code.
to provide desired human attributes respectively. The proposed model embeds component attributes into the latent
space to construct the style code and encodes the keypointsbased 2D skeleton extracted from the person image as
the pose code, which enables intuitive component-specific
(pose) control of the synthesis by freely editing the style
(pose) code. Thus, our method can automatically synthesize high-quality person images in desired component attributes under arbitrary poses and can be widely applied in
not only pose transfer and Re-ID, but also garment transfer
and attribute-specific data augmentation (e.g., clothes commodity retrieval and recognition).
Due to the insufficiency of annotation for human attributes, the simplicity of keypoint representation and the
diversity of person appearances, it is challenging to achieve
the goal mentioned above using existing methods. Pose

5084

