Global Optimality for Point Set Registration Using Semidefinite Programming
José Pedro Iglesias1 , Carl Olsson1,2 , and Fredrik Kahl1
1

Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
2
Lund University, Sweden

Abstract
In this paper we present a study of global optimality
conditions for Point Set Registration (PSR) with missing
data. PSR is the problem of aligning multiple point clouds
with an unknown target point cloud. Since non-linear rotation constraints are present the problem is inherently nonconvex and typically relaxed by computing the Lagrange
dual, which is a Semidefinite Program (SDP).
In this work we show that given a local minimizer the
dual variables of the SDP can be computed in closed form.
This opens up the possibility of verifying the optimally, using the SDP formulation without explicitly solving it. In
addition it allows us to study under what conditions the relaxation is tight, through spectral analysis. We show that if
the errors in the (unknown) optimal solution are bounded
the SDP formulation will be able to recover it.

1. Introduction
Point Set Registration (PSR) is a problem with several
applications in the area of computer vision [4, 20, 14, 21,
29, 5, 2, 11, 24], which consists of estimating transformations that align two or more sets of 3D points. The instance
of PSR with only two views related by a rigid transformation is a particular case which has been been intensively
studied and that can be solved in closed form [3]. But as the
number of view increases, and incomplete observations are
taken in consideration, the problem becomes more complex
due to the constraints on the rotations.
In this work we focus on the registration of multiple
point clouds to a global coordinate system. The point clouds
correspond to observations of subsets of n points from m local coordinate systems. These observations, besides incomplete, can be noisy and are related through unknown rigid
transformations. Assuming that sparse correspondences
between 3D points are known, the aim of such problem
is not only to estimate the unknown transformations from

the m local coordinate systems to a global coordinate system, but also the global coordinates of the original set of n
points. Solutions or approximated solutions to this problem
are not exactly new, as shown in [7], whereby we aim at
study global optimality conditions when solving PSR using
Semidefinite Programming (SDP) [26].
Global optimization over the manifold of rotations have
previously been studied by a number of papers. A classical
result is that of Horn et al. [13] which showed that registration of two point sets under a Euclidean transformation
can be solved globally optimally using singular value decomposition. In [18] a similar problem where the point-topoint correspondences were replaced by point-to-plane correspondences was considered. It was shown how to apply
Lagrangian duality to achieve orthogonality or the transformation matrix. The relaxation was tightened in [6], which
introduced orientation constraints on the columns of the rotation matrix and added redundant rotation constraints to
strengthen the lower bound provided by the dual problem.
Yang et al. [28] also applies Lagrangian duality to obtain a
quaternion-based certifiably optimal solution to the Wahba
problem.
A problem that has received lots of attention in recent
years due to it usefulness in structure from motion and
SLAM applications is that of rotation averaging [9, 1, 30,
19, 8] One of the first attempts at solving this problem
was presented in [10] where the unit norm constraint was
dropped to achieve a linear solution strategy. Fredriksson et
al. [9] showed how to incorporate the norm constraint using
duality. Martinec and Pajdla [16] used the matrix parameterization but dropped the orthogonality and determinant
constraints and extracted an approximate solution from the
eigenvalues corresponding to the three smallest eigenvalues
of the system matrix. Eriksson et al. [8] recently showed
that despite the non-convexity of the problem, applying Lagrangian duality allows to enforce orthonormality and determinant constraints exactly under very generous noise levels. In [12] convexity properties of the single rotation averaging problem are studied. As far as we know these results
18287

