Gait Recognition via Semi-supervised Disentangled Representation Learning to
Identity and Covariate Features
Xiang Li1,2 Yasushi Makihara2 Chi Xu1,2 Yasushi Yagi2 Mingwu Ren1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Osaka University
{lixiangmzlx, xuchisherry}@gmail.com

{makihara, yagi}@am.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

renmingwu@mail.njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing gait recognition approaches typically focus on
learning identity features that are invariant to covariates
(e.g., the carrying status, clothing, walking speed, and viewing angle) and seldom involve learning features from the
covariate aspect, which may lead to failure modes when
variations due to the covariate overwhelm those due to the
identity. We therefore propose a method of gait recognition via disentangled representation learning that considers both identity and covariate features. Specifically, we
first encode an input gait template to get the disentangled
identity and covariate features, and then decode the features to simultaneously reconstruct the input gait template
and the canonical version of the same subject with no covariates in a semi-supervised manner to ensure successful
disentanglement. We finally feed the disentangled identity
features into a contrastive/triplet loss function for a verification/identification task. Moreover, we find that new gait
templates can be synthesized by transferring the covariate
feature from one subject to another. Experimental results
on three publicly available gait data sets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method compared with other
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The gait is an important biometric feature used in human
identity recognition at a distance because it can be recorded
at a long distance without subject cooperation in contrast
with the case for other biometric features (e.g., faces, fingerprints, and irises). Additionally, the gait is an unconscious characteristic and is generally not disguised by people. Gait-based recognition thus has many potential applications, such as surveillance systems, forensics, and criminal investigation [6, 20, 31].
Previous gait recognition studies can be largely categorized according to the extracted features into model-

S1

S2

Disentanglement

𝒇𝟏id

𝒇𝟏id + 𝒇𝟐cov

𝒇𝟐id

𝒇𝟐id + 𝒇𝟏cov

Figure 1. Given two gait templates with different carrying statuses
for two subjects (S1 and S2), our method implicitly disentangles their identity and covariate features (f id and f cov ) and reconstructs gait templates without any carrying statuses using only
the identity feature. Moreover, we can swap the subjects’ covariate
features and generate new gait templates with the carrying statuses
of each other.

based approaches [47, 53, 27, 5, 10, 54, 2] and appearancebased approaches [15, 32, 44, 24, 48, 4, 37, 29, 59]. The
appearance-based approaches are more widely used in the
gait recognition community owing to their effectiveness and
efficiency. However, they suffer from large intra-subject
differences owing to there being many covariates, such as
the carrying status, clothing, posture change, and viewing
angle.
Appearance-based gait recognition requires the extraction of identity features that are invariant to the covariates.
Such invariant approaches fall into two families: discriminative approaches [15, 52, 30, 12, 13, 33, 41, 50, 51, 43,
58, 7, 26] and generative approaches [23, 32, 34, 38, 35,
1, 11, 55, 56, 16]. The former aims at directly extracting
an invariant identity feature subspace from the original gait
representations, while the latter aims at generating gait representations from different covariate conditions into those
under a same covariate condition. However, they all focus
on learning identity feature subspaces or image spaces that
are invariant to covariates and seldom involve learning features from the covariate aspect, which may lead to failure
modes when variations due to a covariate overwhelm those
due to the identity.
To remedy the above problem, we propose a method of
113309

