Tangent Images for Mitigating Spherical Distortion
Marc Eder, Mykhailo Shvets, John Lim, and Jan-Michael Frahm
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC
{meder, mshvets, jlim13, jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Level 1 Icosahedron

Abstract

Tangent Images

In this work, we propose “tangent images,” a spherical
image representation that facilitates transferable and scalable 360◦ computer vision. Inspired by techniques in cartography and computer graphics, we render a spherical image to a set of distortion-mitigated, locally-planar image
grids tangent to a subdivided icosahedron. By varying the
resolution of these grids independently of the subdivision
level, we can effectively represent high resolution spherical images while still benefiting from the low-distortion
icosahedral spherical approximation. We show that training standard convolutional neural networks on tangent images compares favorably to the many specialized spherical
convolutional kernels that have been developed, while also
scaling efficiently to handle significantly higher spherical
resolutions. Furthermore, because our approach does not
require specialized kernels, we show that we can transfer
networks trained on perspective images to spherical data
without fine-tuning and with limited performance drop-off.
Finally, we demonstrate that tangent images can be used to
improve the quality of sparse feature detection on spherical
images, illustrating its usefulness for traditional computer
vision tasks like structure-from-motion and SLAM.

Figure 1: Using tangent images to represent a 4k Earth image

1. Introduction

[13]. TL: A base level 1 icosahedron. TR: Selection of tangent
images rendered from the Earth image. B: Interior view of the
tangent image spherical approximation.

A number of methods have been proposed to address
convolutions on spherical images. These techniques vary
in design, encompassing learnable transformations [25, 26],
generalizations and modifications of the convolution operation [8, 9, 11, 27], and specialized kernels for spherical representations [7, 16, 29]. In general, these spherical convolutions fall into two classes: those that operate on equirectangular projections and those that operate on a subdivided
icosahedral representation of the sphere. The latter has been
shown to significantly mitigate spherical distortion, which
leads to significant improvements for dense prediction tasks
[10, 11, 18]. It also has the useful property that icosahedron’s faces and vertices scale roughly by a factor of 4 at

each subdivision, permitting a simple analogy to 2× upsampling and downsampling operations in standard convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Because of the performance improvements provided by the subdivided icosahedron representation, we focus expressly on it in this paper.
Despite a growing body of work on these icosahedral
convolutions, there are two significant impediments to further development: (1) the transferability of standard CNNs
to spherical data on the icosahedron, and (2) the difficulty
in scaling the proposed spherical convolution operations to
high resolution spherical images. Prior work has implied
[7, 11] or demonstrated [9, 27, 29] the transferability of networks trained on perspective images to different spherical

Interior View

12426

