NAS-FCOS: Fast Neural Architecture Search for Object Detection∗
Ning Wang†‡ , Yang Gao†‡ , Hao Chen⋄ , Peng Wang†‡ , Zhi Tian⋄ , Chunhua Shen⋄ , Yanning Zhang†‡
†

‡

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
National Engineering Lab for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology, China
⋄
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks relies on significant architecture engineering. Recently neural architecture
search (NAS) has emerged as a promise to greatly reduce
manual effort in network design by automatically searching for optimal architectures, although typically such algorithms need an excessive amount of computational resources, e.g., a few thousand GPU-days. To date, on challenging vision tasks such as object detection, NAS, especially fast versions of NAS, is less studied. Here we propose
to search for the decoder structure of object detectors with
search efficiency being taken into consideration. To be more
specific, we aim to efficiently search for the feature pyramid network (FPN) as well as the prediction head of a simple anchor-free object detector, namely FCOS [24], using
a tailored reinforcement learning paradigm. With carefully
designed search space, search algorithms and strategies for
evaluating network quality, we are able to efficiently search
a top-performing detection architecture within 4 days using 8 V100 GPUs. The discovered architecture surpasses
state-of-the-art object detection models (such as Faster RCNN, RetinaNet and FCOS) by 1.5 to 3.5 points in AP on
the COCO dataset,with comparable computation complexity and memory footprint, demonstrating the efficacy of the
proposed NAS for object detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision, and has been researched extensively. In the
past few years, state-of-the-art methods for this task are
based on deep convolutional neural networks (such as Faster
R-CNN [20], RetinaNet [11]), due to their impressive performance. Typically, the designs of object detection networks are much more complex than those for image classification, because the former need to localize and classify
multiple objects in an image simultaneously while the latter
∗ NW, YG, HC contributed to this work equally.

only need to output image-level labels. Due to its complex
structure and numerous hyper-parameters, designing effective object detection networks is more challenging and usually needs much manual effort.
On the other hand, Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
approaches [4, 17, 32] have been showing impressive results
on automatically discovering top-performing neural network architectures in large-scale search spaces. Compared
to manual designs, NAS methods are data-driven instead of
experience-driven, and hence need much less human intervention. As defined in [3], the workflow of NAS can be
divided into the following three processes: 1) sampling architecture from a search space following some search strategies; 2) evaluating the performance of the sampled architecture; and 3) updating the parameters based on the performance.
One of the main problems prohibiting NAS from being
used in more realistic applications is its search efficiency.
The evaluation process is the most time consuming part because it involves a full training procedure of a neural network. To reduce the evaluation time, in practice a proxy
task is often used as a lower cost substitution. In the proxy
task, the input, network parameters and training iterations
are often scaled down to speedup the evaluation. However,
there is often a performance gap for samples between the
proxy tasks and target tasks, which makes the evaluation
process biased. How to design proxy tasks that are both
accurate and efficient for specific problems is a challenging problem. Another solution to improve search efficiency
is constructing a supernet that covers the complete search
space and training candidate architectures with shared parameters [15, 18]. However, this solution leads to significantly increased memory consumption and restricts itself to
small-to-moderate sized search spaces.
To our knowledge, studies on efficient and accurate NAS
approaches to object detection networks are rarely touched,
despite its significant importance. To this end, we present
a fast and memory saving NAS method for object detection
networks, which is capable of discovering top-performing
architectures within significantly reduced search time. Our

11943

