Wavelet Integrated CNNs for Noise-Robust Image Classification
Qiufu Li1,2 Linlin Shen ∗ 1,2 Sheng Guo3 Zhihui Lai1,2
1
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence & Robotics for Society 3 Malong Technologies
{liqiufu,llshen}@szu.edu.cn,sheng@malong.com,lai zhi hui@163.com

A

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are generally
prone to noise interruptions, i.e., small image noise can
cause drastic changes in the output. To suppress the noise
effect to the final predication, we enhance CNNs by replacing max-pooling, strided-convolution, and average-pooling
with Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). We present general DWT and Inverse DWT (IDWT) layers applicable to
various wavelets like Haar, Daubechies, and Cohen, etc.,
and design wavelet integrated CNNs (WaveCNets) using
these layers for image classification. In WaveCNets, feature maps are decomposed into the low-frequency and highfrequency components during the down-sampling. The lowfrequency component stores main information including the
basic object structures, which is transmitted into the subsequent layers to extract robust high-level features. The
high-frequency components, containing most of the data
noise, are dropped during inference to improve the noiserobustness of the WaveCNets. Our experimental results on
ImageNet and ImageNet-C (the noisy version of ImageNet)
show that WaveCNets, the wavelet integrated versions of
VGG, ResNets, and DenseNet, achieve higher accuracy and
better noise-robustness than their vanilla versions.

1. Introduction
Drastic changes due to small variations of the input can
emerge in the output of a well-trained convolutional neural
network (CNN) for image classification [13, 36, 12]. Particularly, the CNN is associated with weak noise-robustness
[15]. Random noise of data is mostly high-frequency components. In the field of signal processing, transforming the
data into different frequency intervals, and denoising the
components in the high-frequency intervals, is an effective
way to denoise it [9, 10]. The transformation, such as Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) [26], consists of filtering
and down-sampling. However, the commonly used CNN
∗ Corresponding Author: Linlin Shen.

Original image X

B

AW

Xll

BW

Xhl

DWT
IDWT

AP

Xlh

Max-pooling

Xhh

BP

Max-pooling image

A

AW

AP

Figure 1. Comparison of max-pooling and wavelet transforms.
Max-pooling is a commonly used down-sampling operation in the
deep networks, which could easily breaks the basic object structures.
Discrete
Wavelet
Transform
(DWT)Xdecomposes
an
image
A
B
Original image
X
AW
BW
X
X into its low-frequency component Xll and high-frequency components Xlh , Xhl , Xhh . While Xlh , Xhl , Xhh represent image details including most of the noise, Xll is a low resolution version of
DWT
the data, where the basic object structures are represented. In the
figures, the window boundary inIDWT
area A (AP) and the poles in area
B (BP) are broken by max-pooling, while the principal features of
these objects are kept in the DWT output (AW and BW).
AP

Max-pooling

X

X

BP

architectures (VGG, ResNets, and DenseNet, etc.) do not
perform filtering before the feature map down-sampling.
Without the filtering, down-sampling may result in the
Max-pooling image
AW
AP
A
aliasing
among
low-frequency and
high-frequency
components [28, 42]. In particular, noise in the high-frequency
components could be down-sampled into the following feature maps, and degrade the Maxnoise-robustness of the CNNs.
Unpooling
Meanwhile, the basic object structures presented in the lowfrequency component could be broken, as Fig. 1 shows.
In this paper, to suppress the noise effect to the final predication and
increase the classification accuracy, we integrate
Max-pooling indices
wavelet into commonly used CNN architectures. We firstly
transform DWT and Inverse DWT (IDWT) as general network layers in PyTorch [29]. Then, we design wavelet integrated convolutional network (WaveCNet), by replacing the
commonly used down-sampling with DWT. During down-

7245

