Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Net: Selective Forgetting in Deep Networks
Aditya Golatkar
UCLA

Alessandro Achille
UCLA

Stefano Soatto
UCLA

aditya29@cs.ucla.edu

achille@cs.ucla.edu

soatto@ucla.edu

Abstract
We explore the problem of selectively forgetting a particular subset of the data used for training a deep neural
network. While the effects of the data to be forgotten can
be hidden from the output of the network, insights may still
be gleaned by probing deep into its weights. We propose
a method for “scrubbing” the weights clean of information
about a particular set of training data. The method does not
require retraining from scratch, nor access to the data originally used for training. Instead, the weights are modified so
that any probing function of the weights is indistinguishable
from the same function applied to the weights of a network
trained without the data to be forgotten. This condition is
a generalized and weaker form of Differential Privacy. Exploiting ideas related to the stability of stochastic gradient
descent, we introduce an upper-bound on the amount of information remaining in the weights, which can be estimated
efficiently even for deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Say you are the number ‘6’ in the MNIST handwritten
digit database. You are proud of having nurtured the development of convolutional neural networks and their many
beneficial uses. But you are beginning to feel uncomfortable with the attention surrounding the new “AI Revolution,” and long to not be recognized everywhere you appear. You wish a service existed, like that offered by the
firm Lacuna INC in the screenplay The Eternal Sunshine of
the Spotless Mind, whereby you could submit your images
to have your identity scrubbed clean from handwritten digit
recognition systems. Before you, the number ‘9’ already
demanded that digit recognition systems returned, instead
of a ten-dimensional “pre-softmax” vector (meant to approximate the log-likelihood of an image containing a number from 0 to 9) a nine-dimensional vector that excluded the
number ‘9’. So now, every image showing ‘9’ yields an outcome at random between 0 and 8. Is this enough? It could
be that the system still contains information about the number ’9,’ and just suppresses it in the output. How do you
know that the system has truly forgotten about you, even

inside the black box? Is it possible to scrub the system so
clean that it behaves as if it had never seen an image of you?
Is it possible to do so without sabotaging information about
other digits, who wish to continue enjoying their celebrity
status? In the next section we formalize these questions to
address the problem of selective forgetting in deep neural
networks (DNNs). Before doing so, we present a summary
of our contributions in the context of related work.

1.1. Related Work
Tampering with a learned model to achieve, or avoid,
forgetting pertains to the general field of life-long learning.
Specifically for the case of deep learning and representation
learning, this topic has algorithmic, architectural and modeling ramifications, which we address in order.
Differential privacy [8] focuses on guaranteeing that
the parameters of a trained model do not leak information
about any particular individual. While this may be relevant
in some applications, the condition is often too difficult to
enforce in deep learning (although see [1]), and not always
necessary. It requires the possible distribution of weights,
given the dataset, P (w|D) to remain almost unchanged after replacing a sample. Our definition of selective forgetting can be seen as a generalization of differential privacy.
In particular, we do not require that information about any
sample in the dataset is minimized, but rather about a particular subset Df selected by the user. Moreover, we can apply
a “scrubbing” function S(w) that can perturb the weights
in order to remove information, so that P (S(w)|D), rather
than P (w|D), needs to remain unchanged. This less restrictive setting allows us to train standard deep neural networks
using stochastic gradient descent (SGD), while still being
able to ensure forgetting.
Deep Neural Networks can memorize details about particular instances, rather than only shared characteristics
[29, 4]. This makes forgetting critical, as attackers can try to
extract information from the weights of the model. Membership attacks [28, 15, 24, 14, 26] attempt to determine
whether a particular cohort of data was used for training,
without any constructive indication on how to actively forget it. They relate to the ability of recovering data from

9304

