PaStaNet: Toward Human Activity Knowledge Engine
Yong-Lu Li, Liang Xu, Xinpeng Liu, Xijie Huang, Yue Xu,
Shiyi Wang, Hao-Shu Fang, Ze Ma, Mingyang Chen, Cewu Lu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yonglu li, liangxu, otaku huang, silicxuyue, shiywang}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{xinpengliu0907, fhaoshu}@gmail.com, {maze1234556, cmy 123, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing image-based activity understanding methods
mainly adopt direct mapping, i.e. from image to activity concepts, which may encounter performance bottleneck
since the huge gap. In light of this, we propose a new path:
infer human part states first and then reason out the activities based on part-level semantics. Human Body Part
States (PaSta) are fine-grained action semantic tokens, e.g.
hhand, hold, somethingi, which can compose the activities and help us step toward human activity knowledge engine. To fully utilize the power of PaSta, we build a largescale knowledge base PaStaNet, which contains 7M+ PaSta
annotations. And two corresponding models are proposed:
first, we design a model named Activity2Vec to extract PaSta
features, which aim to be general representations for various activities. Second, we use a PaSta-based Reasoning method to infer activities. Promoted by PaStaNet, our
method achieves significant improvements, e.g. 6.4 and 13.9
mAP on full and one-shot sets of HICO in supervised learning, and 3.2 and 4.2 mAP on V-COCO and images-based
AVA in transfer learning. Code and data are available at
http://hake-mvig.cn/.

1. Introduction
Understanding activity from images is crucial for building an intelligent system. Facilitated by deep learning,
great advancements have been made in this field. Recent
works [7, 64, 61, 40] mainly address this high-level cognition task in one-stage, i.e. from pixels to activity concept directly based on instance-level semantics (Fig. 1(a)).
This strategy faces performance bottleneck on large-scale
benchmarks [3, 24]. Understanding activities is difficult for
reasons, e.g. long-tail data distribution, complex visual patterns, etc. Moreover, action understanding expects a knowledge engine that can generally support activity related tasks.
∗ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China.

Pose
look_at-sth
swing

swing

no_action

football

person

football

person

kick-sth
football

person-kick-football

(a) Instance Semantics

stand

PaStaNet

Part State
Annotations

(b)

person-kick-football

(b) Hierarchical: Instance & Part Semantics

Figure 1. Instance-level and hierarchical methods. Besides the
instance-level path, we perform body part states recognition in
part-level with the PaSta annotations. With the help of PaSta, we
can significantly boost the performance of activity understanding.

Thus, for data from another domain and unseen activities,
much smaller effort is required for knowledge transfer and
adaptation. Additionally, for most cases, we find that only a
few key human parts are relevant to the existing actions, the
other parts usually carry very few useful clues.
Consider the example in Fig. 1, we argue that perception
in human part-level semantics is a promising path but previously ignored. Our core idea is that human instance actions
are composed of fine-grained atomic body part states. This
lies in strong relationships with reductionism [10]. Moreover, the part-level path can help us to pick up discriminative parts and disregard irrelevant ones. Therefore, encoding knowledge from human parts is a crucial step toward human activity knowledge engine. The generic object
part states [39] reveal that the semantic state of an object
part is limited. For example, after exhaustively checking
on 7M manually labeled body part state samples, we find
that there are only about 12 states for “head” in daily life
activities, such as “listen to”, “eat”, “talk to”, “inspect”,
etc. Therefore, in this paper, we exhaustively collect and
annotate the possible semantic meanings of human parts in
activities to build a large-scale human part knowledge base
PaStaNet (PaSta is the abbreviation of Body Part State).
Now PaStaNet includes 118 K+ images, 285 K+ persons,

382

