SQuINTing at VQA Models:
Introspecting VQA Models with Sub-Questions
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju1∗ Purva Tendulkar1
Devi Parikh1
Eric Horvitz2
Marco Tulio Ribeiro2
Besmira Nushi2
Ece Kamar2
1
2
Georgia Institute of Technology, Microsoft Research
{ramprs, purva, parikh}@gatech.edu
{horvitz, marcotcr, benushi, eckamar}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Existing VQA datasets contain questions with varying
levels of complexity. While the majority of questions in
these datasets require perception for recognizing existence,
properties, and spatial relationships of entities, a significant portion of questions pose challenges that correspond to
reasoning tasks – tasks that can only be answered through
a synthesis of perception and knowledge about the world,
logic and / or reasoning. Analyzing performance across this
distinction allows us to notice when existing VQA models
have consistency issues – they answer the reasoning questions correctly but fail on associated low-level perception
questions. For example, in Figure 1, models answer the
complex reasoning question “Is the banana ripe enough to
eat?” correctly, but fail on the associated perception question “Are the bananas mostly green or yellow?” indicating that the model likely answered the reasoning question
correctly but for the wrong reason. We quantify the extent to which this phenomenon occurs by creating a new
Reasoning split of the VQA dataset and collecting VQAintrospect, a new dataset1 which currently consists of 200K
new perception questions which serve as sub questions corresponding to the set of perceptual tasks needed to effectively answer the complex reasoning questions in the Reasoning split. Our evaluation shows that state-of-the-art
VQA models have comparable performance in answering
perception and reasoning questions, but suffer from consistency problems. To address this shortcoming, we propose
an approach called Sub-Question Importance-aware Network Tuning (SQuINT), which encourages the model to attend to the same parts of the image when answering the reasoning question and the perception sub question.We show
that SQuINT improves model consistency by ∼7%, also
marginally improving performance on the Reasoning questions in VQA, while also displaying better attention maps.
∗ Research partly performed during an internship at Microsoft Research
1 Our dataset can be found at aka.ms/vqa-introspect.

Figure 1: A potential reasoning failure: Current models answer the Reasoning question “Is the banana ripe enough to eat?” correctly with the
answer “Yes”. We might assume that doing so stems from perceiving relevant concepts correctly – perceiving yellow bananas in this example. But
when asked “Are the bananas mostly green or yellow?”, the model answers
the question incorrectly with “Green” – indicating that the model possibly
answered the original Reasoning question for the wrong reasons even if
the answer was right. We quantify the extent to which this phenomenon
occurs in VQA and introduce a new dataset aimed at stimulating research
on well grounded reasoning.

1. Introduction
Human cognition is thought to be compositional in nature: the visual system recognizes multiple aspects of a
scene which are combined into shapes [7] and understandings. Likewise, complex linguistic expressions are built
from simpler ones [5]. Similarly, tasks like Visual Question
Answering (VQA) require models to perform inference at
multiple levels of abstraction. For example, to answer the
question “Is the banana ripe enough to eat?” (Figure 1), a
VQA model has to be able to detect the bananas and extract
associated properties such as size and color (perception),
understand what the question is asking, and reason about
how these properties relate to known properties of edible
bananas (ripeness) and how they manifest (yellow versus
green in color). While “abstraction” is complex and spans
distinctions at multiple levels of detail, we focus on separating questions into Perception and Reasoning questions.
Perception questions only require visual perception to recognize existence, physical properties or spatial relationships
among entities, such as “What color is the banana?” or
110003

