Unity Style Transfer for Person Re-Identification
Chong Liu 1,2
1

Xiaojun Chang 3

Yi-Dong Shen 1∗

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
liuchong@ios.ac.cn, cxj273@gmail.com, ydshen@ios.ac.cn

Abstract
Style variation has been a major challenge for person
re-identification, which aims to match the same pedestrians across different cameras. Existing works attempted to
address this problem with camera-invariant descriptor subspace learning. However, there will be more image artifacts
when the difference between the images taken by different
cameras is larger. To solve this problem, we propose a UnityStyle adaption method, which can smooth the style disparities within the same camera and across different cameras.
Specifically, we firstly create UnityGAN to learn the style
changes between cameras, producing shape-stable styleunity images for each camera, which is called UnityStyle
images. Meanwhile, we use UnityStyle images to eliminate
style differences between different images, which makes a
better match between query and gallery. Then, we apply
the proposed method to Re-ID models, expecting to obtain
more style-robust depth features for querying. We conduct
extensive experiments on widely used benchmark datasets
to evaluate the performance of the proposed framework,
the results of which confirm the superiority of the proposed
model.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) [37] is a multi-camera
query task. Given the image of one or a group of target
people, the same person is identified from the database of
multi-camera. There are multiple cameras in the re-id task,
and the images style taken by each camera are often different for the same person due to various factors (environment, light, etc.) [22, 24]. Besides, even the same camera
will take different styles of images due to the different time
(morning, noon, afternoon, etc.). Therefore, the style of the
image changes, which has a considerable impact on the final
task results.
∗ Corresponding author

Cam 1-6

Query
Gallery
UnityGAN

UnityStyle

Query
Gallery

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Different cameras often have significant style differences, and UnityGAN is used to convert image styles to each other
to achieve a unified style. (b) By using UnityStyle, the query collection is similar to the gallery collection image style, making it
easier to find the right match.

There are some methods available to address different
camera style problems. One solution is to obtain stable feature representations between different cameras. There are
KISSME[16], DNS [34] and so on in the traditional method.
IDE [37], PCB [32] solve problems through deep representation learning. Another way is to use the GANs [44] to
learn the style disparities between different cameras and to
enhance the data through the style transfer method, resulting in CamStyle [43].
Compared with the previous methods, this paper proposes an alternative solution to smooth the style disparities
across different cameras and within the same camera. We
start from CamStyle and find that although this method can

6887

