SmallBigNet: Integrating Core and Contextual Views for Video Classification
Xianhang Li12∗, Yali Wang1∗, Zhipeng Zhou1∗, and Yu Qiao12†
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint
Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society

Abstract
Temporal convolution has been widely used for video
classification. However, it is performed on spatio-temporal
contexts in a limited view, which often weakens its capacity of learning video representation. To alleviate this problem, we propose a concise and novel SmallBig network,
with the cooperation of small and big views. For the current time step, the small view branch is used to learn the
core semantics, while the big view branch is used to capture the contextual semantics. Unlike traditional temporal convolution, the big view branch can provide the small
view branch with the most activated video features from
a broader 3D receptive field. Via aggregating such bigview contexts, the small view branch can learn more robust and discriminative spatio-temporal representations for
video classification. Furthermore, we propose to share
convolution in the small and big view branch, which improves model compactness as well as alleviates overfitting. As a result, our SmallBigNet achieves a comparable
model size like 2D CNNs, while boosting accuracy like 3D
CNNs. We conduct extensive experiments on the large-scale
video benchmarks, e.g., Kinetics400, Something-Something
V1 and V2. Our SmallBig network outperforms a number
of recent state-of-the-art approaches, in terms of accuracy
and/or efficiency. The codes and models will be available
on https://github.com/xhl-video/SmallBigNet.

1. Introduction
3D convolution has been widely used for deep video
classification [1, 23]. In particular, spatio-temporal factorization is preferable to reduce computation cost as well as
overfitting [23, 32]. However, temporal convolution in this
form is usually operated on a limited view, which often con∗ Equally-contributed first authors (xianhang710@gmail.com,
(yl.wang, zp.zhou)@siat.ac.cn)
† Corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn)

tains unrelated video contexts. As shown in Fig.1(a), temporal convolution (e.g., 3 × 1 × 1) is performed over the
yellow tube of a High Jump video. Apparently, for the blue
box at t, the yellow boxes at t − 1 and t + 1 provides almost useless even harmful contexts. For example, the yellow box at t − 1 contains the arm of the athlete. However,
the arm movement is not quite critical to recognize High
Jump. Hence, the context at t − 1 tends to be redundant.
Furthermore, the yellow box at t + 1 contains the upper
body of another sitting person, without any clues about the
moving athlete. Hence, the context at t + 1 tends to be
noisy. By aggregating these contexts with the blue box at
t, temporal convolution often leads to a weak and unstable
spatio-temporal representation that is not discriminative to
recognize High Jump.
To tackle the problem above, we creatively introduce a
novel and concise SmallBig unit in Fig.1(b), where the big
view branch can flexibly provide the small view branch with
discriminative contexts from a larger spatio-temporal receptive field. Via aggregating such contextual clues, the small
view branch tends to learn key spatio-temporal representations for video classification. Note that, our SmallBig design is different from the SlowFast design [7], in terms of
both motivation and mechanism. In particular, SlowFast is
motivated by mimicking two-stream fusion. Hence, it feeds
input frames of two temporal rates to build up two 3D CNNs
(i.e., slow and fast pathways), and applies lateral connections to integrate them into a unified framework. Alternatively, our SmallBig is motivated by releasing the contextual
receptive fields of 3D CNN itself. Hence, we introduce two
distinct views (i.e., small and big branches), and discover
the most activated context of big view to enhance the core
representations of small view.
More specifically, we propose two distinct operations in
our SmallBig unit. First, we perform 3D max pooling in the
big view branch, which can discover the most activated contexts from a broader 3D tube to enhance the process of the
small view branch. For example, we treat the blue box at t
as center, and find its corresponding 3 × 3 × 3 yellow tube

1092

