V IOLIN: A Large-Scale Dataset for Video-and-Language Inference
Jingzhou Liu1∗

Wenhu Chen2∗ Yu Cheng3 Zhe Gan3 Licheng Yu3
Yiming Yang1 Jingjing Liu3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California, Santa Barbara
3
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{liujingzhou,yiming}@cs.cmu.edu, wenhuchen@ucsb.edu
{yu.cheng,zhe.gan,licheng.yu,jingjl}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce a new task, Video-and-Language Inference,
for joint multimodal understanding of video and text. Given
a video clip with aligned subtitles as premise, paired with
a natural language hypothesis based on the video content,
a model needs to infer whether the hypothesis is entailed
or contradicted by the given video clip. A new large-scale
dataset, named V IOLIN (VIdeO-and-Language INference),
is introduced for this task, which consists of 95,322 videohypothesis pairs from 15,887 video clips, spanning over
582 hours of video. These video clips contain rich content with diverse temporal dynamics, event shifts, and people interactions, collected from two sources: (i) popular TV
shows, and (ii) movie clips from YouTube channels. In order to address our new multimodal inference task, a model
is required to possess sophisticated reasoning skills, from
surface-level grounding (e.g., identifying objects and characters in the video) to in-depth commonsense reasoning
(e.g., inferring causal relations of events in the video). We
present a detailed analysis of the dataset and an extensive
evaluation over many strong baselines, providing valuable
insights on the challenges of this new task.

1. Introduction
Joint vision-and-language understanding sits at the nexus
of computer vision and natural language processing (NLP),
and has attracted rapidly growing attention from both communities. Popular tasks include visual question answering [4, 20], referring expression comprehension [69, 68],
visual dialog [12], visual reasoning [27, 52, 25], visual
commonsense reasoning [72], NLVR2 [52], and visual
entailment [61]. The emergence of these diverse Vision+Language tasks, benchmarked over large-scale human
annotated datasets [39, 34], has driven tremendous progress

in joint multimodal embedding learning [53, 42, 10, 51].
However, most of these datasets and models were centered
on static images, leaving the joint modeling of video and its
aligned textual information (e.g., video-and-language understanding) a relatively under-explored territory.
Video Question Answering (Video QA) is one of
the most popular tasks in current studies for video-andlanguage understanding. Video QA model aims to answer
a natural language question given a video clip. Existing
Video QA datasets include MovieFIB [44], MovieQA [54],
TGIF-QA [26], PororoQA [32], and TVQA [35, 36]. While
these datasets have covered a rich pool of video content
(e.g., cartoons, short GIFs and TV shows), they are limited to QA task only. On the other hand, in NLP field, one
important benchmark for natural language understanding is
natural language inference (NLI) [5, 60], where a model is
presented with a pair of sentences (premise and hypothesis),
and judges the relationship between the pair (e.g., Contradiction, Neutral, and Entailment).
Inspired by NLI, we present a novel task, Video-andLanguage Inference, to foster deeper investigations in
video-and-language understanding. Specifically, given a
video clip with aligned subtitles as premise, and a natural language statement as a hypothesis describing the video
content, a model is expected to infer whether the statement
is entailed or contradicted by the given video clip. This new
task is easy to evaluate, since only binary classification is
measured; but also challenging to solve, as a thorough interpretation of both visual and textual clues is required in
order to achieve in-depth understanding and inference for a
complex video scenario.
We introduce a large-scale dataset for this new task,
VIdeO-and-Language INference (V IOLIN)2 , built upon
natural video content with rich temporal dynamics and social interactions. Video clips are collected from diverse
sources to cover realistic visual scenes, and statements are
2 Project page: https://github.com/jimmy646/violin.

∗ This work was done while the authors were interns at Microsoft.

10900

