SCOUT: Self-aware Discriminant Counterfactual Explanations
Pei Wang
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{pew062,nuno}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of counterfactual visual explanations is
considered. A new family of discriminant explanations is
introduced. These produce heatmaps that attribute high
scores to image regions informative of a classifier prediction but not of a counter class. They connect attributive
explanations, which are based on a single heat map, to
counterfactual explanations, which account for both predicted class and counter class. The latter are shown to
be computable by combination of two discriminant explanations, with reversed class pairs. It is argued that selfawareness, namely the ability to produce classification confidence scores, is important for the computation of discriminant explanations, which seek to identify regions where it is
easy to discriminate between prediction and counter class.
This suggests the computation of discriminant explanations
by the combination of three attribution maps. The resulting
counterfactual explanations are optimization free and thus
much faster than previous methods. To address the difficulty of their evaluation, a proxy task and set of quantitative metrics are also proposed. Experiments under this protocol show that the proposed counterfactual explanations
outperform the state of the art while achieving much higher
speeds, for popular networks. In a human-learning machine
teaching experiment, they are also shown to improve mean
student accuracy from chance level to 95%.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) systems are difficult to deploy in
specialized domains, such as medical diagnosis or biology,
requiring very fine-grained distinctions between visual features unnoticeable to the untrained eye. Two main difficulties arise. The first is the black-box nature of DL. When
high-stakes decisions are involved, e.g. a tumor diagnosis, the system users, e.g. physicians, require a justification for its predictions. The second is the large data labeling requirements of DL. Since supervised training is usually needed for optimal classification, modern networks are

Query (Cardinal)

Why is the prediction Why is the prediction
Why is the
a Cardinal?
a Summer Tanager? prediction confident?

Attributive Explanations

Self-aware

Combining

Why is it a Cardinal not
a Summer Tanager?

Image from counterfactual
class (Summer Tanager)

Discriminant Explanations

Thresholding

Segmenting

Why is it a Cardinal not
a Summer Tanager?

Thresholding
Segmenting
Discriminant Explanations

Counterfactual Explanations

Figure 1: Given a query image (Cardinal) and a counterfactual class (Summer Tanager), discriminant explanations bridge the gap between attributions and counterfactual explanations. This enables a fast optimization-free
computation of the latter.

trained with large datasets, manually annotated on Amazon
MTurk. However, because MTurk annotators lack domain
expertise, the approach does not scale to specialized domains.
Both problems can be addressed by explainable AI
(XAI) techniques, which complement network predictions
with human-understandable explanations. These can both
circumvent the black-box nature of DL and enable the design of machine teaching systems that provide feedback to
annotators when they make mistakes [43]. In computer vision, the dominant XAI paradigm is attribution, which consists of computing a heatmap of how strongly each image
pixel [31, 3, 29, 1] or region [41, 28] contributes to a network prediction. For example, when asked “why is this
a truck?” an attributive system would answer or visualize something like “because it has wheels, a hood, seats, a
steering wheel, a flatbed, head and tail lights, and rearview
mirrors.”
While useful to a naive user, this explanation is less useful to an expert in the domain. The latter is likely to be interested in more precise feedback, asking instead the question

8981

