Averaging Essential and Fundamental Matrices in Collinear Camera Settings
Amnon Geifman*

Yoni Kasten*
Meirav Galun
Weizmann Institute of Science

Ronen Basri

{amnon.geifman,yoni.kasten,meirav.galun,ronen.basri}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Global methods to Structure from Motion have gained
popularity in recent years. A significant drawback of global
methods is their sensitivity to collinear camera settings. In
this paper, we introduce an analysis and algorithms for
averaging bifocal tensors (essential or fundamental matrices) when either subsets or all of the camera centers are
collinear. We provide a complete spectral characterization
of bifocal tensors in collinear scenarios and further propose two averaging algorithms. The first algorithm uses
rank constrained minimization to recover camera matrices
in fully collinear settings. The second algorithm enriches
the set of possibly mixed collinear and non-collinear cameras with additional, “virtual cameras,” which are placed
in general position, enabling the application of existing averaging methods to the enriched set of bifocal tensors. Our
algorithms are shown to achieve state of the art results on
various benchmarks that include autonomous car datasets
and unordered image collections in both calibrated and unclibrated settings.

1. Introduction
Global approaches to Structure from Motion (SfM) use
bifocal tensors (essential or fundamental matrices) between
pairs of images to recover camera parameters in multiview
settings. These methods have gained popularity in recent
years due to their high accuracy and improved efficiency. In
contrast to incremental methods, which recover camera parameters for one image at a time and thus involve repeated
application of bundle adjustment (BA) for each handled image, global algorithms apply BA only once, considerably
reducing execution time. Existing global algorithms largely
proceed in two steps, applying rotation averaging followed
by translation averaging. Recent algorithms further improve
accuracy by directly averaging essential and fundamental
matrices in one step [13, 14].
*Equal contributors

A significant drawback of global methods is their sensitivity to collinear camera settings. When all camera centers
in a scene lie along a line, bifocal tensors do not determine
camera locations along this line, and point matches across
three or more images must be utilized. Moreover, with only
bifocal tensors, subsets of collinear cameras can lead to reconstructions of scene parts that are attached nonrigidly. Finally, the averaging algorithms of [13, 14] critically base
their recovery on triplet sub-collections of images whose
cameras must lie in general position. This severely limits the applicability of these algorithms, requiring in many
cases to remove many images from the input datasets. Handling collinear camera settings is critical to many SLAM
applications, including autonomous driving [8].
This paper introduces an analysis and novel solutions
to 3D reconstruction problems involving cameras with
collinear centers in the context of bifocal tensor averaging. We note that to date this problem has been addressed
only in the context of translation averaging [5, 11, 34]. We
introduce a complete algebraic characterization of bifocal
tensors in collinear scenarios, providing both necessary and
sufficient conditions that bifocal tensors can be realized by
cameras with collinear centers. Our analysis complements
the conditions derived for cameras in general position in
[13, 14] and the partial conditions for collinear settings derived in [25]. Specifically, adopting the definitions of nview bifocal matrices introduced in those papers, we provide a full characterization in terms of spectral decomposition and rank patterns of these matrices.
We build upon this characterization to design state of the
art algorithms for global SfM that are applicable in both
calibrated and uncalibrated settings. We first introduce a
method that, given possibly erroneous bifocal tensors, enforces our spectral constraints. This algorithm is suitable
for image collections captured in fully collinear settings.
We subsequently present a second algorithm for bifocal
tensor averaging that can incorporate both collinear cameras
and cameras in general position. This algorithm is based
on the following novel observation. Given a point match
across three views, it is possible to define a virtual camera
centered at the unknown 3D location of this point and subse16021

