A Multi-task Mean Teacher for Semi-supervised Shadow Detection
Zhihao Chen1,∗ , Lei Zhu2,1∗, Liang Wan1†, Song Wang1,3 , Wei Feng1 , and Pheng-Ann Heng2,4
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina
4
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Existing shadow detection methods suffer from an intrinsic limitation in relying on limited labeled datasets, and
they may produce poor results in some complicated situations. To boost the shadow detection performance, this
paper presents a multi-task mean teacher model for semisupervised shadow detection by leveraging unlabeled data
and exploring the learning of multiple information of shadows simultaneously. To be specific, we first build a multitask baseline model to simultaneously detect shadow regions, shadow edges, and shadow count by leveraging their
complementary information and assign this baseline model
to the student and teacher network. After that, we encourage the predictions of the three tasks from the student and
teacher networks to be consistent for computing a consistency loss on unlabeled data, which is then added to
the supervised loss on the labeled data from the predictions of the multi-task baseline model. Experimental results
on three widely-used benchmark datasets show that our
method consistently outperforms all the compared state-ofthe- art methods, which verifies that the proposed network
can effectively leverage additional unlabeled data to boost
the shadow detection performance.

1. Introduction
As a common phenomenon in our daily life, shadows
in natural images have hints for extracting the scene geometry [29, 17], light direction [22], camera location and its
parameters [16], and benefit different high-level image understanding tasks, e.g., image segmentation [4], object detection [2], and object tracking [27]. For these applications,
we need to detect shadows from images with high accuracy.
Existing methods detect shadows by developing physical
models of color and illumination [6, 5], by using data-driven
∗ Zhihao Chen and Lei Zhu are the joint first authors of this work.
† Corresponding author

input
images

ground
truths

our
method

DSD [41] BDRAR [43]
CVPR’2019 ECCV’2018

Figure 1: Shadow detection on two inputs with a soft
shadow (the first row) and multiple shadow regions (the second row). Results in 3rd to 5-th columns are produced by
our method, DSD [41], and BDRAR [43]. Apparently, our
method can more accurately identify the shadow regions,
while some dark regions, as well as shadow boundaries are
mistakenly recognized by DSD and BDRAR.
approaches based on hand-crafted features [13, 23, 42] or by
learning discriminative features from a convolutional neural
network (CNN) [19, 33, 28, 12, 24, 43, 10, 41]. While the
state-of-the-art methods have already achieved high accuracy on benchmark datasets [33, 42, 35, 10], they almost require sufficient amounts of annotated data for training, and
such training data are usually captured in limited scenes.
Creating large labeled datasets for diverse scenes, however,
is expensive and time-consuming. Le et al. [24] proposed
to augment training images by weakening the shadow area
of the original training image, but we notice that these augmented images tend to be fake, and their non-shadow backgrounds are similar to those on the original training image,
hindering the generalization capability. Compared with labeled datasets, we could easily collect abundant unlabeled
shadowed images in real applications. Hence, it is highly
desirable to leverage additional unlabeled data to improve
the shadow detection performance when training with limited labeled data.
On the other hand, when testing the existing methods
on various natural images, we found that they may ne15611

