RoboTHOR: An Open Simulation-to-Real Embodied AI Platform
Matt Deitke2∗ , Winson Han1∗ , Alvaro Herrasti1∗ , Aniruddha Kembhavi1,2∗ , Eric Kolve1∗ ,
Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2∗ , Jordi Salvador1∗ , Dustin Schwenk1∗ , Eli VanderBilt1∗ , Matthew Wallingford2∗ ,
Luca Weihs1∗ , Mark Yatskar1∗ , Ali Farhadi2
1
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI 2 University of Washington
ai2thor.allenai.org/robothor

Simulation

Real

Same Object
Different Appearance

Action
Same Action
Different Result

Figure 1: We present ROBOTHOR, a platform to develop and test embodied AI agents with corresponding environments
in simulation and the physical world. The complexity of environments in ROBOTHOR along with disparities in appearance
and control dynamics between simulation and reality pose new challenges and open many avenues for further research.

Abstract
Visual recognition ecosystems (e.g. ImageNet, Pascal,
COCO) have undeniably played a prevailing role in the evolution of modern computer vision. We argue that interactive and embodied visual AI has reached a stage of development similar to visual recognition prior to the advent of
these ecosystems. Recently, various synthetic environments
have been introduced to facilitate research in embodied AI.
Notwithstanding this progress, the crucial question of how
well models trained in simulation generalize to reality has
remained largely unanswered. The creation of a comparable ecosystem for simulation-to-real embodied AI presents
many challenges: (1) the inherently interactive nature of
the problem, (2) the need for tight alignments between real
and simulated worlds, (3) the difficulty of replicating physical conditions for repeatable experiments, (4) and the associated cost. In this paper, we introduce ROBOTHOR to
democratize research in interactive and embodied visual AI.
ROBOTHOR offers a framework of simulated environments
∗ Alphabetically listed equal contribution

paired with physical counterparts to systematically explore
and overcome the challenges of simulation-to-real transfer,
and a platform where researchers across the globe can remotely test their embodied models in the physical world.
As a first benchmark, our experiments show there exists a
significant gap between the performance of models trained
in simulation when they are tested in both simulations and
their carefully constructed physical analogs. We hope that
ROBOTHOR will spur the next stage of evolution in embodied computer vision.

1. Introduction
For decades, the AI community has sought to create perceptive, communicative and collaborative agents that can
augment human capabilities in real world tasks. While
the advent of deep learning has led to remarkable breakthroughs in computer vision [33, 24, 48] and natural language processing [45, 16], creating active and intelligent
embodied agents continues to be immensely challenging.
The widespread availability of large and open, computer

3164

