Self-supervised Equivariant Attention Mechanism
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yude Wang1,2 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Meina Kan1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
1

yude.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {zhangjie, kanmeina, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation is
a challenging problem that has been deeply studied in recent years. Most of advanced solutions exploit class activation map (CAM). However, CAMs can hardly serve as the
object mask due to the gap between full and weak supervisions. In this paper, we propose a self-supervised equivariant attention mechanism (SEAM) to discover additional supervision and narrow the gap. Our method is based on the
observation that equivariance is an implicit constraint in
fully supervised semantic segmentation, whose pixel-level
labels take the same spatial transformation as the input images during data augmentation. However, this constraint
is lost on the CAMs trained by image-level supervision.
Therefore, we propose consistency regularization on predicted CAMs from various transformed images to provide
self-supervision for network learning. Moreover, we propose a pixel correlation module (PCM), which exploits context appearance information and refines the prediction of
current pixel by its similar neighbors, leading to further improvement on CAMs consistency. Extensive experiments on
PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset demonstrate our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods using the same level of
supervision. The code is released online1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision task, which aims to predict pixel-wise classification
results on images. Thanks to the booming of deep learning researches in recent years, the performance of semantic
segmentation model has achieved great progress [6, 23, 38],
promoting many practical applications, e.g., autopilot and
1 https://github.com/YudeWang/SEAM

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparisons of CAMs generated by input images with
different scales. (a) Conventional CAMs. (b) CAMs predicted by
our SEAM, which are more consistent over rescaling.

medical image analysis. However, compared to other tasks
such as classification and detection, semantic segmentation
needs to collect pixel-level class labels which are timeconsuming and expensive. Recently many efforts are devoted to weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
which utilizes weak supervisions, e.g., image-level classification labels, scribbles, and bounding boxes, attempting to
achieve equivalent segmentation performance of fully supervised approaches. This paper focuses on semantic segmentation by image-level classification labels.
To the best of our knowledge, most of advanced WSSS
methods are based on the class activation map (CAM) [39],
which is an effective way to localize objects by image classification labels. However, the CAMs usually only cover
the most discriminative part of the object and incorrectly
activate in background regions, which can be summarized
as under-activation and over-activation respectively. Moreover, the generated CAMs are not consistent when images
are augmented by affine transformations. As shown in
Fig. 1, applying different rescaling transformations on the
same input images causes significant inconsistency on the

12275

