Gum-Net: Unsupervised Geometric Matching for Fast and Accurate 3D
Subtomogram Image Alignment and Averaging
Xiangrui Zeng
Min Xu∗
Computational Biology Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
xiangruz@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a Geometric unsupervised matching Network (Gum-Net) for finding the geometric correspondence
between two images with application to 3D subtomogram
alignment and averaging. Subtomogram alignment is the
most important task in cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET),
a revolutionary 3D imaging technique for visualizing the
molecular organization of unperturbed cellular landscapes
in single cells. However, subtomogram alignment and averaging are very challenging due to severe imaging limits
such as noise and missing wedge effects. We introduce an
end-to-end trainable architecture with three novel modules
specifically designed for preserving feature spatial information and propagating feature matching information. The
training is performed in a fully unsupervised fashion to optimize a matching metric. No ground truth transformation
information nor category-level or instance-level matching
supervision information is needed. After systematic assessments on six real and nine simulated datasets, we demonstrate that Gum-Net reduced the alignment error by 40 to
50% and improved the averaging resolution by 10%. GumNet also achieved 70 to 110 times speedup in practice with
GPU acceleration compared to state-of-the-art subtomogram alignment methods. Our work is the first 3D unsupervised geometric matching method for images of strong
transformation variation and high noise level. The training code, trained model, and datasets are available in our
open-source software AITom 1 .

1. Introduction
Given a transformation model, geometric matching aims
to estimate the geometric correspondence between related
images. In two and three dimensions, geometric matching is
∗ Corresponding author

1 https://github.com/xulabs/aitom

mxu1@cs.cmu.edu

widely applied to fields such as pattern recognition [48, 74],
3D image reconstruction [35, 29], medical image alignment
and registration [19, 27], and computational chemistry [86].
Finding the global optimal parameters consistent with a geometric transformation model such as affine or rigid transformation has a fundamental bottleneck. The parametric space
needs to be exhaustively searched but the computational cost
is infeasible [36]. Many popular methods have been proposed that alleviate the computational cost by detecting and
matching hand-crafted local features [50, 15, 73] to estimate
the global geometric transformation robustly [23, 67, 47, 51].
Recently, end-to-end trainable image alignment attracts
attention. There are two major advantages over traditional
non-trainable methods: (1) a properly trained convolutional
neural network (CNN) model can process a large amount
of data in a significantly shorter time and (2) with increasing amount of data collected, the deep learning model performance can be improved progressively by better feature
learning [60].
In this paper, we focus on an important geometric matching application field, cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET).
In recent years, cryo-ET emerges as a revolutionary in situ
3D structural biology imaging technique for studying macromolecular complexes in single cells, the nano-machines that
govern cellular biological processes [44]. Cryo-ET captures the 3D native structure and spatial distribution of all
macromolecular complexes together with other subcellular
components without disrupting the cell [11]. Nevertheless,
cryo-ET data is heavily affected by a low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) (example input data and mathematical definition
in Supplementary Section S3) due to the complex cytoplasm
environment and missing wedge effects2 . Therefore, the
macromolecular structures in the 3D tomogram need to be
detected and recovered for further biomedical interpretation.
A subtomogram from a tomogram is a small cubic sub2 Partial sampling of images due to limited tilt angle ranges (description
in Supplementary Section S1)

14073

