Plug-and-Play Algorithms for Large-scale Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Xin Yuan
Bell Labs
NJ USA

Yang Liu
MIT
MA USA

Jinli Suo
Qionghai Dai
Dept. of Automation & Institute for Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua Univ., Beijing China

xyuan@bell-labs.com

yliu12@mit.edu

{jlsuo,daiqh}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) aims to capture the
high-dimensional (usually 3D) images using a 2D sensor
(detector) in a single snapshot. Though enjoying the advantages of low-bandwidth, low-power and low-cost, applying
SCI to large-scale problems (HD or UHD videos) in our
daily life is still challenging. The bottleneck lies in the reconstruction algorithms; they are either too slow (iterative optimization algorithms) or not flexible to the encoding process
(deep learning based end-to-end networks). In this paper,
we develop fast and flexible algorithms for SCI based on the
plug-and-play (PnP) framework. In addition to the widely
used PnP-ADMM method, we further propose the PnP-GAP
(generalized alternating projection) algorithm with a lower
computational workload and prove the global convergence
of PnP-GAP under the SCI hardware constraints. By employing deep denoising priors, we first time show that PnP
can recover a UHD color video (3840 × 1644 × 48 with
PNSR above 30dB) from a snapshot 2D measurement. Extensive results on both simulation and real datasets verify
the superiority of our proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Computational imaging [1, 31] constructively combines
optics, electronics and algorithms for optimized performance [4, 6, 32] or to provide new abilities [5, 25, 35, 43]
to imaging systems. One important branch of computational imaging with promising applications is snapshot
compressive imaging (SCI) [23, 45], which utilized a twodimensional (2D) camera to capture 3D video or spectral
data. Different from conventional cameras, such imaging
systems adopt sampling on a set of consecutive images–
video frames (e.g., CACTI [23, 60]) or spectral channels
(e.g., CASSI [46])–in accordance with the sensing matrix
and integrating these sampled signals along time or spectrum to obtain the final compressed measurements. With
this technique, SCI systems [12, 15, 36, 42, 45, 46, 60] can
capture the high-speed motion [40, 41, 61, 62, 68, 70] and

high-resolution spectral information [28, 69, 37] but with
low memory, low bandwidth, low power and potentially low
cost. In this work, we focus on video SCI reconstruction.
In parallel to the hardware development, various algorithms have been employed and developed for SCI reconstruction. In addition to the widely used TwIST [2], Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) in [49, 50] based algorithms
model the pixels within a spatial-temporal patch by a GMM.
GAP-TV [53] adopts the idea of total variance minimization under the generalized alternating projection (GAP) [21]
framework. Most recently, DeSCI proposed in [22] has led
to state-of-the-art results. However, the slow speed of DeSCI precludes its real applications, especially to the HD
(1280 × 720), FHD (1920 × 1080) or UHD (3840 × 1644 in
Fig. 1 and 3840 × 2160 in Fig. 5) videos, which are getting
popular in our daily life. Recall that DeSCI needs more
than one hour to reconstruct a 256 × 256 × 8 video from a
snapshot measurement. GAP-TV, by contrast, as a fast algorithm, cannot provide good reconstruction to be used in real
applications (in general, this needs the PSNR≥ 30dB). An
alternative solution is to train an end-to-end network [26, 34]
to reconstruct the videos for the SCI system. On one hand,
this approach can finish the task within seconds and by appropriate design of multiple GPUs, an end-to-end sampling
and reconstruction framework can be built. On the other
hand, this method loses the robustness of the network since
whenever the sensing matrix (encoding process) changes, a
new network has to be re-trained. Moreover, it cannot be
readily used in adaptive sensing [70].
Therefore, it is desirable to devise an efficient and flexible
algorithm for SCI reconstruction, especially for large-scale
problems. This will pave the way of applying SCI in our
daily life. In order to solve the trilemma of speed, accuracy
and flexibility for SCI reconstruction, this paper makes the
following contributions:
• Inspired by the plug-and-play (PnP) alternating direction
method of multiplier (ADMM) [9] framework, we extend
PnP-ADMM to SCI and show that PnP-ADMM converges
to a fixed point by considering the hardware constraints
and the special structure of the sensing matrix [18] in SCI.
11447

