Multi-Granularity Reference-Aided Attentive Feature Aggregation
for Video-based Person Re-identification
Zhizheng Zhang1∗
1

Cuiling Lan2†

Wenjun Zeng2

University of Science and Technology of China

zhizheng@mail.ustc.edu.cn

2

Zhibo Chen1†

Microsoft Research Asia

{culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com

Abstract

chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Video Sequence of Example Person 1
Gender, Age, …

Video-based person re-identification (reID) aims at
matching the same person across video clips. It is a challenging task due to the existence of redundancy among
frames, newly revealed appearance, occlusion, and motion blurs. In this paper, we propose an attentive feature
aggregation module, namely Multi-Granularity Referenceaided Attentive Feature Aggregation (MG-RAFA), to delicately aggregate spatio-temporal features into a discriminative video-level feature representation. In order to determine the contribution/importance of a spatial-temporal feature node, we propose to learn the attention from a global
view with convolutional operations. Specifically, we stack
its relations, i.e., pairwise correlations with respect to a representative set of reference feature nodes (S-RFNs) that represents global video information, together with the feature
itself to infer the attention. Moreover, to exploit the semantics of different levels, we propose to learn multi-granularity
attentions based on the relations captured at different granularities. Extensive ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our attentive feature aggregation module MGRAFA. Our framework achieves the state-of-the-art performance on three benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (reID) aims at matching persons
in different positions, times, and camera views. Many researches focus on image-based setting by comparing the
still images [42, 18, 12, 30, 16, 21]. With the prevalence
of video capturing systems, person reID based on video offers larger capacity for achieving more robust performance.
As illustrated in Figure 1, for a video clip, the visible
contents of different frames differ but there are also overlaps/redundancy. In general, the multiple frames of a video
clip/sequence can provide more comprehensive information

Hair Style, …

t=1

t=2
t=3
t=4
Video Sequence of Example Person 2

t=N

t=1

t=2

t=N

Body Shape, …

Clothing details

t=3

t=4
1

Figure 1. Illustration of two video sequences of different identities. We observe that: (a) videos have redundancy with repetitive
contents spanning over time; (b) there are some contents which occasionally appear but are discriminative factors (such as red shoes
of person 1 in t = 2, 3). (c) discriminative factors/properties could
be captured at different granularities/scales (e.g., body shape can
be captured from a large region (coarse granularity) while hair
style is captured from small local region (fine granularity).

of a person for identification, but also raise more challenges,
such as the handling of the presence of abundant redundancy, occlusion, motion blurs.
A typical video-based person reID pipeline [24, 20, 36,
6, 15, 5, 43, 22] extracts and aggregates spatial and temporal features to obtain a single feature vector as the video
representation. To make the video-level feature representation precise, comprehensive and discriminative, we should
latch onto the informative features from a global view, and
meanwhile, remove the interference.
Attention, which aims at strengthening the important
features while suppressing the irrelevant ones, matches the
aforementioned goal well. Some works have studied spatiotemporal attention [15, 5] or the attentive recurrent neural
networks [47, 21] to aggregate spatial and temporal features. They learn the attention weights for spatial and temporal dimensions separately or sequentially [47, 15]. However, due to the lack of a global view, they suffer from

∗ This work was done when Zhizheng Zhang was an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding author.

1 All faces in the images are masked for anonymization.

10407

