Probabilistic Video Prediction from Noisy Data with a Posterior Confidence
Yunbo Wang1 , Jiajun Wu2 , Mingsheng Long1 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum3
1
2
3
Tsinghua University
Stanford University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
We study a new research problem of probabilistic future
frames prediction from a sequence of noisy inputs, which is
useful because it is difficult to guarantee the quality of input
frames in practical spatiotemporal prediction applications.
It is also challenging because it involves two levels of uncertainty: the perceptual uncertainty from noisy observations
and the dynamics uncertainty in forward modeling.
In this paper, we propose to tackle this problem with an
end-to-end trainable model named Bayesian Predictive Network (BP-Net). Unlike previous work in stochastic video prediction that assumes spatiotemporal coherence and therefore
fails to deal with perceptual uncertainty, BP-Net models both
levels of uncertainty in an integrated framework. Furthermore, unlike previous work that can only provide unsorted
estimations of future frames, BP-Net leverages a differentiable sequential importance sampling (SIS) approach to
make future predictions based on the inference of underlying physical states, thereby providing sorted prediction
candidates in accordance with the SIS importance weights,
i.e., the confidences. Our experiment results demonstrate
that BP-Net remarkably outperforms existing approaches on
predicting future frames from noisy data.

1. Introduction
Learning to generate future video frames shows remarkable significance in real-world scenarios, such as precipitation forecasting [27, 35], traffic flows prediction [39, 37],
and model predictive control in robotics [10, 8]. Existing
models assume that training and testing videos are lossless
representations of the underlying physical states; in practice,
however, the quality of video data is often compromised.
Precipitation forecasting depends on radar maps of the past
hours, where there are stochastic measurement errors or accidental data noises, e.g., caused by a passing airplane. In live
streaming, video frames might be corrupted due to signal
instability. Here, predicting future frames in advance could
correct the content of upcoming videos.
Predicting future frames from noisy inputs is a new and
challenging problem, because it involves uncertainty from

Deterministic Models

Stochastic Models

p(y K+1:K+J |y1:K )

p(y K+1:K+J |y1:K ,z 2:K+J )

y2

y1

y4

y3

y2

y1
z2

y4

y3
z3

z4

(a) Previous models

Inference Phase

Prediction Phase

pθ (y1:K |x1:K ,ε1:K )

pφ (y K+1:K+J |y1:K ,z 2:K+J )

x1

ε1

x2

ε2
y2

y1
z2

y4

y3
z3

z4

(b) Our model

Figure 1. A comparison of existing video prediction models and
our model. Our model works under the Bayesian filtering framework to jointly consider both perceptual uncertainty ǫt and dynamics uncertainty zt . K is the length of the input sequence. J is
the length of the generated sequence. K = J = 2 in this much
simplified example. Another advantage of our model is that it is
able to estimate future frames with posteriori confidence scores.

two different sources: perceptual uncertainty, i.e., the multimodal mapping from noisy observations to underlying physical states, and dynamics uncertainty, i.e., the multi-modal
mapping from past to future. Solving the problem requires
new approaches. Previous pixel-level future prediction models do not consider perceptual uncertainty and have a strong
dependency on the temporal consistency and spatial coherence of videos. They thus do not work well for noisy spatiotemporal data videos, because the input-output temporal
consistency is significantly broken.
In this paper, we introduce Bayesian Predictive Network
(BP-Net) to jointly cope with perceptual uncertainty and
dynamics uncertainty in an integrated framework. As shown
in Figure 1, we implicitly decouple this problem into a
Bayesian inference phase and a prediction phase with the
sequential importance sampling (SIS) algorithm. We maintain a set of weighted samples (particles) over time and use

10830

