Robustness Guarantees for Deep Neural Networks on Videos
Min Wu and Marta Kwiatkowska
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{min.wu, marta.kwiatkowska@cs.ox.ac.uk}

Abstract
The widespread adoption of deep learning models places
demands on their robustness. In this paper, we consider the
robustness of deep neural networks on videos, which comprise both the spatial features of individual frames extracted
by a convolutional neural network and the temporal dynamics between adjacent frames captured by a recurrent neural
network. To measure robustness, we study the maximum
safe radius problem, which computes the minimum distance
from the optical flow sequence obtained from a given input to that of an adversarial example in the neighbourhood
of the input. We demonstrate that, under the assumption
of Lipschitz continuity, the problem can be approximated
using finite optimisation via discretising the optical flow
space, and the approximation has provable guarantees. We
then show that the finite optimisation problem can be solved
by utilising a two-player turn-based game in a cooperative
setting, where the first player selects the optical flows and
the second player determines the dimensions to be manipulated in the chosen flow. We employ an anytime approach to
solve the game, in the sense of approximating the value of
the game by monotonically improving its upper and lower
bounds. We exploit a gradient-based search algorithm to
compute the upper bounds, and the admissible A* algorithm
to update the lower bounds. Finally, we evaluate our framework on the UCF101 video dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been developed for
a variety of tasks, including self-driving cars, malicious
software classification, and abnormal network activity detection. While the accuracy of neural networks has significantly improved, matching human cognitive perception,
they are susceptible to adversarial examples. An adversarial example is an input which, whilst initially classified
correctly, is misclassified with a slight, often imperceptible,
perturbation. Robustness of neural networks has been an active topic of investigation, and a number of approaches have
been proposed (see Related Work below.) However, most

existing works focus on robustness of neural networks on
image classification problems, where convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) are sufficient. One assumption that CNNs
rely on is that inputs are independent of each other, and they
are unable to accept a sequence of input data when the final output is dependent on intermediate outputs. In reality,
though, tasks often contain sequential data as inputs, for
instance, in machine translation [23], speech/handwriting
recognition [9, 10, 6], and protein homology detection [12].
To this end, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) come into
play. For RNNs, the connections between neurons form a
directed graph along a temporal sequence, which captures
temporal dynamic behaviours. Unlike CNNs, RNNs can
use the internal state (memory) to process sequential inputs.
In this work, we study robustness guarantees for neural
networks, including CNNs and RNNs, on videos. Video
classification is challenging because it comprises both the
spatial features on each individual frames, which can be extracted by CNNs, as well as the temporal dynamics between
neighbouring frames, which can be captured by RNNs.
Specifically, we develop a methodology for evaluating robustness of videos based on the notion of maximum safe radius (or dually, minimum adversarial distortion [28]), which
captures the maximum allowed magnitude of a perturbation. Our method is based on a game-based approach of [31]
and provides guarantees against perturbations up to a given
magnitude. We compute upper and lower bounds of the
maximum safe radius, and demonstrate their convergence
trend on the UCF101 video dataset.
Related work
Robustness of neural networks has been
mainly studied in the context of image classification, and,
to the best of our knowledge, very few works address robustness guarantees for videos. We review only approaches
most relevant to our approach. Early methods evaluate
the robustness of networks by checking whether they are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which attempt to craft
a perturbation imposed on the input so that it is misclassified by a well-trained network. In the computer vision and security communities, various attack techniques
have been developed, such as the limited-memory BroydenFletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm [24], the fast gradient

311

