DR Loss: Improving Object Detection by Distributional Ranking
Qi Qian1

Lei Chen2 Hao Li2 Rong Jin1
Alibaba Group
1
Bellevue, WA, 98004, USA
2
Hangzhou, China

{qi.qian, fanjiang.cl, lihao.lh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Original Distribution

Margin
Reweight

Most of object detection algorithms can be categorized
into two classes: two-stage detectors and one-stage detectors. Recently, many efforts have been devoted to one-stage
detectors for the simple yet effective architecture. Different from two-stage detectors, one-stage detectors aim to
identify foreground objects from all candidates in a single
stage. This architecture is efficient but can suffer from the
imbalance issue with respect to two aspects: the inter-class
imbalance between the number of candidates from foreground and background classes and the intra-class imbalance in the hardness of background candidates, where only
a few candidates are hard to be identified. In this work, we
propose a novel distributional ranking (DR) loss to handle the challenge. For each image, we convert the classification problem to a ranking problem, which considers
pairs of candidates within the image, to address the interclass imbalance problem. Then, we push the distributions of
confidence scores for foreground and background towards
the decision boundary. After that, we optimize the rank of
the expectations of derived distributions in lieu of original
pairs. Our method not only mitigates the intra-class imbalance issue in background candidates but also improves the
efficiency for the ranking algorithm. By merely replacing
the focal loss in RetinaNet with the developed DR loss and
applying ResNet-101 as the backbone, mAP of the singlescale test on COCO can be improved from 39.1% to 41.7%
without bells and whistles, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed loss function.

1. Introduction
The performance of object detection has been improved
dramatically with the development of deep neural networks
in the past few years. Most of detection algorithms fall into
two categories: two-stage detectors [4, 11, 12, 15] and onestage detectors [3, 14, 16, 18, 21, 25, 29]. For the two-stage
schema, the procedure of the algorithms can be divided

Rank

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed distributional ranking loss.
First, we push the distributions of confidence scores towards the
decision boundary by re-weighting examples. Then, we try to rank
the expectation of the derived distribution of foreground above that
of background by a large margin.

into two parts. In the first stage, a region proposal method
filters most of background candidate bounding boxes and
keeps only a small set of candidates. In the following stage,
these candidates are classified as specific foreground classes
or background and the bounding boxes will be further refined by minimizing a regression loss. Two-stage detectors
demonstrate the superior performance on real-world data
sets while the efficiency can be an issue in practice, especially for the devices with limited computing resources,
e.g., smartphones, cameras, etc.
Therefore, one-stage detectors are developed for the efficient detection. Different from two-stage detectors, onestage methods consist of a single phase and have to identify
foreground objects from all candidates directly. The procedure of one-stage detectors is straightforward and efficient.
However, one-stage detectors can suffer from the imbalance
problem that can reside in the following two aspects. First,
the numbers of candidates between classes are imbalanced.
Without a region proposal phase, the number of background
candidates can easily overwhelm that of foreground ones.
Second, the hardness of identification for background candidates is imbalanced. Most of them can be easily identified
from foreground objects while only a few of them are hard
to be classified.
To mitigate the imbalance problem, SSD [18] adopts
hard negative mining in training, which is a popular strategy [24, 27] to keep a small set of background candidates

12164

