Toward a Universal Model for Shape from Texture
Dor Verbin and Todd Zickler
Harvard University
{dorverbin,zickler}@seas.harvard.edu

Input

Output shape

Sample from output texture process

Figure 1: Shape and texture from a single image. The output is a 2.5D shape and a flat-texture generative process. The
approach succeeds for a wide variety of textures, including those for which previous methods break down.

Abstract
We consider the shape from texture problem, where the
input is a single image of a curved, textured surface, and the
texture and shape are both a priori unknown. We formulate
this task as a three-player game between a shape process,
a texture process, and a discriminator. The discriminator
adapts a set of non-linear filters to try to distinguish image
patches created by the texture process from those created
by the shape process, while the shape and texture processes
try to create image patches that are indistinguishable from
those of the other. An equilibrium of this game yields two
things: an estimate of the 2.5D surface from the shape process, and a stochastic texture synthesis model from the texture process. Experiments show that this approach is robust
to common non-idealities such as shading, gloss, and clutter. We also find that it succeeds for a wide variety of texture
types, including both periodic textures and those composed
of isolated textons, which have previously required distinct
and specialized processing.

1. Introduction
Texture is the repetition of appearance across local spatial neighborhoods of a surface. When a surface is curved,
foreshortening causes spatial compression of local appear-

ance across an image, and this gives a perception of surface
shape. Computer vision systems that can exploit this phenomenon will be able to factor images into their underlying
shape and texture components, which could serve as useful
intermediate representations for shape understanding, material recognition, and other tasks.
Previous approaches to shape from texture use a variety of models for encoding the relevant aspects of local appearance, and they each target a particular class of textures.
Some approaches focus on textures that are composed of
isolated texture elements. These approaches operate by detecting the elements and inferring the relative distortion between them, or the distortion of each one separately in cases
where prior information about the texture is known. Other
approaches apply to textures that are stationary stochastic
processes, and they estimate shape locally, by measuring
how the local frequency spectrum changes between nearby
image patches.
This paper explores the possibility of a single shape
from texture model that can recover shape from all texture
types, including those that are neither perfectly stationary
nor comprising perfectly discernible textons. Our model is
a three-player game between a discriminator, an unwarper,
and a generator. The generator is a texture process that outputs synthetic flat-texture patches computed from samples
of a pre-defined stochastic process, whereas the unwarper
1422

