Few-shot Learning of Part-specific Probability Space for 3D Shape Segmentation
Lingjing Wang∗
Xiang Li∗
Yi Fang†
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE
New York University, New York, USA
{lw1474, xl845, yfang}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Recently, deep neural networks are introduced as supervised discriminative models for the learning of 3D point
cloud segmentation. Most previous supervised methods require a large number of training data with human annotation part labels to guide the training process to ensure the
model’s generalization abilities on test data. In comparison, we propose a novel 3D shape segmentation method
that requires few labeled data for training. Given an input
3D shape, the training of our model starts with identifying a similar 3D shape with part annotations from a minipool of shape templates (e.g. 10 shapes). With the selected
template shape, a novel Coherent Point Transformer is proposed to fully leverage the power of a deep neural network
to smoothly morph the template shape towards the input
shape. Then, based on the transformed template shapes
with part labels, a newly proposed Part-specific Density
Estimator is developed to learn a continuous part-specific
probability distribution function on the entire 3D space with
a batch consistency regularization term. With the learned
part-specific probability distribution, our model is able to
predict the part labels of a new input 3D shape in an end-toend manner. We demonstrate that our proposed method can
achieve remarkable segmentation results on the ShapeNet
dataset with few shots, compared to previous supervised
learning approaches.

1. Introduction
3D shapes can usually be described with three representations: voxel-based representations [16, 31, 2, 18, 28, 29],
mesh-based representations [30, 32, 22], and point cloudbased representations [15, 17, 10, 26]. In this paper, we
mainly discuss the segmentation of 3D point cloud data as a
simple 3D representation. Given a 3D point could, the seg∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. In comparison to supervised method which predicts the
label of each point of input shape using a trained network, our
model aims to transfer the labels from the retrieved template to the
input shape based on the shape morphing and part-specific density
estimation modules.

mentation approach concerns the assignment of each point
with a semantic part label description. Recently, data-driven
and deep learning models have gained popularity and success on learning 3D shape segmentation [15, 17, 10, 20]
via supervised training on an annotated shape segmentation dataset [3]. In contrast to traditional hand-craft shape
segmentation approaches [36, 19, 4], learning-based models
can generalize their ability from training data to resolve ambiguities (e.g. structural variation, geometric complexity,
incompleteness, occlusions) in 3D shapes to reliably segment the 3D shape into meaningful parts [15, 23, 13].
The promise of deep learning naturally motivates researchers to start with learning deep neural networks as a
classifier for 3D points towards supervised 3D segmentation [15]. Those methods leverage the power of deep neural
network to firstly encode 3D points into a high-dimensional
geometric feature space, and then map the feature to the
semantic part label [15, 17, 10]. To generalize the segmentation ability, the deep learning models are usually trained
with a large scale well-annotated dataset in order to optimize the parameters of a model through minimizing the
expectation of a categorical part classification loss across
14504

