Parsing-based View-aware Embedding Network for Vehicle Re-Identification
Dechao Meng1,2 , Liang Li* 1 , Xuejing Liu1,2 , Yadong Li3 , Shijie Yang2 , Zheng-Jun Zha4 , Xingyu Gao6 ,
Shuhui Wang1 , and Qingming Huang2,1,5
1

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, 3 Megvii Inc, Beijing, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, China, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China,
6
Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{dechao.meng, xuejing.liu, shijie.yang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {liang.li, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn,
liyadong@megvii.inc, gaoxingyu@ime.ac.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Vehicle Re-Identification is to find images of the same vehicle from various views in the cross-camera scenario. The
main challenges of this task are the large intra-instance distance caused by different views and the subtle inter-instance
discrepancy caused by similar vehicles. In this paper, we
propose a parsing-based view-aware embedding network
(PVEN) to achieve the view-aware feature alignment and
enhancement for vehicle ReID. First, we introduce a parsing network to parse a vehicle into four different views,
and then align the features by mask average pooling. Such
alignment provides a fine-grained representation of the vehicle. Second, in order to enhance the view-aware features, we design a common-visible attention to focus on the
common visible views, which not only shortens the distance
among intra-instances, but also enlarges the discrepancy of
inter-instances. The PVEN helps capture the stable discriminative information of vehicle under different views. The experiments conducted on three datasets show that our model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Vehicle Re-identiﬁcation (ReID) has attracted more and
more attention in recent years as it is important for building
intelligent transportation and city surveillance systems [16,
11, 18, 14, 13, 30, 2]. This task aims to retrieve images of
a query vehicle in a large gallery set, where the target vehicles are usually under various views and from widespread
cameras. It is particularly useful when the license plates of
* Corresponding author.

vehicles are occluded, blurred, and damaged. As illustrated
in Figure 1, there exists two key challenges in this task, 1)
the large intra-instance difference of the same vehicle under
different views. 2) the subtle inter-instance discrepancy of
different vehicles when they share the same type and color.
To address the above challenges, some works use the
meta information (e.g. vehicle attributes, spatial-temporal
information) to improve the representation ability of the
features. Liu et al. [16] proposed a course-to-ﬁne search
framework to model the attributes and spatial-temporal information into vehicle ReID. Zheng et al. [34] introduced a
deep network to fuse the camera views, vehicle types and
color into the features of vehicle. These approaches focus
on learning global representation for the vehicle.
However, the overall appearance changes dramatically
under different view-points, which results in the instability
of global features and also brings the ﬁrst challenge. In contrast, local features usually provide the stable discriminative
cues. Recently, researchers introduced local regions to learn
the more discriminative features about the vehicle. Wang
et al. [27] generated orientation invariant features based on
vehicle keypoints detection. Liu et al. [17] extracted local
features based on three evenly separated regions of a vehicle
to acquire distinctive visual cues. He et al. [3] detected window, lights, and brand for each vehicle through a YOLO detector to generate discriminative features. The above methods focus on pre-deﬁned regions to learn the subtle local
cues. However, as shown in Figure 1, the distinctive cues
(e.g. exhaust, stickers and ornaments) may appear in any
part of vehicle and this leads to the second challenge.
Recently, data augmentation such as complementary
views generation was applied to shrink the intra-instances
discrepancy. Zhou et al. [37] tried to handle the multi-view

7103

