DNU: Deep Non-local Unrolling for Computational Spectral Imaging
Lizhi Wang

Chen Sun Maoqing Zhang Ying Fu
Beijing Institute of Technology

Hua Huang

{lzwang, sunchen, zmq, fuying, huahuang}@bit.edu.cn

Optimization
method

Abstract
Computational spectral imaging has been striving to
capture the spectral information of the dynamic world in
the last few decades. In this paper, we propose an interpretable neural network for computational spectral imaging. First, we introduce a novel data-driven prior that can
adaptively exploit both the local and non-local correlations
among the spectral image. Our data-driven prior is integrated as a regularizer into the reconstruction problem.
Then, we propose to unroll the reconstruction problem into
an optimization-inspired deep neural network. The architecture of the network has high interpretability by explicitly
characterizing the image correlation and the system imaging model. Finally, we learn the complete parameters in
the network through end-to-end training, enabling robust
performance with high spatial-spectral fidelity. Extensive
simulation and hardware experiments validate the superior
performance of our method over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The spectral image delineates a detailed scene representation about the scene, which is beneficial to a diverse range
of field, from the fundamental research areas, e.g., medical diagnosis, health care, and remote sensing [4, 6, 32],
to the computer vision applications, e.g., face recognition,
appearance modeling and object tracking [40, 47, 23]. Conventional spectrometers generally scan the scene along either the spatial dimension or the spectral dimension, requiring multiple exposures to capture a full spectral image. Thus, these systems are unsuitable for measuring
dynamic scenes. To this end, researchers have developed quite a few computational spectral imaging prototypes [9, 29, 18, 8, 58]. Based on the foundations of the
compressive sensing (CS) theory [14], coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) stands out as a promising
solution [3, 48, 50]. However, the bottleneck of CASSI
lies in the limited reconstruction quality. The core problem of spectral image reconstruction is how to derive the
underlying 3D spectral image from the under-sampled 2D

Deep
unrolling
Brute-force
learning
Iterative
optimization

ISTA-Net
31.1dB

Ours
32.7dB
NLRN
30.8dB

HSCNN
28.6dB

NLNet
29.2dB

HyperReconNet
30.4dB

TwIST
27.1dB

3DNSR
28.5dB

Autoencoder
30.3dB

HC
local

HC
non-local

DL
local

Prior
regularization
DL
non-local

Figure 1. Development trends of the optimization method and the
prior regularization. Our method integrates the power of deep unrolling method and non-local prior into an interpretable neural network, which is customized to solve the reconstruction problem of
computational spectral imaging, achieving the best performance
according to the PSNR. Note that HC and DL are abbreviations
for hand-crafted and deep-learning, respectively. Our code is open
sourced at [1]

measurement. Theoretically, the reconstruction quality is
affected by two aspects: prior regularization and optimization method.
Since the reconstruction problem is under-determined,
regularizations based on image priors are required to delineate the structure characteristic in spectral images. Previous approaches model image priors within a local window, like Total Variation (TV) [55], Markov Random Field
(MRF) [46] and sparsity [15]. The recently proposed deep
denoising prior [61] is also a local prior, as it gradually
processes the information from a local neighborhood [54].
Complementary with the local prior, the non-local prior is
an alternative in spectral image reconstruction to exploit the
long-range dependence [52, 31]. However, existing nonlocal prior-based regularizations, like non-local mean [7],
collaborative filtering [12] and joint sparsity [35], require
manually tweaking parameters to handle the various characteristics of the scenes.
Besides the prior regularization, the optimization method
is also crucial for the reconstruction quality. Early development of CASSI employs model-based optimization techniques in general [5, 16]. Later, some works propose to
learn a brute-force mapping between the compressive im-

1661

