MiLeNAS: Efficient Neural Architecture Search via Mixed-Level Reformulation
Chaoyang He1∗ Haishan Ye2∗ Li Shen3 Tong Zhang4
1
University of Southern California 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
chaoyang.he@usc.edu hsye cs@outlook.com lshen.lsh@gmail.com tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Many recently proposed methods for Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) can be formulated as bilevel optimization.
For efficient implementation, its solution requires approximations of second-order methods. In this paper, we demonstrate that gradient errors caused by such approximations
lead to suboptimality, in the sense that the optimization procedure fails to converge to a (locally) optimal solution. To
remedy this, this paper proposes MiLeNAS, a mixed-level
reformulation for NAS that can be optimized efficiently and
reliably. It is shown that even when using a simple firstorder method on the mixed-level formulation, MiLeNAS can
achieve a lower validation error for NAS problems. Consequently, architectures obtained by our method achieve consistently higher accuracies than those obtained from bilevel
optimization. Moreover, MiLeNAS proposes a framework
beyond DARTS. It is upgraded via model size-based search
and early stopping strategies to complete the search process
in around 5 hours. Extensive experiments within the convolutional architecture search space validate the effectiveness
of our approach.

Formally, gradient-based methods can be formulated as
a bilevel optimization problem [17]:
min
α

s.t.

Lval (w∗ (α), α)
∗

w (α) = arg min Ltr (w, α)

The success of deep learning in computer vision heavily depends on novel neural architectures [7, 10]. However,
most widely-employed architectures are developed manually, making them time-consuming and error-prone. Thus,
there has been an upsurge of research interest in neural architecture search (NAS), which automates the manual process of architecture design [1, 23]. There are three major methods for NAS: evolutionary algorithms [23, 5], reinforcement learning-based methods [1, 21], and gradientbased methods [17, 28, 5, 19]. Developing optimization
methods for the gradient-based NAS is promising since it
achieves state-of-the-art performances on CNNs with less
than one GPU day [17, 4].
∗ Equal contribution

(2)

w

where w represents the network weight and α determines
the neural architecture. Ltr (w, α) and Lval (w, α) denote
the losses with respect to training data and validation data
with w and α, respectively. Though bilevel optimization can
accurately describe the NAS problem, it is difficult to solve,
as obtaining w∗ (α) in Equation 2 requires one to completely train a network for each update of α. Current methods used in NAS to solve bilevel optimization are heuristic,
and w∗ (α) in Equation 2 is not satisfied due to first-order or
second-order approximation [17, 4]. The second-order approximation has a superposition effect in that it builds upon
the one-step approximation of w, causing gradient error and
deviation from the true gradient.
Single-level optimization is another method used to
solve the NAS problem and is defined as:
min Ltr (w, α),
w,α

1. Introduction

(1)

(3)

which can be solved efficiently by stochastic gradient descent. However, single-level optimization commonly leads
to overfitting with respect to α, meaning that it cannot
guarantee that the validation loss Lval (w, α) is sufficiently
small. This directly contradicts the objective of NAS, which
is to minimize the validation loss to find the optimal structures. Therefore, single-level optimization is insufficient for
NAS.
In this work, we propose mixed-level optimization,
which incorporates both bilevel and single-level optimization schemes. Rather than minimizing the validation loss
with respect to α with the fully trained weights w∗ (α) as
in Equation 2, or directly minimizing α over the training
loss, we minimize both the training loss and validation loss
with respect to α, and the training loss with respect to w, simultaneously. Note that when the hyperparameter λ (Equation 5) of our mixed-level optimization is set to zero, our

11993

