Learning to Select Base Classes for Few-shot Classification
Linjun Zhou1,2
Peng Cui1,∗
1
Tsinghua University

Xu Jia2,∗
Shiqiang Yang1
Qi Tian2
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

zhoulj16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn
jiayushenyang@gmail.com,

yangshq@tsinghua.edu.cn,

Abstract
Few-shot learning has attracted intensive research attention in recent years. Many methods have been proposed
to generalize a model learned from provided base classes
to novel classes, but no previous work studies how to select base classes, or even whether different base classes
will result in different generalization performance of the
learned model. In this paper, we utilize a simple yet effective measure, the Similarity Ratio, as an indicator for the
generalization performance of a few-shot model. We then
formulate the base class selection problem as a submodular
optimization problem over Similarity Ratio. We further provide theoretical analysis on the optimization lower bound
of different optimization methods, which could be used to
identify the most appropriate algorithm for different experimental settings. The extensive experiments on ImageNet [4],
Caltech256 [8] and CUB-200-2011 [27] demonstrate that
our proposed method is effective in selecting a better base
dataset.

1. Introduction
Few-shot Learning [6, 13] is a branch of Transfer Learning, its basic setting is to train a base model on the base
dataset consisting of base classes with ample labeled samples, then adapt the model to a novel support set consisting
of novel classes with few samples, and finally evaluate the
model on the novel testing set consisting of the same novel
classes as the novel support set.
Traditionally, many works focus on how to learn metaknowledge from a fixed base dataset. The generation process
of the base datasets generally depends on random selection or
human experience, which is not necessarily perfect for fewshot learning. Due to the fact that the fine-tuning mechanism
on the novel support set is not as effective as learning with
large-scaled training samples on novel classes [25], the base
dataset plays a critical role for the performance of few shot
learning. Till now, however, we have little knowledge on
* Co-corresponding authors.

tian.qi1@huawei.com

how to measure the quality of a base dataset, and not to
mention how to optimize the its selection process.
The targeting problem described above is somewhat related to Curriculum Learning [1, 24] and data selection in
transfer learning [19–21]. Different from Curriculum Learning aiming to speed up learning of provided classes, we
focus on learning to select base classes in a transfer learning manner, where the selected base classes are used for
classification on novel classes. With respect to the data selection methods in transfer learning, first, our problem is
a class-based selection instead of sample-based selection
problem, which significantly decreases the search space for
selection. Second, we consider the problem in a few-shot
learning scenario, where there is no validation dataset on
novel classes, and modern methods with feedback mechanism on validation performance (e.g. Bayesian Optimization
in [21], Reinforcement Learning in [19]) are not applicable.
Here we consider a realistic and practical setting that M
base classes are to be selected from N candidate classes, and
each candidate class contains only a small number of labeled
samples before selection. Once the M classes are selected,
one could expand the samples of these selected classes to a
sufficient size by manually labeling, which are further used
to construct the base dataset and train the base model. The
selection process could be conducted either in an one-time
or incremental manner.
To solve the problem, we confront two challenges. First,
the problem is a discrete optimization problem. The complexity of naive enumeration method is O(N M ), which is
intractable in real cases. Second, there is no touchable way
to optimize the classification performance of novel classes
directly, hence we need to find a proxy indicator that is both
easy to optimize and highly correlated with the classification
performance on novel classes.
In this paper, we find a simple yet effective indicator
Similarity Ratio, first proposed by our previous work [30].
For a candidate class, the Similarity Ratio considers both its
similarities with novel classes and diversity in base classes.
We demonstrate that this indicator is highly and positively
correlated with the performance of few-shot learning on the

4624

