Progressive Adversarial Networks for Fine-Grained Domain Adaptation
Sinan Wang, Xinyang Chen, Yunbo Wang, Mingsheng Long (B), and Jianmin Wang
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
{wang-sn17,chenxiny17,wangyb15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition aims to categorize an object
among a large number of subordinate categories within the
same root category. It is a valuable problem in the sense
that it could potentially endow machine learning models
with strong cognitive abilities approaching human experts
on some tasks. For example, we might be interested in distinguishing subordinate species of birds such as pacific gull
or black-tailed gull. In recent years, there has been great advance in some fundamental problems of fine-grained recognition. On one hand, the ability of deep networks for identifying subtle differences between highly similar objects has

Target

Fine-grained visual categorization has long been considered as an important problem, however, its real application is still restricted, since precisely annotating a large
fine-grained image dataset is a laborious task and requires
expert-level human knowledge. A solution to this problem
is applying domain adaptation approaches to fine-grained
scenarios, where the key idea is to discover the commonality
between existing fine-grained image datasets and massive
unlabeled data in the wild. The main technical bottleneck
lies in that the large inter-domain variation will deteriorate
the subtle boundaries of small inter-class variation during
domain alignment. This paper presents the Progressive Adversarial Networks (PAN) to align fine-grained categories
across domains with a curriculum-based adversarial learning framework. In particular, throughout the learning process, domain adaptation is carried out through all multigrained features, progressively exploiting the label hierarchy from coarse to fine. The progressive learning is applied
upon both category classification and domain alignment,
boosting both the discriminability and the transferability of
the fine-grained features. Our method is evaluated on three
benchmarks, two of which are proposed by us, and it outperforms the state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods.

Source

Abstract

Figure 1. The fine-grained domain adaptation problem is characterized by the entanglement of large inter-domain variations,
small inter-class variations, and large intra-class variations,
which differs from classic domain adaptation scenario in granularity. From left to right: red-winged blackbirds, yellow-headed
blackbirds, bobolinks, and brown creepers.

been greatly improved [23, 43, 45, 16, 46, 25, 13]. On
the other hand, an increasing number of fine-grained image datasets have been collected, including a variety of root
categories such as birds [55, 54, 50], dogs [18, 27], flowers
[36, 1], aircrafts [52, 32], cars [44, 22, 26, 58], and food [4].
Still, it is unrealistic to cover all subordinate categories,
and the limited size of the existing datasets still hampers the
scalability of the fine-grained recognition algorithms. Annotating large-scale image datasets with fine-grained labels
is time-consuming and requires strong expertise, especially
for some particular application domains. To solve this problem, a promising idea is to apply the domain adaptation approaches [38] to fine-grained recognition tasks. For example, learning to categorize birds in the field guide may help
recognize bird species in the wild, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Thus, we may transfer the common knowledge from existing labeled datasets to massive unlabeled data, and save the
efforts of dense fine-grained annotations.
However, there are new challenges in the context of
fine-grained domain adaptation: the concurrence of large

9213

