Episode-based Prototype Generating Network for Zero-Shot Learning
Selected for training
model

1∗

2∗

Refine training
model

3

Yunlong Yu
Zhong Ji
Jungong
HanBlock 1 ... Zhongfei
Zhang4 Model
Base
Block k-1
Block k
Block 1
1
1
College of Information Science & Electronic Block 2
Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
Base
Block 1
Block k
Block k-1
...
2
Training
Model 2
Tianjin Key BIIT Lab, School of Electrical &
Information
Engineering,
Tianjin
University,
China
...
Data
3
Block
k-1
WMG Data Science, University of Warwick, UK
Base
k
4
Block k
Block 2
Block 1
...
Model
Department of Computer Science, Block
Binghamton
University,
USA
yuyunlong@zju.edu.cn, jizhong@tju.edu.cn, jungong.han@warwick.ac.uk, zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu
Test
Data

Abstract

Episode 1

We introduce a simple yet effective episode-based training
framework for zero-shot learning (ZSL), where the learning
system requires to recognize unseen classes given only the
corresponding class semantics. During training, the model
is trained within a collection of episodes, each of which is
designed to simulate a zero-shot classification task. Through
training multiple episodes, the model progressively accumulates ensemble experiences on predicting the mimetic unseen
classes, which will generalize well on the real unseen classes.
Based on this training framework, we propose a novel generative model that synthesizes visual prototypes conditioned
on the class semantic prototypes. The proposed model aligns
the visual-semantic interactions by formulating both the visual prototype generation and the class semantic inference
into an adversarial framework paired with a parametereconomic Multi-modal Cross-Entropy Loss to capture the
discriminative information. Extensive experiments on four
datasets under both traditional ZSL and generalized ZSL
tasks show that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches by large margins.

Episode 2

Model Training

Model Refining
Model 1

1. Introduction
With the renaissance of deep learning, tremendous breakthroughs have been achieved on various visual tasks [12,
5, 21]. However, the deep learning techniques typically
rely on the availability of artificially balanced training data,
which poses a significant bottleneck against building comprehensive models for the real visual world. In recent years,
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [16, 9, 32, 37, 36] has been attracting a lot of attention due to its potential to address the
data scarcity issue.
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) aims at recognizing unseen
∗ The corresponding authors are Yunlong Yu and Zhong Ji.

...

...

...

Model 2

Training
Data
Episode k

Model k

Test
Data

Predicted
Results

Figure 1. An illustration of the episode-based framework for ZSL.
The training process consists of a collection of episodes, each of
which randomly splits the training data into two class-exclusive
subsets: one is used for training the base model, the other one
is used for refining the model. The model generalized ability is
progressively enhanced as the episodes go on. The test data are
predicted with the final model.

classes that have no visual instances during the training
stage. Such harsh but realistic scenarios are painful for the
traditional classification approaches because there are no
labeled visual data to support the parameter training for
unseen classes. To tackle this task, the existing methods
mostly resort to the transfer learning that assumes the model
trained on the seen classes can be applied to the unseen
classes, and focus on learning a transferable model with the
seen data.
Although promising performances have been achieved,
the most existing approaches [1, 2, 32, 22, 9, 25, 27, 23]
dedicated to designing visual-semantic interaction models
with the seen classes cannot guarantee to generalize well
to the unseen classes, as the seen and unseen classes are
located in disjoint domains. Furthermore, the models trained
with the seen data favorably guide the unseen test instances
to be misclassified into the seen classes, which tends to
produce a remarkable imbalanced classification shift issue.
The existing generative approaches [15, 17, 34] transfer the

14035

