MotionNet: Joint Perception and Motion Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Based on Bird’s Eye View Maps
Pengxiang Wu∗
Rutgers University

Siheng Chen
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories

Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University

pw241@cs.rutgers.edu

schen@merl.com

dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
Determining the environmental states is critical for deploying autonomous vehicles (AVs) [11]. Accurate state
information would facilitate motion planning and provide
smooth user experience. The estimation of environmental
state typically comprises two tasks: (1) perception, which
identifies the foreground objects from the background; (2)
motion prediction, which predicts the future trajectories of
objects. In the past years, various methods have been developed to handle these two tasks independently or jointly,
achieving remarkable progress with the aid of deep learning [22, 5]. In this work, we consider joint perception and
motion prediction from a sequence of LiDAR point clouds.
Traditional approaches to the perception of environment
∗ Work done during an internship at MERL.

Tracking &
Trajectory
Prediction

3D Object
Detection
3D bounding boxes

Motion
Planning

MotionNet

LiDAR point cloud

BEV map with motion and category

2. Example: disabled person in a wheelchair

3D Object Detection

The ability to reliably perceive the environmental states,
particularly the existence of objects and their motion behavior, is crucial for autonomous driving. In this work, we propose an efficient deep model, called MotionNet, to jointly
perform perception and motion prediction from 3D point
clouds. MotionNet takes a sequence of LiDAR sweeps as
input and outputs a bird’s eye view (BEV) map, which encodes the object category and motion information in each
grid cell. The backbone of MotionNet is a novel spatiotemporal pyramid network, which extracts deep spatial and
temporal features in a hierarchical fashion. To enforce
the smoothness of predictions over both space and time,
the training of MotionNet is further regularized with novel
spatial and temporal consistency losses. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method overall outperforms
the state-of-the-arts, including the latest scene-flow- and
3D-object-detection-based methods. This indicates the potential value of the proposed method serving as a backup to
the bounding-box-based system, and providing complementary information to the motion planner in autonomous driving. Code is available at https://www.merl.com/
research/license#MotionNet.

1. A system for autonomous driving

(a) LiDAR data (BEV)

Vehicle
Wheelchair

(b) Predicted 3D box (BEV)
Vehicle
Wheelchair

Vehicle
Wheelchair

(c) GT 3D box (BEV)
Vehicle
Wheelchair

MotionNet

Abstract

(d) Front camera image

(e) Predicted motion (BEV)

(f) GT motion (BEV)

Figure 1. Top: MotionNet is a system based on bird’s eye
view (BEV) map, and performs perception and motion prediction
jointly without using bounding boxes. It can potentially serve as
a backup to the standard bounding-box-based-system and provide
complementary information for motion planning. Bottom: During testing, given an object (e.g., disabled person on a wheelchair,
as illustrated in (d)) that never appears in the training data, 3D object detection (e.g., [46]) tends to fail; see plots (b) and (c). In
contrast, MotionNet is still able to perceive the object and forecast its motion; see plots (e) and (f), where the color represents the
category and the arrow denotes the future displacement.

mainly rely on the bounding box detection, which is implemented through 2D object detection based on camera
data [41, 27, 20, 63], 3D object detection based on LiDAR
data [64, 19, 46], or fusion-based detection [6, 24, 23]. The
111385

