Detailed 2D-3D Joint Representation for Human-Object Interaction
Yong-Lu Li, Xinpeng Liu, Han Lu, Shiyi Wang, Junqi Liu, Jiefeng Li, Cewu Lu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
yonglu li@sjtu.edu.cn, xinpengliu0907@gmail.com,
{sjtu luhan, shiywang, ljq435, ljf likit, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

2D: Same HOI, Different Viewpoints

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection lies at the
core of action understanding. Besides 2D information
such as human/object appearance and locations, 3D pose
is also usually utilized in HOI learning since its viewindependence. However, rough 3D body joints just carry
sparse body information and are not sufficient to understand complex interactions. Thus, we need detailed 3D
body shape to go further. Meanwhile, the interacted object in 3D is also not fully studied in HOI learning. In
light of these, we propose a detailed 2D-3D joint representation learning method. First, we utilize the singleview human body capture method to obtain detailed 3D
body, face and hand shapes. Next, we estimate the 3D
object location and size with reference to the 2D humanobject spatial configuration and object category priors. Finally, a joint learning framework and cross-modal consistency tasks are proposed to learn the joint HOI representation. To better evaluate the 2D ambiguity processing capacity of models, we propose a new benchmark
named Ambiguous-HOI consisting of hard ambiguous images. Extensive experiments in large-scale HOI benchmark and Ambiguous-HOI show impressive effectiveness
of our method. Code and data are available at https:
//github.com/DirtyHarryLYL/DJ-RN .

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection recently receives lots of attentions. It aims at locating the active
human-object and inferring the action simultaneously. As
a sub-task of visual relationship [37], it can facilitate activity understanding [6, 43, 44, 55], imitation learning [2], etc.
What do we need to understand HOI? The possible answers are human/object appearance, spatial configuration,
context, pose, etc. Among them, human body information
∗ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China.

+

+

+

Similar 3D Body & Spatial Configuration

Single-view
Body Capture,
Object Location
Estimation

Spatial & Semantic
Alignment

3D HOI

Spatial Configuration

Ambiguity

Joint 2D-3D Representation

Figure 1. HOI detection based on 2D may have ambiguities under various viewpoints. HOI representation in 3D is more robust.
Thus, we estimate the 3D detailed human body and interacted object location and size to represent the HOI in 3D. Then we learn a
joint 2D-3D representation to combine multi-modal advantages.

often plays an important role, such as 2D pose [31, 21, 58,
13] and 3D pose [63, 39]. Because of the various viewpoints, 2D human pose [7] or segmentation [22, 61, 16] often has ambiguities, e.g. same actions may have very different 2D appearances and poses. Although 3D pose is more
robust, rough 3D body joints are not enough to encode essential geometric and meaningful patterns. For example, we
may need detailed hand shape to infer the action “use a knife
to cut”, or facial shape for “eat and talk”. And body shape
would also largely affect human posture. In light of this, we
argue that detailed 3D body can facilitate the HOI learning.
Meanwhile, the object in HOI is also important, e.g. “hold
an apple” and “hold the horse” have entirely different patterns. However, few studies considered how to embed 3D
interacted objects in HOI. The reasons are two-fold: first,
it is hard to reconstruct objects because of the 6D pose estimation and diverse object shapes (detailed point cloud or
mesh [8, 64]). Second, estimating 3D human-object spatial
relationship is also difficult for single-view.
In this work, we propose a method to not only borrow
essential discriminated clues from the detailed 3D body but
also consider the 3D human-object spatial configuration.
First, we represent the HOI in 3D. For human, we utilize
the single-view human body capture [45] to obtain detailed
human shape. For object, referring to the 2D human-object

10166

