Reconstruct Locally, Localize Globally: A Model Free Method for Object Pose
Estimation
Ming Cai, Ian Reid
The University of Adelaide
{ming.cai, ian.reid}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Labels
Masks

In computer vision, the pose of an object describes the
geometric relation of the object instance with respect to the
capturing camera. It is mathematically encoded by the Euclidean transformation between the representations of the
object structure in two coordinate spaces: object-centric and
camera-centric frame. The task we are interested in is to estimate the accurate six-degree-of-freedom (6dof) pose of a
previously-seen rigid object instance from an RGB image.
Standard methods to solve this problem make use of a
CAD model of the object. This predefined structural information contributes variously to the classical geometry
methods[10, 57, 31, 25, 39] and recent machine learning
based methods[41, 22, 48, 54, 27, 47, 20, 40, 52, 55, 7]. For

Detection head

tu

re
s

Object coordinate

If

ea

Landmarks

Ro
Input RGB
image

Object coordinate head
3D Object coordinates
2D

3D

Correspondences Mi

+

Scaled intrinsics by
bounding box
K(bboxi )

=

pi = PnPRANSAC (Mi , K(bboxi ))

Output poses

Geometric pose
estimation

1. Introduction

Bounding boxes
bboxi

Network inference

Six degree-of-freedom pose estimation of a known object
in a single image is a long-standing computer vision objective. It is classically posed as a correspondence problem
between a known geometric model, such as a CAD model,
and image locations. If a CAD model is not available, it is
possible to use multi-view visual reconstruction methods to
create a geometric model, and use this in the same manner.
Instead, we propose a learning-based method whose input
is a collection of images of a target object, and whose output
is the pose of the object in a novel view. At inference time,
our method maps from the RoI features of the input image
to a dense collection of object-centric 3D coordinates, one
per pixel. This dense 2D-3D mapping is then used to determine 6dof pose using standard PnP plus RANSAC. The
model that maps 2D to object 3D coordinates is established
at training time by automatically discovering and matching
image landmarks that are consistent across multiple views.
We show that this method eliminates the requirement for a
3D CAD model (needed by classical geometry-based methods and state-of-the-art learning based methods alike) but
still achieves performance on a par with the prior art.

Figure 1. The inference of our approach. Although our model
is trained with a pair of two-view images, it requires only a single
image to infer the object pose. For a novel image, the detection
head predicts a box and a mask for the object. Meanwhile the
object coordinate head outputs a 3D object point map for the box.
The object points on the background are removed according to the
mask. The remaining points are used for establishing the 2D-3D
correspondences within the box. The 6dof pose is then solved via
PnP plus RANSAC based on these correspondences along with the
scaled projection matrix derived from the box position. The pose
estimate is subsequently refined using the predicted object points.
The landmark head is turned off at inference time.

instance, in the classic family, such roles might be the reference for registration[57], base for templates generation[18]
and provider of texture for feature extraction. As for the
CNN-based approaches, this model acts such as the supervision for network learning[2, 38, 4, 22], a source for
synthetic image generation[40, 27, 22, 9] and/or an agent
for post-process refinement[27, 41, 22] etc. However, finegrained and well-textured 3D structure does not exist for
every object in the wild. This limits the generalization of
these approaches. In this paper, we are therefore devoted to
answer this question: Is it possible to accomplish the object
pose estimation task, without using the 3D CAD model of
the object?
Reconstruction-based methods [51, 37, 36] have shown
the feasibility of this proposal. They firstly reconstruct
the 3D object from the multi-view RGB images to substitute missing CAD model, using Structure from Motion
(SfM[1]). Object pose is then solved using the Perspective13153

