Erasing Integrated Learning : A Simple yet Effective Approach for Weakly
Supervised Object Localization
Jinjie Mai

Meng Yang*

Wenfeng Luo

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, *Corresponding author
The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen University
waynemaibutterfly@gmail.com

yangm6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

(Left)

𝑭𝒖

luowf5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

𝑭𝒆 (Right)

(Left)

𝑭𝒖

𝑭𝒆 (Right)

(Left)

𝑭𝒖

𝑭𝒆 (Right)

pool4

Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to
localize object with only weak supervision like image-level
labels. However, a long-standing problem for available
techniques based on the classification network is that they
often result in highlighting the most discriminative parts
rather than the entire extent of object. Nevertheless, trying
to explore the integral extent of the object could degrade
the performance of image classification on the contrary. To
remedy this, we propose a simple yet powerful approach
by introducing a novel adversarial erasing technique, erasing integrated learning (EIL). By integrating discriminative
region mining and adversarial erasing in a single forwardbackward propagation in a vanilla CNN, the proposed EIL
explores the high response class-specific area and the less
discriminative region simultaneously, thus could maintain
high performance in classification and jointly discover the
full extent of the object. Furthermore, we apply multiple
EIL (MEIL) modules at different levels of the network in a
sequential manner, which for the first time integrates semantic features of multiple levels and multiple scales through
adversarial erasing learning. In particular, the proposed
EIL and advanced MEIL both achieve a new state-of-the-art
performance in CUB-200-2011 and ILSVRC 2016 benchmark, making significant improvement in localization while
advancing high performance in image classification.

1. Introduction
Weakly Supervised Learning (WSL) aims to construct
predictive models by learning only with weak supervision
[42] like incomplete, coarse, or inaccurate labels. In the
field of computer vision, as WSL doesn’t require expensive manpower and efforts to obtain pixel-level annotations,
weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) [41, 6, 5, 4,
34, 20, 12, 26, 23, 25, 32, 38, 1, 29, 15, 37] and segmentation [14, 10, 16, 25, 24, 18, 7] are attracting more and more

Erase

Erase

Erase

conv51

conv52

conv53

GradCAM

CAM

TRAINING ITERATION

Figure 1: VGG16-EIL with erasing at pool4. Visualization
of different layers as training proceeds. pool4 to conv53
is visualized using channel-wise average map. The left
column of each box is visualization of different layers in
unerased branch F u during training, while the right for the
erased branch F e .

attention.
Similar to WSOD, weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) also aims to localize object using coarse labels but for only one class. Recently, various methods
[41, 43, 28, 13, 40, 39, 2] have been developed to handle
this challenging task. Zhou et al. [41] proposed to replace
top layers with Global Average Pooling[19] (GAP) in Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) trained for classification,
making it feasible to mine the spatial location of the object.
Although the modified CNN is able to generate Class Acti-

8766

