Weakly Supervised Semantic Point Cloud Segmentation: Towards 10× Fewer
Labels
Xun Xu∗
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
alex.xun.xu@gmail.com, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Point cloud analysis has received much attention recently; and segmentation is one of the most important tasks.
The success of existing approaches is attributed to deep network design and large amount of labelled training data,
where the latter is assumed to be always available. However, obtaining 3d point cloud segmentation labels is often
very costly in practice. In this work, we propose a weakly
supervised point cloud segmentation approach which requires only a tiny fraction of points to be labelled in the
training stage. This is made possible by learning gradient
approximation and exploitation of additional spatial and
color smoothness constraints. Experiments are done on
three public datasets with different degrees of weak supervision. In particular, our proposed method can produce results that are close to and sometimes even better than its
fully supervised counterpart with 10× fewer labels. Our
code is available at the project website1 .

1. Introduction
Recent developments in point cloud data research have
witnessed the emergence of many supervised approaches
[19, 20, 33, 12, 29]. Most efforts of current research are
dedicated into two tasks: point cloud shape classification
(a.k.a. shape recognition) and point cloud segmentation
(a.k.a. semantic segmentation). For both tasks, the success of the state-of-the-art methods is attributed mostly to
the deep learning architecture [19] and the availability of
large amount of labelled 3d point cloud data [16, 1]. Although the community is still focused on pushing forward
in the former direction, we believe the latter issue, i.e. data
annotation, is an overlooked bottleneck. In particular, it is
assumed that all points for the point cloud segmentation task
are provided with ground-truth labels, which is often in the
range of 1k to 10k points for a 3d shape [34, 16]. The order
of magnitude increases drastically to millions of points for
∗ now with A-STAR, Singapore.
1 https://github.com/alex-xun-xu/WeakSupPointCloudSeg

Weak Supervision

Full Supervision

10% labelled

100% labelled

1 point per-cat. (1pt) labelled

Wings,
Body,
Tail, …

Wheel,
Body, …

Fewer
Labels

Further
Fewer
Labels

Figure 1: Illustration of the weak supervision concept in
this work. Our approach achieves segmentation with only a
fraction of labelled points. .
a real indoor scene [11]. As a result, very accurate labels
for billions of points are needed in a dataset to train good
segmentation models. Despite the developments of modern
annotation toolkits [16, 1] to facilitate large-scale annotation, exhaustive labelling is still prohibitively expensive for
ever growing new datasets.
In this work, we raise the question on whether it is possible to learn a point cloud segmentation model with only
partially labelled points. And, if so, how many is enough
for good segmentation. This problem is often referred to
as weakly supervised learning in the literature [37] as illustrated in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, there are
only a handful of works which tried to address related problems [6, 14]. In [6], a non-parametric conditional random
field classifier (CRF) is proposed to capture the geometric
structure for weakly supervised segmentation. However, it
casts the task into a pure structured optimization problem,
and thus fail to capture the context, e.g. spatial and color
cues. A method for semi-supervised 3D LiDAR data segmentation is proposed in [14]. It converts 3D points into a
depth map with CNNs applied for feature learning, and the
semi-supervised constraint is generated from the temporal
consistency of the LiDAR scans. Consequently, it is not
applicable to general 3D point cloud segmentation.
To enable the weakly supervised segmentation with both
strong contextual modelling ability and handling generic 3D
point cloud data, we choose to build upon the state-of-theart deep neural networks for learning point cloud feature
embedding [19, 33]. Given partially labelled point cloud
113706

