Filter Grafting for Deep Neural Networks
Fanxu Meng1,2∗ , Hao Cheng2∗† , Ke Li2 , Zhixin Xu1 , Rongrong Ji3,4 , Xing Sun2 , Guangming Lu 1†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{louischeng, tristanli, winfredsun}@tencent.com, {18S151514,xuzhixin}@stu.hit.edu.cn, luguangm@hit.edu.cn, rrj@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a new learning paradigm called filter grafting, which aims to improve the representation capability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). The motivation is that DNNs have unimportant (invalid) filters (e.g.,
l1 norm close to 0). These filters limit the potential of
DNNs since they are identified as having little effect on
the network. While filter pruning removes these invalid filters for efficiency consideration, filter grafting re-activates
them from an accuracy boosting perspective. The activation is processed by grafting external information (weights)
into invalid filters. To better perform the grafting process,
we develop an entropy-based criterion to measure the information of filters and an adaptive weighting strategy for
balancing the grafted information among networks. After
the grafting operation, the network has very few invalid
filters compared with its untouched state, enpowering the
model with more representation capacity. We also perform
extensive experiments on the classification and recognition
tasks to show the superiority of our method. For example,
the grafted MobileNetV2 outperforms the non-grafted MobileNetV2 by about 7 percent on CIFAR-100 dataset. Code
is available at https://github.com/fxmeng/filter-grafting.git.

1. Introduction
Since Krizhevsky et al. [7] make a breakthrough in the
2012 ImageNet competition [17], researchers have got significant advancements in exploring various architectures for
DNNs (Szegedy et al. [20]; He et al. [4]; Lu et al. [13, 12];
Zheng et al. [27]). DNNs gradually become very popular and powerful models in areas including computer vision
[7, 11], speech recognition [2], and language processing
[24]. However, recent studies show that DNNs have in1 In the author list, ∗ denotes that authors contribute equally and are
listed in alphabetical order; † denotes corresponding authors.

Valid Filter
Invalid Filter
ࡸࢇ࢟ࢋ࢘࢏ 澳

Pruning :

ࡸࢇ࢟ࢋ࢘࢏‫כ‬

Grafting :

ࡸࢇ࢟ࢋ࢘ᇱ࢏

Remove

ࡸࢇ࢟ࢋ࢘࢏ 澳

Reactivate

Figure 1. An illustration of the difference between filter pruning
and filter grafting. For filter grafting, we graft external information into invalid filters without changing the model structure. (best
viewed in color)

valid (unimportant) filters [9]. These filters are identified
as having a small effect on output accuracy. Removing certain filters could accelerate the inference of DNNs without
hurting much performance. This discovery inspires many
works studying how to decide which filters are unimportant
[14] and how to effectively remove the filters with tolerable
performance drop [19, 10].
However, it is unclear that whether directly abandoning
such filters and components is the best choice. What if,
such traditional invalid filters are indeed useful in certain
senses? The same story happens in the ensemble learning
like boosting, where while a single weak classifier is poor,
their combination and retraining might open a gate towards
optimal performance. Besides, given multiple networks, it
is unclear whether one network can learn from the others. In
this paper, we investigate the possibility to re-activate the invalid filters in one network by bringing outside information.
This is achieved by proposing a novel filter grafting scheme,
as illustrated in Figure 1. Filter grafting differs from filter
pruning in the sense that we re-activate filters by assigning

6599

