Multi-Scale Boosted Dehazing Network with Dense Feature Fusion
Hang Dong1

Jinshan Pan2 Lei Xiang1 Zhe Hu3 Xinyi Zhang1
Fei Wang1 Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1
College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 3 Hikvision Research America
4
University of California, Merced 5 Google Research

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Multi-Scale Boosted Dehazing Network with Dense Feature Fusion based on the U-Net
architecture. The proposed method is designed based on
two principles, boosting and error feedback, and we show
that they are suitable for the dehazing problem. By incorporating the Strengthen-Operate-Subtract boosting strategy
in the decoder of the proposed model, we develop a simple
yet effective boosted decoder to progressively restore the
haze-free image. To address the issue of preserving spatial
information in the U-Net architecture, we design a dense
feature fusion module using the back-projection feedback
scheme. We show that the dense feature fusion module can
simultaneously remedy the missing spatial information from
high-resolution features and exploit the non-adjacent features. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that the proposed
model performs favorably against the state-of-the-art approaches on the benchmark datasets as well as real-world
hazy images.

1. Introduction
Hazy images are usually degraded by the turbid medium
in the atmosphere during the imaging formation process.
The goal of image dehazing is to restore a clean scene from
a hazy image. This problem has received signiﬁcant attention as images need to be ﬁrst enhanced before applying
high-level vision tasks (e.g., scene understanding [53] and
detection [32]). Existing methods [5, 49, 60, 31, 58] usually
model a hazy image I by:
I(x) = T (x)J(x) + (1 − T (x))A,

(1)

where J denotes a haze-free scene radiance, A describes the
global atmospheric light indicating the intensity of ambient
light, T is the transmission map, and x represents the pixel
position.
To restore the haze-free scene radiance J from a hazy
image I, data-driven deep learning approaches have been

demonstrated to be effective. Early approaches ﬁrst use
deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to estimate
transmission maps [5, 49, 60, 31, 59, 46] and then apply
conventional methods (e,g., [23]) to estimate atmospheric
light. However, the estimation of the transmission map or
the atmospheric light from a single hazy input is not a trivial
task, due to the airlight-albedo ambiguity [36] and the difﬁculty of obtaining ground truth data of transmission maps.
In addition, inaccurate estimation of the transmission map
or the atmospheric light would signiﬁcantly interfere with
the clear image restoration. To address this problem, several
algorithms directly [35, 50, 61, 43, 9, 14, 41, 40] or iteratively [42, 10] estimate clean images based on deep CNNs.
Nevertheless, these methods mainly adopt generic network
architectures (e.g., DenseNet [61], U-Net [43], Dilated Network [9], Grid Network [40]), which are not well optimized
for the image dehazing problem.
Different from many high-level vision tasks, inverse problems such as the image dehazing problem are highly illposed, where small measurement errors usually lead to dramatic changes. To solve these ill-posed problems, certain
priors [15, 16, 23, 4] or careful algorithm designs are needed
to make the problem well-posed. For a dehazing deep network, simply stacking more layers or using wider layers is
inefﬁcient for signiﬁcant performance gain. Thus, it is of
great interest and importance to tailor design network models
for the dehazing problem.
In this work, we propose a dehazing network following
two well-established principles for image restoration problems, i.e., boosting and error feedback mechanisms. The
boosting strategy [44, 6, 51] is originally developed for image denoising by progressively reﬁning the intermediate result from the previous iteration, and the error feedback mechanism, especially the back-projection technique [27, 12, 22],
is designed for super-resolution to progressively recover details that are missed in the degradation process. We ﬁrst
show that the boosting strategy would facilitate the image
dehazing task as well. Considering these two principles,
we propose a Multi-Scale Boosted Dehazing Network (MS-

2157

