Creating Something from Nothing:
Unsupervised Knowledge Distillation for Cross-Modal Hashing
Hengtong Hu1,2∗, Lingxi Xie3 , Richang Hong1,2†, Qi Tian3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology,
2
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data, Hefei University of Technology,
3
Huawei Inc.
huhengtong.hfut@gmail.com, 198808xc@gmail.com, hongrc@hfut.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
1

Abstract
In recent years, cross-modal hashing (CMH) has attracted increasing attentions, mainly because its potential
ability of mapping contents from different modalities, especially in vision and language, into the same space, so that
it becomes efficient in cross-modal data retrieval. There are
two main frameworks for CMH, differing from each other in
whether semantic supervision is required. Compared to the
unsupervised methods, the supervised methods often enjoy
more accurate results, but require much heavier labors in
data annotation. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
that enables guiding a supervised method using outputs produced by an unsupervised method. Specifically, we make
use of teacher-student optimization for propagating knowledge. Experiments are performed on two popular CMH
benchmarks, i.e., the MIRFlickr and NUS-WIDE datasets.
Our approach outperforms all existing unsupervised methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the rapid increase of multimedia data,
cross-modal retrieval [37, 46, 18, 47, 7, 1, 10, 25, 22] has
attracted more and more attentions in both academia and industry. The goal is to retrieve instances from one modality
using a query instance from another modality, e.g., finding
an image with a few textual tags. One of the most popular pipeline for this purpose, named cross-modal hashing
(CMH) [1, 19, 23, 47, 7], involves mapping contents in different modalities into a common hamming space. By compressing each instance into a fixed-length binary code, the
storage cost can be dramatically reduced and the time complexity for retrieval is constant since the indexing structure
∗ This work was done when the first author was an intern at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding author.

WL?
DCMH [17]
SSAH [20]
UCH [21]
UGACH [45]
UKD

X
X
X

ER?
X
X
X
X

KD?

X

Table 1. The difference between our approach and some recent
cross-modal hashing methods. Here, ‘WL’ indicates that training
without using labels, ‘ER’ indicates that the method utilizes extensive relevance information rather than only the pairwise information, and ‘KD’ indicates utilizing knowledge distillation in the
training process.

is built with hashing codes.
State-of-the-art CMH methods can be roughly categorized into two parts, namely, supervised and unsupervised
methods. Both of them learn to shrink the gap between
the distributions of two sets of training data (e.g., using
adversarial-learning-based approaches [20, 21, 13]), but
they differ from each other in whether an instance-level annotation is provided during the training stage. From this
perspective, the supervised CMH methods [1, 25, 22, 34,
44], receiving additional supervision, often produce more
accurate results, and the unsupervised counterparts, while
achieving lower performance, are relatively easier to deploy
to real-world scenarios.
This paper combines the benefits of both methods by
a simple yet effective idea, known as creating something
from nothing. The core idea is straightforward: the supervised methods do not really require each instance to be
labeled, but they use the labels to estimate the similarity between each pair of cross-modal data. Such information, in
case of no supervision, can also be obtained from calculating the distance between their feature vectors, with the features provided by a trained unsupervised CMH method. Our
approach, unsupervised knowledge distillation (UKD),
13123

