Cross-Batch Memory for Embedding Learning
Xun Wang∗ , Haozhi Zhang∗ , Weilin Huang† , Matthew R. Scott
Malong Technologies
{xunwang, haozhang, whuang, mscott}@malong.com

Abstract
Mining informative negative instances are of central importance to deep metric learning (DML), however this task
is intrinsically limited by mini-batch training, where only a
mini-batch of instances is accessible at each iteration. In
this paper, we identify a “slow drift” phenomena by observing that the embedding features drift exceptionally slow
even as the model parameters are updating throughout the
training process. This suggests that the features of instances
computed at preceding iterations can be used to considerably approximate their features extracted by the current
model. We propose a cross-batch memory (XBM) mechanism that memorizes the embeddings of past iterations, allowing the model to collect sufficient hard negative pairs
across multiple mini-batches - even over the whole dataset.
Our XBM can be directly integrated into a general pairbased DML framework, where the XBM augmented DML
can boost performance considerably. In particular, without bells and whistles, a simple contrastive loss with our
XBM can have large R@1 improvements of 12%-22.5% on
three large-scale image retrieval datasets, surpassing the
most sophisticated state-of-the-art methods [37, 26, 2], by
a large margin. Our XBM is conceptually simple, easy to
implement - using several lines of codes, and is memory efficient - with a negligible 0.2 GB extra GPU memory. Code
is available at: https://github.com/MalongTech/researchxbm.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning (DML) aims to learn an embedding
space where instances from the same class are encouraged
to be closer than those from different classes. As a fundamental problem in computer vision, DML has been applied
to various tasks, including image retrieval [39, 12, 7], face
recognition [38], zero-shot learning [47, 1, 16], visual tracking [17, 34] and person re-identification [44, 13].
∗ Equal contribution † Corresponding author

A family of DML approaches are known as pair-based,
whose objectives can be defined in terms of pair-wise similarities within a mini-batch, such as contrastive loss [3],
triplet loss [29], lifted-structure loss[22], n-pairs loss [30],
multi-similarity (MS) loss [37] and etc. Moreover, most
existing pair-based DML methods can be unified as weighting schemes under a General Pair Weighting (GPW) framework [37]. The performance of pair-based methods heavily rely on their capability of mining informative negative
pairs. To collect sufficient informative negative pairs from
each mini-batch, many efforts have been devoted to improving the sampling schemes, which can be categorized
into two main directions: (1) sampling informative minibatches based on global data distribution [32, 6, 28, 32, 9];
(2) weighting informative pairs within each individual minibatch [22, 30, 37, 35, 40].
Various sophisticated sampling schemes have been developed, but the hard mining ability is inherently limited
by the size of a mini-batch, which the number of possible training pairs depends on. Therefore, to improve the
sampling scheme, it is straightforward to enlarge the minibatch, which can boost the performance of pair-based DML
methods immediately. We demonstrate by experiments that
the performance of pair-based approaches, such as contrastive loss [3] and recent MS loss [37], can be improved
strikingly when the mini-batch grows larger on large-scale
datasets (Figure 1, left and middle). It is not surprising
because the number of negative pairs grows quadratically
w.r.t. the mini-batch size. However, simply enlarging a
mini-batch is not an ideal solution to solve the hard mining problem due to two limitations: (1) the mini-batch size
is limited by the GPU memory and computational cost; (2)
a large mini-batch (e.g. 1800 used in [29]) often requires
cross-device synchronization, which is a challenging engineering task. A naive solution to collect abundant informative pairs is to compute the features of instances in the
whole training set at each training iteration, and then search
for hard negative pairs from the whole dataset. Obviously,
this solution is extremely time consuming, especially for a
large-scale dataset, but it inspired us to break the limit of
mining hard negatives within a single mini-batch.

6388

