Geometry-Aware Satellite-to-Ground Image Synthesis for Urban Areas
Xiaohu Lu1∗ Zuoyue Li2∗ Zhaopeng Cui2† Martin R. Oswald2
Marc Pollefeys2,3 Rongjun Qin1†
1
The Ohio State University 2 ETH Zürich 3 Microsoft

Abstract
We present a novel method for generating panoramic
street-view images which are geometrically consistent with
a given satellite image. Different from existing approaches
that completely rely on a deep learning architecture to generalize cross-view image distributions, our approach explicitly loops in the geometric configuration of the ground objects based on the satellite views, such that the produced
ground view synthesis preserves the geometric shape and
the semantics of the scene. In particular, we propose a
neural network with a geo-transformation layer that turns
predicted ground-height values from the satellite view to a
ground view while retaining the physical satellite-to-ground
relation. Our results show that the synthesized image retains well-articulated and authentic geometric shapes, as
well as texture richness of the street-view in various scenarios. Both qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate
that our method compares favorably to other state-of-theart approaches that lack geometric consistency.

1. Introduction
Due to the increasing availability of satellite images (e.g.
Google Earth) it is nowadays possible to cover almost every single corner of the world, yet such a capacity for
ground-view images does not exist. Being able to generate a consistent ground view from a given satellite image
is extremely useful for applications such as wide-area virtual model generation, media content enrichment, 3D realistic gaming, simulations and cross-view matching. This
problem is known as a satellite-to-ground cross-view synthesis. In this work, we address this problem by proposing
a geometry-aware framework that preserves the geometric
and the relative geographical locations of the ground objects by fully utilizing information extracted from a satellite
image. Our goal is to represent the ground-view as geometrically realistic as possible.
This raises several unique and difficult challenges: first
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Satellite patch

Predicted street-view panorama

Figure 1: Two examples of our satellite-to-ground imaging synthesis. Given a single satellite image patch, we learn
to predict a corresponding street-view RGB panorama in an
end-to-end fashion by leveraging geometric information.
of all, the view differences are drastic such that the information extracted from one view usable for inferring the other
is highly limited. For instance, we may only observe the
rooftop of a building in the satellite view with very little
or no information about the facades. Secondly, the resolution of the inferable information from the satellite view
is too coarse as compared to the ground images (normally
the common regions might just be the ground), thus directly using partial information from the satellite view to
generate ground views are difficult. Thirdly, the groundview images generally exhibit much more local details than
satellite views. As for example in an urban scenario, there
exist many dynamic objects such as pedestrians and vehicles. Also, places with visibly similar street patterns in the
satellite view might look completely different in the ground
view, which can present a one-to-many mapping leading to
the lack of diversity when the synthesized ground-view image is conditioned to the satellite views. Finally, due to the
limited accuracy and availability of the GPS (Global Positioning System) information of images, the alignment between the satellite and ground-view is often insufficient to
serve as training data for learning-based methods.
Recently there are several works trying to solve simi-

859

