Adaptive Fractional Dilated Convolution Network
for Image Aesthetics Assessment
Qiuyu Chen1 , Wei Zhang2 , Ning Zhou3 , Peng Lei3 , Yi Xu2 , Yu Zheng4 , Jianping Fan1
1
2

Department of Computer Science, UNC Charlotte

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
4

Amazon Lab126

School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University

{qchen12,jfan}@uncc.edu, {weizh,yxu17}@fudan.edu.cn
{ningzho,leipeng}@amazon.com, yuzheng.xidian@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
This paper addresses image aesthetics assessment where
the goal is to predict the given image an aesthetic score. Automatic image aesthetics assessment has many applications
such as album photo recommendation, auxiliary photo editing, and multi-shot photo selection. The task is challenging because it entails computations of both global cues (e.g.
scene, exposure control, color combination, etc) and localization information (composition, photographic angle, etc).
Early approaches extract aesthetic features according to
photographic rules (lighting, contrast) and global image
composition (symmetry, rule of thirds), which require ex-

Original image

Data
Augmentation

To leverage deep learning for image aesthetics assessment, one critical but unsolved issue is how to seamlessly
incorporate the information of image aspect ratios to learn
more robust models. In this paper, an adaptive fractional dilated convolution (AFDC), which is aspect-ratio-embedded,
composition-preserving and parameter-free, is developed
to tackle this issue natively in convolutional kernel level.
Specifically, the fractional dilated kernel is adaptively constructed according to the image aspect ratios, where the interpolation of nearest two integer dilated kernels are used to
cope with the misalignment of fractional sampling. Moreover, we provide a concise formulation for mini-batch training and utilize a grouping strategy to reduce computational
overhead. As a result, it can be easily implemented by common deep learning libraries and plugged into popular CNN
architectures in a computation-efficient manner. Our experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on image aesthetics
assessment over the AVA dataset [18].

Wrapping

Still Score=5.01 ?
Cropping

Score=5.01

Still Score=5.01 ?

Figure 1: Image warping and cropping are widely used
for data augmentation, but they alter the object aspect
ratios and composition, causing different aesthetics perceptions. Assigning the groundtruth aesthetic score of
the original image to the altered image may introduce
label noise and deteriorate the discriminative ability.
tensive manual designs [3, 5, 13, 19, 25, 28]. However,
manual design for such aesthetic features is not a trivial task even for experienced photographers. Recent work
adopts deep convolutional neural networks for image aesthetics assessment by learning models in an end-to-end
fashion. The models mainly use three types of formulations:
binary classification labels [12, 15, 16, 29, 20, 33, 23],
scores [17, 27, 8], and rankings [14, 22].
In the aforementioned methods, the backbone networks
are usually adopted from an image classification network.
The data augmentation methods, i.e. image cropping and
warping, are widely used for preventing overfitting in the
image recognition task. However, a shortcoming is that
the compositions and object aspect ratios are altered, which
may introduce label noise and harm the task of aesthetics
assessment (Fig. 1). A succinct solution proposed in MNACNN [16] is to feed one original-size image into the network at a time during training and test (bottom stream in
Fig. 2). A major constraint of the approach is that im-

14114

