OccuSeg: Occupancy-aware 3D Instance Segmentation
Lei Han1,2 , Tian Zheng1 , Lan Xu1,2 , and Lu Fang1B
1

Tsinghua University

2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

(a) Input Geometry

(b) Result

(c) Ground Truth Instance

(d) Spatial Term

(e) Feature Term

(f) Occupancy

Figure 1. Given the input colored point cloud, occupancy size is regressed for each voxel, which predicts the number of voxels occupied by
its belonging instance. An adaptive clustering scheme jointly considers both the occupancy information and embedding distance is further
applied for 3D instance segmentation.

Abstract
3D instance segmentation, with a variety of applications
in robotics and augmented reality, is in large demands these
days. Unlike 2D images that are projective observations
of the environment, 3D models provide metric reconstruction of the scenes without occlusion or scale ambiguity. In
this paper, we define “3D occupancy size”, as the number
of voxels occupied by each instance. It owns advantages
of robustness in prediction, on which basis, OccuSeg, an
occupancy-aware 3D instance segmentation scheme is proposed. Our multi-task learning produces both occupancy
signal and embedding representations, where the training of
spatial and feature embedding varies with their difference in
scale-aware. Our clustering scheme benefits from the reliable comparison between the predicted occupancy size and
the clustered occupancy size, which encourages hard samples being correctly clustered and avoids over segmentaB Corresponding author. Mail: fanglu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn.

This work was supported in part by Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under contract No. 61722209 and 6181001011, and was
carried out at Tsinghua University.

tion. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on 3 real-world datasets, i.e. ScanNetV2, S3DIS
and SceneNN, while maintaining high efficiency.

1. Introduction
The past ten years have witnessed a rapid development of
real-time 3D reconstruction technologies [31, 32, 5, 45, 14]
with the popularity of commercial RGB-D depth sensors
like Kinect, Xtion, etc. Given the reconstructed scene, there
is an increasing attention for instance-level semantic understanding of the 3D environment. More specifically, 3D
instance segmentation aims to recognize points belonging
to the same object and simultaneously infer their semantic
class, which serves as the fundamental technique for mobile
robots as well as augmented/virtual reality applications.
Although scene understanding on 2D images has
achieved significant progress recently with the development
of deep learning techniques, the irregularity of 3D data introduces new challenges beyond the capability of 2D solutions. As demonstrated in previous works [17], directly
projecting the state-of-the-art 2D instance segmentation

2940

