Training Quantized Neural Networks with a Full-precision Auxiliary Module
Bohan Zhuang1
Lingqiao Liu1
1
The University of Adelaide

Mingkui Tan2
Chunhua Shen1∗ Ian Reid1
2
South China University of Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we seek to tackle a challenge in training
low-precision networks: the notorious difficulty in propagating gradient through a low-precision network due to
the non-differentiable quantization function. We propose a
solution by training the low-precision network with a fullprecision auxiliary module. Specifically, during training,
we construct a mix-precision network by augmenting the
original low-precision network with the full precision auxiliary module. Then the augmented mix-precision network
and the low-precision network are jointly optimized. This
strategy creates additional full-precision routes to update
the parameters of the low-precision model, thus making
the gradient back-propagates more easily. At the inference
time, we discard the auxiliary module without introducing
any computational complexity to the low-precision network.
We evaluate the proposed method on image classification
and object detection over various quantization approaches
and show consistent performance increase. In particular,
we achieve near lossless performance to the full-precision
model by using a 4-bit detector, which is of great practical
value.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made great strides
in many computer vision tasks such as image classification [11, 20], segmentation [8, 10] and detection [37, 40].
Even though deep and/or wide models can achieve promising accuracy, their huge computational complexity makes
them incompatible with energy constrained devices which
usually have limited memory bandwidth and computational
power. This has motivated the community to design energyefficient models, often based on quantized precision, aiming
not to sacrifice accuracy relative to the full-precision models. In this paper, we propose to improve the training of the
low-precision networks.
The core challenge for quantization is the nondifferentiability of the discrete quantizer. As a result,
we cannot directly optimize the discretised network with
∗ Corresponding author, e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

stochastic gradient descent. And the current solutions
can be divided into two categories. The first category is
to employ a surrogate of gradient. The most commonly
used approach is the straight-through estimator (STE) [2].
Some recent works have been proposed to relax the discrete quantizer to be continuous for gradient-based optimization [1, 31]. Even though the discontinuity of the discretization operation during training can be partly solved
by smoothing it appropriately, some important information
may still be missed due to the approximation which can lead
to an undesirable drop in accuracy. The second category is
to seeking guidance from a full-precision model for discretised network training. For example, new training strategies
such as knowledge distillation [32, 56, 57] have been proposed to learn a low-precision student network by distilling
knowledge from a full-precision teacher network.
Our method falls into the second category and our approach is based on the idea of sharing parameters between
a mixed-precision (partially fully-precision) model and a
low-precision model. Specifically, our method constructs a
full-precision auxiliary module which connects to multiple
layers of a low-precision model (see Fig. 1). During training, the low-precision network and the full-precision auxiliary module will be combined to form an augmented mixedprecision network. Then, the mixed-precision network and
the low-precision model are jointly optimized. Since the
parameters from the low-precision model are shared, they
can receive gradient from both full-precision connections
and low-precision connections. Consequently, the parameters of low-precision model can be updated via two routes,
and this can overcome the gradient propagation difficulty
due to the discontinuity of the quantizer. Note that only
the low-precision network will be utilized for inference and
therefore there is no additional complexity introduced at the
test stage.
In addition to image classification, we further extend
the proposed approach to building quantized networks for
object detection. Building low-precision networks for object detection is more challenging since detection needs the
network outputs richer information, such as locations of
bounding boxes. There has been several works in literature
to address the quantized object detectors [16, 22, 48]. How-

1488

