AvatarMe: Realistically Renderable 3D Facial Reconstruction “in-the-wild”
Alexandros Lattas1,2
Stylianos Moschoglou1,2
Baris Gecer1,2
Stylianos Ploumpis1,2
Vasileios Triantafyllou2
Abhijeet Ghosh1
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
1
1

Imperial College London, UK

2

FaceSoft.io

{a.lattas,s.moschoglou,b.gecer,s.ploumpis,ghosh,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

2

v.triantafyllou@facesoft.io

Figure 1: From left to right: Input image; Predicted reflectance (diffuse albedo, diffuse normals, specular albedo and specular
normals); Rendered reconstruction in different environments, with detailed reflections; Rendered result with head completion.

Abstract
Over the last years, with the advent of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), many face analysis tasks have
accomplished astounding performance, with applications
including, but not limited to, face generation and 3D face
reconstruction from a single “in-the-wild” image. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, there is no method
which can produce high-resolution photorealistic 3D faces
from “in-the-wild” images and this can be attributed to the:
(a) scarcity of available data for training, and (b) lack of robust methodologies that can successfully be applied on very
high-resolution data. In this paper, we introduce AvatarMe,
the first method that is able to reconstruct photorealistic 3D
faces from a single “in-the-wild” image with an increasing
level of detail. To achieve this, we capture a large dataset
of facial shape and reflectance and build on a state-of-theart 3D texture and shape reconstruction method and successively refine its results, while generating the per-pixel diffuse and specular components that are required for realistic
rendering. As we demonstrate in a series of qualitative and
quantitative experiments, AvatarMe outperforms the existing arts by a significant margin and reconstructs authentic,
4K by 6K -resolution 3D faces from a single low-resolution
image that, for the first time, bridges the uncanny valley.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of a 3D face geometry and texture is
one of the most popular and well-studied fields in the intersection of computer vision, graphics and machine learning. Apart from its countless applications, it demonstrates
the power of recent developments in scanning, learning and
synthesizing 3D objects [3, 44]. Recently, mainly due to
the advent of deep learning, tremendous progress has been
made in the reconstruction of a smooth 3D face geometry,
even from images captured in arbitrary recording conditions
(also referred to as “in-the-wild”) [13, 14, 33, 36, 37]. Nevertheless, even though the geometry can be inferred somewhat accurately, in order to render a reconstructed face in
arbitrary virtual environments, much more information than
a 3D smooth geometry is required, i.e., skin reflectance as
well as high-frequency normals. In this paper, we propose
a meticulously designed pipeline for the reconstruction of
high-resolution render-ready faces from “in-the-wild” images captured in arbitrary poses, lighting conditions and occlusions. A result from our pipeline is showcased in Fig. 1.
The seminal work in the field is the 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) fitting algorithm [3]. The facial texture and shape
that is reconstructed by the 3DMM algorithm always lies in
a space that is spanned by a linear basis which is learned
by Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The linear basis,
1760

