Active Vision for Early Recognition of Human Actions
Boyu Wang1 , Lihan Huang1 , Minh Hoai1,2
1
Stony Brook University, 2 VinAI Research
{boywang, lihahuang, minhhoai}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Camera view

Scene and camera locations

Abstract

1

We propose a method for early recognition of human
actions, one that can take advantages of multiple cameras
while satisfying the constraints due to limited communication bandwidth and processing power. Our method considers multiple cameras, and at each time step, it will decide
the best camera to use so that a confident recognition decision can be reached as soon as possible. We formulate the
camera selection problem as a sequential decision process,
and learn a view selection policy based on reinforcement
learning. We also develop a novel recurrent neural network
architecture to account for the unobserved video frames and
the irregular intervals between the observed frames. Experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach for early recognition of human actions.

1. Introduction
We propose a method for early recognition of human actions using multiple video cameras. Early recognition aims
to recognize an action as soon as possible. This task arises
in many situations, and the ability to make early and reliable decisions will enable a wide range of applications,
from robotics to surveillance and health care.
Early recognition is an emerging research area, and several methods have been proposed in the last few years [1,
3, 6, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 21, 24, 30, 41, 42, 49–51, 53, 57].
However, existing methods only consider scenarios where
temporal events can be wholly observed by a single camera
at a fixed viewpoint. Unfortunately, human actions usually
spread out in time and space, and a single camera with a
fixed viewpoint cannot fully capture the progression of action due to limited view and coverage of the camera.
The limitations of a single camera can be overcome by
using multiple cameras. Compared to systems with a single camera, the advantages of having multiple cameras are
obvious: wider coverage and multiple perspectives. Unfortunately, these obvious benefits of multiple cameras might
be difficult to realize in practice due to the lack of a method
that can handle the constraints of the physical infrastruc-

Sofa Table
1

2

2

3

4
TV

4

3

Figure 1: Early recognition of human actions with multiple cameras. Camera 1 is frontal but occluded by a sofa
and a coffee table. Camera 2 shows a top-down view from
far away. Camera 3 does not observe the action. Camera
4 only sees from the side. Due to the limited network and
processing bandwidths, only one camera can be analyzed at
a time. Which camera should be used at each time step, if
no camera is always superior to the others?
ture. Multiple cameras will require more communication
bandwidth and processing power. In many situations, communication bandwidth and processing power cannot be increased, putting an upper limit on the processing throughput. Although many cameras can be installed and the cameras might have high frame rates, not all the frames captured by the cameras can be transmitted and analyzed. Thus,
temporal downsampling, i.e., frame dropping, is unavoidable. A simple approach is to apply the same downsampling factor to all cameras to satisfy the overall throughput
limit. However, this uniform resource allocation strategy
is unlikely to be optimal because some cameras might provide more information about the ongoing human action than
other cameras, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
If processing power is not constrained and if limited
communication bandwidth is the only issue that we need
to address, one may wonder if we can use low-resolution
image or high compression factor instead. However, spatial downsampling and compression can reduce the accuracy of the system especially when the camera is far away
from the scene of human action. Furthermore, to save com11081

