Fashion Outfit Complementary Item Retrieval

Yen-Liang Lin, Son Tran, Larry S. Davis
Amazon
{yenliang,sontran,lrrydav}@amazon.com

Abstract
Complementary fashion item recommendation is critical
for fashion outfit completion. Existing methods mainly focus on outfit compatibility prediction but not in a retrieval
setting. We propose a new framework for outfit complementary item retrieval. Specifically, a category-based subspace attention network is presented, which is a scalable
approach for learning the subspace attentions. In addition, we introduce an outfit ranking loss that better models
the item relationships of an entire outfit. We evaluate our
method on the outfit compatibility, FITB and new retrieval
tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both compatibility
prediction and complementary item retrieval.

1. Introduction
Outfit complementary item retrieval is the task of finding compatible item(s) to complete an outfit. For example,
given a (partially constructed) outfit with a top, a bottom
and a pair of shoes, finding a bag that can go well (i.e.,
is compatible) with them. It is an important recommendation problem especially for online retailers. Customers frequently shop for clothing items that fit well with what has
been selected or purchased before. Being able to recommend compatible items at the right moment would improve
their shopping experience. Figure 1 gives an illustration of
the problem.
Unlike visual or text similarity searching (e.g., [22, 19]),
the item of interest (a.k.a. missing item or target item) for
complementary item retrieval is from a different category
than the categories in the incomplete outfit. So they are visually dis-similar from the other items in the outfit. They are
instead consistent with the global outfit style. As discussed
in [16, 15], complementary fashion items are compatible
along multiple attribute dimensions such as color, pattern,
material, occasion. Being able to deal with this variety is
essential. Moreover, a practical outfit completion system

Query outfit:

?
bags

accessories

sunglasses

all-body

outerwear

missing item: shoe

4

5

Outfit complementary item retrieval:

0

1

2

3

Figure 1. An example of outfit complementary item retrieval. First
row: partial outfit with a missing item (shoe). Second row: retrieved results using our method.

must support large scale searching, where exhaustive comparison is prohibitive.
Prior work such as [18, 11] addressed pairwise complementary retrieval but did not explicitly deal with entire outfit
compatibility. Recent approaches such as [5, 15, 2] focus on
outfit compatibility prediction but not in a retrieval setting.
While technically it is possible to use the classification score
to rank items in the database for retrieval, it is impractical
to do so at a large scale. These approaches were not designed with large-scale outfit complementary item retrieval
in mind (see Section 2 and Section 4 for further analysis and
comparison).
In this work, to capture the notion of item compatibility, we employ an approach that uses multiple style subspaces, similar to [17, 16, 15]. In contrast to prior work,
while the subspaces are generated using a shared model,
the subspace attention weights are conditioned on the item
categories. Our system is designed for large scale retrieval
and outperforms the state-of-the-art on compatibility prediction, fill-in-the-blank (FITB) and outfit complementary
item retrieval (see Section 4).
We train a deep neural network to generate feature em13311

