PQ-NET: A Generative Part Seq2Seq Network for 3D Shapes
Rundi Wu1

Yixin Zhuang1
Kai Xu2
Hao Zhang3
Baoquan Chen1
1
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
2
National University of Defense Technology
3
Simon Fraser University

“The characterization of object perception provided by
recognition-by-components (RBC) bears a close resemblance to some current views as to how speech is perceived.”

Input
Random
Noise

Sequential Generation

Z

— Irving Biederman [5]
RGB
Image

Abstract
We introduce PQ-NET, a deep neural network which represents and generates 3D shapes via sequential part assembly. The input to our network is a 3D shape segmented into
parts, where each part is ﬁrst encoded into a feature representation using a part autoencoder. The core component
of PQ-NET is a sequence-to-sequence or Seq2Seq autoencoder which encodes a sequence of part features into a latent vector of ﬁxed size, and the decoder reconstructs the
3D shape, one part at a time, resulting in a sequential assembly. The latent space formed by the Seq2Seq encoder
encodes both part structure and ﬁne part geometry. The decoder can be adapted to perform several generative tasks
including shape autoencoding, interpolation, novel shape
generation, and single-view 3D reconstruction, where the
generated shapes are all composed of meaningful parts.

1. Introduction
Learning generative models of 3D shapes is a key problem in both computer vision and computer graphics. While
graphics is mainly concerned with 3D shape modeling, in
inverse graphics [23], a major line of work in computer vision, one aims to infer, often from a single image, a disentangled representation with respect to 3D shape and scene
structures [29]. Lately, there has been a steady stream of
works on developing deep neural networks for 3D shape
generation using different shape representations, e.g., voxel
grids [54], point clouds [15, 1], meshes [20, 51], and most
recently, implicit functions [35, 41, 10, 56]. However, most
of these works produce unstructured 3D shapes, despite the
fact that object perception is generally believed to be a process of structural understanding, i.e., to infer shape parts,
their compositions, and inter-part relations [24, 5].

Depth
Map

Partial
Shape

Figure 1. Our network, PQ-NET, learns 3D shape representations
as a sequential part assembly. It can be adapted to generative tasks
such as random 3D shape generation, single-view 3D reconstruction (from RGB or depth images), and shape completion.

In this paper, we introduce a deep neural network which
represents and generates 3D shapes via sequential part assembly, as shown in Figures 1 and 2. In a way, we regard
the assembly sequence as a “sentence” which organizes and
describes the parts constituting a 3D shape. Our approach
is inspired, in part, by the resemblance between speech and
shape perception, as suggested by the seminal work of Biederman [5] on recognition-by-components (RBC). Another
related observation is that the phase structure rules for language parsing, ﬁrst introduced by Noam Chomsky, take on
the view that a sentence is both a linear string of words and
a hierarchical structure with phrases nested in phrases [7].
In the context of shape structure presentations, our network
adheres to linear part orders, while other works [53, 31, 36]
have opted for hierarchical part organizations.
The input to our network is a 3D shape segmented into
parts, where each part is ﬁrst encoded into a feature representation using a part autoencoder; see Figure 2(a). The
core component of our network is a sequence-to-sequence
or Seq2Seq autoencoder which encodes a sequence of part
features into a latent vector of ﬁxed size, and the decoder
1829

