Event Probability Mask (EPM) and Event Denoising Convolutional Neural
Network (EDnCNN) for Neuromorphic Cameras
R. Wes Baldwin1 , Mohammed Almatrafi2 , Vijayan Asari1 and Keigo Hirakawa1
1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Dayton
Department of Electrical Engineering, Umm Al-Qura University

{baldwinr2, vasari1, khirakawa1}@udayton.edu, mmmatrafi@uqu.edu.sa

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method for labeling realworld neuromorphic camera sensor data by calculating the
likelihood of generating an event at each pixel within a
short time window, which we refer to as “event probability
mask” or EPM. Its applications include (i) objective benchmarking of event denoising performance, (ii) training convolutional neural networks for noise removal called “event
denoising convolutional neural network” (EDnCNN), and
(iii) estimating internal neuromorphic camera parameters.
We provide the first dataset (DVSNOISE20) of real-world
labeled neuromorphic camera events for noise removal.

1. Introduction
Neuromorphic (a.k.a. event-based) cameras offer a hardware solution to overcome limitations of conventional cameras, with high temporal resolution (>800 kHz), low latency (20 µs), wide dynamic range (120 dB), and low power
(10−30 mW) [28]. This is accomplished by a dynamic vision sensor (DVS), which reports the log-intensity changes
(i.e. events) of each pixel in microseconds. However, performance of methods using neuromorphic cameras deteriorate with noise. This fact has been cited as a major challenge in recent research [18, 20]. Noise is noticeable in low
light conditions, where events triggered by minor intensity
fluctuations dominate over the usable signal in the scene.
Currently, there is no reliable way to benchmark the denoising performance because the exact distribution of noise in
DVS circuitry—which is environment-, scene-, and sensordependent—is still unknown. Since neuromorphic cameras
generate millions of events each second, it is impractical
to manually label each event. This has precluded machine
learning approaches to event denoising until this point.
We propose the notion of an “event probability mask”

Figure 1. Proposed EDnCNN denoising applied to “CheckerFast”
sequence in DVSNOISE20 dataset. DVS dots are colored by time
and overlaid on APS image. Red dots were classified by EDnCNN
as noise. EDnCNN characterizes real-world noise distribution by
learning the mapping between actual and noise-free DVS events.

(EPM) – a label for event data acquired by real-world neuromorphic camera hardware. We infer the log–likelihood
probability of an event within a neuromorphic camera pixel
by combining the intensity measurements from active pixel
sensors (APS) and the camera motion captured by an inertial measurement unit (IMU). Our contributions are:
• Event Probability Mask (EPM): spatial-time neuromorphic event probability label for real-world data;
• Relative Plausibility Measure of Denoising (RPMD):
objective metric for benchmarking DVS denoising;
• Event Denoising CNN (EDnCNN): DVS feature extraction and binary classifier model for denoising;
• Calibration: a maximum likelihood estimation of
threshold values internal to the DVS circuitry; and
• Dataset (DVSNOISE20): labeled real-world neuromorphic camera events for benchmarking denoising.

1701

