Height and Uprightness Invariance for 3D Prediction from a Single View
Manel Baradad
Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
mbaradad@mit.edu

torralba@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art methods that predict 3D from
single images ignore the fact that the height of objects and
their upright orientation is invariant to the camera pose and
intrinsic parameters. To account for this, we propose a system that directly regresses 3D world coordinates for each
pixel. First, our system predicts the camera position with
respect to the ground plane and its intrinsic parameters.
Followed by that, it predicts the 3D position for each pixel
along the rays spanned by the camera. The predicted 3D
coordinates and normals are invariant to a change in the
camera position or its model, and we can directly impose a
regression loss on these world coordinates.
Our approach yields competitive results for depth and
camera pose estimation (while not being explicitly trained
to predict any of these) and improves across-dataset
generalization performance over existing state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1. Given a single image, we predict 3D world coordinates
(where y = 0 corresponds to the floor) for each pixel. To this
end, we predict the camera intrinsics, the extrinsics and the depth
per pixel, and use these to recover world coordinates. We note
that, with this representation, ny and y per pixel are invariant to a
change in the position of the camera or its model.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding from single images has greatly improved in the last decade, with major successes in a wide
variety of dense prediction tasks such as depth regression
[11, 18, 26], intrinsic image decomposition [24, 29] and
semantic segmentation [39, 43, 47], between others [41].
Though state-of-the-art methods for all these tasks use similar architectures and training techniques, there is an inherent
difference between these tasks that is usually disregarded:
whether the prediction for each pixel is invariant or not to
projective transformations.
If we had access to an algorithm that could derender an
image and produce novel views of the scene from different
positions, some of these tasks would behave differently. For
example, if a point on some element of the scene appeared
in both views, it would have the same values for the semantics and the albedo, but it would have different values for
the depth. That is, semantics and albedo are invariant to
projective transformations, but depth is not.
Convolutional neural networks are somewhat invariant to

this type of transformations and there are known techniques
that can make them generalize better [2, 31, 42]. Additionally, augmenting the training data with random transformations of carefully chosen classes (such as affine transformations) has shown to improve generalization of CNN’s at test
time [8].
To exploit this robustness when predicting 3D structure
from a single image, we propose using a neural network that
predicts 3D coordinates in an appropriate reference frame
(which we call world frame). Using this reference frame,
one spatial dimension (y w , the height relative to a reference
plane) and one normal dimension (nw
y , the upright normal)
become invariant to projective transformations.
As seen in Figure 1, our model does not produce three
independent coordinate maps. Instead, we propose predicting the camera model and the depth per pixel, which define
the 3D coordinates for each pixel. This technique allows reducing the possible configurations for the point cloud of an
image to those that are possible under the predicted camera
1491

