Rotation Consistent Margin Loss for Efficient Low-bit Face Recognition
Yudong Wu1 , Yichao Wu1 , Ruihao Gong1,2 , Yuanhao Lv1 , Ken Chen1 ,
Ding Liang1 , Xiaolin Hu3 , Xianglong Liu2 , Junjie Yan1
1
SenseTime Group Limited 2 BeiHang University 3 Tsinghua University
{wuyudong,wuyichao,liangding,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The problem of face recognition (FR) has been well investigated [41, 42, 12, 4, 25, 8, 46, 54] in recent years.
Among them, the deep FR technique, which leverages
hierarchical and heavy-weight network architectures [43,
34, 38, 14, 16], has significantly improved the state-ofthe-art performance and fostered wide-spread applications.
Whereas excessive memory and computational consumption make it impractical to deploy massive networks on mobile or embedded devices.
Quantization technique [6, 5, 31, 55, 56, 10] emerges
as an elegant compression solution to address this problem. The core idea of this method is to reduce bit-width
of weights and activations by mapping continuous values
to discrete integers, which can not only reduce the memory
footprint but also accelerate the inference directly. Despite
the attractive benefits, low bit-width may degrade accuracy
due to quantization errors (QEs). To minimize QEs, many
methods have been proposed [53, 36, 2, 1], and have been
demonstrated successful in the fields of closed-set computer

𝒘"
𝒘"

𝒘#

𝒘"

𝒘#

𝒘"

𝒘#

𝒘#

Open-set

Closed-set

(a) Quantization processes of closed-set and open-set
100 94.5
93.5
90

88.0

86.0

80
70
60
50
40

0.02

66.0
FP
4-bits

Top1

TPR (closed)

FP
4-bits

0.03

Ratio (%)

Accuracy (%)

In this paper, we consider the low-bit quantization problem of face recognition (FR) under the open-set protocol.
Different from well explored low-bit quantization on closedset image classification task, the open-set task is more sensitive to quantization errors (QEs). We redefine the QEs in
angular space and disentangle it into class error and individual error. These two parts correspond to inter-class separability and intra-class compactness, respectively. Instead
of eliminating the entire QEs, we propose the rotation consistent margin (RCM) loss to minimize the individual error,
which is more essential to feature discriminative power. Extensive experiments on popular benchmark datasets such as
MegaFace Challenge, Youtube Faces (YTF), Labeled Face
in the Wild (LFW) and IJB-C show the superiority of proposed loss in low-bit (e.g., 4-, 3-bit) FR quantization tasks.

Margin

50.0

0.01

TPR (open)

0.00 0

(b) Comparison of accuracy

25

50

75

Angle ( )

100

125

(c) Angles of positive pairs

Figure 1: Difference between closed-set and open-set quantization. (a) sketches the quantization processes of closed and openset, respectively. W i is the i-th column of the weight of the last
fully connected layer (i-th class weight). Gray circle represents
unknown face categories in test set, and the green dotted line denotes decision boundary. (b) compares the degradation of top1
accuracy and TPR after quantization. FP refers to full precision.
(c) illustrates the increase of angles between positive pairs caused
by quantization.

vision problems1 , such as image classification and object
detection [23]. However, for real-world FR, it is common
that the testing identities (IDs) are disjoint from the training
set, which makes open-set FR2 problems more challenging
and practical [25, 11]. In this study, we show that FR is
much more sensitive to the QEs than closed-set classification tasks, thus novel sophisticated techniques are required
to address this issue.
Essentially, FR is a typical scenario of metric learning
where features of different IDs are expected to have discriminative large-margins rather than just be separable, as
illustrated in Fig. 1a. To demonstrate the difficulty in openset model quantization, we conduct a toy experiment. For
1 For closed-set protocol, all testing classes are predefined in the training set [25].
2 In this paper, “open-set FR” and “FR” can be used interchangeably.

6866

