Heterogeneous Knowledge Distillation using Information Flow Modeling
N. Passalis, M. Tzelepi and A. Tefas
Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
{passalis, mtzelepi, tefas}@csd.auth.gr

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) methods are capable of
transferring the knowledge encoded in a large and complex teacher into a smaller and faster student. Early methods were usually limited to transferring the knowledge only
between the last layers of the networks, while latter approaches were capable of performing multi-layer KD, further increasing the accuracy of the student. However, despite their improved performance, these methods still suffer from several limitations that restrict both their efficiency
and flexibility. First, existing KD methods typically ignore
that neural networks undergo through different learning
phases during the training process, which often requires
different types of supervision for each one. Furthermore,
existing multi-layer KD methods are usually unable to effectively handle networks with significantly different architectures (heterogeneous KD). In this paper we propose a
novel KD method that works by modeling the information
flow through the various layers of the teacher model and
then train a student model to mimic this information flow.
The proposed method is capable of overcoming the aforementioned limitations by using an appropriate supervision
scheme during the different phases of the training process,
as well as by designing and training an appropriate auxiliary teacher model that acts as a proxy model capable of
“explaining” the way the teacher works to the student. The
effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated using
four image datasets and several different evaluation setups.

1. Introduction
Despite the tremendous success of Deep Learning (DL)
in a wide range of domain [12], most DL methods suffer
from a significant drawback: powerful hardware is needed
for training and deploying DL models. This significantly
hinders DL applications on resource-scarce environments,
such as embedded and mobile devices, leading to the development of various methods for overcoming these limitations. Among the most prominent methods for this task

Critical
connections
formed

≈

Further
ﬁtting and
compression

1.9

< 0.01

Forming critical
connections
2

≤ ≤

100

Figure 1. Existing knowledge distillation approaches ignore the
existence of critical learning periods when transferring the knowledge, even when multi-layer transfer approaches are used. However, as argued in [1], the information plasticity rapidly declines
after the first few training epochs, reducing the effectiveness of
knowledge distillation. On the other hand, the proposed method
models the information flow in the teacher network and provides
the appropriate supervision during the first few critical learning
epochs in order to ensure that the necessary connections between
successive layers of the networks will be formed. Note that even
though this process initially slows down the convergence of the
network slightly (epochs 1-8), it allows for rapidly increasing the
rate of convergence after the critical learning period ends (epochs
10-25). The parameter α controls the relative importance of transferring the knowledge from the intermediate layers during the various learning phases, as described in detail in Section 3.

is knowledge distillation (KD) [9], which is also known as
knowledge transfer (KT) [30]. These approaches aim to
transfer the knowledge encoded in a large and complex neural network into a smaller and faster one. In this way, it is
possible to increase the accuracy of the smaller model, compared to the same model trained without employing KD.
Typically, the smaller model is called student model, while
the larger model is called teacher model.
Early KD approaches focused on transferring the knowledge between the last layer of the teacher and student mod-

2339

