Unifying Training and Inference for Panoptic Segmentation
Qizhu Li Xiaojuan Qi∗ Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford
{qizhu.li, xiaojuan.qi, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present an end-to-end network to bridge the gap between training and inference pipeline for panoptic segmentation, a task that seeks to partition an image into semantic
regions for “stuff” and object instances for “things”. In contrast to recent works, our network exploits a parametrised,
yet lightweight panoptic segmentation submodule, powered
by an end-to-end learnt dense instance affinity, to capture
the probability that any pair of pixels belong to the same
instance. This panoptic submodule gives rise to a novel
propagation mechanism for panoptic logits and enables
the network to output a coherent panoptic segmentation
map for both “stuff” and “thing” classes, without any postprocessing. Reaping the benefits of end-to-end training, our
full system sets new records on the popular street scene
dataset, Cityscapes, achieving 61.4 PQ with a ResNet-50
backbone using only the fine annotations. On the challenging COCO dataset, our ResNet-50-based network also
delivers state-of-the-art accuracy of 43.4 PQ. Moreover, our
network flexibly works with and without object mask cues,
performing competitively under both settings, which is of
interest for applications with computation budgets.

1. Introduction
As a pixel-wise classification task, panoptic segmentation
aims to achieve a seamless semantic understanding of all
countable and uncountable objects in a scene - a.k.a. “things”
and “stuff” respectively, and delineate the instance boundaries of objects where semantically possible.
While early attempts at tackling panoptic segmentation
often resort to two separate networks for instance and semantic segmentation, recent works [17, 15, 12, 24, 25] are
able to improve the overall efficiency by constructing the
two branches on a single, shared feature extractor, and training the multi-head, multi-task network jointly. However,
these works have stopped short of devising an end-to-end
pipeline for panoptic segmentation, as they all adopt a post∗ Xiaojuan Qi is now with the University of Hong Kong.

processing stage with heuristics to combine the different outputs of their multi-task networks, following [13, 12]. Such
pipelines suffer from several shortcomings. Firstly, postprocessing often requires a time-consuming trial-and-error
procedure to mine a good set of hyperparameters, which
may need to be repeated for each image domain. As the
performance of an algorithm can be quite sensitive to the
choice of hyperparameters, how well a method performs
can quickly degenerate to a function of the amount of computation resources at its disposal [14, 12]. Secondly, methods without an explicit loss function for panoptic segmentation [17, 15, 12, 25] cannot directly optimise for the ultimate
goal. Even with expert knowledge, it is difficult to design
an exhaustive set of rules and remedies for all failure modes.
An example is shown in Fig. 1 (c): after the heuristic postprocessing, the missing part of the car cannot be recovered.
To achieve an end-to-end system, we reckon three challenging steps need to be taken: (1) unify the training and
inference, enabling the network to differentiably produce
panoptic segmentation during training; (2) embed a datadriven mechanism in the multi-task network whereby imperfect and coarse cues can be cleaned and corrected; (3) design
an appropriate loss function to directly optimise the global
objective for panoptic segmentation.
To achieve (1) and (2), we propose a novel pipeline using
segmentation and localisation cues to predict a coherent
panoptic segmentation in an end-to-end manner. At the heart
of this pipeline lie a dynamic potential head – a parameterfree stage that represents a dynamic number of panoptic
instances, and a dense instance affinity head – a parametrised,
efficient, and data-driven module that predicts and utilises
the likelihood for any pair of pixels to belong to the same
“thing” instance or “stuff” class. These two differentiable
heads produces full panoptic segmentation during training
and inference, eradicating the train-test logic discrepancy.
Furthermore, to fulfil (3), we propose a panoptic matching
loss which computes loss directly on panoptic segmentations.
This objective function, together with the differentiable nature of our proposed panoptic head, enables the network to
learn in an end-to-end manner. To our best knowledge, our
loss is the first to perform online segment matching before

13320

