MSeg: A Composite Dataset for Multi-domain Semantic Segmentation
John Lambert∗ 1,3 , Zhuang Liu∗1,2 , Ozan Sener1 , James Hays3,4 , and Vladlen Koltun1
1

Intel Labs, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology, 4 Argo AI

Input image

Ground truth

ADE20K model

Mapillary model

COCO model

MSeg model

Figure 1: MSeg unifies multiple semantic segmentation datasets by reconciling their taxonomies and resolving incompatible annotations.
This enables training models that perform consistently across domains and generalize better. Input images in this figure were taken (top to
bottom) from the ScanNet [8], WildDash [44], and Pascal VOC [10] datasets, none of which were seen during training.

Abstract
We present MSeg, a composite dataset that unifies semantic segmentation datasets from different domains. A
naive merge of the constituent datasets yields poor performance due to inconsistent taxonomies and annotation practices. We reconcile the taxonomies and bring the pixel-level
annotations into alignment by relabeling more than 220,000
object masks in more than 80,000 images. The resulting
composite dataset enables training a single semantic segmentation model that functions effectively across domains
and generalizes to datasets that were not seen during training. We adopt zero-shot cross-dataset transfer as a benchmark to systematically evaluate a model’s robustness and
show that MSeg training yields substantially more robust
models in comparison to training on individual datasets or
naive mixing of datasets without the presented contributions. A model trained on MSeg ranks first on the WildDash
leaderboard for robust semantic segmentation, with no exposure to WildDash data during training.

*Equal contribution

1. Introduction
When Papert first proposed computer vision as a summer
project in 1966 [26], he described the primary objective as
“...a system of programs which will divide a vidisector picture into regions such as likely objects, likely background
areas and chaos.” Five decades later, computer vision is a
thriving engineering field, and the task described by Papert
is known as semantic segmentation [5, 15, 20, 33, 42, 45].
Have we delivered on Papert’s objective? A cursory
examination of the literature would suggest that we have.
Hundreds of papers are published every year that report ever-higher accuracy on semantic segmentation benchmarks such as Cityscapes [7], Mapillary [25], COCO [19],
ADE20K [46], and others. Yet a simple exercise can show
that the mission has not been accomplished. Take a camera
and begin recording as you traverse a sequence of environments: for example, going about your house to pack some
supplies, getting into the car, driving through your city to
a forest on the outskirts, and going on a hike. Now perform semantic segmentation on the recorded video. Is there
a model that will successfully perform this task?
A computer vision professional will likely resort to mul12879

