3FabRec: Fast Few-shot Face alignment by Reconstruction
Björn Browatzki and Christian Wallraven*
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul
browatbn@korea.ac.kr, wallraven@korea.ac.kr

Figure 1: The framework of 3FabRec consisting of: (leftmost box) a first, unsupervised training stage that trains a low-dimensional latent
space via an adversarial (generative) autoencoder on a large dataset of unlabeled faces, (middle box) subsequent supervised training with
few annotated faces. The rightmost box shows results from testing the framework trained on only the 10 images of the middle box with
original faces (top row), reconstructed faces via the autoencoder (middle row), and confidence heatmaps (bottom row).

Abstract
Current supervised methods for facial landmark detection require a large amount of training data and may suffer
from overfitting to specific datasets due to the massive number of parameters. We introduce a semi-supervised method
in which the crucial idea is to first generate implicit face
knowledge from the large amounts of unlabeled images of
faces available today. In a first, completely unsupervised
stage, we train an adversarial autoencoder to reconstruct
faces via a low-dimensional face embedding. In a second,
supervised stage, we interleave the decoder with transfer
layers to retask the generation of color images to the prediction of landmark heatmaps. Our framework (3FabRec)
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several common
benchmarks and, most importantly, is able to maintain impressive accuracy on extremely small training sets down to
as few as 10 images. As the interleaved layers only add a
low amount of parameters to the decoder, inference runs at
several hundred FPS on a GPU.

1. Introduction
Accurate and robust localization of facial landmarks is a
critical step in many existing face processing applications,
including tracking, expression analysis, and face identification. Unique localization of such landmarks is severely
affected by occlusions, partial face visibility, large pose
variations, uneven illumination, or large, non-rigid deformations during more extreme facial expressions [41, 44].
These challenges have to be overcome in order to achieve
a low landmark localization error, implying high robustness
to appearance changes in faces while guaranteeing high localization accuracy for each landmark.
The recent advances in deep learning techniques [3] coupled with the availability of large, annotated databases have
allowed steady progress with localization accuracy on a typical benchmark increasing by 100% (from [51] to [49] see below for more related work). Most approaches use a
combination of highly-tuned, supervised learning schemes
in order to achieve this performance and almost always
16110

