Rethinking Differentiable Search for Mixed-Precision Neural Networks
Zhaowei Cai
UC San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

zwcai@ucsd.edu

nuno@ucsd.edu

1-bit
D

S1

2-bit

S1

output

...

S NE

+

S 2D

+

S 2E

...

S ND

N-bit

N-bit

Deep neural networks have state-of-the-art performance
on computer vision tasks such as visual recognition [16,
26, 29, 30, 12], object detection [24, 19, 5], segmentation
[11, 6], etc. However, their large computation and memory
costs make them difficult to deploy on devices such as mobile phones, drones, autonomous robots, etc. Low-precision
networks, which severely reduce computation and storage
by quantizing network weights and activations to low-bit
representations, promise a solution to this problem.
In the low-precision literature, all network weights and
activations are usually quantized to the same bit-width
[14, 23, 35, 4, 37, 34]. The resulting uniform low-precision
networks have been preferred mostly because they are well
supported by existing hardware, e.g. CPUs, FPGAs, etc.
However, uniform bit allocation does not account for the
individual properties of different filters, e.g. their location

weight

2-bit

1. Introduction

activation

E

input

Low-precision networks, with weights and activations
quantized to low bit-width, are widely used to accelerate
inference on edge devices. However, current solutions are
uniform, using identical bit-width for all filters. This fails
to account for the different sensitivities of different filters
and is suboptimal. Mixed-precision networks address this
problem, by tuning the bit-width to individual filter requirements. In this work, the problem of optimal mixed-precision
network search (MPS) is considered. To circumvent its difficulties of discrete search space and combinatorial optimization, a new differentiable search architecture is proposed,
with several novel contributions to advance the efficiency
by leveraging the unique properties of the MPS problem.
The resulting Efficient differentiable MIxed-Precision network Search (EdMIPS) method is effective at finding the
optimal bit allocation for multiple popular networks, and
can search a large model, e.g. Inception-V3, directly on ImageNet without proxy task in a reasonable amount of time.
The learned mixed-precision networks significantly outperform their uniform counterparts.

1-bit

Abstract

Figure 1. Differentiable architecture of the proposed mixedprecision network search module.

on the network, structure, parameter cardinality, etc. In
result, it can lead to suboptimal performance for a given
network size and complexity. Mixed-precision networks
[1, 18, 17, 33, 32, 31, 9] address this limitation, enabling
the optimization of bit-widths at the filter level. They are
also becoming practically relevant, with the introduction
of hardware that supports mixed-precision representations.
For example, the NVIDIA AMP1 can choose between different floating point representations during training.
Nevertheless, the problem of optimizing bit allocation
for a mixed-precision network is very challenging. Since
a network of L layers and N candidate bit-widths can have
N L different configurations, it is usually impossible to manually craft the optimal solution, and automatic bit allocation
techniques are required. While this is well aligned with
recent progresses in automatic neural architecture search
(NAS) [38, 39, 3, 2, 20], there are several important differences between generic NAS and mixed-precision network
search (MPS). First, NAS relies extensively on a proxy task
to overcome the extremely high computational demands of
searching for the optimal network architecture on a large
dataset, such as ImageNet. It is common to search for a
module block on a small dataset (such as CIFAR-10) and
stack copies of this module as the final architecture. How1 https://devblogs.nvidia.com/nvidia-automatic-mixed-precisiontensorflow

12349

