Augment Your Batch: Improving Generalization Through Instance Repetition
Elad Hoffer1 , Tal Ben-Nun2 , Itay Hubara1 , Niv Giladi3 , Torsten Hoefler2 , Daniel Soudry3
1
Habana-Labs, Caesarea, Israel
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel
{elad.hoffer,daniel.soudry,itayhubara}@gmail.com
{talbn,htor}@inf.ethz.ch
giladiniv@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Large-batch SGD is important for scaling training of
deep neural networks. However, without fine-tuning hyperparameter schedules, the generalization of the model may
be hampered. We propose to use batch augmentation: replicating instances of samples within the same batch with different data augmentations. Batch augmentation acts as a
regularizer and an accelerator, increasing both generalization and performance scaling for a fixed budget of optimization steps. We analyze the effect of batch augmentation
on gradient variance and show that it empirically improves
convergence for a wide variety of networks and datasets.
Our results show that batch augmentation reduces the number of necessary SGD updates to achieve the same accuracy as the state-of-the-art. Overall, this simple yet effective
method enables faster training and better generalization by
allowing more computational resources to be used concurrently.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network training is a computationallyintensive problem, whose performance is inherently limited by the sequentiality of the Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) algorithm. In a common variant of the algorithm,
a batch of samples is used at each step for gradient computation, accumulating the results to compute the descent
direction. Batch computation enables data parallelism [2],
which is necessary to scale training to a large number of
processing elements.
Increasing batch size while mitigating accuracy degradation is actively researched in the ML and systems communities [8, 19, 13, 23, 25, 40]. [29] comprehensively study
the relation between batch size and convergence, whereas

other works focus on increasing parallelism for a specific
setting or hardware. Using such techniques, it is possible to
reduce the time to successfully train ResNet-50 [9] on the
ImageNet [5] dataset down to 132 seconds [40], to the point
where the performance bottleneck is reported to be input
data processing (I/O) time.
The key to supporting large batch training often involves
fine-tuning the base Learning Rate (LR), per-layer LR [41],
LR schedules [8, 41], or the optimization step [15, 10, 25].
These methods typically use higher LRs to account for the
lower gradient variance in large batch updates. However,
without fine-tuning, large batch training often results in degraded generalization. It was suggested [14] that this is
caused by a tendency of such low variance updates to converge to “sharp minima” .
In this work, we propose Batch Augmentation (BA),
which enables to control the gradient variance while
increasing batch size. Using larger augmented batches, we
can better utilize the computational resources without the
cost of additional I/O. In fact, it is even possible to achieve
better generalization accuracy while adopting existing,
standard LR schedules.
Our main contributions are:
• Introducing BA and its possible usages.
• Empirical results for BA properties, resource utilization and gradient variance.
• Convergence results on multi-GPU nodes and a Cray
supercomputer with 5,704 GPUs.

1.1. Large batch training of neural networks
Recent approaches by [10], [8], [41] and others show
that by adapting the optimization regime (i.e., hyperparameter schedule), large batch training can achieve equally good
18129

