“Looking at the right stuff” - Guided semantic-gaze for autonomous driving
Anwesan Pal
UC San Diego

Sayan Mondal
UC San Diego

Henrik I. Christensen
UC San Diego

a2pal@eng.ucsd.edu

samondal@eng.ucsd.edu

hichristensen@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
In recent years, predicting driver’s focus of attention
has been a very active area of research in the autonomous
driving community. Unfortunately, existing state-of-the-art
techniques achieve this by relying only on human gaze information, thereby ignoring scene semantics. We propose
a novel Semantics Augmented GazE (SAGE) detection approach that captures driving specific contextual information, in addition to the raw gaze. Such a combined attention mechanism serves as a powerful tool to focus on the
relevant regions in an image frame in order to make driving
both safe and efficient. Using this, we design a complete
saliency prediction framework - SAGE-Net, which modifies
the initial prediction from SAGE by taking into account vital aspects such as distance to objects (depth), ego vehicle
speed, and pedestrian crossing intent. Exhaustive experiments conducted through four popular saliency algorithms
show that on 49/56 (87.5%) cases - considering both the
overall dataset and crucial driving scenarios, SAGE outperforms existing techniques without any additional computational overhead during the training process. The augmented dataset along with the relevant code are available
as part of the supplementary material.1

1. Introduction
Cameras are one of the most powerful sensors in the
world of robotics as they capture detailed information about
the environment, and thus can be used for object detection [51, 33] and segmentation [48, 49] - something that is
much harder to achieve with a basic range sensor. However,
an image/video may contain some irrelevant information.
Therefore, there is a need to filter out these unimportant regions and instead, learn to focus our “attention” on parts
of the image which are necessary to solve the task at hand.
This is crucial for autonomous driving scenarios, where a
vehicle should pay more attention to other vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists present in its vicinity, while ignoring the
1 Supplementary material including code and videos are available
at https://sites.google.com/eng.ucsd.edu/sage-net.

(a) Input image

(b) SAGE-Net (our)

(c) BDD-A [53]

(d) DR(eye)VE [4]

Figure 1: Predicted saliency map for different models (Best
viewed in color). The bounding box shows a pedestrian illegally crossing the road and is prone to accident. While other
models only capture the car ahead (partially), our proposed
model can completely learn to detect both the car and the
crossing pedestrian.

inconsequential objects. Upon successfully identifying the
objects of interest, the controller driving the vehicle only
needs to attend to them in order to make optimal decisions.
We propose a novel framework for predicting driver’s
focus of attention through a learnt saliency map by taking
into consideration the semantic context in an image. Typical saliency prediction algorithms [39, 40, 53, 45] in driving scenarios rely only on human-gaze information, either
through an in-car [4], or in-lab [53] setting. However, gaze
by itself does not completely describe everything a driver
should attend to, mainly due to the following reasons:
(i) Peripheral vision: Humans have a tendency to rely
on peripheral vision, thus giving us the ability to fixate our
eyes on one object while attending to another. This cannot be captured by an eye-tracking device. Thus, only incar driver gaze [4] does not convey sufficient information.
While the in-lab annotation does alleviate this problem to
some extent [53] by aggregating the gazes of multiple in-

11883

