Cross-domain Detection via Graph-induced Prototype Alignment
Minghao Xu1,2 Hang Wang1,2 Bingbing Ni1,2,3∗ Qi Tian4 Wenjun Zhang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Huawei Hisilicon 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{xuminghao118, wang–hang, nibingbing, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn
nibingbing@hisilicon.com tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Applying the knowledge of an object detector trained on
a specific domain directly onto a new domain is risky, as
the gap between two domains can severely degrade model’s
performance. Furthermore, since different instances commonly embody distinct modal information in object detection scenario, the feature alignment of source and target
domain is hard to be realized. To mitigate these problems, we propose a Graph-induced Prototype Alignment
(GPA) framework to seek for category-level domain alignment via elaborate prototype representations. In the nutshell, more precise instance-level features are obtained
through graph-based information propagation among region proposals, and, on such basis, the prototype representation of each class is derived for category-level domain alignment. In addition, in order to alleviate the negative effect of class-imbalance on domain adaptation, we
design a Class-reweighted Contrastive Loss to harmonize
the adaptation training process. Combining with Faster
R-CNN, the proposed framework conducts feature alignment in a two-stage manner. Comprehensive results on
various cross-domain detection tasks demonstrate that our
approach outperforms existing methods with a remarkable
margin. Our code is available at https://github.
com/ChrisAllenMing/GPA-detection.

1. Introduction
Following the rapid development of techniques leveraging Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), a variety of computervision-related tasks, e.g. object classiﬁcation [20, 14], object detection [35, 24], and semantic segmentation [4, 13],
witnessed major breakthroughs in the last decade. It should
be noticed that the impressive performance of these models is established, to a great extent, on the basis of massive
amounts of annotated data, of which the annotation process
*The corresponding author is Bingbing Ni.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Two vehicles and corresponding region proposals from
the Cityscapes [6] dataset which serves as target domain. These
two vehicles reﬂect multi-modal information, e.g. distinct scale
and orientation, and the generated region proposals contain incomplete information of them.

itself could be a laborious task in many cases. Furthermore,
when the model trained on a domain with abundant annotations is applied to a distinct domain with limited, even
unavailable, labels, it will suffer from performance decay,
due to the existence of domain shift [53].
One of the extensively explored techniques to deal with
such dilemma is Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA),
which seeks for knowledge transfer from a labeled dataset
(source domain) to another unlabeled one (target domain).
In order to encourage domain-invariant feature representations, commonly adopted strategies can be roughly classiﬁed into two categories: 1) Minimizing an explicitly deﬁned domain discrepancy measurement [25, 44, 42, 48]; 2)
Applying adversarial training to UDA via domain classiﬁer [7, 43, 1, 32]. These strategies are comprehensively
exploited in classiﬁcation-based tasks.
Besides classiﬁcation, cross-domain detection is also
strongly demanded in modern Computer Vision systems,
including intelligent surveillance and autonomous driving,
in which the deployment environment, e.g. backgrounds,
weather, illumination, changes from site to site. Previous
works [5, 2, 55] utilize independent or grouped region proposals to align source and target domain on local instance
level. However, since supervisory signal is lacked on target
domain, the generated region proposals commonly deviate
from instances, which makes the information from primal

12355

