TDAN: Temporally-Deformable Alignment Network for Video Super-Resolution
Yapeng Tian1 , Yulun Zhang2 , Yun Fu2 , Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester, 2 Northeastern University
{yapengtian,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu, yulun100@gmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to restore a photorealistic high-resolution (HR) video frame from both its
corresponding low-resolution (LR) frame (reference frame)
and multiple neighboring frames (supporting frames). Due
to varying motion of cameras or objects, the reference
frame and each support frame are not aligned. Therefore,
temporal alignment is a challenging yet important problem for VSR. Previous VSR methods usually utilize optical flow between the reference frame and each supporting
frame to warp the supporting frame for temporal alignment. However, both inaccurate flow and the image-level
warping strategy will lead to artifacts in the warped supporting frames. To overcome the limitation, we propose a
temporally-deformable alignment network (TDAN) to adaptively align the reference frame and each supporting frame
at the feature level without computing optical flow. The
TDAN uses features from both the reference frame and each
supporting frame to dynamically predict offsets of sampling convolution kernels. By using the corresponding kernels, TDAN transforms supporting frames to align with the
reference frame. To predict the HR video frame, a reconstruction network taking aligned frames and the reference frame is utilized. Experimental results demonstrate
that the TDAN is capable of alleviating occlusions and artifacts for temporal alignment and the TDAN-based VSR
model outperforms several recent state-of-the-art VSR networks with a comparable or even much smaller model size.
The source code and pre-trained models are released in
https://github.com/YapengTian/TDAN-VSR.

1. Introduction
The goal of video super-resolution (VSR) is to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) video frame from its corresponding low-resolution (LR) video frame (reference
frame) and multiple neighboring LR video frames (supporting frames). HR video frames contain more image details
and are more preferred to humans. Therefore, the VSR technique is desired in many real applications, such as video

Walk

HR

Bicubic

DUF [1]

Ours

Figure 1. VSR results for a frame in the walk sequence. We find
that our method can restore more accurate image structures and
details than the recent DUF network.

surveillance and high-definition television (HDTV).
To super-resolve the LR reference frame, VSR will exploit both the LR reference frame and multiple LR supporting frames. However, the LR reference frame and each supporting frame may not be aligned due to the motion of camera or objects. Thus, a vital issue in VSR is how to align the
supporting frames with the reference frame.
Previous methods [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] usually exploit optical
flow to predict motion fields between the reference frame
and supporting frames, then warp the supporting frames using their corresponding motion fields. Therefore, the optical
flow prediction is crucial for these approaches. Any errors
in the flow computation or the image-level warping operation may introduce artifacts around image structures in the
aligned supporting frames.
To alleviate the above issues, we propose a temporallydeformable alignment network (TDAN) in this paper that
performs one-stage temporal alignment without using optical flow. Unlike previous optical flow-based VSR methods,
our approach can adaptively align the reference frame and
supporting frames at the feature level without explicit motion estimation and image warping operations. Therefore,
the aligned LR video frames will have less annoying image artifacts, and the image quality of the reconstructed HR
video frame will be improved. In specific, inspired by the
deformable convolution [7], our TDAN uses features from
both the reference frame and each supporting frame to dy-

3360

