Sequential motif profiles and topological plots for offline signature verification
Elias N. Zois and Evangelos Zervas
University of West Attica
Ancient olive grove campus, 12241, Greece

Dimitrios Tsourounis and George Economou
University of Patras
Patras, 26500, Greece

{ezois, ezervas}@uniwa.gr

{dtsourounis, economou}@upatras.gr

Abstract
In spite of the overwhelming high-tech marvels and
applications that rule our digital lives, the use of the
handwritten signature is still recognized worldwide in
government, personal and legal entities to be the most
important behavioral biometric trait. A number of notable
research approaches provide advanced results up to a
certain point which allow us to assert with confidence that
the performance attained by signature verification (SV)
systems is comparable to those provided by any other
biometric modality. Up to now, the mainstream trend for
offline SV is shared between standard -or handcraftedfeature extraction methods and popular machine learning
techniques, with typical examples ranging from sparse
representation to Deep Learning. Recent progress in graph
mining algorithms provide us with the prospect to
re-evaluate the opportunity of utilizing
graph
representations by exploring corresponding graph features
for offline SV. In this paper, inspired by the recent use of
image visibility graphs for mapping images into networks,
we introduce for the first time in offline SV literature their
use as a parameter free, agnostic representation for
exploring global as well as local information. Global
properties of the sparsely located content of the shape of the
signature image are encoded with topological information
of the whole graph. In addition, local pixel patches are
encoded by sequential visibility motifs-subgraphs of size
four, to a low six dimensional motif profile vector. A
number of pooling functions operate on the motif codes in a
spatial pyramid context in order to create the final feature
vector. The effectiveness of the proposed method is
evaluated with the use of two popular datasets. The local
visibility graph features are considered to be highly
informative for SV; this is sustained by the corresponding
results which are at least comparable with other classic
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Despite the advancement and growth in several biometric

13248

modalities, the handwritten signature remains a very
popular way for a person to declare his/her consent or
attendance throughout a governmental, personal or financial
action [1-2], with imminent applications to a non-invasive,
friendly and secure environment for security oriented
e-society applications [3]. Signatures are characterized as a
behavioral biometric; they are usually acquired and stored
with the help of low cost sensors (e.g. mobile phones,
PDA’s, etc.) that records the outcome of the executed
personal signing process. According to the type of sensor,
signatures can be acquired either in a dynamic mode (or
online) [4-7] or in a static mode (or offline). The offline SV
usually considers grayscale images as input to an assembly
of computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR)
algorithms in order to carry out the task of authenticating an
individual, by means of his/hers signature. During the last
forty years, signature verification (SV), defined as the act or
art of verifying the presence of an individual by means of his
signature, has gained considerable attention from the
scientific community. This is easily supported by a
considerable number of comprehensive surveys and
state-of-the-art reviews in automatic SV (ASV) [8-13] that
have been published up to now.
A set of handwritten signatures performed by the same
person are by definition diverse; that is, no two signatures
are ever the same [14]. This intrapersonal variation affects
any mapping procedure from the image domain to the
representation or feature space. Ideally, any signature
mapping must preserve any valuable intrapersonal
information, which is vital to the verification stage that
follows. During the preceding decade, the mainstream
research effort in offline signature representation was
dominated by the use of classical or handcrafted computer
vision feature vectors. A taxonomy on these methods
distinguishes feature extraction by leveraging global and/or
local methods. Global information methods explore among
others geometric features like signature height, width, area,
number of branches and/or holes [15] as well as moments,
projections, distributions, graphometrics, directions,
curvatures and chain codes [16]. Local features were also
employed for offline ASV with notable results [17-32]. In
recent years, we witnessed a shift of ASV research from the
classic approaches towards the more data driven machine

