Improving Confidence Estimates for Unfamiliar Examples
Zhizhong Li, Derek Hoiem
Department of Computer Science,
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
{zli115,dhoiem}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Intuitively, unfamiliarity should lead to lack of confidence. In reality, current algorithms often make highly confident yet wrong predictions when faced with relevant but
unfamiliar examples. A classifier we trained to recognize
gender is 12 times more likely to be wrong with a 99% confident prediction if presented with a subject from a different
age group than those seen during training. In this paper,
we compare and evaluate several methods to improve confidence estimates for unfamiliar and familiar samples. We
propose a testing methodology of splitting unfamiliar and
familiar samples by attribute (age, breed, subcategory) or
sampling (similar datasets collected by different people at
different times). We evaluate methods including confidence
calibration, ensembles, distillation, and a Bayesian model
and use several metrics to analyze label, likelihood, and
calibration error. While all methods reduce over-confident
errors, the ensemble of calibrated models performs best
overall, and T-scaling performs best among the approaches
with fastest inference.

1. Introduction
In research, the i.i.d. assumption, that train and test sets
are sampled from the same distribution, is convenient and
easily satisfied. In practice, the training and test samples
often come from different distributions, as developers often
have access to a less diverse set of images than future samples observed by the deployed system. For example, the
face images gathered by a company’s employees may not
have the racial or age diversity of the world’s population.
Scholars that study the impact of AI on society consider differently distributed samples to be a major risk [49]: “This
is one form of epistemic uncertainty that is quite relevant to
safety because training on a dataset from a different distribution can cause much harm.” Indeed, high profile failures,
such as a person being labeled as a gorilla [54] or a car driving through a tractor trailer [52], are due at least in part to
failure to provide good confidence estimates for unfamiliar

MALE: 99.3%

MALE: 99.8%

FEMALE: 99.9%

DOG: 100.0%

DOG: 100.0%

CAT: 100.0%

BIRD: 99.3%

MAMMAL: 99.7%

BIRD: 99.4%

Figure 1. Deep networks often make highly confident mistakes
when samples are drawn from outside the distribution observed
during training. Examples shown have ages (top), breeds (middle), or species (bottom) that are not observed during training and
are misclassified by a deep network model with high confidence.
This paper investigates the problem of overconfidence for unfamiliar samples and evaluates several potential methods for improving
reliability of prediction confidences.

data.
In this paper, our goal is to compare and evaluate several methods for improving confidence estimates for familiar and unfamiliar samples. We consider familiar samples
to be drawn from the same distribution as the training, as
is typically done when creating training and test sets for research. We term unfamiliar samples as drawn from a different but still applicable distribution. For example, for cat
vs. dog classification, an image of a dog from a breed seen
during training is familiar, while an image from a breed not
seen during training is unfamiliar. We are not concerned
with non-applicable “out of domain” images such as an im-

2686

