LG-GAN: Label Guided Adversarial Network for Flexible Targeted Attack of
Point Cloud-based Deep Networks
Hang Zhou1∗, Dongdong Chen2,∗ , Jing Liao3 , Kejiang Chen1 , Xiaoyi Dong1 ,
Kunlin Liu1 , Weiming Zhang1,† , Gang Hua4 , Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Microsoft Research
3
City University of Hong Kong, 4 Wormpex AI Research
{zh2991,chenkj,dlight,lkl6949}@mail.ustc.edu.cn; cddlyf@gmail.com;
jingliao@cityu.edu.hk; {zhangwm, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn; ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks have made tremendous progress
in 3D point-cloud recognition. Recent works have shown
that these 3D recognition networks are also vulnerable to
adversarial samples produced from various attack methods, including optimization-based 3D Carlini-Wagner attack, gradient-based iterative fast gradient method, and
skeleton-detach based point-dropping. However, after a
careful analysis, these methods are either extremely slow
because of the optimization/iterative scheme, or not flexible
to support targeted attack of a specific category. To overcome these shortcomings, this paper proposes a novel label
guided adversarial network (LG-GAN) for real-time flexible targeted point cloud attack. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first generation based 3D point cloud attack method. By feeding the original point clouds and target attack label into LG-GAN, it can learn how to deform
the point clouds to mislead the recognition network into the
specific label only with a single forward pass. In detail, LGGAN first leverages one multi-branch adversarial network
to extract hierarchical features of the input point clouds,
then incorporates the specified label information into multiple intermediate features using the label encoder. Finally,
the encoded features will be fed into the coordinate reconstruction decoder to generate the target adversarial sample. By evaluating different point-cloud recognition models
(e.g., PointNet, PointNet++ and DGCNN), we demonstrate
that the proposed LG-GAN can support flexible targeted attack on the fly while guaranteeing good attack performance
and higher efficiency simultaneously.

∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully
applied to many computer vision tasks [31, 12, 26, 6, 41,
19]. Recently, pioneering works such as DeepSets [40],
PointNet [5] and its variants [25, 33] explored the possibility of reasoning with point clouds through DNNs for understanding geometry and recognizing 3D structures. These
methods directly extract features from raw 3D point coordinates without utilizing hand-crafted features, such as normals and curvatures, and present impressive results for 3D
object classification and semantic scene segmentation.
However, recent works have demonstrated that DNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are maliciously created by adding imperceptible perturbations to
the original input by attackers. This would potentially
bring security threats to real application systems such as autonomous driving [2], speech recognition [7] and face verification [21], to name a few. Similar to images, many recent
works [36, 20, 42] have shown that deep point cloud recognition networks are also sensitive to adversarial examples
and readily fooled by them.
Existing 3D adversarial attack methods can be roughly
categorized into three: optimization-based methods such as
L-BFGS [32] and C&W attack [3], gradient-based methods such as FGSM [8] and IFGM [9], and skeleton-detach
based methods like [38]. Notwithstanding their demonstrated effectiveness in attack, they all have some significant limitations. For example, the former two rely on a
very time-consuming optimization/iterative scheme. This
renders them not flexible enough for real-time attack. In
contrast, the last one is faster but has lower attack success
rates. Moreover, it requires to delete some critical point
cloud structures and only supports the untargeted attack.
To overcome these shortcomings and motivated by im-

10356

