PolarNet: An Improved Grid Representation for
Online LiDAR Point Clouds Semantic Segmentation
Yang Zhang∗1 , Zixiang Zhou∗1 , Philip David2 , Xiangyu Yue3 , Zerong Xi1 , Boqing Gong†1 , and
Hassan Foroosh1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida
Computational and Information Sciences Directorate, U.S. Army Research Laboratory
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
yangzhang@knights.ucf.edu, zhouzixiang@knights.ucf.edu, philip.j.david4.civ@mail.mil,
xyyue@berkeley.edu, zxi@knights.ucf.edu, boqinggo@outlook.com, foroosh@cs.ucf.edu
2

The need for fine-grained perception in autonomous
driving systems has resulted in recently increased research
on online semantic segmentation of single-scan LiDAR. Despite the emerging datasets and technological advancements, it remains challenging due to three reasons: (1)
the need for near-real-time latency with limited hardware;
(2) uneven or even long-tailed distribution of LiDAR points
across space; and (3) an increasing number of extremely
fine-grained semantic classes. In an attempt to jointly
tackle all the aforementioned challenges, we propose a new
LiDAR-specific, nearest-neighbor-free segmentation algorithm — PolarNet. Instead of using common spherical or
bird’s-eye-view projection, our polar bird’s-eye-view representation balances the points across grid cells in a polar coordinate system, indirectly aligning a segmentation
network’s attention with the long-tailed distribution of the
points along the radial axis. We find that our encoding
scheme greatly increases the mIoU in three drastically different segmentation datasets of real urban LiDAR single
scans while retaining near real-time throughput.

1. Introduction
There has been a great surge of LiDAR point cloud data
over the last decade, especially in the self-driving domain.
In order to make use of the LiDAR point clouds in various
downstream applications, it is vital to develop automatic analytic methods to make sense of the data. In this paper, we
focus on the online fine-grained semantic segmentation of
∗ Contributed equally.
† Now at Google.

Code at https://github.com/edwardzhou130/PolarSeg

Semantic KITTI test mIoU

Abstract
55%

PolarNet (Ours)

50%

Cartesian Unet
DarkNet53

45%
40%

Squeezesegv2

35%
30%

Squeezeseg
0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350 400
MACs (billion)

Figure 1. Point-level SemanticKITTI [1] segmentation mIoU vs.
multiply–accumulate operations per scan on the same GPU. Our
Unet-based PolarNet not only significantly outperforms CartesianBEV Unet, PointNet, SqueezeSeg and SqueezeSeg’s overparameterized variants (connected by line), but also retains remarkably
low computational cost.

LiDAR point clouds. Similar to image semantic segmentation, the task is to assign a semantic label to each of the
points given an input point cloud.
While several large-scale LiDAR point clouds datasets
are publicly available [9, 29, 42, 3], it is until recent that the
semantic segmentation labels, provided by [1, 10], are able
to match their scales. The lag between the release of massive point clouds and the readiness of semantic segmentation labels indicates the challenge for human raters to provide point-wise labels and the demand for automatic and
fast semantic segmentation solutions for LiDAR scans.
We consider to use end-to-end deep neural networks
for the single-scan semantic segmentation of LiDAR point
clouds. Before studying the network architecture or advanced training algorithms, however, we first focus on the

9601

