Learning Representations by Predicting Bags of Visual Words
Spyros Gidaris1 Andrei Bursuc1 Nikos Komodakis2 Patrick Pérez1 Matthieu Cord1
1

Valeo.ai

2

University of Crete

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning targets to learn
convnet-based image representations from unlabeled data.
Inspired by the success of NLP methods in this area, in this
work we propose a self-supervised approach based on spatially dense image descriptions that encode discrete visual
concepts, here called visual words. To build such discrete
representations, we quantize the feature maps of a first pretrained self-supervised convnet, over a k-means based vocabulary. Then, as a self-supervised task, we train another
convnet to predict the histogram of visual words of an image
(i.e., its Bag-of-Words representation) given as input a perturbed version of that image. The proposed task forces the
convnet to learn perturbation-invariant and context-aware
image features, useful for downstream image understanding tasks. We extensively evaluate our method and demonstrate very strong empirical results, e.g., our pre-trained
self-supervised representations transfer better on detection
task and similarly on classification over classes “unseen”
during pre-training, when compared to the supervised case.
This also shows that the process of image discretization
into visual words can provide the basis for very powerful selfsupervised approaches in the image domain, thus allowing
further connections to be made to related methods from the
NLP domain that have been extremely successful so far.1

1. Introduction
The goal of our work is to learn convolutional neural
network [37] (convnet) based representations without human supervision. One promising approach towards this
goal is the so-called self-supervised representation learning
[14, 20, 35, 45, 49, 72], which advocates to train the convnet
with an annotation-free pretext task defined using only the
information available within an image, e.g., predicting the
relative location of two image patches [14]. Pre-training on
such a pretext task enables the convnet to learn representa1 We will provide the implementation code and pre-trained models at:
https://github.com/valeoai/bownet

tions that are useful for other vision tasks of actual interest,
such as image classification or object detection. Moreover,
recent work has shown that self-supervision can be beneficial to many other learning problems [10, 18, 28, 29, 58, 71],
such as few-shot [18, 58] and semi-supervised [28, 71] learning, or training generative adversarial networks [10].
A question that still remains open is what type of selfsupervision we should use. Among the variety of the proposed learning tasks, many follow the general paradigm of
first perturbing an image or removing some part/aspect of
the image and then training the convnet to reconstruct the
original image or the dropped part (e.g., color channel, image
region). Popular examples are Denoising AutoEncoders [62],
Image Colorization [35, 72], Split-Brain architectures [73],
and Image In-painting [49]. However, predicting such lowlevel image information can be a difficult task to solve, and
does not necessarily force the convnet to acquire image understanding “skills”, which is what we ultimately want to
achieve. As a result, such reconstruction-based methods have
not been very successful so far. In contrast, in Natural Language Processing (NLP), similar self-supervised methods,
such as predicting the missing words of a sentence (e.g.,
BERT [12] and ROBERTA [39]), have proven much more
successful at learning strong language representations. The
difference of those NLP methods with their computer vision counterparts is that (1) words undoubtedly represent
more high-level semantic concepts than raw image pixels.
Also, (2) words are defined in a discrete space while images
in a continuous one where, without changing the depicted
content, small pixel perturbations can significantly alter the
target of a reconstruction task.
Spatially dense image quantization into visual words.
Inspired by the above NLP methods, in this work we propose for self-supervised learning in the image domain to use
tasks that aim at predicting/reconstructing targets that encode discrete visual concepts as opposed, e.g., to (low-level)
pixel information. To build such discrete targets, we first
take an existing self-supervised method (e.g., rotation prediction [20]) and use it to train an initial convnet, which can
learn feature representations that capture mid-to-higher-level
16928

