Context-Aware Attention Network for Image-Text Retrieval
Qi Zhang1,2 Zhen Lei1,2∗ Zhaoxiang Zhang 1,2 Stan Z. Li3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for AI Research and Innovation, Westlake University, Hangzhou, China.
{qi.zhang,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
As a typical cross-modal problem, image-text bidirectional retrieval relies heavily on the joint embedding
learning and similarity measure for each image-text pair.
It remains challenging because prior works seldom explore
semantic correspondences between modalities and semantic correlations in a single modality at the same time. In this
work, we propose a unified Context-Aware Attention Network (CAAN), which selectively focuses on critical local
fragments (regions and words) by aggregating the global
context. Specifically, it simultaneously utilizes global intermodal alignments and intra-modal correlations to discover
latent semantic relations. Considering the interactions between images and sentences in the retrieval process, intramodal correlations are derived from the second-order attention of region-word alignments instead of intuitively comparing the distance between original features. Our method
achieves fairly competitive results on two generic imagetext retrieval datasets Flickr30K and MS-COCO.

1. Introduction
Associating vision with language and exploring the relations between them have attracted great interest in the past
decades. Many tasks have efficiently combined these two
modalities and made significant progress, such as visual
question answering (VQA) [1, 2, 33, 25], image captioning [1, 9], and person search with natural language [22, 23].
Image-text bidirectional retrieval [40, 44] is one of the most
popular branches in the field of cross-modal research. It
aims to retrieve images given descriptions or find sentences
from image queries. Due to the large discrepancy between
these two modalities, the main challenge is how to learn
joint embeddings and accurately measure the image-text
similarity.
While describing a target image, people tend to make
∗ Corresponding author.

A bunch of different fruits sitting
in baskets and on a table .

Pineapples , bananas and oranges
are in crates near smoothies .

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of the adaptive retrieval process with different contexts. An image is annotated with two different sentences.
The regions highlighted with green in (a) correspond to ”fruits” in
the left sentence. However, they correspond to ”pineapples”, ”bananas” and ”oranges” in the right sentence, highlighted with blue,
yellow and red in (b), respectively.

frequent references to salient objects and depict their attributes and actions. Based on the observation, some approaches [15, 16, 33] map regions in images and words
in sentences into a latent space and explore alignments between them. Although validating the efficacy of exploring
region-word correspondences, they ignore the different importance of each local fragment. Recently, attention-based
methods [19, 20, 26, 41] have taken steps toward attending
differently to the specific regions and words and shown very
promising results in the image-text retrieval task. SCAN
[19] is a typical one to decide the importance of fragments
based on fragments from another modality, aiming to discover full region-word alignments. Nevertheless, it ignores
semantic correlations (common or exclusive attributes, categories, scenes etc.) between fragments in a single modality. Furthermore, some works [20, 26] have been proposed
to either learn visual relation features with pre-trained neural scene graph generators or eliminate irrelevant fragments
based on intra-modal relations, which alleviate the problems mentioned above to some extent.

3536

