Pathological Retinal Region Segmentation From OCT Images Using Geometric
Relation Based Augmentation
Dwarikanath Mahapatra1
Behzad Bozorgtabar2,3,4
1
Ling Shao
1
2
3
4
IIAI, Abu Dhabi
LTS5, EPFL, Lausanne
CIBM, Laussane
CHUV, Lausanne
{dwarikanath.mahapatra, ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

behzad.bozorgtabar@epfl.ch

Abstract
Medical image segmentation is an important task for
computer aided diagnosis. Pixelwise manual annotations
of large datasets require high expertise and is time consuming. Conventional data augmentations have limited benefit
by not fully representing the underlying distribution of the
training set, thus affecting model robustness when tested
on images captured from different sources. Prior work
leverages synthetic images for data augmentation ignoring the interleaved geometric relationship between different
anatomical labels. We propose improvements over previous GAN-based medical image synthesis methods by jointly
encoding the intrinsic relationship of geometry and shape.
Latent space variable sampling results in diverse generated
images from a base image and improves robustness. Given
those augmented images generated by our method, we train
the segmentation network to enhance the segmentation performance of retinal optical coherence tomography (OCT)
images. The proposed method outperforms state-of-theart segmentation methods on the public RETOUCH dataset
having images captured from different acquisition procedures. Ablation studies and visual analysis also demonstrate benefits of integrating geometry and diversity.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation is an important task for
healthcare applications like disease diagnosis, surgical planning, and disease progression monitoring. While deep
learning (DL) methods demonstrate state-of-the-art results
for medical image analysis tasks [38], their robustness depends upon the availability of a diverse training dataset to
learn different disease attributes such as appearance and
shape characteristics. Large scale dataset annotations for
segmentation require image pixel labels, which is time consuming and involves high degree of clinical expertise. The
problem is particularly acute for pathological images since

(a)

(b)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Figure 1. (a) Base image (red contour denotes segmentation mask);
Example of generated images using: (b) Our proposed GeoGAN
method; (c) Zhao et al. [42]; (d) DAGAN method by [1]; (e)
cGAN method by [25].

it is difficult to obtain diverse images for less prevalent
disease conditions, necessitating data augmentation. We
propose a generative adversarial network (GAN) based approach for pathological images augmentation and demonstrate its efficacy in pathological region segmentation. Figure 1 summarizes the image generation results of our approach and [42], and highlights our superior performance
by incorporating geometric information.
Traditional augmentations such as image rotations or deformations have limited benefit as they do not fully represent the underlying data distribution of the training set
and are sensitive to parameter choices. Recent works
[15, 42, 14, 30] proposed to solve this issue by using synthetic data for augmentation and increase diversity in the
training samples. However, certain challenges have not
been satisfactorily addressed by these methods.
Zhao et. al. [42] proposed a learning-based registration
method to register images to an atlas, use corresponding deformation field to deform a segmentation mask and obtain
19611

