Training Noise-Robust Deep Neural Networks via Meta-Learning
Zhen Wang∗1 , Guosheng Hu∗2 , Qinghua Hu† 1
1
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China 2 AnyVision
wangzhen315@tju.edu.cn, huguosheng100@gmail.com, huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Label noise may significantly degrade the performance
of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). To train noise-robust
DNNs, Loss correction (LC) approaches have been introduced. LC approaches assume the noisy labels are corrupted from clean (ground-truth) labels by an unknown
noise transition matrix T . The backbone DNNs and T can
be trained separately, where T is approximated by prior
knowledge. For example, T can be constructed by stacking the maximum or mean predictions of the samples from
each class. In this work, we propose a new loss correction
approach, named as Meta Loss Correction (MLC), to directly learn T from data via the meta-learning framework.
The MLC is model-agnostic and learns T from data rather
than heuristically approximates T using prior knowledge.
Extensive evaluations are conducted on computer vision
(MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Clothing1M) and natural
language processing (Twitter) datasets. The experimental
results show that MLC achieves very competitive performance against state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success on computer
vision tasks such as object detection [9], image classification [20], segmentation [2], face recognition [13]. It is
well known that the performance of DNNs highly relies
on the large-scale high quality well-labeled training data.
However, collecting such big clean data is expensive and
time-consuming. To collect such data, people usually turn
to search engine, automatic tagging software and crowdsourcing, which inevitably bring label noises (wrong or corrupted labels). The label noises can lead the DNNs to overfit to such noises [38], eventually degrading the model generalization performance.
The loss correction (LC) approaches [17, 28, 12] re∗ Indicates equal contributions.
†

Corresponding author: Qinghua Hu (huqinghua@tju.edu.cn)

cently achieved great success on noise-robust deep learning. LC approaches assume the noisy labels are corrupted
from clean (ground-truth) labels by an unknown noise transition matrix T . Thus, the LC approaches try to learn this
matrix accurately. Some early works [31, 17] add a linear
noise layer at the end of backbone Convolutional Neural
Network (CNNs) to implicitly estimate matrix T . Unlike
these implicit optimizations, the LC approaches [28, 12]
explicitly estimate T . For example, a ‘perfect example’ assumption [28] is made to approximate ‘perfect example’ as
the one with the maximum prediction in each class. Then
T is estimated by stacking the prediction of each ‘perfect
example’. Instead of using the maximum predictions, Gold
Loss Correction (GLC) [12] uses the mean predictions of a
small clean dataset to estimate T . Clearly, these approaches
[28, 12], which use prior knowledge to estimate T , are
heuristic and the ‘perfect example’ assumption cannot always hold true.
To learn T directly from data rather than in a heuristic way, we introduce meta-learning. Meta-learning is
a general data-driven optimization framework, and it can
learn experience (meta-parameters) from data (meta-data).
More general, meta-parameters can be some parameters to
be optimized in deep learning. Recently, meta-learning
achieved great success on many optimization tasks including: hyper-parameter optimization [18], neural architecture searching [41] and optimizer selection [26], etc.
Most meta-learning approaches contain two optimization
loops: an inner loop (Actual-Train) conducts the main
optimization (e.g. the main deep network training), and
an outer loop (Meta-Train) optimizes some aspects (metaparameters, e.g. hyper-parameters of the main network) of
inner loop.
Motivated by the success of meta-parameter optimization, in this work, we adapt meta-learning to optimize T by
viewing T as the meta-parameter. Meta-learning usually
uses a small ‘clean’ validation set to conduct outer loop
optimization (Meta-Train) [30] . A small ‘clean’ validation set is also a popular setting for LC noise-robust learning approach [12]. With meta-learning and a small valida4321
4524

