Structured Compression by Weight Encryption
for Unstructured Pruning and Quantization
Se Jung Kwon1∗
Dongsoo Lee1∗
Byeongwook Kim1
1
1
Parichay Kapoor
Baeseong Park
Gu-Yeon Wei1,2
1
2
Samsung Research, Republic of Korea
Harvard University, MA
{sejung0.kwon, dongsoo3.lee, byeonguk.kim, pk.kapoor, bpbs.park, gy.wei}@samsung.com

Abstract
Model compression techniques, such as pruning and
quantization, are becoming increasingly important to reduce the memory footprints and the amount of computations. Despite model size reduction, achieving performance enhancement on devices is, however, still challenging mainly due to the irregular representations of
sparse matrix formats. This paper proposes a new weight
representation scheme for Sparse Quantized Neural Networks, specifically achieved by fine-grained and unstructured pruning method. The representation is encrypted in a
structured regular format, which can be efficiently decoded
through XOR-gate network during inference in a parallel
manner. We demonstrate various deep learning models that
can be compressed and represented by our proposed format
with fixed and high compression ratio. For example, for
fully-connected layers of AlexNet on ImageNet dataset, we
can represent the sparse weights by only 0.28 bits/weight
for 1-bit quantization and 91% pruning rate with a fixed
decoding rate and full memory bandwidth usage. Decoding
through XOR-gate network can be performed without any
model accuracy degradation with additional patch data associated with small overhead.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are evolving to solve
increasingly complex and varied tasks with dramatically
growing data size [7]. As a result, the growth rate of model
sizes for recent DNNs leads to slower response times and
higher power consumption during inference [9]. To mitigate
such concerns, model compression techniques have been introduced to significantly reduce model size of DNNs while
maintaining reasonable model accuracy.
It is well known that DNNs are designed to be overparameterized in order to ease local minima exploration
∗ Equal contribution

[5, 6]. Thus, various model compression techniques have
been proposed for high-performance and/or low-power inference. For example, pruning techniques remove redundant weights (to zero) without compromising accuracy [18],
in order to achieve memory and computation reduction on
devices [11, 27, 37, 20]. As another model compression
technique, non-zero weights can be quantized to fewer bits
with comparable model accuracy of full-precision parameters, as discussed in [4, 28, 14, 32].
To achieve even higher compression ratios, pruning and
quantization can be combined to form Sparse Quantized
Neural Networks (SQNNs). Intuitively, quantization can
leverage parameter pruning since pruning reduces the number of weights to be quantized and quantization loss decreases accordingly [21]. Deep compression [10], ternary
weight networks (TWN) [23], trained ternary quantization
(TTQ) [36], and viterbi-based compression [1, 19] represent recent efforts to synergistically combine pruning and
quantization.
To benefit from sparsity, it is important to (1) represent
pruned models in a format with small memory footprint and
(2) implement fast computations with sparse matrices as input operands. Even if reduced SQNNs can be generated
with a high pruning rate, it is challenging to gain performance enhancement without an inherently parallel sparsematrix decoding process during inference. To illustrate such
a challenge, Figure 1 presents DRAM bandwidth, the number of transactions, and execution time of a matrix multiplication using one random (2048×2048) sparse matrix
(following CSR format) and a random (2048×64) dense
matrix on NVIDIA Tesla V100 (supported by CUDA 9.1).
Because of unbalanced workloads (note that pruning each
weight is a somewhat independent and random operation)
and additional data for index, sparse matrix computations
using CSR format do not offer performance gain as much
as sparsity. Moreover, if pruning rate is not high enough,
sparse matrix operations can be even slower than dense matrix operations.
As such, structured and blocked-based pruning tech11909

