Bidirectional Graph Reasoning Network for Panoptic Segmentation
Yangxin Wu1† , Gengwei Zhang1† , Yiming Gao1 , Xiajun Deng1 , Ke Gong2 , Xiaodan Liang1,2⋆ , and
Liang Lin1,2
1

Sun Yat-sen University, 2 DarkMatter AI Research

{wuyx29, zhanggw8, gaoym9, dengxj9}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, kegong936@gmail.com, xdliang328@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Recent researches on panoptic segmentation resort to a
single end-to-end network to combine the tasks of instance
segmentation and semantic segmentation. However, prior
models only unified the two related tasks at the architectural
level via a multi-branch scheme or revealed the underlying
correlation between them by unidirectional feature fusion,
which disregards the explicit semantic and co-occurrence
relations among objects and background. Inspired by the
fact that context information is critical to recognize and localize the objects, and inclusive object details are significant to parse the background scene, we thus investigate
on explicitly modeling the correlations between object and
background to achieve a holistic understanding of an image in the panoptic segmentation task. We introduce a Bidirectional Graph Reasoning Network (BGRNet), which incorporates graph structure into the conventional panoptic
segmentation network to mine the intra-modular and intermodular relations within and between foreground things
and background stuff classes. In particular, BGRNet first
constructs image-specific graphs in both instance and semantic segmentation branches that enable flexible reasoning at the proposal level and class level, respectively. To
establish the correlations between separate branches and
fully leverage the complementary relations between things
and stuff, we propose a Bidirectional Graph Connection
Module to diffuse information across branches in a learnable fashion. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our BGRNet that achieves the new state-of-the-art
performance on challenging COCO and ADE20K panoptic
segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the visual reasoning based on human com† Equal contribution. ⋆ Corresponding Author.

monsense, humans are capable of accomplishing recognition and segmentation of the objects and background of an
image at a single glance. Recent researches have been devoted to developing numerous specific models for instance
segmentation [5, 22] and semantic segmentation [26]. Generally, instance segmentation detects and segments each
foreground object (named things) while semantic segmentation parses amorphous regions and background (named
stuff ). Tackling the two correlated tasks in separate models,
these methods have sacrificed the holistic understanding of
an image.
Recently, a new proposed panoptic segmentation task
has attracted researches [18, 19, 21, 25] to develop end-toend networks to segment all foreground objects and background contents at the same time. As shown in Figure 1(a,
b), some of the previous works [18, 19] unified instance
segmentation and semantic segmentation at the architectural level via a multi-branch scheme. The others moved
forward to reveal the underlying connection between the
two related tasks by unidirectional feature fusion [21]. Although successfully tackling two tasks in one network,
these approaches overlooked the explicit semantic and cooccurrence relations between objects and background in a
complicated environment, which leads to limited performance gain.
To address these realistic challenges, we reconsider the
characteristics of object segmentation as well as scene parsing and investigate on robustly modeling the various relations between them to better tackle the panoptic segmentation task. Intuitively, visual context is essential for instance segmentation when predicting fine-grained objects
categories and contours [8], while foreground object details
can benefit the segmentation of global scene and stuff [21].
It is obvious and remarkable that things and stuff can benefit each other by information propagation in one unified network to boost the overall performance of panoptic segmentation. Inspired by this, we introduce a new Bidirectional
Graph Reasoning Network (named BGRNet) that incorpo-

9080

