AdaCoSeg: Adaptive Shape Co-Segmentation with Group Consistency Loss
Chenyang Zhu1,2 Kai Xu2 Siddhartha Chaudhuri3,4 Li Yi5 Leonidas Guibas6 Hao Zhang1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 National University of Defense Technology
3
Adobe Research 4 IIT Bombay 5 Google Research 6 Stanford University

Abstract
We introduce AdaCoSeg, a deep neural network architecture for adaptive co-segmentation of a set of 3D shapes
represented as point clouds. Differently from the familiar
single-instance segmentation problem, co-segmentation is
intrinsically contextual: how a shape is segmented can vary
depending on the set it is in. Hence, our network features
an adaptive learning module to produce a consistent shape
segmentation which adapts to a set. Specifically, given an
input set of unsegmented shapes, we first employ an offline
pre-trained part prior network to propose per-shape parts.
Then, the co-segmentation network iteratively and jointly
optimizes the part labelings across the set subjected to a
novel group consistency loss defined by matrix ranks. While
the part prior network can be trained with noisy and inconsistently segmented shapes, the final output of AdaCoSeg is
a consistent part labeling for the input set, with each shape
segmented into up to (a user-specified) K parts. Overall,
our method is weakly supervised, producing segmentations
tailored to the test set, without consistent ground-truth segmentations. We show qualitative and quantitative results
from AdaCoSeg and evaluate it via ablation studies and
comparisons to state-of-the-art co-segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of data-driven and deep learning
techniques in computer vision and computer graphics, remarkable progress has been made on supervised image [1,3]
and shape segmentations [11,33]. Co-segmentation is an instance of the segmentation problem where the input consists
of a collection, rather than one piece, of data and the collection shares certain common characteristics. Typically, for
shape co-segmentation, the commonality is that the shapes
all belong to the same category, e.g., chairs or airplanes.
The goal of co-segmentation is to compute a consistent
segmentation for all shapes in the input collection. The
consistency of the segmentation implies a correspondence
between all the segmented parts, which is a critical requirement for knowledge and attribute transfer, collecting

Shape generation via part reshuffling

Shape generation via part reshuffling

Figure 1. Our adaptive shape co-segmentation network,
AdaCoSeg, produces structurally different segmentations (here up
to 4 parts) for two sets of chairs — one with armrests, one without. For each set, the segmentations are semantically consistent,
allowing shape generation via part reshuffling. However, the same
shape can be segmented differently depending on its containing
set (see the circled chair), showing the method’s adaptivity.

statistics over a dataset, and structure-aware shape modeling [18]. Figure 1 shows such a modeling example based
on part reshuffling induced by a co-segmentation.
In contrast to the familiar single-instance segmentation
problem, a distinctive feature of co-segmentation is that it is
inherently contextual. As dictated by the consistency criterion, the same shape may be segmented differently depending on which input set it belongs to; see Figure 1. From
this perspective, the input shape collection serves both as
the test set and the training set. Ideally, the co-segmentation
network can quickly adapt to a new input set without expensive retraining. Such an adaptive network would change its
behavior, i.e., the network weights, at the time it is run. This
is different from the traditional label learning paradigm,
where the trained model strives to generalize to new inputs
without changing the network weights, either under the supervised [11, 20] or weakly supervised settings [5, 19, 26].
In this paper, we introduce a deep neural network for
shape co-segmentation, coined AdaCoSeg, which is designed to be adaptive. AdaCoSeg takes as input a set of
unsegmented shapes represented as point clouds, proposes
per-shape parts in the first stage, and then jointly optimizes
the parts subject to a novel group consistency loss defined
by matrix rank estimates for the specific input set. The
18543

