ManiGAN: Text-Guided Image Manipulation
Bowen Li1

Xiaojuan Qi1,2 Thomas Lukasiewicz1 Philip H. S. Torr1
1
University of Oxford 2 University of Hong Kong

{bowen.li, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The goal of our paper is to semantically edit parts of
an image matching a given text that describes desired attributes (e.g., texture, colour, and background), while preserving other contents that are irrelevant to the text. To
achieve this, we propose a novel generative adversarial
network (ManiGAN), which contains two key components:
text-image affine combination module (ACM) and detail
correction module (DCM). The ACM selects image regions
relevant to the given text and then correlates the regions
with corresponding semantic words for effective manipulation. Meanwhile, it encodes original image features to
help reconstruct text-irrelevant contents. The DCM rectifies mismatched attributes and completes missing contents
of the synthetic image. Finally, we suggest a new metric for evaluating image manipulation results, in terms of
both the generation of new attributes and the reconstruction of text-irrelevant contents. Extensive experiments on
the CUB and COCO datasets demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method. Code is available at
https://github.com/mrlibw/ManiGAN.

{xiaojuan.qi, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

guided image manipulation methods are only able to produce low-quality images (see Fig. 1: first row), far from
satisfactory, and even fail to effectively manipulate complex
scenes (see Fig. 1: second row).

1. Introduction

To achieve effective image manipulation guided by text
descriptions, the key is to exploit both text and image crossmodality information, generating new attributes matching
the given text and also preserving text-irrelevant contents
of the original image. To fuse text and image information,
existing methods [6, 23] typically choose to directly concatenate image and global sentence features along the channel direction. Albeit simple, the above heuristic may suffer from some potential issues. Firstly, the model cannot
precisely correlate fine-grained words with corresponding
visual attributes that need to be modified, leading to inaccurate and coarse modification. For instance, shown in the
first row of Fig. 1, both models cannot generate detailed
visual attributes like black eye rings and a black bill. Secondly, the model cannot effectively identify text-irrelevant
contents and thus fails to reconstruct them, resulting in undesirable modification of text-irrelevant parts in the image.
For example, in Fig. 1, besides modifying the required attributes, both models [6, 23] also change the texture of the
bird (first row) and the structure of the scene (second row).

Image manipulation aims to modify some aspects of
given images, from low-level colour or texture [9, 40]
to high-level semantics [41], to meet a user’s preferences,
which has numerous potential applications in video games,
image editing, and computer-aided design. Recently, with
the development of deep learning and deep generative
models, automatic image manipulation has made remarkable progress, including image inpainting [12, 25], image
colourisation [40], style transfer [9, 14], and domain or attribute translation [13, 16].
All the above works mainly focus on specific problems,
and few studies [6, 23] concentrate on more general and
user-friendly image manipulation by using natural language
descriptions. More precisely, the task aims to semantically
edit parts of an image according to the given text provided
by a user, while preserving other contents that are not described in the text. However, current state-of-the-art text-

To address the above issues, we propose a novel generative adversarial network for text-guided image manipulation (ManiGAN), which can generate high-quality new
attributes matching the given text, and at the same time effectively reconstruct text-irrelevant contents of the original
image. The key is a text-image affine combination module
(ACM) where text and image features collaborate to select
text-relevant regions that need to be modified, and then correlate those regions with corresponding semantic words for
generating new visual attributes semantically aligned with
the given text description. Meanwhile, it also encodes original image representations for reconstructing text-irrelevant
contents. Besides, to further enhance the results, we introduce a detail correction module (DCM) which can rectify
mismatched attributes and complete missing contents. Our
final model can produce high-quality manipulation results
with fine-grained details (see Fig. 1: Ours).

7880

