Neural Topological SLAM for Visual Navigation
Devendra Singh Chaplot1†, Ruslan Salakhutdinov1∗, Abhinav Gupta1,2∗, Saurabh Gupta3∗
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Facebook AI Research, 3 UIUC
Project webpage: https://devendrachaplot.github.io/projects/Neural-Topological-SLAM

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of image-goal navigation which involves navigating to the location indicated by
a goal image in a novel previously unseen environment. To
tackle this problem, we design topological representations
for space that effectively leverage semantics and afford approximate geometric reasoning. At the heart of our representations are nodes with associated semantic features,
that are interconnected using coarse geometric information.
We describe supervised learning-based algorithms that can
build, maintain and use such representations under noisy
actuation. Experimental study in visually and physically
realistic simulation suggests that our method builds effective representations that capture structural regularities and
efficiently solve long-horizon navigation problems. We observe a relative improvement of more than 50% over existing methods that study this task.

1. Introduction
Imagine you are in a new house as shown in Fig 1 and
you are given the task of finding a target object as shown in
Fig 1 (top). While there are multiple possible directions to
move, most of us would choose the path number 2 to move.
This is because we use strong structural priors – we realize the target is an oven which is more likely to be found
in the kitchen which seems accessible via path number 2.
Now let us suppose, once you reach the oven, your goal is
to reach back to the living room which you saw initially.
How would you navigate? The answer to this question lies
in how we humans store maps (or layout) of the house we
just traversed. One possible answer would be metric maps,
in which case we would know exactly how many steps to
take to reach the living room. But this is clearly not how we
humans operate [16, 41]. Instead, most of us would first get
out of the kitchen by moving to the hallway and then navigate to the living room which is visible from the hallway.
It is clear from the above examples, there are two main
† Correspondence: chaplot@cs.cmu.edu
∗ Equal Contribution

Figure 1: Semantic Priors and Landmarks. When asked to go
to target image of an oven most humans would use the path number 2 since it allows access to kitchen. Humans use semantic priors and common-sense to explore and navigate everyday yet most
navigation algorithms struggle to do so.

components of a successful visual navigation algorithm: (a)
ability to build spatial representations and store them; (b)
ability to exploit structural priors. When it comes to spatial representations, the majority of papers in navigation insist on building metrically precise representations of free
space. However, metric maps have two major shortcomings: first, metric maps do not scale well with environment
size and amount of experience. But more importantly, actuation noise on real-robots makes it challenging to build
consistent representations, and precise localization may not
always be possible. When it comes to exploiting structural
priors, most learning-based approaches do not model these
explicitly. Instead, they hope the learned policy function has
these priors encoded implicitly. But it still remains unclear
if these policy functions can encode semantic priors when
learned via RL.
In this paper, we propose to tackle both the problems
head-on. Instead of using metric-maps which are brittle
to localization and noise, we propose a topological representation of the space. Our proposed representation consists of nodes that are connected in the form of a graph,
based on local geometry information. Each node is repre112875

