3D-ZeF: A 3D Zebrafish Tracking Benchmark Dataset
Malte Pedersen∗, Joakim Bruslund Haurum∗, Stefan Hein Bengtson, Thomas B. Moeslund
Visual Analysis of People (VAP) Laboratory, Aalborg University, Denmark
mape@create.aau.dk, joha@create.aau.dk, shbe@create.aau.dk, tbm@create.aau.dk

Abstract
In this work we present a novel publicly available stereo
based 3D RGB dataset for multi-object zebrafish tracking,
called 3D-ZeF. Zebrafish is an increasingly popular model
organism used for studying neurological disorders, drug
addiction, and more. Behavioral analysis is often a critical part of such research. However, visual similarity, occlusion, and erratic movement of the zebrafish makes robust
3D tracking a challenging and unsolved problem.
The proposed dataset consists of eight sequences with
a duration between 15-120 seconds and 1-10 free moving
zebrafish. The videos have been annotated with a total
of 86,400 points and bounding boxes. Furthermore, we
present a complexity score and a novel open-source modular baseline system for 3D tracking of zebrafish. The performance of the system is measured with respect to two detectors: a naive approach and a Faster R-CNN based fish
head detector. The system reaches a MOTA of up to 77.6%.
Links to the code and dataset is available at the project page
http://vap.aau.dk/3d-zef

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, the use of zebrafish (Danio rerio) as an animal model has increased significantly due to
its applicability within large-scale genetic screening [1, 2].
The zebrafish has been used as a model for studying human neurological disorders, drug addiction, social anxiety
disorders, and more [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Locomotion and behavioral analysis are often critical parts of neuroscientific
and biological research, which have traditionally been conducted manually [9, 10, 11]. However, manual inspection
is subjective and limited to small-scale experiments. Therefore, tracking systems are getting increasingly popular due
to their efficiency and objectivity. The majority of the solutions has been developed for terrestrial animals or fish in
shallow water, and most studies have been based on 2D observations in scientific [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] and com∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1: An example that illustrates the difference between
the two perspectives. The 3D trajectories are estimated
based on the head point annotations.

mercial systems [19, 20, 21, 22]. However, observations in
a single plane cannot capture all the relevant phenotypes of
fish [23, 24, 25]. Estimating the 3D trajectories of multiple
zebrafish accurately is difficult due to their erratic movement, visual similarity, and social behavior [26], see Figure 1. This may be one of the reasons why no commercial
solution has been developed yet. Only few groups in the
scientific community have addressed the problem, focusing
mainly on stereo vision [27, 28, 29, 30, 31] and monocular
stereo using mirrors [32, 33]. However, no labeled datasets
have been made publicly available within the field, which
makes a fair comparison between the applied methods difficult. This ultimately hinders significant developments in
the field as we have seen in other computer vision fields
with common datasets. Therefore, our contributions are
• a publicly available RGB 3D video dataset of zebrafish
with 86,400 bounding box and point annotations.
• an open-source modular baseline system.
A large part of 3D multi-object tracking methods are developed for LiDAR-based traffic datasets [34, 35, 36, 37,
38] or RGB-D tracking [39, 40]. However, to the best of
our knowledge, there exists no publicly available annotated
RGB stereo dataset with erratic moving and similarly looking subjects like the one we propose.

2426

