VIBE: Video Inference for Human Body Pose and Shape Estimation
Muhammed Kocabas1,2 , Nikos Athanasiou1 , Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
{mkocabas,nathanasiou,black}@tue.mpg.de

SOTA Method

VIBE

Figure 1: Given challenging in-the-wild videos, a recent state-of-the-art video-pose-estimation approach [30] (top), fails
to produce accurate 3D body poses. To address this, we exploit a large-scale motion-capture dataset to train a motion
discriminator using an adversarial approach. Our model (VIBE) (bottom) is able to produce realistic and accurate pose and
shape, outperforming previous work on standard benchmarks.

Abstract
Human motion is fundamental to understanding behavior. Despite progress on single-image 3D pose and shape
estimation, existing video-based state-of-the-art methods
fail to produce accurate and natural motion sequences due
to a lack of ground-truth 3D motion data for training. To address this problem, we propose “Video Inference for Body
Pose and Shape Estimation” (VIBE), which makes use of
an existing large-scale motion capture dataset (AMASS)
together with unpaired, in-the-wild, 2D keypoint annotations. Our key novelty is an adversarial learning framework that leverages AMASS to discriminate between real
human motions and those produced by our temporal pose
and shape regression networks. We define a novel temporal network architecture with a self-attention mechanism

and show that adversarial training, at the sequence level,
produces kinematically plausible motion sequences without in-the-wild ground-truth 3D labels. We perform extensive experimentation to analyze the importance of motion
and demonstrate the effectiveness of VIBE on challenging
3D pose estimation datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/mkocabas/VIBE

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress has been made on estimating 3D
human pose and shape from a single image [11, 21, 25, 29,
35, 36, 38, 45, 48]. While this is useful for many applications, it is the motion of the body in the world that tells us
about human behavior. As noted by Johansson [28] even a
15253

