Diverse Image Generation via Self-Conditioned GANs
Steven Liu1

Generated

Real

Real

Generated

Generated

Antonio Torralba1

Real

Generated

Places365

Real

Tongzhou Wang1 David Bau1 Jun-Yan Zhu2
1
2
MIT CSAIL
Adobe Research

Cluster 61

Cluster 75

Cluster 99

Cluster 19

Cluster 59

Cluster 60

Cluster 66

ImageNet

Cluster 03

Figure 1: Our proposed self-conditional GAN model learns to perform clustering and image synthesis simultaneously. The model training
requires no manual annotation of object classes. Here, we visualize several discovered clusters for both Places365 (top) and ImageNet
(bottom). For each cluster, we show both real images and the generated samples conditioned on the cluster index.

Abstract
We introduce a simple but effective unsupervised method
for generating realistic and diverse images. We train a classconditional GAN model without using manually annotated
class labels. Instead, our model is conditional on labels
automatically derived from clustering in the discriminator’s
feature space. Our clustering step automatically discovers diverse modes, and explicitly requires the generator to
cover them. Experiments on standard mode collapse benchmarks show that our method outperforms several competing
methods when addressing mode collapse. Our method also
performs well on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet and
Places365, improving both image diversity and standard
quality metrics, compared to previous methods.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable progress of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13, 5, 20], there remains a significant gap regarding the quality and diversity between classconditional GANs trained on labeled data, and unconditional
GANs trained without any labels in a fully unsupervised setting [30, 26]. This problem reflects the challenge of mode
collapse: the tendency for a generator to focus on a subset of
modes to the exclusion of other parts of the target distribution [12]. Both empirical and theoretical studies have shown
strong evidence that real data has a highly multi-modal distribution [33, 39]. Unconditional GANs trained on such data
distributions often completely miss important modes, e.g.,
not being able to generate one of ten digits for MNIST [37],
or omitting object classes such as people and cars within
synthesized scenes [3]. Class-conditional GANs alleviate
114286

