Learning Selective Self-Mutual Attention for RGB-D Saliency Detection
Nian Liu1,2
1
Northwestern Polytechincal University

Ni Zhang1
Junwei Han1∗
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

{liunian228, nnizhang.1995, junweihan2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
Saliency detection on RGB-D images is receiving more
and more research interests recently. Previous models
adopt the early fusion or the result fusion scheme to fuse
the input RGB and depth data or their saliency maps, which
incur the problem of distribution gap or information loss.
Some other models use the feature fusion scheme but are
limited by the linear feature fusion methods. In this paper, we propose to fuse attention learned in both modalities. Inspired by the Non-local model, we integrate the
self-attention and each other’s attention to propagate longrange contextual dependencies, thus incorporating multimodal information to learn attention and propagate contexts more accurately. Considering the reliability of the
other modality’s attention, we further propose a selection
attention to weight the newly added attention term. We
embed the proposed attention module in a two-stream CNN for RGB-D saliency detection. Furthermore, we also propose a residual fusion module to fuse the depth decoder features into the RGB stream. Experimental results
on seven benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed model components and our final saliency model. Our code and saliency maps are available at
https://github.com/nnizhang/S2MA.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection is the task to distinguish the most
salient object from complex background in a visual scene.
It mimics the human visual attention mechanism to find out
what catch people’s eyes when free viewing scenes. This
task can be used as a pre-processing technique or a model
component for many other vision tasks, such as semantic
segmentation [52, 2], and image editing [43, 50].
Researchers have proposed many saliency models in
decades, and most of them work on RGB images. Although
recent RGB saliency models have achieved very promising
performance, e.g., [32, 33, 17, 31], they can only leverage
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison of the RGB and RGB-D saliency detection
results and the learned attention. In (a) we give a challenging image and its corresponding depth map. (b) shows the saliency maps
of a RGB-based deep model (top) and our RGB-D-based model
(bottom). (c) illustrates the learned attention maps at the same position (the red point) in a RGB-based Non-local model [51] (top)
and our proposed attention fusion model (bottom).

appearance cues from the input RGB data, which are often severely limited in many challenging scenarios, e.g.,
cluttered background or salient object having similar appearance with the background. Nevertheless, we human
beings actually live in a 3D environment, in which depth
cues can supply sufficient complementary information for
the appearance cues. Thus, it is quite necessary to study
the saliency detection problem on RGB-D data. In Figure 1
we show a challenging image with complex appearance. In
column (b), we can see that its RGB-based saliency detection result is easily disturbed and has severe false positive
highlights. However, its foreground object is quite different
from the background in terms of depth. Thus the depth information can be used to easily distinguish the foreground
object and obtain an accurate saliency map.
To combine the appearance information and the depth
cues for RGB-D salient object detection, some previous
methods adopt the early fusion strategy [46, 41, 34, 14], in
which case both RGB and depth data are taken as inputs and
processed in a unified model. However, it is not easy for one
model to fit the data from two modalities well due to their
distribution gap. Some other models use the result fusion
strategy [11, 22, 49], where the RGB image and the depth

13756

