Perceptual Quality Assessment of Smartphone Photography
Yuming Fang1∗, Hanwei Zhu1∗ , Yan Zeng1 , Kede Ma2†, and Zhou Wang3
1

Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics, 2 City University of Hong Kong,
3
University of Waterloo

Abstract
As smartphones become people’s primary cameras to
take photos, the quality of their cameras and the associated
computational photography modules has become a de facto
standard in evaluating and ranking smartphones in the consumer market. We conduct so far the most comprehensive
study of perceptual quality assessment of smartphone photography. We introduce the Smartphone Photography Attribute and Quality (SPAQ) database, consisting of 11,125
pictures taken by 66 smartphones, where each image is attached with so far the richest annotations. Specifically, we
collect a series of human opinions for each image, including
image quality, image attributes (brightness, colorfulness,
contrast, noisiness, and sharpness), and scene category labels (animal, cityscape, human, indoor scene, landscape,
night scene, plant, still life, and others) in a well-controlled
laboratory environment. The exchangeable image file format (EXIF) data for all images are also recorded to aid
deeper analysis. We also make the first attempts using the
database to train blind image quality assessment (BIQA)
models constructed by baseline and multi-task deep neural networks. The results provide useful insights on how
EXIF data, image attributes and high-level semantics interact with image quality, how next-generation BIQA models can be designed, and how better computational photography systems can be optimized on mobile devices. The
database along with the proposed BIQA models are available at https://github.com/h4nwei/SPAQ.

1. Introduction
Perceptual image quality assessment (IQA) aims to
quantify human perception of image quality. IQA methods
can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories: subjective and
objective IQA [35]. Although time-consuming and expen-

sive, subjective IQA offers the most reliable way of evaluating image quality through psychophysical experiments [30].
Objective IQA, on the other hand, attempts to create computational models that are capable of automatically predicting subjective image quality [3]. In the past decades, there
have been a signiﬁcant number of studies on both directions [1, 12, 17], most of which focus on synthetic distortions, with the assumption that the original undistorted images exist and can be used as reference [37].
In recent years, there has been a fast development of
smartphone photography technologies. From a hardware
perspective, dual-camera systems prevail, representing major advancements for the unprecedented photography experience. From a software perspective, computational methods play a more and more important role, introducing novel
features such as digital zoom, HDR, portrait and panorama
modes. It could be argued that the camera system along
with the integrated computational photography module has
become a crucial part and one of the biggest selling points of
smartphones. Nevertheless, the vast majority of pictures are
taken by inexperienced users, whose capture processes are
largely affected by lighting conditions, sensor limitations,
lens imperfections, and unprofessional manipulations. Arguably it is often challenging for professional photographers to acquire high-quality pictures consistently across a
variety of natural scenes, especially in low-light and highdynamic-range (HDR) scenarios [7]. As a result, real-world
smartphone photos often contain mixtures of multiple distortions, which we call realistic camera distortions (as opposed to distortions such as JPEG compression that may be
synthesized). Therefore, if the visual quality of the captured
images could not be quantiﬁed in a perceptually meaningful way, it is difﬁcult to develop next-generation smartphone
cameras for improved visual experience.
In this paper, we carry out so far the most comprehensive study of perceptual quality assessment of smartphone
photography. Our contributions include:
• A large-scale image database, which we name Smartphone Photography Attribute and Quality (SPAQ)

∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (email:kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk)

13677

