End-to-End Learnable Geometric Vision by Backpropagating PnP Optimization
Bo Chen1 Álvaro Parra1 Jiewei Cao1 Nan Li2 Tat-Jun Chin1
1
The University of Adelaide 2 Shenzhen University
{bo.chen, alvaro.parrabustos, jiewei.cao, tat-jun.chin}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Deep networks excel in learning patterns from large
amounts of data. On the other hand, many geometric vision
tasks are specified as optimization problems. To seamlessly
combine deep learning and geometric vision, it is vital to
perform learning and geometric optimization end-to-end.
Towards this aim, we present BPnP, a novel network module that backpropagates gradients through a Perspective-nPoints (PnP) solver to guide parameter updates of a neural
network. Based on implicit differentiation, we show that the
gradients of a “self-contained” PnP solver can be derived
accurately and efficiently, as if the optimizer block were a
differentiable function. We validate BPnP by incorporating
it in a deep model that can learn camera intrinsics, camera
extrinsics (poses) and 3D structure from training datasets.
Further, we develop an end-to-end trainable pipeline for
object pose estimation, which achieves greater accuracy by
combining feature-based heatmap losses with 2D-3D reprojection errors. Since our approach can be extended to other
optimization problems, our work helps to pave the way to
perform learnable geometric vision in a principled manner. Our PyTorch implementation of BPnP is available on
http://github.com/BoChenYS/BPnP.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning is due in large part to its
ability to learn patterns from vast amounts of training data.
Applications that have benefited from this ability include
object detection and image segmentation [26, 19]. Fundamentally, such problems can often be formulated as classification/regression problems, which facilitates suitable objective functions for backpropagation learning [29].
On the other hand, there are many important computer
vision tasks that are traditionally formulated as geometric
optimization problems, e.g., camera localization/pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, point set registration. A common property in these optimization problems is the minimization of a residual function (e.g., sum of squared reprojection errors) defined over geometric quantities (e.g.,

nan.li@szu.edu.cn

6DOF camera poses), which are not immediately amenable
to backpropagation learning. This limits the potential of geometric vision tasks to leverage large datasets.
A straightforward solution towards “learnable” geometric vision is to replace the “front end” modules (e.g., image
feature detection and matching) using a deep learning alternative [48, 55, 45]. However, this does not allow the “back
end” steps (e.g., searching for optimal geometric quantities)
to influence the training of the neural network parameters.
On the other extreme, end-to-end methods have been devised [23, 21, 22, 8, 32, 50, 52, 9] that bypass geometric optimization, by using fully connected layers to compute the
geometric quantity (e.g., 6DOF camera pose) from a feature
map derived from previous layers. However, it has been
observed that these methods are equivalent to performing
image retrieval [39], which raises questions on their ability
to generalize. Also, such end-to-end methods do not explicitly exploit established methods from geometric vision [18],
such as solvers for various well-defined tasks.
To benefit from the strengths of deep learning and geometry, it is vital to combine them in a mutually reinforcing
manner. One approach is to incorporate a geometric optimization solver in a deep learning architecture, and allow
the geometric solver to participate in guiding the updates
of the neural network parameters, thereby realising end-toend learnable geometric vision. The key question is how to
compute gradients from a “self-contained” optimizer.
A recent work towards the above goal is differentiable
RANSAC [3, 5, 6], which was targeting at the camera localization task. A perspective-n-point (PnP) module was incorporated in a deep architecture, and the derivatives of the PnP
solver are calculated using central differences [38] to enable
parameter updates in the rest of the pipeline. However, such
an approach to compute gradients is inexact and time consuming because, in order to obtain each partial derivative, it
requires solving PnP at values that lie to the left and right of
the input.
Other approaches to derive gradients from an independent optimization block for backpropagation learning [16,
1] conduct implicit differentiation [2, Chap. 8]. Briefly, in
the context of end-to-end learning, the gradient of the opti-

8100

