Same Features, Different Day: Weakly Supervised Feature Learning for
Seasonal Invariance
Jaime Spencer, Richard Bowden, Simon Hadfield
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP)
University of Surrey
{jaime.spencer, r.bowden, s.hadfield}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Source

“Like night and day” is a commonly used expression
to imply that two things are completely different. Unfortunately, this tends to be the case for current visual feature
representations of the same scene across varying seasons
or times of day. The aim of this paper is to provide a
dense feature representation that can be used to perform
localization, sparse matching or image retrieval, regardless
of the current seasonal or temporal appearance.
Recently, there have been several proposed methodologies for deep learning dense feature representations. These
methods make use of ground truth pixel-wise correspondences between pairs of images and focus on the spatial
properties of the features. As such, they don’t address temporal or seasonal variation. Furthermore, obtaining the
required pixel-wise correspondence data to train in crossseasonal environments is highly complex in most scenarios.
We propose Deja-Vu, a weakly supervised approach to
learning season invariant features that does not require
pixel-wise ground truth data. The proposed system only
requires coarse labels indicating if two images correspond
to the same location or not. From these labels, the network is trained to produce “similar” dense feature maps
for corresponding locations despite environmental changes.
Code will be made available at: https://github.com/
jspenmar/DejaVu_Features

1. Introduction
Feature extraction and representation is a core component of computer vision. In this paper we propose a novel
approach to feature learning with applications in a multitude
of tasks. In particular, this paper addresses the highly challenging task of learning features which are robust to temporal appearance changes. This includes both short-term and
long-term changes, e.g. day vs. night and summer vs. winter, respectively. This is important in scenarios such as au-

Target

(a) Traditional

Positive

Anchor

Negative

(b) Proposed

Figure 1: Traditional methods for learning dense features
require pixel-wise correspondences, making cross-seasonal
training nearly impossible. We propose a novel method for
dense feature training requiring only image level correspondences and relational labels.
tonomous driving, where the vehicle must be capable of operating reliably regardless of the current season or weather.
Traditional hand-crafted features, such as SIFT [28] and
ORB [43], typically fail to obtain reliable matches in crossdomain environments since they haven’t been designed to
handle these changes. More recently, there have been several deep learning techniques proposed [46, 48, 50] to learn
dense feature representations. These methods tend to use a
set of pixel-wise correspondences to obtain relational labels
indicating similarity or dissimilarity between different image regions. As such, these techniques focus on the spatial
properties of the learned features.
However, none of these methods address the huge vi-

6459

