Bringing Old Photos Back to Life
Ziyu Wan1∗ , Bo Zhang2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Pan Zhang4 , Dong Chen2 , Jing Liao1† , Fang Wen2
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Cloud + AI
4
University of Science and Technology of China

Figure 1: Old image restoration results produced by our method. Our method can handle the complex degradation mixed
by both unstructured and structured defects in real old photos.

Abstract
We propose to restore old photos that suffer from severe
degradation through a deep learning approach. Unlike conventional restoration tasks that can be solved through supervised learning, the degradation in real photos is complex
and the domain gap between synthetic images and real old
photos makes the network fail to generalize. Therefore, we
propose a novel triplet domain translation network by leveraging real photos along with massive synthetic image pairs.
Specifically, we train two variational autoencoders (VAEs)
to respectively transform old photos and clean photos into
two latent spaces. And the translation between these two
latent spaces is learned with synthetic paired data. This
translation generalizes well to real photos because the domain gap is closed in the compact latent space. Besides, to
address multiple degradations mixed in one old photo, we
design a global branch with a partial nonlocal block targeting to the structured defects, such as scratches and dust
spots, and a local branch targeting to the unstructured defects, such as noises and blurriness. Two branches are fused
in the latent space, leading to improved capability to restore
old photos from multiple defects. The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of visual quality
for old photos restoration.
∗ Work done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Photos are taken to freeze the happy moments that otherwise gone. Even though time goes by, one can still evoke
memories of the past by viewing them. Nonetheless, old
photo prints deteriorate when kept in poor environmental
condition, which causes the valuable photo content permanently damaged. Fortunately, as mobile cameras and
scanners become more accessible, people can now digitalize the photos and invite a skilled specialist for restoration.
However, manual retouching is usually laborious and timeconsuming, which leaves piles of old photos impossible to
get restored. Hence, it is appealing to design automatic algorithms that can instantly repair old photos for those who
wish to bring old photos back to life.
Prior to the deep learning era, there are some attempts [1,
2, 3, 4] that restore photos by automatically detecting the
localized defects such as scratches and blemishes, and filling in the damaged areas with inpainting techniques. Yet
these methods focus on completing the missing content and
none of them can repair the spatially-uniform defects such
as film grain, sepia effect, color fading, etc., so the photos
after restoration still appear outdated compared to modern
photographic images. With the emergence of deep learning, one can address a variety of low-level image restoration problems [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] by exploiting the powerful
representation capability of convolutional neural networks,
i.e., learning the mapping for a specific task from a large
12747

