Learning Video Stabilization Using Optical Flow
Jiyang Yu
University of California, San Diego

Ravi Ramamoorthi
University of California, San Diego

jiy173@eng.ucsd.edu

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel neural network that infers the perpixel warp fields for video stabilization from the optical flow
fields of the input video. While previous learning based video
stabilization methods attempt to implicitly learn frame motions from color videos, our method resorts to optical flow for
motion analysis and directly learns the stabilization using the
optical flow. We also propose a pipeline that uses optical flow
principal components for motion inpainting and warp field
smoothing, making our method robust to moving objects, occlusion and optical flow inaccuracy, which is challenging
for other video stabilization methods. Our method achieves
quantitatively and visually better results than the state-ofthe-art optimization based and deep learning based video
stabilization methods. Our method also gives a ∼3x speed
improvement compared to the optimization based methods.

1. Introduction
Video stabilization is a common need in both amateur and
professional video capture. On the amateur side, using specific video stabilization equipment is usually difficult and
expensive. Therefore, various algorithms have been developed for stabilizing the video. There are two main steps in
the video stabilization: understanding the motion pattern and
stable frame generation. For the first step, previous video
stabilization algorithms resort to explicit physics. Some of
these algorithms use image feature detection and tracking to
build feature tracks, like Matsushita et.al.[12], Liu et.al.[10]
and Grundmann et.al.[5]. Other physically based algorithms
consider the real 3D camera motion and scene structures, like
Liu et.al.[8] and Goldstein and Fattal[4]. However, the complex nature of videos makes it very difficult for a physically
based motion model to cover all the scenarios: the motion
blur and occlusions may negatively affect the feature detection and tracking, and reconstructing 3D structure from video
with these effects is also difficult. Having observed the limitation of physically based algorithms, in this paper, we use
the optical flow to understand the frame motions.
For the second step, traditional video stabilization algorithms use full-frame or grid homography to warp the
original frames. However, simple parameterized warping cannot handle complex scenarios like parallax and the
rolling shutter effect. Like other optical flow based methods
SteadyFlow[11] and Yu and Ramamoorthi[19], we use the

per-pixel warp field, which provides the most flexibility in
warping the video frames. These methods perform well on
handling complex camera effects like rolling shutter. However, the optical flow essentially only provides a pseudo correspondence between two frames. At occlusion boundaries,
pixels can either appear in the next frame or be occluded in
the next frame. The optical flow is also inaccurate in regions
lacking texture. Using the optical flow as the reference can
lead to unexpected artifacts in the output warp fields. We propose a pipeline that is specifically designed to handle the inaccuracy in the optical flow. We are the first method that uses
the optical flow principal components[17] in video stabilization instead of hand-crafted spatial smoothness constraints.
We will discuss the details of our pipeline in Sec. 3.
The core of our algorithm is a deep neural network that
takes the optical flow as the input and directly outputs the
warp fields. Our neural network based method overcomes
the major drawback of optical flow based methods: the computational complexity. Both SteadyFlow[11] and Yu and
Ramamoorthi[19] use optimization to minimize an objective
function with a significant amount of unknowns(the motion
vectors in the warp fields). The optimization process must be
performed for each different video. Our pre-trained network
is generalizable to any videos; thus we avoid this main overhead compared to traditional optical flow based methods.
We summarize our contribution as follows:
a) An optical flow based video stabilization network: We
proposed a novel neural network that takes the optical flow
fields as the input and produces a pixel-wise warp field for
each frame. Our neural network can be pre-trained and generalized to any videos. The details are discussed in Sec. 5.
b) Frequency domain regularized training: We propose
a frequency domain loss function that enables learning with
optical flow fields. We will show the necessity of this loss
function in Sec. 5.1.
c) Robust video stabilization pipeline: We propose a
pipeline that is robust to moving occlusion and optical flow
inaccuracy by applying PCA Flow to video stabilization. The
design is demonstrated in Sec. 3. In Sec. 7, we will show that
our method generates better results compared to the stateof-the-art optimization based and deep learning based video
stabilization methods. Our method also achieves ∼3x speed
improvement compared to optimization based methods.

8159

