AANet: Adaptive Aggregation Network for Efficient Stereo Matching
Haofei Xu Juyong Zhang∗
University of Science and Technology of China
xhf@mail.ustc.edu.cn, juyong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress made by learning based
stereo matching algorithms, one key challenge remains unsolved. Current state-of-the-art stereo models are mostly
based on costly 3D convolutions, the cubic computational
complexity and high memory consumption make it quite expensive to deploy in real-world applications. In this paper, we aim at completely replacing the commonly used 3D
convolutions to achieve fast inference speed while maintaining comparable accuracy. To this end, we first propose a sparse points based intra-scale cost aggregation
method to alleviate the well-known edge-fattening issue at
disparity discontinuities. Further, we approximate traditional cross-scale cost aggregation algorithm with neural
network layers to handle large textureless regions. Both
modules are simple, lightweight, and complementary, leading to an effective and efficient architecture for cost aggregation. With these two modules, we can not only significantly speed up existing top-performing models (e.g.,
41× than GC-Net, 4× than PSMNet and 38× than GANet), but also improve the performance of fast stereo models (e.g., StereoNet). We also achieve competitive results
on Scene Flow and KITTI datasets while running at 62ms,
demonstrating the versatility and high efficiency of the proposed method. Our full framework is available at https:
//github.com/haofeixu/aanet.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth from stereo pairs is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision [29]. The key task
is to find spatial pixel correspondences, i.e., stereo matching, then depth can be recovered by triangulation. Efficient and accurate stereo matching algorithms are crucial
for many real-world applications that require fast and reliable responses, such as robot navigation, augmented reality
and autonomous driving.
Traditional stereo matching algorithms generally per∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Illustration of the sampling locations in regular
convolution based cost aggregation methods and our proposed approach, where the yellow and red points represent
the locations for aggregation. (a) left image of a stereo
pair. (b) fixed sampling locations in regular convolutions,
also the aggregation weights are spatially shared. (c) adaptive sampling locations and position-specific aggregation
weights in our approach. The background in (b) and (c)
is ground truth disparity.

form a four-step pipeline: matching cost computation, cost
aggregation, disparity computation and refinement, and
they can be broadly classified into global and local methods
[29]. Global methods usually solve an optimization problem by minimizing a global objective function that contains
data and smoothness terms [31, 17], while local methods
only consider neighbor information [40, 12], making themselves much faster than global methods [23, 29]. Although
significant progress has been made by traditional methods,
they still suffer in challenging situations like textureless regions, repetitive patterns and thin structures.
Learning based methods make use of deep neural networks to learn strong representations from data, achieving promising results even in those challenging situations.
DispNetC [20] builds the first end-to-end trainable framework for disparity estimation, where a correlation layer is
used to measure the similarity of left and right image features. GC-Net [14] takes a different approach by directly
concatenating left and right features, and thus 3D convolutions are required to aggregate the resulting 4D cost volume. PSMNet [4] further improves GC-Net by introducing more 3D convolutions for cost aggregation and accordingly obtains better accuracy. Although state-of-the-art performance can be achieved with 3D convolutions, the high

1959

