Dynamic Graph Message Passing Networks
Li Zhang1

Dan Xu1
1

Anurag Arnab2∗

University of Oxford

2

Google Research

{lz, danxu, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Modelling long-range dependencies is critical for scene
understanding tasks in computer vision. Although CNNs
have excelled in many vision tasks, they are still limited in
capturing long-range structured relationships as they typically consist of layers of local kernels. A fully-connected
graph is beneficial for such modelling, however, its computational overhead is prohibitive. We propose a dynamic
graph message passing network, that significantly reduces
the computational complexity compared to related works
modelling a fully-connected graph. This is achieved by adaptively sampling nodes in the graph, conditioned on the input, for message passing. Based on the sampled nodes, we
dynamically predict node-dependent filter weights and the
affinity matrix for propagating information between them.
Using this model, we show significant improvements with
respect to strong, state-of-the-art baselines on three different
tasks and backbone architectures. Our approach also outperforms fully-connected graphs while using substantially
fewer floating-point operations and parameters.

1. Introduction
Capturing long-range dependencies is crucial for complex
scene understanding tasks such as semantic segmentation,
instance segmentation and object detection. Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have excelled in a wide
range of scene understanding tasks [20, 30, 15], they are still
limited by their ability to capture these long-range interactions. To improve the capability of CNNs in this regard, a
recent, popular model Non-local networks [34] proposes a
generalisation of the attention model of [31] and achieves
significant advance in several computer vision tasks.
Non-local networks essentially model pairwise structured
relationships among all feature elements in a feature map
to produce the attention weights which are used for feature aggregation. Considering each feature element as a
node in a graph, Non-local networks effectively model a
∗ Work primarily done at the University of Oxford.

Philip H.S. Torr1

aarnab@google.com

fully-connected feature graph and thus have a quadratic inference complexity with respect to the number of the feature
elements. This is infeasible for dense prediction tasks on
high-resolution imagery, as commonly encountered in semantic segmentation [9]. Moreover, in dense prediction
tasks, capturing relations between all pairs of pixels is usually unnecessary due to the redundant information contained
within the image (Fig. 1). Simply subsampling the feature
map to reduce the memory requirements is also suboptimal,
as such naı̈ve subsampling would result in smaller objects in
the image not being represented adequately.
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) [19, 12] – which
propagate information along graph-structured input data –
can alleviate the computational issues of non-local networks
to a certain extent. However, this stands only if local neighbourhoods are considered for each node. Employing such
local-connected graphs means that the long-range contextual information needed for complex vision tasks such as
segmentation and detection [29, 28, 3] will only be partially
captured. Along this direction, GraphSAGE [13] introduced
an efficient graph learning model based on graph sampling.
However, the proposed sampling method considered a uniform sampling strategy along the spatial dimension of the
input, and was independent of the actual input. Consequently,
the modelling capacity was restricted as it assumed a static
input graph where the neighbours for each node were fixed
and filter weights were shared among all nodes.
To address the aforementioned shortcomings, we propose
a novel dynamic graph message passing network (DGMN)
model, targeting effective and efficient deep representational
learning with joint modeling of two key dynamic properties
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Our contribution is twofold: (i) We
dynamically sample the neighbourhood of a node from the
feature graph, conditioned on the node features. Intuitively,
this learned sampling allows the network to efficiently gather
long-range context by only selecting a subset of the most
relevant nodes in the graph; (ii) Based on the nodes that
have been sampled, we further dynamically predict nodedependant, and thus position specific, filter weights and also
the affinity matrix, which are used to propagate information
among the feature nodes via message passing. The dynamic

3726

