Fashion Editing with Adversarial Parsing Learning
Haoye Dong1,2 , Xiaodan Liang3 , Yixuan Zhang5 , Xujie Zhang1 ,
Xiaohui Shen4 , Zhenyu Xie1 , Bowen Wu1 , Jian Yin1,2,∗
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
3
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
4
ByteDance AI Lab, 5 Petuum Inc.
donghy7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, issjyin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
xdliang328@gmail.com, shenxiaohui@bytedance.com

Abstract
Interactive fashion image manipulation, which enables
users to edit images with sketches and color strokes, is an
interesting research problem with great application value.
Existing works often treat it as a general inpainting task and
do not fully leverage the semantic structural information in
fashion images. Moreover, they directly utilize conventional
convolution and normalization layers to restore the incomplete image, which tends to wash away the sketch and color
information. In this paper, we propose a novel Fashion
Editing Generative Adversarial Network (FE-GAN), which
is capable of manipulating fashion images by free-form
sketches and sparse color strokes. FE-GAN consists of two
modules: 1) a free-form parsing network that learns to control the human parsing generation by manipulating sketch
and color; 2) a parsing-aware inpainting network that renders detailed textures with semantic guidance from the human parsing map. A new attention normalization layer is
further applied at multiple scales in the decoder of the inpainting network to enhance the quality of the synthesized
image. Extensive experiments on high-resolution fashion
image datasets demonstrate that the proposed FE-GAN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on fashion image manipulation.

1. Introduction
Fashion image manipulation aims to generate highresolution realistic fashion images with user-provided
sketches and color strokes. It has huge potential values in
various applications. For example, a fashion designer can
easily edit clothing designs with different styles; filmmakers can design characters by controlling the facial expres∗ Corresponding author is Jian Yin

sion, hairstyle, and body shape of the actor or actress. In
this paper, we propose FE-GAN, a fashion image manipulation network that enables flexible and efficient user interactions such as simple sketches and a few sparse color
strokes. Some interactive manipulation results of FE-GAN
are shown in Figure 1, which indicates that it can generate
realistic images with convincing and desired details.
In general, image manipulation has made great progress
due to the significant improvement of neural network techniques [2, 6, 7, 14, 17, 21, 34]. However, previous methods
often treat it as an end-to-end one-stage image completion
problem without flexible user interactions [12, 16, 19, 20,
25, 31, 32]. Those methods usually do not explicitly estimate and then leverage the semantic structural information
in the image. Furthermore, they excessively use the conventional convolutional layers and batch normalization, which
significantly dissolve the sketch and color information from
the input during propagation. As a result, the generated images usually contain unrealistic artifacts and undesired textures.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel
Fashion Editing Generative Adversarial Network (FEGAN), which consists of a free-form parsing network and a
parsing-aware inpainting network with multi-scale attention
normalization layers. Different from the previous methods,
we do not directly generate the complete image in one stage.
Instead, we first generate a complete parsing map from incomplete inputs, and then render detailed textures on the
layout induced from the generated parsing map. Specifically, in the training stage, given an incomplete parsing map
obtained from the image, a sketch, sparse color strokes, a
binary mask, and a noise sampled from the Gaussian distribution, the free-form parsing network learns to reconstruct
a complete human parsing map guided by the sketch and
color. A parsing-aware inpainting network then takes the

8120

