Skeleton-Based Action Recognition with Shift Graph Convolutional Network
∗

Ke Cheng1,2 , Yifan Zhang1,2 , Xiangyu He1,2 , Weihan Chen1,2 , Jian Cheng1,2,3 , Hanqing Lu1,2
1
NLPR & AIRIA, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{chengke2017, chenweihan2018}@ia.ac.cn, {yfzhang, xiangyu.he, jcheng, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Action recognition with skeleton data is attracting more
attention in computer vision. Recently, graph convolutional
networks (GCNs), which model the human body skeletons
as spatiotemporal graphs, have obtained remarkable performance. However, the computational complexity of GCNbased methods are pretty heavy, typically over 15 GFLOPs
for one action sample. Recent works even reach ∼100
GFLOPs. Another shortcoming is that the receptive fields
of both spatial graph and temporal graph are inflexible. Although some works enhance the expressiveness of spatial
graph by introducing incremental adaptive modules, their
performance is still limited by regular GCN structures. In
this paper, we propose a novel shift graph convolutional network (Shift-GCN) to overcome both shortcomings. Instead
of using heavy regular graph convolutions, our Shift-GCN
is composed of novel shift graph operations and lightweight
point-wise convolutions, where the shift graph operations
provide flexible receptive fields for both spatial graph and
temporal graph. On three datasets for skeleton-based action recognition, the proposed Shift-GCN notably exceeds
the state-of-the-art methods with more than 10× less computational complexity.

1. Introduction
In the computer vision field, skeleton-based human action recognition has attracted much attention due to its robustness against the dynamic circumstance and complicated
background [2, 12, 14, 16, 20, 21, 23–25, 27, 30, 34, 36].
Earlier methods [2, 3, 27] simply employ the joint coordinates to form feature vectors, which rarely explore the relations between body joints. With the development of deep
learning, researchers manually structure the skeleton data
as a pseudo-image [5, 7, 10, 14] or a sequence of coordinate
vectors [2, 16, 19, 35, 36], which is fed into CNNs or RNNs

Figure 1. GFLOPs v.s. accuracy on NTU RGB+D X-sub task.

to generate the prediction. Recently, Yan et al. [34] propose
ST-GCN to model the skeleton data with graph convolutional networks (GCNs), which contains spatial graph convolution and temporal graph convolution. Many variants of
ST-GCN are proposed [9,12,20–22,31], which typically introduce incremental modules to enhance the expressiveness
and network capacity.
However, there are two shortcomings of these GCNbased methods. (1) The computational complexity is too
heavy. For example, ST-GCN [34] costs 16.2 GFLOPs1 for
one action sample. Some recent works even reach ∼100
GFLOPs [20] due to introducing incremental modules and
multi-stream fusion strategy. (2) The receptive fields of both
spatial graph and temporal graph are pre-defined heuristically. Although [20, 21] makes the spatial adjacent matrix
learnable, our experiments show that their expressiveness is
still limited by the regular spatial GCN structure.
In this paper, we propose shift graph convolutional network (Shift-GCN) to address both shortcomings. Our ShiftGCN is inspired by shift CNNs [4, 32, 37], which use a
lightweight shift operation as an alternative of 2D convolution and can adjust receptive fields by simply changing shift
distances. The proposed Shift-GCN consists of spatial shift
graph convolution and temporal shift graph convolution.
For spatial skeleton graph, instead of using three GCNs
with different adjacent matrices to obtain enough receptive
field [9,12,20–22,31], we propose a spatial shift graph operation to shift information from neighbor nodes to the current
1 GFLOPs: Giga FLoating-number OPerations

∗ Corresponding author.

183

