Fusing Wearable IMUs with Multi-View Images for Human Pose Estimation: A
Geometric Approach
Zhe Zhang1∗
1

Chunyu Wang2

Southeast University, Nanjing, China

Wenhu Qin1
2

Wenjun Zeng2

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China

Abstract
We propose to estimate 3D human pose from multi-view
images and a few IMUs attached at person’s limbs. It operates by firstly detecting 2D poses from the two signals,
and then lifting them to the 3D space. We present a geometric approach to reinforce the visual features of each
pair of joints based on the IMUs. This notably improves 2D
pose estimation accuracy especially when one joint is occluded. We call this approach Orientation Regularized Network (ORN). Then we lift the multi-view 2D poses to the
3D space by an Orientation Regularized Pictorial Structure Model (ORPSM) which jointly minimizes the projection error between the 3D and 2D poses, along with the discrepancy between the 3D pose and IMU orientations. The
simple two-step approach reduces the error of the stateof-the-art by a large margin on a public dataset. Our
code will be released at https://github.com/microsoft/imuhuman-pose-estimation-pytorch.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D poses from images has been a longstanding goal in computer vision. With the development of deep
learning models, the recent approaches [5, 17, 2, 20, 21, 26]
have achieved promising results on the public datasets. One
limitation of the vision-based methods is that they cannot
robustly solve the occlusion problem.
A number of works are devoted to estimating poses from
wearable sensors such as IMUs [27, 22, 29, 30]. They suffer less from occlusion since IMUs can provide direct 3D
measurements. For example, Roetenberg et al. [22] place
17 IMUs with 3D accelerometers, gyroscopes and magnetometers at the rigid bones. If the measurements are accurate, the 3D pose is fully determined. In practice, however,
the accuracy is limited by a number of factors such as calibration errors and the drifting problem.
Recently, fusing images and IMUs to achieve more robust pose estimation has attracted much attention [27, 28,
∗ Work done when Zhe Zhang is an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

Figure 1. Our approach gets accurate 3D pose estimations even
when severe self-occlusion occurs in the images.

6, 15]. They mainly follow a similar framework of building
a parametric 3D human model and optimizing its parameters to minimize its discrepancy with the images and IMUs.
The accuracy of these approaches is limited mainly due to
the hard optimization problem.
We present an approach to fuse IMUs with images for robust pose estimation. It gets accurate estimations even when
occlusion occurs (see Figure 1). In addition, it outperforms
the previous methods [15, 28] by a notable margin on the
public dataset. We first introduce Orientation Regularized
Network (ORN) to jointly estimate 2D poses for multi-view
images as shown in Figure 2. ORN differs from the previous multiview methods [19] in that it uses IMU orientations
as a structural prior to mutually fuse the image features of
each pair of joints linked by IMUs. For example, it uses the
features of the elbow to reinforce those of the wrist based
on the IMU at the lower-arm.
The cross-joint-fusion allows to accurately localize the
occluded joints based on their neighbors. The main challenge is to determine the relative positions between each
pair of joints in the images, which we solve elegantly in the
3D space with the help of IMU orientations. The approach
significantly improves the 2D pose estimation accuracy especially when occlusion occurs.
In the second step, we estimate 3D pose from multi-view
2D poses (heatmaps) by a Pictorial Structure Model (PSM)
[12, 17, 2]. It jointly minimizes the projection error between the 3D and 2D poses, along with the discrepancy be-

2200

