Sideways: Depth-Parallel Training of Video Models
Mateusz Malinowski

Grzegorz Świrszcz

João Carreira

Viorica Pătrăucean

mateuszm@google.com

swirszcz@google.com

joaoluis@google.com

viorica@google.com

DeepMind
London, U.K.

Abstract
We propose Sideways, an approximate backpropagation
scheme for training video models. In standard backpropagation, the gradients and activations at every computation
step through the model are temporally synchronized. The
forward activations need to be stored until the backward
pass is executed, preventing inter-layer (depth) parallelization. However, can we leverage smooth, redundant input
streams such as videos to develop a more efficient training
scheme? Here, we explore an alternative to backpropagation; we overwrite network activations whenever new ones,
i.e., from new frames, become available. Such a more gradual accumulation of information from both passes breaks
the precise correspondence between gradients and activations, leading to theoretically more noisy weight updates.
Counter-intuitively, we show that Sideways training of deep
convolutional video networks not only still converges, but
can also potentially exhibit better generalization compared
to standard synchronized backpropagation.

1. Introduction
The key ingredient of deep learning is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [7, 42, 53], which has many variants,
including SGD with Momentum [47], Adam [26], and Adagrad [14]. E.g., SGD approximates gradients using minibatches sampled from full datasets. Efficiency considerations primarily motivated the development of SGD as many
datasets do not fit in memory. Moreover, computing full
gradients over them would take a long time, compared to
mini-batches, i.e., performing SGD steps is often more preferred [7, 16, 53]. However, SGD is not only more efficient
but also produces better models. E.g, giant-sized models
trained using SGD are naturally regularized and may generalize better [18, 43], and local minima do not seem to be a
problem [11]. Explaining these phenomena is still an open
theoretical problem, but it is clear that SGD is doing more
than merely optimizing a given loss function [52].

t+30

t+15

t

Figure 1: Three frames of a fish swimming, sampled 15
frames apart, or about every half a second. Note how little
variation there is in the patch within the red square. Can
we leverage such redundancies and the smoothness in local neighborhoods of such type of data for more efficient
training? Our results suggest we can and there could be
generalization benefits in doing that.

In this paper, we propose a further departure from the
gradient descent, also motivated by efficiency considerations, which trains models that operate on sequences of
video frames. Gradients of neural networks are computed
using the backpropagation (BP) algorithm. However, BP
operates in a synchronized blocking fashion: first, activations for a mini-batch are computed and stored during the
forward pass, and next, these activations are re-used to compute Jacobian matrices in the backward pass. Such blocking
means that the two passes must be done sequentially, which
leads to high latency, low throughput. This is particularly
sub-optimal if there are parallel processing resources available, and is particularly prominent if we cannot parallelize
across batch or temporal dimensions, e.g., in online learning
or with causal models.
The central hypothesis studied in this paper is whether
we can backpropagate gradients based on activations from
different timesteps, hence removing the locking between
the layers. Intuitively, one reason this may work is that high
frame rate videos are temporally smooth, leading to similar

11834

