Hi-CMD: Hierarchical Cross-Modality Disentanglement for Visible-Infrared
Person Re-Identification
Seokeon Choi Sumin Lee Youngeun Kim Taekyung Kim Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea
{seokeon, suminlee94, youngeunkim, tkkim93, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match a specific
person across multiple non-overlapping camera views. Due
to its usefulness in security and surveillance systems, person ReID has been of great research interest in recent years.
Existing ReID methods mainly treat visible images captured by single-modality cameras, and depend on human
appearance for RGB-RGB matching [35, 42, 45, 25, 36, 26].
However, visible light cameras can not capture all the ap-

Pose & Illumination Variation
(IR)
Infrared

Hi-CMD
Disentanglement
ID-discriminative

ID-excluded
Pose & Illumination Variation
& n
o
se
Po inati y
m tit
Illu Iden

1. Introduction

ID-Preserving
Image Generation

& n
o
se
Po inati y
m tit
Illu Iden

Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) is
an important task in night-time surveillance applications,
since visible cameras are difficult to capture valid appearance information under poor illumination conditions. Compared to traditional person re-identification that handles
only the intra-modality discrepancy, VI-ReID suffers from
additional cross-modality discrepancy caused by different
types of imaging systems. To reduce both intra- and crossmodality discrepancies, we propose a Hierarchical CrossModality Disentanglement (Hi-CMD) method, which automatically disentangles ID-discriminative factors and IDexcluded factors from visible-thermal images. We only use
ID-discriminative factors for robust cross-modality matching without ID-excluded factors such as pose or illumination. To implement our approach, we introduce an IDpreserving person image generation network and a hierarchical feature learning module. Our generation network
learns the disentangled representation by generating a new
cross-modality image with different poses and illuminations
while preserving a person’s identity. At the same time,
the feature learning module enables our model to explicitly extract the common ID-discriminative characteristic between visible-infrared images. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods on two VI-ReID datasets. The source code
is available at: https://github.com/bismex/HiCMD.

(RGB)
Visible

Shape and size
of human body

Illumination attribute
(Cross-modality)

Pattern and style
of clothes

Pose attribute
(Intra-modality)

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of our Hierarchical Cross-Modality Disentanglement (Hi-CMD) concept. Our Hi-CMD method aims
to hierarchically disentangle ID-discriminative factors (e.g. body
shape and clothes pattern) and ID-excluded factors (e.g. pose
and illumination) from RGB-IR images. (b) Examples of IDpreserving Person Image Generation (ID-PIG). The images in each
row show that pose and illumination attributes can be changed
while maintaining the identity information. Best viewed in color.

pearance characteristics of a person under poor illumination
conditions. For these conditions, most surveillance cameras automatically switch from visible to the infrared mode
in dark environments [33, 34]. After all, it becomes essential to consider visible-infrared person re-identification
(VI-ReID). The goal of VI-ReID is to match pedestrians
observed from visible and infrared cameras with different
spectra.
Compared to the traditional ReID task that only has the
intra-modality discrepancy problem, VI-ReID encounters
the additional cross-modality discrepancy problem resulting from the natural difference between the reflectivity of

10257

