Instance-aware Image Colorization
Jheng-Wei Su1
Hung-Kuo Chu1
Jia-Bin Huang2
1 National Tsing Hua University
2 Virginia Tech
https://cgv.cs.nthu.edu.tw/projects/instaColorization

Figure 1. Instance-aware colorization. We present an instance-aware colorization method that is capable of producing natural and colorful
results on a wide range of scenes containing multiple objects with diverse context (e.g., vehicles, people, and man-made objects).

Abstract
Image colorization is inherently an ill-posed problem
with multi-modal uncertainty. Previous methods leverage
the deep neural network to map input grayscale images to
plausible color outputs directly. Although these learningbased methods have shown impressive performance, they
usually fail on the input images that contain multiple objects. The leading cause is that existing models perform
learning and colorization on the entire image. In the absence of a clear figure-ground separation, these models
cannot effectively locate and learn meaningful object-level
semantics. In this paper, we propose a method for achieving instance-aware colorization. Our network architecture
leverages an off-the-shelf object detector to obtain cropped
object images and uses an instance colorization network to
extract object-level features. We use a similar network to
extract the full-image features and apply a fusion module
to full object-level and image-level features to predict the
final colors. Both colorization networks and fusion modules are learned from a large-scale dataset. Experimental
results show that our work outperforms existing methods on
different quality metrics and achieves state-of-the-art performance on image colorization.

1. Introduction
Automatically converting a grayscale image to a plausible color image is an exciting research topic in computer
vision and graphics, which has several practical applications such as legacy photos/video restoration or image compression. However, predicting two missing channels from a
given single-channel grayscale image is inherently an illposed problem. Moreover, the colorization task could be
multi-modal [3] as there are multiple plausible choices to
colorize an object (e.g., a vehicle can be white, black, red,
etc.). Therefore, image colorization remains a challenging
yet intriguing research problem awaiting exploration.
Traditional colorization methods rely on user intervention to provide some guidance such as color scribbles [20,
12, 35, 26, 22, 31] or reference images [34, 14, 3, 9, 21, 5]
to obtain satisfactory results. With the advances of deep
learning, an increasing amount of efforts has focused on
leveraging deep neural network and large-scale dataset such
as ImageNet [28] or COCO-Stuff [2] to learn colorization
in an end-to-end fashion [4, 13, 17, 38, 41, 15, 42, 11, 8,
27, 6, 24, 1]. A variety of network architectures have been
proposed to address image-level semantics [13, 17, 38, 42]
at training or predict per-pixel color distributions to model
multi-modality [17, 38, 42]. Although these learning-based
17968

