DOA-GAN: Dual-Order Attentive Generative Adversarial Network for Image
Copy-move Forgery Detection and Localization
Ashraful Islam1 , Chengjiang Long2∗, Arslan Basharat2 , and Anthony Hoogs2
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
2
Kitware Inc., Clifton Park, NY
islama6@rpi.edu, {chengjiang.long, arslan.basharat, anthony.hoogs}@kitware.com

Abstract
Images can be manipulated for nefarious purposes to
hide content or to duplicate certain objects through copymove operations. Discovering a well-crafted copy-move
forgery in images can be very challenging for both humans
and machines; for example, an object on a uniform background can be replaced by an image patch of the same background. In this paper, we propose a Generative Adversarial
Network with a dual-order attention model to detect and
localize copy-move forgeries. In the generator, the firstorder attention is designed to capture copy-move location
information, and the second-order attention exploits more
discriminative features for the patch co-occurrence. Both
attention maps are extracted from the affinity matrix and
are used to fuse location-aware and co-occurrence features
for the final detection and localization branches of the network. The discriminator network is designed to further ensure more accurate localization results. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to propose such a network architecture with the 1st-order attention mechanism from the
affinity matrix. We have performed extensive experimental
validation and our state-of-the-art results strongly demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
The content of digital images can be easily manipulated
or forged as there are many image editing tools like GIMP
or Adobe Photoshop. Such manipulations can be done for
nefarious purposes to either hide or duplicate an object or
similar content in the original images. A copy-move image forgery refers to a type of image manipulation where a
source region is copied to another location within the same
image. As two real-world examples in Figure 1, copy-move
image forgery could be used to add or hide some objects
∗ This work was supervised by Chengjiang Long when Ashraful Islam
was a summer intern at Kitware, Inc.

Figure 1: Two examples of copy-move forgery with object cloning (top) and object removal (bottom). From
left to right are original, forged, and ground-truth images.
Our goal is to automatically detect and localize the source
(green) and the target (red) regions in forged images.
appearing a digital image, leading to a different interpretation. If such a manipulated image was part of a criminal
investigation, without effective forensics tools the investigators could be misled. Therefore, it is crucial to develop
a robust image forensic tool for copy-move detection and
localization.
A number of copy-move detection approaches are already available including various traditional patch/blockbased methods [8, 32, 17], keypoint-based methods [49,
33], irregular region-based methods [19, 36], and a few recent deep learning approaches [44, 22, 46]. Although some
copy-move detection methods have been able to generate
reasonable localization result, but the results of these approaches are still far from perfect on some of the more challenging scenarios. As shown in Figure 1, it is very challenging to distinguish copy-moves from incidental similarities,
which occur frequently.
In this paper, we propose a dual-order attentive Generative Adversarial Network (DOA-GAN) for copy-move
forgery detection and localization. As illustrated in Figure 2, the generator is an end-to-end unified framework
based on a deep convolutional neural network. Given an
input image, we calculate an affinity matrix based on the

4676

