Universal Weighting Metric Learning for Cross-Modal Matching
Jiwei Wei, Xing Xu∗, Yang Yang, Yanli Ji, Zheng Wang, Heng Tao Shen
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China

Abstract
Cross-modal matching has been a highlighted research
topic in both vision and language areas. Learning appropriate mining strategy to sample and weight informative
pairs is crucial for the cross-modal matching performance.
However, most existing metric learning methods are developed for unimodal matching, which is unsuitable for crossmodal matching on multimodal data with heterogeneous
features. To address this problem, we propose a simple
and interpretable universal weighting framework for crossmodal matching, which provides a tool to analyze the interpretability of various loss functions. Furthermore, we introduce a new polynomial loss under the universal weighting
framework, which defines a weight function for the positive
and negative informative pairs respectively. Experimental
results on two image-text matching benchmarks and two
video-text matching benchmarks validate the efficacy of the
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal matching aims at retrieving relevant instances of a different media type from the query, which
has a variety of applications such as Image-Text matching [6, 32, 28, 36, 31, 37, 41, 2, 14], Video-Text matching [22, 29, 10, 38], Sketch-based image matching [3], etc.
Compared with unimodal matching, cross-modal matching
is more challenging due to the heterogeneous gap between
different modalities. The key issue in cross-modal matching
is to reduce the heterogeneous gap and exploit discriminative information across modalities [21, 8, 35, 33, 27].
A common solution for cross-modal matching is to learn
a shared embedding space for different modalities so that
the features from different modalities can be compared. Recently, a variety of cross-modal matching methods have
been devoted to learning richer semantic representations for
different modalities and a ranking loss is adopted to jointly
optimize the network so that the similarity of the positive
∗ Corresponding author.

Shared Embedding Space
A flower vase is
sitting on a porch
stand.

A lone zebra
grazing in some
green grass.

A couple of men
riding horses on
top of a green
field.

A woman in a
floral swimsuit
holds a pink
umbrella.

Positive
Anchor
Negative

𝑆 = 𝛷 𝑣 𝑇 𝑊𝛹 𝑡

𝑆𝑎𝑝 > 𝑆𝑎𝑛 + 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛

Figure 1. A typical solution for cross-modal matching is to learn a
shared embedding space where visual features Φ(v) and text features Ψ(t) can be compared. Points with the same shape are from
the same modality. A triplet loss was utilized to encourage the
similarity of positive (matching) pairs larger than negative (nonmatching) pairs. Take image-text matching as an example.

pairs is higher than that of all negative pairs, as illustrated
in Figure 1. In previous literature, attention mechanism [18]
and generative models [11, 15] have been explored to build
advanced encoding networks. Liu et al. [23] proposed a
recurrent residual fusion block to reduce the modality gap,
and a triplet loss [13] was used to encourage semantically
associated samples close to each other in the shared embedding space. Li et al. [19] proposed a visual reasoning model
to generate global representation of a scene.
While these methods have achieved encouraging performance, most of them use the ranking loss as an objective
function, which usually trained with random sampling. This
gives rise to an issue for cross-modal matching, where random sampling cannot effectively select informative pairs for
training, leading a slow convergence and poor performance.
While more recent metric learning methods have provided
various mining strategies for unimodal matching, few of
them are suitable for cross-modal matching. Hence, learning an appropriate mining strategy to sample and weight
informative pairs is still a challenging problem for crossmodal matching.
113005

