Unsupervised Domain Adaptation via Structurally Regularized Deep Clustering
Hui Tang, Ke Chen, and Kui Jia∗
South China University of Technology
381 Wushan Road, Tianhe District, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
eehuitang@mail.scut.edu.cn, {chenk,kuijia}@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is to make predictions for unlabeled data on a target domain, given labeled data on a source domain whose distribution shifts
from the target one. Mainstream UDA methods learn
aligned features between the two domains, such that a classifier trained on the source features can be readily applied
to the target ones. However, such a transferring strategy
has a potential risk of damaging the intrinsic discrimination of target data. To alleviate this risk, we are motivated
by the assumption of structural domain similarity, and propose to directly uncover the intrinsic target discrimination
via discriminative clustering of target data. We constrain
the clustering solutions using structural source regularization that hinges on our assumed structural domain similarity. Technically, we use a flexible framework of deep network based discriminative clustering that minimizes the KL
divergence between predictive label distribution of the network and an introduced auxiliary one; replacing the auxiliary distribution with that formed by ground-truth labels of
source data implements the structural source regularization
via a simple strategy of joint network training. We term our
proposed method as Structurally Regularized Deep Clustering (SRDC), where we also enhance target discrimination
with clustering of intermediate network features, and enhance structural regularization with soft selection of less
divergent source examples. Careful ablation studies show
the efficacy of our proposed SRDC. Notably, with no explicit
domain alignment, SRDC outperforms all existing methods
on three UDA benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Given labeled data on a source domain, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is to make predictions in the same
label space for unlabeled data on a target domain, where
there may exist divergence between the two domains. Main∗ Corresponding author.

stream methods are motivated by the classic UDA theories
[2, 3, 40] that specify the learning bounds involving domain
divergences, whose magnitudes depend on the feature space
and the hypothesis space of classifier. Consequently, these
methods (e.g., those recent ones based on adversarial training of deep networks [16, 48]) strive to learn aligned features between the two domains, such that classifiers trained
on the source features can be readily applied to the target ones. In spite of impressive results achieved by these
methods, they have a potential risk of damaging the intrinsic structures of target data discrimination, as discussed in
[9, 50, 69]. Attempts are made in [9, 50] to alleviate this
risk, however, explicit domain alignments are still pursued
in their proposed solutions.
To address this issue, we first instantiate the general assumption of domain closeness in UDA problems [2, 50] as
structural domain similarity, which spells as two notions of
domain-wise discrimination and class-wise closeness — the
former notion assumes the existence of intrinsic structures
of discriminative data clusters in individual domains, and
the later one assumes that clusters of the two domains corresponding to the same class label are geometrically close.
This assumption motivates us to consider a UDA approach
that directly uncovers the intrinsic data discrimination via
discriminative clustering of target data, where we propose
to constrain the clustering solutions using structural source
regularization hinging on our assumed structural similarity.
Among various deep network based clustering algorithms [4, 8, 14, 61], we choose a simple but flexible nongenerative framework [14], which performs discriminative
clustering by minimizing the KL divergence between predictive label distribution of the network and an introduced
auxiliary one. Structural source regularization is simply
achieved via a simple strategy of joint network training,
by replacing the auxiliary distribution with that formed
by ground-truth labels of source data. We term our proposed method as Structurally Regularized Deep Clustering
(SRDC). In SRDC, we also enhance target discrimination
with clustering of intermediate network features, and enhance structural regularization with soft selection of less

8725

