RMP-SNN: Residual Membrane Potential Neuron for Enabling Deeper
High-Accuracy and Low-Latency Spiking Neural Network
Bing Han, Gopalakrishnan Srinivasan, and Kaushik Roy
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, referred to as Analog Neural Networks (ANNs) in this article, composed of several layers of
interconnected neurons, have achieved state-of-the-art performance in various Artificial Intelligence (AI) tasks including image localization and recognition [18, 31], video analytics [28], and natural language processing [16], among
other tasks. The superior performance has been achieved by

0.3
0.3

0.2
0.2

V"
V"

V"
V"

V"

V"

With proper
ANN Training
(with ReLU activation) threshold balancing

V"

Output spikes

0.1

Input spikes

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have recently attracted
significant research interest as the third generation of artificial neural networks that can enable low-power eventdriven data analytics. The best performing SNNs for image
recognition tasks are obtained by converting a trained Analog Neural Network (ANN), consisting of Rectified Linear
Units (ReLU), to SNN composed of integrate-and-fire neurons with “proper” firing thresholds. The converted SNNs
typically incur loss in accuracy compared to that provided
by the original ANN and require sizable number of inference time-steps to achieve the best accuracy. We find that
performance degradation in the converted SNN stems from
using “hard reset” spiking neuron that is driven to fixed
reset potential once its membrane potential exceeds the firing threshold, leading to information loss during SNN inference. We propose ANN-SNN conversion using “soft reset” spiking neuron model, referred to as Residual Membrane Potential (RMP) spiking neuron, which retains the
“residual” membrane potential above threshold at the firing instants. We demonstrate near loss-less ANN-SNN conversion using RMP neurons for VGG-16, ResNet-20, and
ResNet-34 SNNs on challenging datasets including CIFAR10 (93.63% top-1), CIFAR-100 (70.93% top-1), and ImageNet (73.09% top-1 accuracy). Our results also show that
RMP-SNN surpasses the best inference accuracy provided
by the converted SNN with “hard reset” spiking neurons
using 2-8× fewer inference time-steps across network architectures and datasets.

0.2
0.5

Real-valued outputs

Abstract

Real-valued inputs

{han183,srinivg,kaushik}@purdue.edu

SNN Inference
(with IF neurons)

Figure 1. Illustration of the ANN-SNN conversion methodology.

trading off computational efficiency. For instance, ResNet
[11] that won the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge in 2015 consists of 152 layers with over 60 million parameters, and incurs 11.3 billion FLOPS per classification. In an effort to explore more power efficient neural
architectures, recent research efforts have been directed towards devising computing models inspired from biological
neurons that compute and communicate using spikes. These
emerging class of networks with increased bio-fidelity are
known as Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)[22]. The intrinsic power-efficiency of SNNs stems from their sparse spikebased computation and communication capability, which
can be exploited to achieve higher computational efficiency
in specialized neuromorphic hardware [2, 4, 24].
Considering the rapid strides in accuracy achieved by
ANNs over the past few years, SNN training algorithms
are much less mature and are an active field of research.
The training algorithms for SNNs can be categorized into
Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP) based localized learning rules, spike-based error backpropagation, and
ANN-SNN conversion methodologies. STDP-based unsupervised [5, 23, 37, 40] and semi-supervised learning algorithms [17, 20, 25, 39] have thus far been restricted to
shallow SNNs (with ≤5 layers) yielding considerably lower
accuracy than that provided by ANNs on complex datasets
like CIFAR-10 [9, 38]. In order to scale the networks
much deeper, spike-based error backpropagation algorithms
have been proposed for the supervised training of SNNs
[1, 15, 19, 21, 27, 29, 35, 41]. The training complexity incurred for performing error backpropagation over time has
limited their scalability for SNNs beyond 9-11 layers [19].
113558

