Deep Shutter Unrolling Network
Peidong Liu1
Zhaopeng Cui1
Viktor Larsson1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
Microsoft Artificial Intelligence and Mixed Reality Lab, Zürich, Switzerland
{peidong.liu, zhaopeng.cui, vlarsson, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch
mapoll@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a novel network for rolling shutter effect correction. Our network takes two consecutive rolling shutter
images and estimates the corresponding global shutter image of the latest frame. The dense displacement field from
a rolling shutter image to its corresponding global shutter
image is estimated via a motion estimation network. The
learned feature representation of a rolling shutter image is
then warped, via the displacement field, to its global shutter
representation by a differentiable forward warping block.
An image decoder recovers the global shutter image based
on the warped feature representation. Our network can
be trained end-to-end and only requires the global shutter image for supervision. Since there is no public dataset
available, we also propose two large datasets: the CarlaRS dataset and the Fastec-RS dataset. Experimental results
demonstrate that our network outperforms the state-of-theart methods. We make both our code and datasets available
at https://github.com/ethliup/DeepUnrollNet.

1. Introduction
CMOS imaging sensors are widely used in many consumer products. Most CMOS sensors capture images with
a rolling shutter mechanism. In contrast to a global shutter
camera, which captures all pixels at the same time, a rolling
shutter camera sequentially captures the image pixels row
by row. Therefore, different types of distortions, e.g. skew,
smear or wobble, will appear if the camera is moving during the image capture. It is well known that many vision
tasks (e.g. structure from motion, visual odometry, pose
estimation or depth prediction) suffer from rolling shutter
distortions [1, 11, 15, 16, 26, 27]. The rolling shutter effect
correction problem has thus received considerable attention
in the past [24, 30, 32].
Existing works on rolling shutter effect correction can
be categorized into classical approaches and single image
based deep learning approaches. The classical approaches

Figure 1: Deep shutter unrolling network. Top left:
Ground truth global shutter image. Top right: Input rolling
shutter image. Bottom left: Predicted global shutter image by our network. Bottom right: Absolute difference
between our predicted image and the ground truth global
shutter image.
can be further categorized into single image based methods and methods which use multiple images. Single image
based rolling shutter effect correction is an ill-posed problem and relies heavily on prior assumptions (e.g. straight
lines must remain straight), either formulated explicitly or
learned implicitly by a deep network, which limit their applicability to real scenarios. Classical multi-image based
approaches are more general and instead rely on geometric
constraints from multiple views to perform the rectification.
However, they usually formulate it as a computationally expensive optimization problem for 6 DoF camera motions,
which prevents the algorithm from being used in time constrained applications.
Inspired by the recent success of deep neural networks
on image-to-image translation problems, such as optical
flow estimation [29], dense depth prediction [6], motion deblurring [21] and image super-resolution [19], we propose

5941

