GreedyNAS: Towards Fast One-Shot NAS with Greedy Supernet
Shan You1,2 ,* Tao Huang1,3∗ , Mingmin Yang1∗ , Fei Wang1 , Chen Qian1 , Changshui Zhang2
1
SenseTime 2 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Dian Group, School of CST, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{youshan,huangtao,yangmingmin,wangfei,qianchen}@sensetime.com zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Sample (exploration)

Sample (exploitation)

with probability 1−ϵ

with probability ϵ

Supernet

Training a supernet matters for one-shot neural architecture search (NAS) methods since it serves as a basic performance estimator for different architectures (paths). Current methods mainly hold the assumption that a supernet
should give a reasonable ranking over all paths. They thus
treat all paths equally, and spare much effort to train paths.
However, it is harsh for a single supernet to evaluate accurately on such a huge-scale search space (e.g., 721 ). In
this paper, instead of covering all paths, we ease the burden of supernet by encouraging it to focus more on evaluation of those potentially-good ones, which are identified
using a surrogate portion of validation data. Concretely,
during training, we propose a multi-path sampling strategy with rejection, and greedily filter the weak paths. The
training efficiency is thus boosted since the training space
has been greedily shrunk from all paths to those potentiallygood ones. Moreover, we further adopt an exploration and
exploitation policy by introducing an empirical candidate
path pool. Our proposed method GreedyNAS is easy-tofollow, and experimental results on ImageNet dataset indicate that it can achieve better Top-1 accuracy under same
search space and FLOPs or latency level, but with only
∼60% of supernet training cost. By searching on a larger
space, our GreedyNAS can also obtain new state-of-the-art
architectures.

1. Introduction
By dint of automatic feature engineering, deep neural
networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various computer vision tasks, such as image classification
[37, 36, 41, 33, 32, 15, 39], visual generation [34, 35],
image retrieval [40, 7, 8, 12] and semantic comprehension
[18, 17]. In contrast, neural architecture search (NAS) aims
at automatically learning the network architecture to further
boost the performance for target tasks [10, 20, 43, 2, 19].
Nevertheless, previous NAS methods in general suffer from
* Equal contributions.

Pool
Evaluate

Sort

Top k

Searcher

Optimize

Queue

Best Architectures

Figure 1: Diagram of supernet training for our proposed
GreedyNAS. The supernet greedily shrinks its training
space from all paths (red and blue dots) into potentiallygood paths (red dots), and further into candidate pool.
huge computation budget, such as 2000 GPU days of reinforcement learning [43] and 3150 GPU days of evolution
[26] with hundreds of GPUs.
Current One-shot NAS methods boost the search efficiency by modeling NAS as a one-shot training process of
an over-parameterized supernet. As a result, various architectures can be derived from the supernet, and share the
same weights. For example, DARTS [21] and its variants
[38, 1] parameterize the supernet with an additional categorical distribution for indicating what operations we want
to keep. In contrast, recent single path methods adopt a
non-parametric architecture modeling, and split the searching into two consecutive stages, i.e., supernet training and
architecture sampling. For training supernet, only a single
path consisting of a single operation choice is activated and
gets optimized by regular gradient-based optimizers. After
the supernet is trained well, it is regarded as a performance
estimator for all architectures (i.e., paths). Then the optimal architecture can be searched using a hold-out validation
dataset via random search [16] or (reinforced) evolutionary
[11, 4] algorithms under specified hardware constraint (e.g.,
FLOPs and latency). As only one path is activated for training, the memory cost coheres with that of traditional network training, and scales well on large-scale datasets (e.g.,
ImageNet [27]).

1999

