LSTM

Understanding Road Layout from Videos as a Whole
Bingbing Zhuang1 Samuel Schulter1 Pan Ji1
Manmohan Chandraker1,2
1
NEC Laboratories America 2 UC San Diego

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of inferring the
layout of complex road scenes from video sequences. To
this end, we formulate it as a top-view road attributes prediction problem and our goal is to predict these attributes
for each frame both accurately and consistently. In contrast
to prior work, we exploit the following three novel aspects:
leveraging camera motions in videos, including context cues
and incorporating long-term video information. Specifically,
we introduce a model that aims to enforce prediction consistency in videos. Our model consists of one LSTM and
one Feature Transform Module (FTM). The former implicitly incorporates the consistency constraint with its hidden
states, and the latter explicitly takes the camera motion into
consideration when aggregating information along videos.
Moreover, we propose to incorporate context information by
introducing road participants, e.g. objects, into our model.
When the entire video sequence is available, our model is
also able to encode both local and global cues, e.g. information from both past and future frames. Experiments on
two data sets show that: (1) Incorporating either global
or contextual cues improves the prediction accuracy and
leveraging both gives the best performance. (2) Introducing
the LSTM and FTM modules improves the prediction consistency in videos. (3) The proposed method outperforms the
SOTA by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D properties of road scenes from single
or multiple images is an important and challenging task.
Semantic segmentation [2, 3, 41], (monocular) depth estimation [9, 16, 40] and road layout estimation [10, 25, 28, 38]
are some well-explored directions for single image 3D scene
understanding. Compared to image-based inputs, videos
provide the opportunity to exploit more cues such as temporal coherence, dynamics and context [19], yet 3D scene
understanding in videos is relatively under-explored, especially with long-term inputs. This work takes a step towards
3D road scene understanding in videos through a holistic
consideration of local, global and consistency cues.

Input video

Final prediction

tim
e

Buyu Liu1

FTM

LSTM

Top-view representation

Figure 1: Given perspective images (top left) that captures a
3D scene, our goal is to predict the layout of complex driving
scenes in top-view both accurately and coherently.

To this end, we formulate this video scene understanding problem as a road layout estimation problem. We are
particularly interested in estimating top-view representations [25, 27] as working in the top-view is beneficial for
higher-level reasoning and decision making for downstream
applications, e.g. path planning and autonomous driving.
Given a video sequence, our goal is to predict the road layout of each frame both accurately and coherently.
To achieve that, we first propose a novel network structure
to enforce temporal smoothness in videos. Specifically, our
network consists of (i) an LSTM [13] that incorporates the
long-range prediction coherency and (ii) a Feature Transform
Module (FTM) that explicitly aggregates information w.r.t.
estimated camera motion and encourages consistency on the
feature level. By explicitly and implicitly encoding temporal
smoothness constraints, our proposed network is able to
improve the prediction accuracy and consistency. Apart
from incorporating temporal coherency in videos, we further
propose to exploit context cues in scene attribute prediction
in the top-view. More specifically, such cues are represented
and obtained with 3D object detection [17, 18] and provide
useful priors and constraints for layout estimation in the topview. For instance, by looking at only the green rectangles
in the "top-view representation" in Fig. 1, one can obtain a
rough estimate of the drivable areas.
The above mentioned proposals are applicable for both

4414

