TCTS: A Task-Consistent Two-stage Framework for Person Search
Cheng Wang1 , Bingpeng Ma1∗, Hong Chang2,1 , Shiguang Shan2,1,3 , Xilin Chen2,1
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
wangcheng18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Query Image

Abstract

Detection results

Search

The state of the art person search methods separate person search into detection and re-ID stages, but ignore the
consistency between these two stages. The general person detector has no special attention on the query target; The re-ID model is trained on hand-drawn bounding
boxes which are not available in person search. To address the consistency problem, we introduce a Task-Consist
Two-Stage (TCTS) person search framework, includes an
identity-guided query (IDGQ) detector and a Detection Results Adapted (DRA) re-ID model. In the detection stage,
the IDGQ detector learns an auxiliary identity branch to
compute query similarity scores for proposals. With consideration of the query similarity scores and foreground score,
IDGQ produces query-like bounding boxes for the re-ID
stage. In the re-ID stage, we predict identity labels of detected bounding boxes, and use these examples to construct
a more practical mixed train set for the DRA model. Training on the mixed train set improves the robustness of the reID stage to inaccurate detection. We evaluate our method
on two benchmark datasets, CUHK-SYSU and PRW. Our
framework achieves 93.9% of mAP and 95.1% of rank1 accuracy on CUHK-SYSU, outperforming the previous state
of the art methods.

1. Introduction
Person search is the extension of person re-identification
(re-ID). Person search aims to localize specific targets in the
whole scenarios. It can be seen as the organic combination
of person detection and re-ID, which meets the practical requirements. It is applicable for many fields, such as video
surveillance systems, people finder systems in parks, selfservice supermarket and so on. Therefore, more and more
researchers put attention on person search task.
∗ Corresponding Author

Gallery Image
Detection

Figure 1. The consistency problem in the detection stage. The red
boxes indicates non-query pedestrians and the green box indicates
the query target in gallery image. The person detector produces
bounding boxes of each pedestrian, which leads to a large gallery
size for the re-ID stage.

Deep-learning based person search methods can be divided into two classes. One is two-step, which separates
the network parameters of the two tasks. In this way, person search is regarded as a sequential procedure with two
stages, detection and re-ID. The other is end-to-end, which
learns a shared feature representation for person detection
and person re-ID. The model receives the training signals
from the two tasks at the same time. However, the detection
task focuses on the commonness of pedestrians while the
re-ID task focuses on the uniqueness of pedestrians. There
exists a conflict between two tasks in joint learning, which
eventually influences the optimization of model. Thus, we
adopt the two-step structure in this paper.
Exists two-stage methods fail to notice the consistency
requirements between the sub-tasks in person search. For
the detection stage, a general person detector is not consistent with the follow re-ID task. The general person detector produces bounding boxes of each pedestrian (Fig. 1),
so that the re-ID stage suffers from a large gallery size,
which increases the difficulty of recognition. Besides, because the query targets are not received particular attention, the problems of false alarm (on the background) and
missed detection on query targets are more critical. This
kind of detection error will lead to further matching errors
inevitably. Therefore, the detector in person search frame-

11952

