Spatial Pyramid Based Graph Reasoning for Semantic Segmentation
Xia Li1,2,4,*

Yibo Yang3,4,*

Qijie Zhao5

Tiancheng Shen3,4
1

2

Zhouchen Lin4

Hong Liu2,

Zhejiang Lab

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
4

Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
5

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University

{ethanlee,ibo,zhaoqijie,tianchengshen,zlin,hongliu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The convolution operation suffers from a limited receptive filed, while global modeling is fundamental to dense
prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation. In this paper, we apply graph convolution into the semantic segmentation task and propose an improved Laplacian. The graph
reasoning is directly performed in the original feature space
organized as a spatial pyramid. Different from existing
methods, our Laplacian is data-dependent and we introduce
an attention diagonal matrix to learn a better distance metric. It gets rid of projecting and re-projecting processes,
which makes our proposed method a light-weight module
that can be easily plugged into current computer vision architectures. More importantly, performing graph reasoning directly in the feature space retains spatial relationships and makes spatial pyramid possible to explore multiple long-range contextual patterns from different scales.
Experiments on Cityscapes, COCO Stuff, PASCAL Context
and PASCAL VOC demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods on semantic segmentation. We achieve comparable performance with advantages in computational and
memory overhead.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based architectures have revolutionized a wide range of computer vision
tasks [20, 48, 5, 38]. Despite the huge success, convolutional operations suffer from a limited receptive filed, so
they can only capture local information. Only with layers
stacked as a deep model, can convolution networks have
the ability to aggregate rich information of global context.
However, it is an inefficient way since stacking local cues
*: Equal contribution.

cannot always precisely handle long-range context relationships. Especially for pixel-level classification problems,
such as semantic segmentation, performing long-range interactions is an important factor for reasoning in complex
scenarios [5, 6]. For examples, it is prone to assign visually similar pixels in a local region into the same category.
Meanwhile, pixels of the same object but distributed with a
distance are difficult to construct dependencies.
Several approaches have been proposed to address the
problem. Convolutional operations are reformulated with
dilation [51] or learnable offsets [12] to augment the spatial
sampling locations. Non-local network [46] and double attention network [9] try to introduce new interaction modules
that sense the whole spatial-temporal space. They enlarge
the receptive region and enable capturing long-range dependencies within deep neural networks. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can also be employed to perform long-range
reasoning [16, 43]. However, these methods learn global
relationships implicitly and rely on dense computation. Because graph-based propagation has the potential benefits of
reasoning with explicit semantic meaning stored in graph
structure, graph convolution [24] recently has been introduced into high-level computer vision tasks [28, 29, 10].
These methods first transform the grid-based CNN features
into graph representation by projection, and then perform
graph reasoning with graph convolution proposed in [24].
Finally, these node features are re-projected back into the
original space. The projection and re-projection processes
try to build connections between coordinate space and interaction space, but introduce much computation overhead
and damage the spatial relationships.
As illustrated in Figure 1, in this paper, we propose an
improved Laplacian formulation for graph reasoning that
is directly performed in the original CNN feature space
organized as a spatial pyramid. It gets rid of projection
and re-projection processes, making our proposed method
a light-weight module jointly optimized with the network
18950

