Single-Stage 6D Object Pose Estimation
Yinlin Hu,

Pascal Fua,

Wei Wang,

Mathieu Salzmann

CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Most recent 6D pose estimation frameworks first rely on
a deep network to establish correspondences between 3D
object keypoints and 2D image locations and then use a
variant of a RANSAC-based Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm. This two-stage process, however, is suboptimal:
First, it is not end-to-end trainable. Second, training the
deep network relies on a surrogate loss that does not directly reflect the final 6D pose estimation task.
In this work, we introduce a deep architecture that directly regresses 6D poses from correspondences. It takes
as input a group of candidate correspondences for each 3D
keypoint and accounts for the fact that the order of the correspondences within each group is irrelevant, while the order of the groups, that is, of the 3D keypoints, is fixed. Our
architecture is generic and can thus be exploited in conjunction with existing correspondence-extraction networks
so as to yield single-stage 6D pose estimation frameworks.
Our experiments demonstrate that these single-stage frameworks consistently outperform their two-stage counterparts
in terms of both accuracy and speed.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Motivation. Consider the modern 6D pose estimation
algorithm of [13] that uses a deep network to predict several 2D
correspondences for each of the eight 3D corners of the pitcher’s
bounding box. (a) Because it minimizes the average 2D error of
these correspondences, two instances of such a framework could
produce correspondences that differ but have the same average accuracy, such as the green and the red ones. As evidenced by the
projected green and red reference frames, applying a RANSACbased PnP algorithm to these two sets of correspondences can
yield substantially different poses. (b) Even when using only the
set of green correspondences, simply changing their order causes
a RANSAC-based PnP algorithm to return different solutions.

1. Introduction
Detecting 3D objects in images and computing their
6D pose must be addressed in a wide range of applications [11, 31, 48, 29], ranging from robotics to augmented
reality. State-of-the-art approaches [39, 41, 32, 16, 13, 36,
54, 34, 24] follow a two-stage paradigm: First use a deep
network to establish correspondences between 3D object
points and their 2D image projections, then use a RANSACbased Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm to compute the 6
pose parameters [9, 20, 40, 47, 21, 18, 7, 46].
While effective, this paradigm suffers from several
weaknesses. First, the loss function used to train the deep
network does not reflect the true goal of pose estimation, but
encodes a surrogate task, such as minimizing the 2D errors
of the detected image projections. The relationship between
such errors and the pose accuracy, however, is not one-to-

one. As shown in Fig. 1 (a) for the state-of-the-art framework of [13], two sets of correspondences with the same
average 2D error can result in different pose estimates. Second, the two-stage process is not end-to-end trainable. Finally, the iterative RANSAC is time-consuming when there
are many correspondences that need to be handled.
In principle, an end-to-end framework could be designed
by exploiting a deep version of RANSAC [1, 2], followed
by another network performing pose estimation from correspondences [5]. However, the time-consuming character
of RANSAC in the presence of many outliers, and the poor
repeatability of its solution, arising from the fact that, as
shown in Fig. 1 (b), the order of the correspondences affects the resulting pose, do not make it a good candidate
for inclusion into an end-to-end trainable network. Further-

2930

