RevealNet: Seeing Behind Objects in RGB-D Scans
Ji Hou

Angela Dai
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: RevealNet takes an RGB-D scan as input and learns to “see behind objects”: from the scan’s color images and
geometry (encoded as a TSDF), objects in the observed scene are detected (as 3D bounding boxes and class labels) and for
each object, the complete geometry of that object is predicted as per-instance masks (in both seen and unseen regions).

Abstract
During 3D reconstruction, it is often the case that people
cannot scan each individual object from all views, resulting in missing geometry in the captured scan. This missing
geometry can be fundamentally limiting for many applications, e.g., a robot needs to know the unseen geometry to
perform a precise grasp on an object. Thus, we introduce
the task of semantic instance completion: from an incomplete RGB-D scan of a scene, we aim to detect the individual object instances and infer their complete object geometry. This will open up new possibilities for interactions with
objects in a scene, for instance for virtual or robotic agents.
We tackle this problem by introducing RevealNet, a new
data-driven approach that jointly detects object instances
and predicts their complete geometry. This enables a semantically meaningful decomposition of a scanned scene
into individual, complete 3D objects, including hidden and
unobserved object parts. RevealNet is an end-to-end 3D
neural network architecture that leverages joint color and
geometry feature learning. The fully-convolutional nature
of our 3D network enables efficient inference of semantic
instance completion for 3D scans at scale of large indoor
environments in a single forward pass. We show that pre-

dicting complete object geometry improves both 3D detection and instance segmentation performance. We evaluate
on both real and synthetic scan benchmark data for the new
task, where we outperform state-of-the-art approaches by
over 15 in mAP@0.5 on ScanNet, and over 18 in mAP@0.5
on SUNCG.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D environments is fundamental to many
tasks spanning computer vision, graphics, and robotics. In
particular, in order to effectively navigate, and moreover
interact with an environment, an understanding of the geometry of a scene and the objects it comprises of is essential. This is in contrast to the partial nature of reconstructed
RGB-D scans; e.g., due to sensor occlusions. For instance,
for a robot exploring an environment, it needs to infer where
objects are as well as what lies behind the objects it sees in
order to efficiently navigate or perform tasks like grasping.
That is, it needs not only instance-level knowledge of objects in the scene, but to also estimate the missing geometry
of these objects. Additionally, for content creation or mixed
reality applications, captured scenes must be decomposable

2098

