Unsupervised Person Re-identification via Softened Similarity Learning
Yutian Lin1∗, Lingxi Xie2 , Yu Wu3,4 , Chenggang Yan1 , Qi Tian2†
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, 2 Huawei Inc., 3 Baidu Research,
4
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
yutianlin477@gmail.com, 198808xc@gmail.com, yu.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au,
cgyan@hdu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Person re-identification (re-ID) is an important topic in
computer vision. This paper studies the unsupervised setting of re-ID, which does not require any labeled information and thus is freely deployed to new scenarios. There are
very few studies under this setting, and one of the best approach till now used iterative clustering and classification,
so that unlabeled images are clustered into pseudo classes
for a classifier to get trained, and the updated features are
used for clustering and so on. This approach suffers two
problems, namely, the difficulty of determining the number of clusters, and the hard quantization loss in clustering. In this paper, we follow the iterative training mechanism but discard clustering, since it incurs loss from hard
quantization, yet its only product, image-level similarity,
can be easily replaced by pairwise computation and a softened classification task. With these improvements, our approach becomes more elegant and is more robust to hyperparameter changes. Experiments on two image-based and
video-based datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance under the unsupervised re-ID setting.

1. Introduction
Given a query image, person re-identification (re-ID)
aims to match the person across multiple non-overlapped
cameras. In the last few years, person re-ID has drawn increasing research attention [12, 45, 46, 25, 24, 23], due to its
wide range of applications such as finding people of interest
(e.g., lost kids or criminals) and person tracking. However,
most of the proposed methods are of supervised manner,
which requires intensive manual labeling and is not applicable to real-world applications. To relieve the scalability
problem, in this paper, we focus on the unsupervised re-ID
task.
∗ This work was done when the first author was an intern at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Qi Tian is the corresponding author.

B
C
A
𝑑(𝐴, 𝐵) = 0.5

B
A

B
C
A

B
A
A

B

C

𝑑(𝐴, 𝐵) = 1

(a) Unlabeled feature space (b) Clustering based method

C

B
A

𝑑(𝐴, 𝐵) = 0.3

(c) Our method

Figure 1. (a) Unlabeled images are represented as gray circles in
the feature space. The image A and B are of the same person, with
an initialized distance of 0.5. The image C is from another person. (b) The clustering based unsupervised re-ID method roughly
divides images into classes for network training. Although images
A and B are of the same identity, they are assigned with different
pseudo labels and learn to be separated. (c) Our method push circles in similar colors (similar images) closer with a soft constraint.

Different from the unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) methods [28, 37, 41] that leverage the prior knowledge learned from other re-ID datasets, in this paper, we
aim to solve the problem without any re-ID annotation. A
branch of methods [4, 14, 15] were verified effective, which
adopted an iterative clustering and deep learning mechanism, where the network was trained based on the pseudo
labels generated by unsupervised clustering. However, the
clustering based methods roughly divided images into clusters for training, which made the model highly depends on
the clustering result. As shown in Figure 1 (b), images of
the same person could be divided into different clusters,
which are further trained to be separated with the wrong assigned pseudo label. Since mistakes of unsupervised clustering are inevitable, learning with a hard quantization loss
can be prone to fit the noisy labels produced by clustering.
In this paper, we propose a new framework of unsupervised learning in which clustering is no longer required, and
thus the error of the hard quantization loss is relieved. As
illustrated in Figure 1 (c), instead of using explicit labels

3390

