Robust Homography Estimation via Dual Principal Component Pursuit
Tianjiao Ding1 Yunchen Yang1 Zhihui Zhu2 Daniel P. Robinson3 René Vidal4 Laurent Kneip1 Manolis C. Tsakiris1

Abstract
We revisit robust estimation of homographies over point
correspondences between two or three views, a fundamental problem in geometric vision. The analysis serves as a
platform to support a rigorous investigation of Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP) as a valid and powerful
alternative to RANSAC for robust model fitting in multipleview geometry. Homography fitting is cast as a robust
nullspace estimation problem over either homographic or
epipolar/trifocal embeddings. We prove that the nullspace
of epipolar or trifocal embeddings in the homographic scenario, of dimension 3 and 6 for two and three views respectively, is defined by unique, computable homographies.
Experiments show that DPCP performs on par with USAC
with local optimization, while requiring an order of magnitude less computing time, and it also outperforms a recent
deep learning implementation for homography estimation.

1. Introduction
A linear image-to-image map in homogeneous space—
commonly known as a homography or a projective transformation in the plane—is a fundamental model in many
contexts in photogrammetry and computer vision. Assuming the imaging device follows the pinhole or perspective
camera model, the notion of homography provides a simple
model of the image warping that occurs if the camera rotates and translates in front of a planar scene or undergoes a
pure rotation. Thus, it has played an important role in camera calibration [1, 2], metric rectification [3, 4], panorama
imaging [5], augmented reality [6, 7], optical flow based on
piece-wise planar scene modelling [8] and video stabilization [9, 10]. The present paper focuses on robust homography estimation from image correspondences across two or
three views, with points in each view extracted from a local
1 School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech
University, PRC 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Denver, USA 3 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, USA 4 Mathematical Institute
for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, USA. Correspondence
to: Tianjiao Ding <dingtj@shanghaitech.edu.cn>, Manolis C. Tsakiris
<mtsakiris@shanghaitech.edu.cn>

invariant key point detector [11], and the correspondences
established by appearance descriptor matching techniques.
The quality of the correspondences depends on a number of factors such as the invariance properties of the employed feature detector, motion blur, the texture of the environment, and the efficiency versus accuracy trade-off of
the matching algorithm. It is therefore common that only
a fraction of the identified cross-view correspondences are
of high enough quality to yield an accurate homography estimate. As a result, the model fitting algorithm needs to
be robust with respect to outliers in the set of correspondences, and the predominant scheme in computer vision to
address this issue is RANSAC [12] and its more sophisticated derivatives developed over the last couple of decades,
e.g., see [13, 14, 15, 16, 17] and references therein. Typically, these schemes may exhibit a high computational complexity due to a large ratio of outliers, high dimension of
the inlier model, adaptive threshold determination, or local
model refinement also known as local optimization.
On the other hand, over the past decade a variety of robust subspace learning methods have appeared, admitting
efficient implementations and strong theoretical guarantees
[18, 19]. Among these, Dual Principal Component Pursuit
(DPCP) [20, 21, 22, 23, 24] stands as one of the few methods able to handle subspaces of high relative dimension or
equivalently low relative codimension. This is precisely the
case in homography estimation, since, under homographic
embeddings, it can be cast as a robust hyperplane learning
problem in R9 and R27 for two and three views respectively. DPCP formulates the hyperplane learning problem
as an ℓ1 non-convex optimization problem on the sphere,
which can then be solved by a variety of methods such as recursive linear programming [20, 22], alternating minimization [25, 22], Iteratively-Reweighed-Least-Squares (DPCPIRLS) [21, 22, 26], projected sub-gradient (DPCP-PSGM)
[23, 24] and Riemannian sub-gradient (DPCP-RSGM) [27,
28] methods, or geodesic-gradient-descent [29]. In particular, DPCP-PSGM has been shown to tolerate M < O(N 2 )
outliers (here N, M is the number of inliers and outliers respectively), a notable result that contrasts sharply the typical
guarantee M < O(N ) of alternative methods [19]1 . More1 A statistical analysis of this type of ℓ non-convex optimization prob1
lem for subspace learning had already revealed that an arbitrarily large out-

6080

