BDD100K: A Diverse Driving Dataset for Heterogeneous Multitask Learning
Fisher Yu1 Haofeng Chen1 Xin Wang1 Wenqi Xian2∗ Yingying Chen1
Fangchen Liu3∗ Vashisht Madhavan4∗ Trevor Darrell1
1

UC Berkeley

2

Cornell University

Abstract
Datasets drive vision progress, yet existing driving
datasets are impoverished in terms of visual content and
supported tasks to study multitask learning for autonomous
driving. Researchers are usually constrained to study a
small set of problems on one dataset, while real-world computer vision applications require performing tasks of various complexities. We construct BDD100K 1 , the largest
driving video dataset with 100K videos and 10 tasks to evaluate the exciting progress of image recognition algorithms
on autonomous driving. The dataset possesses geographic,
environmental, and weather diversity, which is useful for
training models that are less likely to be surprised by new
conditions. Based on this diverse dataset, we build a benchmark for heterogeneous multitask learning and study how to
solve the tasks together. Our experiments show that special
training strategies are needed for existing models to perform such heterogeneous tasks. BDD100K opens the door
for future studies in this important venue.

1. Introduction
Diverse, large-scale annotated visual datasets, such as
ImageNet [8] and COCO [18], have been the driving force
behind recent advances in supervised learning tasks in computer vision. Typical deep learning models can require millions of training examples to achieve state-of-the-art performance for a task [16, 27, 15].
For autonomous driving applications, however, leveraging the power of deep learning is not as simple due to the
lack of comprehensive datasets. Existing datasets for autonomous driving [14, 7, 23] are limited in one or more significant aspects, including the scene variation, the richness
of annotations, and the geographic distribution. Additionally, models trained on existing datasets tend to overfit specific domain characteristics [25].
Real-world applications require performing a combina∗ Work done at UC Berkeley.
1 The data is available at https://bdd-data.berkeley.edu

3

UC San Diego

4

Element, Inc.

tion of perception tasks with different complexities, instead
of only homogeneous multiple tasks with the same prediction structure [26, 37, 1, 20]. Although it may be feasible
to label a large number of images with simple annotations
such as drivable areas and object bounding boxes [11, 18],
it remains challenging to obtain more complicated annotations such as instance segmentation [3], not to mention
multi-object detection and segmentation tracking [30, 21].
As a result, even though a considerable amount of effort
has been put into constructing large-scale visual datasets,
research on those complicated tasks is still limited to small
datasets [7, 14]. In production environments, it is also unclear how to allocate resources for various annotations to
support the applications requiring heterogeneous tasks with
various output structures.
We aim to facilitate algorithmic study on large-scale diverse visual data and multiple tasks. We build BDD100K,
a new, diverse, and large-scale dataset of visual driving
scenes, together with various tasks, to overcome the limitations. We have been able to collect and annotate the largest
available dataset of annotated driving scenes, consisting of
over 100K diverse video clips. BDD100K covers more realistic driving scenarios and captures more of the “long-tail”
of appearance variation and pose configuration of categories
of interest in diverse environmental domains. Our benchmarks are comprised of ten tasks: image tagging, lane detection, drivable area segmentation, road object detection,
semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, multi-object
detection tracking, multi-object segmentation tracking, domain adaptation, and imitation learning, as shown in Figure 1. These diverse tasks make the study of heterogeneous
multitask learning possible. In our benchmarks, the models
can perform a series of tasks with increasing complexities.
We conduct extensive evaluations of existing algorithms
on our new benchmarks. Special attention is paid to multitask learning in homogeneous, cascaded, and heterogeneous settings. Our experiments present many new findings, made possible by the diverse set of tasks on a single
dataset. Our benchmark models on heterogeneous multitask learning shed light on the challenges of designing one
single model to support multiple tasks.
12636

