Modeling Biological Immunity to Adversarial Examples
Edward Kim1 , Jocelyn Rego1 , Yijing Watkins2 , Garrett T. Kenyon2
1
Department of Computer Science, Drexel University, PA
2
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM
ek826@drexel.edu,jr3548@drexel.edu,twatkins@lanl.gov,gkeynon@lanl.gov

Abstract
While deep learning continues to permeate through all
fields of signal processing and machine learning, a critical
exploit in these frameworks exists and remains unsolved.
These exploits, or adversarial examples, are a type of signal attack that can change the output class of a classifier by perturbing the stimulus signal by an imperceptible
amount. The attack takes advantage of statistical irregularities within the training data, where the added perturbations can “move” the image across deep learning decision
boundaries. What is even more alarming is the transferability of these attacks to different deep learning models and
architectures. This means a successful attack on one model
has adversarial effects on other, unrelated models.
In a general sense, adversarial attack through perturbations is not a machine learning vulnerability. Human and
biological vision can also be fooled by various methods, i.e.
mixing high and low frequency images together, by altering semantically related signals, or by sufficiently distorting the input signal. However, the amount and magnitude
of such a distortion required to alter biological perception
is at a much larger scale. In this work, we explored this gap
through the lens of biology and neuroscience in order to understand the robustness exhibited in human perception. Our
experiments show that by leveraging sparsity and modeling
the biological mechanisms at a cellular level, we are able
to mitigate the effect of adversarial alterations to the signal
that have no perceptible meaning. Furthermore, we present
and illustrate the effects of top-down functional processes
that contribute to the inherent immunity in human perception in the context of exploiting these properties to make a
more robust machine vision system.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has revolutionized nearly
all machine learning fields and has been transformational
to the community at large. Deep learning has shown great
success in supervised learning tasks where a neural network

(a) ambulance (=1.0)

(b) flamingo (=0.99)

(c) cauliflower (=1.0)

(d) ambulance perturb

(e) flamingo perturb

(f) cauliflower perturb

Figure 1: Illustration of an attack using the Projected Gradient Descent method [29] to target different classes. (a)(c) are adversarial examples altered by the noise in (d)(f). ResNet50 [18] classifies the following images as ambulance, flamingo, and cauliflower with confidence levels
of 1.0, 0.99, and 1.0, respectively.

model can been trained on a large amount of labeled training data using backpropagation and gradient descent. However, research has shown that this artificial architecture and
learning mechanism can be exploited by adversarial examples [44]. Adversarial examples are a type of signal attack
that can change the output class of a classifier by perturbing the stimulus signal by an imperceptible amount. The
attack takes advantage of statistical irregularities within the
training data, where the added perturbations can “move” the
image across deep learning decision boundaries. An illustration of attacked images with their corresponding perturbation signal can be seen in Figure 1.
In contrast to machine adversarial examples, there are
examples that fool humans as seen in Figure 2. These ex-

4666

