WCP: Worst-Case Perturbations for Semi-Supervised Deep Learning
Liheng Zhang 1 , Guo-Jun Qi 1,2,∗
1

Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
http://maple-lab.net/
2

Futurewei Technologies

https://github.com/maple-research-lab/WCP

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel regularization
mechanism for training deep networks by minimizing
the Worse-Case Perturbation (WCP). It is based on the
idea that a robust model is least likely to be affected by small perturbations, such that its output decisions should be as stable as possible on both labeled
and unlabeled examples. We will consider two forms
of WCP regularizations – additive and DropConnect perturbations, which impose additive noises on network weights, and make structural changes by dropping the network connections, respectively. We will
show that the worse cases of both perturbations can
be derived by solving respective optimization problems with spectral methods. The WCP can be minimized
on both labeled and unlabeled data so that networks can be trained in a semi-supervised fashion. This
leads to a novel paradigm of semi-supervised classifiers by stabilizing the predicted outputs in presence of
the worse-case perturbations imposed on the network
weights and structures. We conduct experiments to
demonstrate the proposed method outperforms many
state-of-the-art models in literature. The source code
will be released after the paper is accepted for publication.

1. Introduction
When training a predictive model fθ with parameters θ, the idea behind many “denoising” approaches in
literature [30, 9] is to train a robust model that would
∗

Corresponding author: G.-J. Qi. Email: guojunq@gmail.com

not change its predictions abruptly in presence of model noises. In this paper, we will show that the idea
can be further elaborated to train a regularized model
by minimizing the change of model predictions in the
worst case when a given magnitude of perturbations is
presented.
For example, for a sigmoid classifier, it would be
intuitive to learn a preferred linear boundary that has
the largest margin to separate datapoints of different
classes. This large margin principle is well connected
with the idea of minimizing the impact of worst-case
model perturbation, since a maximum-margin classifier [2, 3, 21, 18] is least likely to change its predictions when it is maximally perturbed. We refer the
readers to the deferred example shown in Figure 1 that
will be discussed in Section 4.1 in the context of additive perturbation. Although it is a simple example, it
reveals the intrinsic relation between the classic large
margin principle and the worst-case perturbation regularization, while the latter can be applied to a general
nonlinear model and unsupervised data.
Formally, in this paper, we present a novel paradigm of regularized deep networks by minimizing the
impact of Worse-Case Perturbations (WCP) to train
robust models. We will present two forms of WCP
mechanisms – the Additive Perturbation with additive
noises on model weights, and the DropConnect Perturbation by making structural changes by dropping
network connections. We will show how to tractably
derive the worse-case perturbations that maximally
change the network predictions, and integrate them
to regularize the training of the network weights and
structures. We will apply the proposed WCP regular13912

