LatentFusion: End-to-End Differentiable Reconstruction and Rendering
for Unseen Object Pose Estimation
Keunhong Park1,2∗
Arsalan Mousavian2
1
University of Washington
1. Reconstruction and Rendering

Yu Xiang2
2
NVIDIA

Dieter Fox1,2

2. Pose Estimation
Renderer

Pose
…

…

Pose

Predicted Depth

…

Query

…
…

Latent Object

𝜽

Image
Based
Renderer

Renderer

Modeler

Reference

Gradients

Novel Pose

Depth + Mask

RGB

(RGB + Mask + Depth)

Query Depth

Figure 1: We present an end-to-end differentiable reconstruction and rendering pipeline. We use this pipeline to perform pose
estimation on unseen objects using simple gradient updates in a render-and-compare fashion.

Abstract
Current 6D object pose estimation methods usually require a 3D model for each object. These methods also require additional training in order to incorporate new objects. As a result, they are difficult to scale to a large number
of objects and cannot be directly applied to unseen objects.
We propose a novel framework for 6D pose estimation
of unseen objects. We present a network that reconstructs a
latent 3D representation of an object using a small number of reference views at inference time. Our network
is able to render the latent 3D representation from arbitrary views. Using this neural renderer, we directly optimize for pose given an input image. By training our network with a large number of 3D shapes for reconstruction and rendering, our network generalizes well to unseen objects. We present a new dataset for unseen object
pose estimation–MOPED. We evaluate the performance of
our method for unseen object pose estimation on MOPED
as well as the ModelNet and LINEMOD datasets. Our
method performs competitively to supervised methods that
are trained on those objects. Code and data will be available at https://keunhong.com/publications/latentfusion/.

1. Introduction
The pose of an object defines where it is in space and
how it is oriented. An object pose is typically defined by
a 3D orientation (rotation) and translation comprising six
degrees of freedom (6D). Knowing the pose of an object is
∗ Work done while author was an intern at NVIDIA.

crucial for any application that involves interacting with real
world objects. For example, in order for a robot to manipulate objects it must be able to reason about the pose of the
object. In augmented reality, 6D pose estimation enables
virtual interaction and re-rendering of real world objects.
In order to estimate the 6D pose of objects, current stateof-the-art methods [49, 8, 45] require a 3D model for each
object. Methods based on renderings [42] usually need high
quality 3D models typically obtained using 3D scanning devices. Although modern 3D reconstruction and scanning
techniques such as [26] can generate 3D models of objects,
they typically require significant effort. It is easy to see how
building a 3D model for every object is an infeasible task.
Furthermore, existing pose estimation methods require
extensive training under different lighting conditions and
occlusions. For methods that train a single network for multiple objects [49], the pose estimation accuracy drops significantly with the increase in the number of objects. This
is due to large variation of object appearances depending
on the pose. To remedy this mode of degradation, some approaches train a separate network for each object [42, 41, 8].
This approach is not scalable to a large number of objects. Regardless of using a single or multiple networks, all
model-based methods require extensive training for unseen
test objects that are not in the training set.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of constructing
a 3D object representations for 6D object pose estimation
without 3D models and without extra training for unseen
objects during test time. The core of our method is a novel
neural network that takes a set of reference RGB images of
a target object with known poses, and internally builds a 3D
110710

