AnimalWeb: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Dataset of Annotated Animal Faces
Muhammad Haris Khan1 , John McDonagh2 , Salman Khan1 , Muhammad Shahabuddin4
Aditya Arora1 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1 , Ling Shao1 , Georgios Tzimiropoulos3
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 2 University of Nottingham, UK
3
Queen Mary University of London, UK 4 Comsats University Islamabad, Pakistan

{muhammad.haris,salman.khan,fahad.khan,ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org, shahab.pk05@gmail.com
john.mcdonagh@nottingham.ac.uk, g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Several studies show that animal needs are often expressed through their faces. Though remarkable progress
has been made towards the automatic understanding of human faces, this has not been the case with animal faces.
There exists significant room for algorithmic advances that
could realize automatic systems for interpreting animal
faces. Besides scientific value, resulting technology will foster better and cheaper animal care.
We believe the underlying research progress is mainly
obstructed by the lack of an adequately annotated dataset of
animal faces, covering a wide spectrum of animal species.
To this end, we introduce a large-scale, hierarchical annotated dataset of animal faces, featuring 22.4K faces
from 350 diverse species and 21 animal orders across biological taxonomy. These faces are captured ‘in-the-wild’
conditions and are consistently annotated with 9 landmarks on key facial features. The dataset is structured and
scalable by design; its development underwent four systematic stages involving rigorous, overall effort of over
6K man-hours. We benchmark it for face alignment using the existing art under two new problem settings. Results showcase its challenging nature, unique attributes and
present definite prospects for novel, adaptive, and generalized face-oriented CV algorithms. Further benchmarking
the dataset across face detection and fine-grained recognition tasks demonstrates its multi-task applications and room
for improvement. The dataset is available at: https:
//fdmaproject.wordpress.com/.

1. Introduction
Animals are a fundamental part of our world. Their needs
are often expressed through faces which, if understood
properly, can help us improve the well-being of animals in
labs, farms and homes. Behavioural and neurophysiologi-

Barabary
Macaque

Japanese
Macaque

Macaca

Papio

Cercopithacedae

Hominadae

Primates

AnimalWeb
Carnivora
Phocidae

Canidae

Canis

Vulpes

Arctic fox

Cape fox

Figure 1: AnimalWeb: We introduce a large-scale, hierarchical
dataset of annotated animal faces featuring diverse species while
covering a broader spectrum of animal biological taxonomy. It
exhibits unique challenges e.g., large biodiversity in species, high
variations in pose, scale, appearance, and backgrounds. Further, it
offers unique attributes like class imbalance (CI), multi-task applications (MTA), and zero-shot face alignment (ZFA). Facial landmarks shown in blue and the images belong to classes with identical color in the hierarchy.

cal studies have shown that mammalian brains can interpret
social signals on fellow animal’s faces and have developed
specialized skills to process facial features. Therefore, the
study of animal faces is of prime importance.
Facial landmarks can help us better understand animals
and foster their well-being via deciphering their facial expressions. Facial expressions reflect the internal emotions
and psychological state of an animal being. As an example, animals with different anatomical structure (such as
mice, horses, rabbits and sheep), show a similar grimace
expression when in pain i.e., tighten eyes and mouth, flatten cheeks and unusual ear postures. Understanding abnormal animal expressions and behaviours with visual imagery
is a much cheaper and quicker alternative to clinical examinations and vital signs monitoring. Encouraging indi-

6939

