Factorized Higher-Order CNNs
with an Application to Spatio-Temporal Emotion Estimation
Jean Kossaifi∗†

Antoine Toisoul∗

Adrian Bulat

Yannis Panagakis†

NVIDIA

Samsung AI Center

Samsung AI Center

University of Athens

Timothy Hospedales

Maja Pantic†

Samsung AI Center

Imperial College London

Abstract
Training deep neural networks with spatio-temporal
(i.e., 3D) or multidimensional convolutions of higher-order
is computationally challenging due to millions of unknown
parameters across dozens of layers. To alleviate this, one
approach is to apply low-rank tensor decompositions to
convolution kernels in order to compress the network and
reduce its number of parameters. Alternatively, new convolutional blocks, such as MobileNet, can be directly designed
for efficiency. In this paper, we unify these two approaches
by proposing a tensor factorization framework for efficient multidimensional (separable) convolutions of higherorder. Interestingly, the proposed framework enables a
novel higher-order transduction, allowing to train a network on a given domain (e.g., 2D images or N-dimensional
data in general) and using transduction to generalize to
higher-order data such as videos (or (N+K)–dimensional
data in general), capturing for instance temporal dynamics
while preserving the learnt spatial information.
We apply the proposed methodology, coined CP-HigherOrder Convolution (HO-CPConv), to spatio-temporal facial emotion analysis. Most existing facial affect models
focus on static imagery and discard all temporal information. This is due to the above-mentioned burden of training
3D convolutional nets and the lack of large bodies of video
data annotated by experts. We address both issues with our
proposed framework. Initial training is first done on static
imagery before using transduction to generalize to the temporal domain. We demonstrate superior performance on
three challenging large scale affect estimation datasets, AffectNet, SEWA, and AFEW-VA.

1. Introduction
With the unprecedented success of deep convolutional
neural networks came the quest for training always deeper
networks. However, while deeper neural networks give better performance when trained appropriately, that depth also
translates into memory and computationally heavy models,
typically with tens of millions of parameters. This is especially true when training training higher-order convolutional nets –e.g. third order (3D) on videos. However, such
models are necessary to perform predictions in the spatiotemporal domain and are crucial in many applications, including action recognition and emotion recognition.
In this paper, we depart from conventional approaches
and propose a novel factorized multidimensional convolutional block that achieves superior performance through efficient use of the structure in the data. In addition, our model
can first be trained on the image domain and extended seamlessly to transfer performance to the temporal domain. This
novel transduction method is made possible by the structure
of our proposed block. In addition, it allows one to drastically decrease the number of parameters, while improving
performance and computational efficiency and it can be applied to already existing spatio-temporal network architectures such as a ResNet3D [47]. Our method leverages a
CP tensor decomposition, in order to separately learn the
disentangled spatial and temporal information of 3D convolutions. This improves accuracy by a large margin while
reducing the number of parameters of spatio-temporal architectures and greatly facilitating training on video data.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We show that many of deep nets architectural improvements, such as MobileNet or ResNet’s Bottleneck
blocks, are in fact drawn from the same larger family
of tensor decomposition methods (Section 3). We propose a general framework unifying tensor decompositions and efficient architectures, showing how these ef-

∗ Joint first authors.
† Jean Kossaifi, Yannis Panagakis and Maja Pantic were with Samsung
AI Center, Cambridge and Imperial College London.

16060

