RGBD-Dog: Predicting Canine Pose from RGBD Sensors
Sinéad Kearney 1 Wenbin Li 1 Martin Parsons 1 Kwang In Kim 2 Darren Cosker 1
1

2

University of Bath

UNIST

{s.kearney,w.li,m.m.parsons,d.p.cosker}@bath.ac.uk

kimki@unist.ac.kr

Figure 1: We present a system to predict the skeleton pose of a dog from RGBD images. If the size and shape of the dog is
unknown, an estimation is provided. Displayed here are frames [4,7,13,18] of a Kinect sequence, showing 2D projection, 3D
skeleton and skinned mesh as produced by the pipeline. All figures in this paper are most informative when viewed in colour.

Abstract
The automatic extraction of animal 3D pose from images
without markers is of interest in a range of scientific fields.
Most work to date predicts animal pose from RGB images,
based on 2D labelling of joint positions. However, due to
the difficult nature of obtaining training data, no ground
truth dataset of 3D animal motion is available to quantitatively evaluate these approaches. In addition, a lack
of 3D animal pose data also makes it difficult to train 3D
pose-prediction methods in a similar manner to the popular
field of body-pose prediction. In our work, we focus on the
problem of 3D canine pose estimation from RGBD images,
recording a diverse range of dog breeds with several Microsoft Kinect v2s, simultaneously obtaining the 3D ground
truth skeleton via a motion capture system. We generate a
dataset of synthetic RGBD images from this data. A stacked
hourglass network is trained to predict 3D joint locations,
which is then constrained using prior models of shape and
pose. We evaluate our model on both synthetic and real
RGBD images and compare our results to previously published work fitting canine models to images. Finally, despite
our training set consisting only of dog data, visual inspection implies that our network can produce good predictions
for images of other quadrupeds – e.g. horses or cats – when
their pose is similar to that contained in our training set.

less, there are far more practical difficulties associated with
this when compared with human subjects. Some animals
may find markers distressing and it is impossible to place
them on wild animals. Neural networks currently achieve
the best results for human pose estimation, and generally require training on widely available large-scale data sets that
provide 2D and/or 3D annotations ([33], [1], [15], [16]).
However, there are currently no datasets of 3D animal data
available at the same scale concerning the number of samples, variety and annotations, making comparable studies or
approaches to pose prediction difficult to achieve.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we propose a markerless approach for 3D
skeletal pose-estimation of canines from RGBD images. To
achieve this, we present a canine dataset which includes
skinned 3D meshes, as well as synchronised RGBD video
and 3D skeletal data acquired from a motion capture system
which acts as ground truth. Dogs are chosen as our capture
subject for several reasons: they are familiar with human
contact and so generally accept wearing motion capture
suits; they can be brought into the motion capture studio
with ease; they respond to given directions producing comparable motions across the numerous subjects; their diverse
body shape and size produces data with interesting variations in shape. We propose that our resulting dog skeleton
structure is more anatomically correct when compared with
that of the SMAL model and a larger number of bones in
the skeleton allows more expression.

While pose estimation has traditionally focused on human
subjects, there has been an increased interest on animal subjects in recent years ([7], [3], [37], [38]). It is possible to
put markers on certain trained animals such as dogs to employ marker-based motion capture techniques. Neverthe-

It is challenging to control the capture environment with
(uncontrolled) animals - covering wide enough variability
in a limited capture session proved to be challenging. Hence
our method utilises the dog skeletons and meshes produced
by the motion capture system to generate a large synthetic

8336

