Scalable Uncertainty for Computer Vision with Functional Variational Inference
Eduardo D C Carvalho∗

Ronald Clark∗

Abstract
As Deep Learning continues to yield successful applications in Computer Vision, the ability to quantify all forms
of uncertainty is a paramount requirement for its safe and
reliable deployment in the real-world. In this work, we
leverage the formulation of variational inference in function space, where we associate Gaussian Processes (GPs)
to both Bayesian CNN priors and variational family. Since
GPs are fully determined by their mean and covariance
functions, we are able to obtain predictive uncertainty estimates at the cost of a single forward pass through any chosen CNN architecture and for any supervised learning task.
By leveraging the structure of the induced covariance matrices, we propose numerically efficient algorithms which enable fast training in the context of high-dimensional tasks
such as depth estimation and semantic segmentation. Additionally, we provide sufficient conditions for constructing
regression loss functions whose probabilistic counterparts
are compatible with aleatoric uncertainty quantification.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning, in its deterministic formulation, involves learning a mapping f : X → Y given observed data
DN = {xi , yi }N
i=1 = {X D , y D }. In a Deep Learning context, f is parametrized by a neural network whose architecture expresses convenient inductive biases for the task
of interest and whose training consists on optimizing a loss
function with respect to its parameters by using stochastic
optimization techniques. Despite its widespread empirical
success, Deep Learning approaches are hardly ever transparent, so that in certain domains, such as medical diagnosis or self-driving vehicles, it becomes unclear how to
map predictions on unseen inputs to a non-catastrophic decision. Thus much research has been focused on obtaining
uncertainties from deep models for common computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation [18, 16, 33], depth
estimation [20, 24], visual odometry [2, 46, 7, 6], SLAM [8]
and active learning [10].
A more reliable approach is to consider a Bayesian
∗ Authors are with Department of Computing, Imperial College Lon-

don. Correspondence to eduardo.carvalho16@ic.ac.uk or

ronald.clark@ic.ac.uk

Andrea Nicastro∗

Paul H J Kelly∗

probabilistic formulation of deep supervised learning, also
known as Bayesian Deep Learning [32, 34], so that all
forms of predictive uncertainty may be quantified. There
are two types of uncertainty one may encounter: epistemic
and aleatoric [20], both which are naturally accounted for in
a Bayesian framework. Epistemic uncertainty is associated
with a model’s inability of finding a meaningful mapping
from inputs to outputs and will eventually vanish as it is
trained on a large and diverse dataset. Epistemic uncertainty
becomes particularly relevant when the trained model has to
make predictions on input examples which, in some sense,
differ significantly from training data: out-of-distribution
(OOD) inputs [13]. Aleatoric uncertainty is associated to
noise contained in the observed data and cannot be reduced
as more data is observed, nor does it increase on OOD inputs, so that it is not able to detect these by itself. Modelling
the combination of epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties is
therefore key in order to build deep learning based systems
which are transparent about their predictive capabilities.

1.1. General background
Denoting all parameters of a neural network as W ,
Bayesian Deep Learning starts with positing a prior distribution π(W ), typically multivariate normal, and a likelihood p(y|T (x; W )), where T (.; W ) is a neural network
with weights W . The solution to this bayesian inference
problem is the posterior over weights p(W |DN ), which is
unknown due to the intractable computation of marginal
likelihood p(DN ). Stochastic variational inference (SVI)
[12, 15] allows one to perform scalable approximate posterior inference, hence being the dominant paradigm in
Bayesian Deep Learning. Denoting q(W ) as the variational
distribution and DB as a mini-batch of size B, the following
training objective is considered:

B

NX
Eq(W ) [log p(yi |T (xi ; W ))]−KL (q(W )||π(W ))
B i=1
(1)
This quantity is denoted as evidence lower bound
(ELBO), given that it is bounded above by log p(DN ). By
choosing a convenient family of distributions for q(W ) and

12003

