Bayesian Adversarial Human Motion Synthesis
Rui Zhao∗
Amazon

Hui Su
RPI and IBM Research

Qiang Ji
RPI

zhaori@amazon.com

huisuibmres@us.ibm.com

qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
!(#|'()

Dataset

We propose a generative probabilistic model for human
motion synthesis. Our model has a hierarchy of three layers.
At the bottom layer, we utilize Hidden semi-Markov Model
(HSMM), which explicitly models the spatial pose, temporal transition and speed variations in motion sequences. At
the middle layer, HSMM parameters are treated as random
variables which are allowed to vary across data instances
in order to capture large intra- and inter-class variations.
At the top layer, hyperparameters define the prior distributions of parameters, preventing the model from overfitting. By explicitly capturing the distribution of the data and
parameters, our model has a more compact parameterization compared to GAN-based generative models. We formulate the data synthesis as an adversarial Bayesian inference problem, in which the distributions of generator and
discriminator parameters are obtained for data synthesis.
We evaluate our method through a variety of metrics, where
we show advantage than other competing methods with better fidelity and diversity. We further evaluate the synthesis
quality as a data augmentation method for recognition task.
Finally, we demonstrate the benefit of our fully probabilistic
approach in data restoration task.

1. Introduction
A model that can describe the dynamic process of pose
change is useful in motion analysis tasks such as simulation, restoration and prediction. Recently, generative dynamic models [8, 9, 12, 26, 35, 38, 40, 41, 44, 48] have
attracted increasing attention for their capability in generating data that resemble real data distribution. Despite the
substantial progress made, the modeling of pose dynamics
remains challenging due to several reasons. First, there are
significant intra-class and inter-class variations in sequential data. While the inter-class variation is caused by distinct
dynamic pattern of different motions, the intra-class variation is mainly caused by different spatial extents and tempo∗ This work was performed while at RPI as a student.

!(*(|#)

Real data
+(#)
!(#|%)
Generator

!(#|') )
Synthetic data

!(*) |#)
Discriminator

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. The generator is the proposed probabilistic dynamic model. The discriminator consists of
K models that jointly determine the class probability of data.

ral paces of executing the motion. Second, the data may be
noisy and can have missing values. Obtaining accurate pose
requires expensive motion capture (mocap) system. The alternative is to estimate pose from video data, which is still
an open research problem [30, 52]. Furthermore, neither approaches are error-free. Thus, a framework that can handle
all these issues in a principled manner is required.
In this work, we propose a generative hierarchical probabilistic dynamic model that explicitly models the spatial
and temporal variations in human motion sequences. Compared to conventional state-space model, our method leverages Bayesian framework to improve the model capacity i.e.
the ability to model variations in data. The model parameters are treated as random variables whose distributions are
further governed by prior distributions. The resulting hierarchical dynamic model increases the model capacity for
capturing large intra- and inter-class variations. Compared
to deterministic models such as RNN/LSTM [8, 35, 50] or
extensions of GAN [32, 38, 40], the proposed model is fully
probabilistic with a compact parameterization. Therefore, it
requires less training compared to purely data-driven deep
models and is less susceptible to overfitting.
In the last few years, adversarial learning emerges to be
a major framework in synthesizing data of different modalities including image, text, audio, and video [10, 12, 19, 21,
22, 25, 27, 28, 32, 39, 46]. One major issue with adversarial learning is the mode-collapsing, where the generator
tends to generate the same data which can fool the discriminator well. To address this issue, we propose to combine
Bayesian inference with adversarial learning. Instead of estimating a single set of parameters, Bayesian inference ob16225

