The Edge of Depth: Explicit Constraints between Segmentation and Depth
Shengjie Zhu, Garrick Brazil, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI
{zhusheng, brazilga, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
In this work we study the mutual benefits of two common
computer vision tasks, self-supervised depth estimation and
semantic segmentation from images. For example, to help
unsupervised monocular depth estimation, constraints from
semantic segmentation has been explored implicitly such as
sharing and transforming features. In contrast, we propose
to explicitly measure the border consistency between segmentation and depth and minimize it in a greedy manner
by iteratively supervising the network towards a locally optimal solution. Partially this is motivated by our observation that semantic segmentation even trained with limited
ground truth (200 images of KITTI) can offer more accurate
border than that of any (monocular or stereo) image-based
depth estimation. Through extensive experiments, our proposed approach advances the state of the art on unsupervised monocular depth estimation in the KITTI.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth is a fundamental problem in computer
vision with notable applications in self-driving [1] and virtual/augmented reality. To solve the challenge, a diverse
set of sensors has been utilized ranging from monocular
camera [11], multi-view cameras [4], and depth completion
from LiDAR [16]. Although the monocular system is the
least expensive, it is the most challenging due to scale ambiguity. The current highest performing monocular methods [8, 13, 20, 23, 37] are reliant on supervised training, thus
consuming large amounts of labelled depth data. Recently,
self-supervised methods with photometric supervision have
made significant progress by leveraging unlabeled stereo
images [9, 11] or monocular videos [33, 40, 43] to approach
comparable performance as the supervised methods.
Yet, self-supervised depth inference techniques suffer
from high ambiguity and sensitivity in low-texture regions,
reflective surfaces, and the presence of occlusion, likely
leading to a sub-optimal solution. To reduce these effects,
many works seek to incorporate constraints from external
modalities. For example, prior works have explored leveraging diverse modalities such as optical flow [40], surface

Figure 1: We explicitly regularize the depth border to be
consistent with segmentation border. A “better” depth I∗ is
created through morphing according to distilled point pairs
pq. By penalizing its difference with the original prediction
I at each training step, we gradually achieve a more consistent border. The morph happens over every distilled pairs
but only one pair illustrated, due to limited space.
normal [38], and semantic segmentation [3, 25, 34, 42]. Optical flow can be naturally linked to depth via ego-motion
and object motion, while surface normal can be re-defined
as direction of the depth gradient in 3D. Comparatively, semantic segmentation is unique in that, though highly relevant, it is difficult to form definite relationship with depth.
In response, prior works tend to model the relation of semantic segmentation and depth implicitly [3,25,34,42]. For
instance, [3, 34] show that jointly training a shared network
with semantic segmentation and depth is helpful to both.
[42] learns a transformation between semantic segmentation and depth feature spaces. Despite empirically positive
results, such techniques lack clear and detailed explanation
for their improvement. Moreover, prior work has yet to explore the relationship from one of the most obvious aspects
— the shared borders between segmentation and depth.
Hence, we aim to explicitly constrain monocular selfsupervised depth estimation to be more consistent and
aligned to its segmentation counterpart. We validate the in113116

