Deep 3D Capture: Geometry and Reflectance from Sparse Multi-View Images
Sai Bi1

Zexiang Xu1

Kalyan Sunkavalli2
David Kriegman1
1
2
UC San Diego
Adobe Research

Ravi Ramamoorthi1

Input

Abstract
We introduce a novel learning-based method to reconstruct the high-quality geometry and complex, spatiallyvarying BRDF of an arbitrary object from a sparse set of only
six images captured by wide-baseline cameras under collocated point lighting. We first estimate per-view depth maps
using a deep multi-view stereo network; these depth maps
are used to coarsely align the different views. We propose a
novel multi-view reflectance estimation network architecture
that is trained to pool features from these coarsely aligned
images and predict per-view spatially-varying diffuse albedo,
surface normals, specular roughness and specular albedo.
Finally, we fuse and refine these per-view estimates to construct high-quality geometry and per-vertex BRDFs. We
do this by jointly optimizing the latent space of our multiview reflectance network to minimize the photometric error
between images rendered with our predictions and the input images. While previous state-of-the-art methods fail on
such sparse acquisition setups, we demonstrate, via extensive experiments on synthetic and real data, that our method
produces high-quality reconstructions that can be used to
render photorealistic images.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D geometry and reflectance properties of an object from 2D images has been a long-standing
problem in computer vision and graphics, with applications
including 3D visualization, relighting, and augmented and
virtual reality. Traditionally this has been accomplished
using complex acquisition systems [5, 17, 41, 45, 56] or
multi-view stereo (MVS) methods [13, 40] applied to dense
image sets [34, 49]. The acquisition requirements for these
methods significantly limits their practicality. Recently, deep
neural networks have been proposed for material estimation
from a single or a few images. However, many of these methods are restricted to estimating the spatially-varying BRDF
(SVBRDF) of planar samples [10, 15, 31]. Li et al. [32]
demonstrate shape and reflectance reconstruction from a single image, but their reconstruction quality is limited by their
single image input.
Our goal is to enable practical and high-quality shape

Diﬀuse albedo

Normal

Roughness Specular albedo

Geometry

Rendering

Figure 1: From six wide-baseline input images of an object captured under collocated point lighting (top row), our
method reconstructs high-quality geometry and spatiallyvarying, non-Lambertian reflectance (bottom row, a tone
mapping is performed on specular albedo to make it more
visible), allowing us to re-render the captured object under
novel viewpoint and illumination (bottom, right).
and appearance acquisition. To this end, we propose using
a simple capture setup: a sparse set of six cameras—placed
at one vertex and the centers of the adjoining faces of a
regular icosahedron, forming a 60◦ cone—with collocated
point lighting (Fig. 2 left). Capturing six images should
allow for better reconstruction compared to single image
methods. However, at such wide baselines, the captured
images have few correspondences and severe occlusions,
making it challenging to fuse information across viewpoints.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we propose a two-stage approach
to address this problem. First, we design multi-view geometry and reflectance estimation networks that regress the
2D depth, normals and reflectance for each input view
by robustly aggregating information across all sparse
viewpoints. We estimate the depth for each input view using
a deep multi-view stereo network [50, 53] (Sec. 3.1). Because of our sparse capture, these depth maps contain errors
and cannot be used to accurately align the images to estimate
per-vertex BRDFs [34, 56]. Instead, we use these depth
maps to warp the images to one viewpoint and use a novel
deep multi-view reflectance estimation network to estimate
per-pixel normals and reflectance (parameterized by diffuse
albedo, specular albedo and roughness in a simplified Disney
BRDF model [24]) for that viewpoint (Sec. 3.2). This network extracts features from the warped images, aggregates

5960

