Online Depth Learning against Forgetting in Monocular Videos
Zhenyu Zhang1† , Stéphane Lathuilière2,4 , Elisa Ricci2,3 , Nicu Sebe2 , Yan Yan1∗ † and Jian Yang1∗†
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China1
DISI, University of Trento, via Sommarive 14, Povo (TN), Italy2
Technologies of Vision, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, Povo (TN), Italy3
Télécom Paris, Multimedia Group, France4
zhangjesse, yanyan, csjyang@njust.edu.cn
stephane.lathuiliere, e.ricci, niculae.sebe@unitn.it

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a fundamental task in visual scene understanding, which has attracted increasing
attention in computer vision and robotics [8, 58, 47, 54]
communities. With the success of deep learning algorithms [46, 21], recent works usually propose methods
∗ Corresponding authors
† Zhenyu Zhang, Yan Yan and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of
Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of
Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology.

6RXUFH)UDPH3DLUV

|----

'HSWK1HW
'HSWK

It

L source

Pose Net
3RVH

It-1

Online
Adaptation

Online depth learning is the problem of consistently
adapting a depth estimation model to handle a continuously changing environment. This problem is challenging
due to the network easily overfits on the current environment and forgets its past experiences. To address such problem, this paper presents a novel Learning to Prevent Forgetting (LPF) method for online mono-depth adaptation to new
target domains in unsupervised manner. Instead of updating the universal parameters, LPF learns adapter modules
to efficiently adjust the feature representation and distribution without losing the pre-learned knowledge in online
condition. Specifically, to adapt temporal-continuous depth
patterns in videos, we introduce a novel meta-learning approach to learn adapter modules by combining online adaptation process into the learning objective. To further avoid
overfitting, we propose a novel temporal-consistent regularization to harmonize the gradient descent procedure at
each online learning step. Extensive evaluations on realworld datasets demonstrate that the proposed method, with
very limited parameters, significantly improves the estimation quality.

|----Pre-training----| |----

Abstract

6RXUFH9LGHRV

%DVLF0RGHO

2QOLQH$GDSWHU

Ċ
7DUJHW9LGHRV

Ċ

L meta

Depth

L target

Backward

'HSWK1HW$GDSWHU

3RVH1HW$GDSWHU
3RVH

Figure 1. The proposed framework for online monocular depth
learning. The model is ﬁrstly trained on synthetic dataset through
un-and supervised loss Lsource . Then, a series of online adapters
are learned from synthetic video sequences through an onlinelearning objective Lmeta . Finally, when adapting on the target
real-world video, we only update the learned adapters and regressors (decoder) by unsupervised loss Ltarget .

based on deep neural networks [13, 27, 31, 53, 56, 59, 57].
Despite the attractive performance of these approaches, they
mainly learn depth information from ground truth in a supervised manner. As such setting may not be practical in
real-world applications due to the expensiveness of data collecting, many works turn to design unsupervised depth estimation methods [63, 17, 55, 1, 18], and show good performance compared with supervised approaches.
Despite the attractiveness of the above unsupervised
methods, they may have limitations on open-world applications. Due to the classical paradigm in machine learning,
after training phase, the model is frozen and used for inferencing without any change in the model parameters. However, in real-world applications, the deployment environment (i.e. target domain) may differ signiﬁcantly from the
training one (i.e. source domain), and keeps changing continuously over time. Several recent works are proposed to
tackle this practical open-world problem for stereo matching [62, 50, 49], but few work focus on online monocular depth adaptation. Compared with online stereo, online

4494

