Seeing without Looking: Contextual Rescoring of Object Detections for AP
Maximization
Lourenço V. Pato1

Renato Negrinho2

Pedro M. Q. Aguiar1

lourenco.pato@tecnico.ulisboa.pt

negrinho@cs.cmu.edu

aguiar@isr.ist.utl.pt

1

Institute for Systems and Robotics / IST, ULisboa

2

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The majority of current object detectors lack context:
class predictions are made independently from other detections. We propose to incorporate context in object detection by post-processing the output of an arbitrary detector to rescore the confidences of its detections. Rescoring is done by conditioning on contextual information from
the entire set of detections: their confidences, predicted
classes, and positions. We show that AP can be improved by simply reassigning the detection confidence values such that true positives that survive longer (i.e., those
with the correct class and large IoU) are scored higher
than false positives or detections with small IoU. In this
setting, we use a bidirectional RNN with attention for contextual rescoring and introduce a training target that uses
the IoU with ground truth to maximize AP for the given
set of detections. The fact that our approach does not
require access to visual features makes it computationally inexpensive and agnostic to the detection architecture. In spite of this simplicity, our model consistently
improves AP over strong pre-trained baselines (Cascade
R-CNN and Faster R-CNN with several backbones), particularly by reducing the confidence of duplicate detections (a learned form of non-maximum suppression) and
removing out-of-context objects by conditioning on the confidences, classes, positions, and sizes of the co-occurrent
detections. Code is available at https://github.com/
LourencoVazPato/seeing-without-looking/

1. Introduction
The convolutional backbone of current object detectors
processes the whole image to generate object proposals.
However, these proposals are then classified independently,
ignoring strong co-occurrence relationships between object
classes. By contrast, humans use a broad range of contextual cues to recognize objects [12], such as class cooccurrence statistics and relative object locations and sizes.

Figure 1: Detection confidences before (left) and after
(right) contextual rescoring. High-confidence detections inform the topic of the image. False positives have their confidences reduced (only suitcase and the umbrella are in the
ground truth). The line thickness of a bounding box is proportional to its confidence.

This observation motivates our work, where we exploit contextual information from the whole set of detections to inform which detections to keep.
Through an error analysis, we observe that current object detectors make errors that can be mitigated by the use
of context. Errors can be ascribed to two types of problems:
non-maximum suppression failing to remove duplicate detections (Figure 3); and local methods making insufficient
use of context, e.g., when the object is visually similar to
some class but the its context makes it unlikely (Figure 4).
We first study how to improve AP by rescoring detections while keeping the same location and class (Section 4.1). The insight is that detections with higher IoU
count as true positives for more IoU thresholds and therefore should be scored higher. These scores are induced with
the knowledge of the ground truth labels and lead to im-

14610

