The Secret Revealer: Generative Model-Inversion Attacks Against Deep Neural
Networks
Yuheng Zhang ∗1 , Ruoxi Jia ∗2 , Hengzhi Pei1 , Wenxiao Wang3 , Bo Li4 , and Dawn Song2
1

Fudan University
University of California at Berkeley
3
Tsinghua University
4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yuhengzhang16,hzpei16}@fudan.edu.cn, ruoxijia@berkeley.edu, wangwx16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
lxbosky@gmail.com, dawnsong@gmail.com
2

Abstract
This paper studies model-inversion attacks, in which the
access to a model is abused to infer information about the
training data. Since its first introduction by [7], such attacks
have raised serious concerns given that training data usually
contain privacy-sensitive information. Thus far, successful
model-inversion attacks have only been demonstrated on simple models, such as linear regression and logistic regression.
Previous attempts to invert neural networks, even the ones
with simple architectures, have failed to produce convincing
results. We present a novel attack method, termed the generative model-inversion attack, which can invert deep neural
networks with high success rates. Rather than reconstructing private training data from scratch, we leverage partial
public information, which can be very generic, to learn
a distributional prior via generative adversarial networks
(GANs) and use it to guide the inversion process. Moreover,
we theoretically prove that a model’s predictive power and
its vulnerability to inversion attacks are indeed two sides of
the same coin—highly predictive models are able to establish a strong correlation between features and labels, which
coincides exactly with what an adversary exploits to mount
the attacks. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed attack improves identification accuracy over the
existing work by about 75% for reconstructing face images
from a state-of-the-art face recognition classifier. We also
show that differential privacy, in its canonical form, is of
little avail to defend against our attacks.

∗ Both authors contributed equally

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been adopted in
a wide range of applications, including computer vision,
speech recognition, healthcare, among others. The fact that
many compelling applications of DNNs involve processing sensitive and proprietary datasets raised great concerns
about privacy. In particular, when machine learning (ML)
algorithms are applied to private training data, the resulting
models may unintentionally leak information about training
data through their output (i.e., black-box attack) or their
parameters (i.e., white-box attack).
A concrete example of privacy attacks is model-inversion
(MI) attacks, which aim to reconstruct sensitive features of
training data by taking advantage of their correlation with the
model output. Algorithmically, MI attacks are implemented
as an optimization problem seeking for the sensitive feature
value that achieves the maximum likelihood under the target
model. The first MI attack was proposed in the context of
genomic privacy [7], where the authors showed that adversarial access to a linear regression model for personalized
medicine can be abused to infer private genomic attributes
about individuals in the training dataset. Recent work [6]
extended MI attacks to other settings, e.g., recovering an
image of a person from a face recognition model given just
their name, and other target models, e.g., logistic regression
and decision trees.
Thus far, effective MI attacks have only been demonstrated on the aforementioned simple models. It remains an
open question whether it is possible to launch the attacks
against a DNN and reconstruct its private training data. The
challenges of inverting DNNs arise from the intractability
and ill-posedness of the underlying attack optimization problem. For neural networks, even the ones with one hidden
1253

