Detecting Adversarial Samples Using Influence Functions and Nearest Neighbors
Gilad Cohen
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, 69978

Guillermo Sapiro
Duke University
North Carolina, 27708

Raja Giryes
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, 69978

giladco1@mail.tau.ac.il

guillermo.sapiro@duke.edu

raja@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are notorious for their vulnerability to adversarial attacks, which are small perturbations added to their input images to mislead their prediction.
Detection of adversarial examples is, therefore, a fundamental requirement for robust classification frameworks. In this
work, we present a method for detecting such adversarial
attacks, which is suitable for any pre-trained neural network
classifier. We use influence functions to measure the impact
of every training sample on the validation set data. From the
influence scores, we find the most supportive training samples for any given validation example. A k-nearest neighbor
(k-NN) model fitted on the DNN’s activation layers is employed to search for the ranking of these supporting training
samples. We observe that these samples are highly correlated with the nearest neighbors of the normal inputs, while
this correlation is much weaker for adversarial inputs. We
train an adversarial detector using the k-NN ranks and distances and show that it successfully distinguishes adversarial
examples, getting state-of-the-art results on six attack methods with three datasets. Code is available at https://
github.com/giladcohen/NNIF_adv_defense.

Figure 1. The correspondence between the helpful examples based
on influence functions and the k-nearest neighbours (k-NN) in the
embedding space of a DNN can help to distinguish adversarial
examples from normal ones. We present (using PCA) the embedding space of a DNN for a normal example (black star) with its
adversarial version (brown X) along with their k-NN (k=25) and 25
most helpful samples. Note that for the normal example, the helpful
samples highly correlate with the k-NN in the embedding space.
Yet, in the adversarial case, these samples are far from each other.
This observation leads us to a technique for detecting adversarial
attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vastly employed in
both the academy and industry, achieving state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results in many domains such as computer vision
[21, 41, 49], natural language processing [1, 18], and speech
recognition [15, 51]. However, studies have shown that
DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [12, 46], which
are specially crafted perturbations on their input. Adversarial
attacks generate such examples that fool machine learning
models, inducing them to predict erroneously with high confidence, while being imperceptible to humans. Adversarial
subspaces of different DNN classifiers tend to overlap, which
makes some adversarial examples generated for a surrogate
model fool also other different unseen DNNs [47]. This
makes adversarial attacks a real threat to any machine learn-

ing model and thus should be kept in mind while deploying
a DNN.
The vulnerability of neural networks puts into question
their usage in sensitive applications, where an opponent may
provide modified inputs to cause misidentifications. For
this reason, many methods have been developed to face this
challenge. They can be mainly divided into two groups:
1) proactive defense methods, which aim at improving the
robustness of DNNs to adversarial examples, and 2) reactive
detection techniques that do not change the DNN but rather
try to find whether an attack is associated with a certain input
or not.
Contribution. In this work, we focus on the reactive
detection problem. We propose a novel strategy for detecting

14453

