When to use Convolutional Neural Networks for Inverse Problems
Nathaniel Chodosh1
Simon Lucey1,2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Argo AI
{nchodosh,slucey}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Reconstruction tasks in computer vision aim fundamentally to recover an undetermined signal from a
set of noisy measurements. Examples include superresolution[7], image denoising[23], and non-rigid structure from motion[13], all of which have seen recent advancements through deep learning. However, earlier work
made extensive use of sparse signal reconstruction frameworks (e.g. convolutional sparse coding). While this work
was ultimately surpassed by deep learning, it rested on a
much more developed theoretical framework. Recent work
by Papyan et al. [16] provides a bridge between the two approaches by showing how a convolutional neural network
(CNN) can be viewed as an approximate solution to a convolutional sparse coding (CSC) problem. In this work we
argue that for some types of inverse problems the CNN approximation breaks down leading to poor performance. We
argue that for these types of problems the CSC approach
should be used instead and validate this argument with
empirical evidence. Specifically we identify JPEG artifact
reduction and non-rigid trajectory reconstruction as challenging inverse problems for CNNs and demonstrate state of
the art performance on them using a CSC method. Furthermore, we offer some practical improvements to this model
and its application, and also show how insights from the
CSC model can be used to make CNNs effective in tasks
where their naive application fails.

1. Introduction
In computer vision we often deal with signals which contain local spatial or temporal statistical dependencies. Convolution has been demonstrated to be an effective tool for
modeling this type of inherent redundancy; notable examples include convolutional sparse coding (CSC) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In CSC in particular,
one can say that a signal is convolutionally compressible if
there exists a convolutional dictionary and a sparse vector
such that,
z ≈ Dx .
(1)

Here z is the signal, D ∈ RN ×K is the convolutional dictionary, and x is the sparse signal such that kxk0 << K. The
convolutionally compressible assumption has been notably
applied to many inverse reconstruction problem in vision
such as image inpainting, super resolution, and trajectory
reconstruction[12, 27, 30].
Inverse problems which use the convolutionally compressible assumption can be expressed in a general form;
2

arg min ky − MDxk2 + λΩ(x),
x

(2)

where y is the degraded signal such that y = Mz, and
Ω provides a prior on the sparsity of x. Throughout this
paper we shall assume we know the degradation matrix M
a priori.
Recently, however, CNNs have demonstrated their utility for such inverse problems[23, 7]. Unlike CSC methods, however, CNNs make no explicit assumptions about
the signal (z) being convolutionally compressible; but are
yet considered state-of-the-art for most inversion problems
in vision. In this paper we want to explore if CNNs are
always the correct tool for inverse problems in computer vision. In particular, we hypothesize that for inverse problems
with particular types of degradation matrices (M), CNNs
are substantially sub-optimal in comparison to CSC inspired approaches. Notable examples include JPEG artifact
removal[11], and non-rigid trajectory reconstruction[30].
Bridge between CSC and CNNs: In this paper we shall
heavily rely upon a recently established theoretical connection between CSC and CNNs by Papyan et al. [16]. Their
work shows that a convolutional neural network (CNN) can
be interpreted as approximately solving a multi-layer CSC
objective. Specifically the authors state that Equation (2)
can be approximated by a feed forward CNN when Ω represents a hierarchical sparsity model. That is, instead of just
assuming that z = Dx, we further assume that the sparse
code x also has a convolutional structure with respect to a
different dictionary, and so on. Given this observation, we
can view CNNs as implicitly including the sparsity prior
which is made explicit in Equation (2). In this work we
use this connection to hypothesize that for certain types of
degradation matricies, the implicit convolutional assump18226

