Future Video Synthesis with Object Motion Prediction
Yue Wu
HKUST

Rongrong Gao
HKUST

Abstract
We present an approach to predict future video frames
given a sequence of continuous video frames in the past.
Instead of synthesizing images directly, our approach is designed to understand the complex scene dynamics by decoupling the background scene and moving objects. The appearance of the scene components in the future is predicted by
non-rigid deformation of the background and affine transformation of moving objects. The anticipated appearances are
combined to create a reasonable video in the future. With
this procedure, our method exhibits much less tearing or
distortion artifact compared to other approaches. Experimental results on the Cityscapes and KITTI datasets show
that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of
visual quality and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Can an artificial intelligence system predict a photorealistic video conditioned on past visual observation? With
an accurate video prediction model, an intelligent agent can
plan its motion according to the predicted video. Future
video generation techniques can also be used to synthesize a
long video by repeatedly extending the future of the video.
Video prediction has been adopted in various applications
such as sensorimotor control, autonomous driving, and video
analysis [9, 34, 24, 31].
Video prediction has not been solved yet, especially if we
need to synthesize frames of an extended period. Existing
methods tend to generate blurry and distorted images where
rigid objects are usually bent and spread. This issue indicates
that it is necessary to consider several aspects: forecasting
the motion of dynamic objects, creating new visual data for
unveiled regions, finding spatio-temporal relationships when
two objects overlap, and so on. Therefore, to generate realistic future video, understanding essential information such as
semantics, shape, or dynamics of the scene is necessary.
Most existing methods tackle the video prediction task
by generating future video frames one by one in an unsupervised fashion [23, 48, 39, 6]. These approaches synthesize
future frames at the pixel level without explicit modeling

Jaesik Park
POSTECH

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

of the motions or semantics of the scene. Thus, it is difficult for the model to grasp the concept of object boundaries
to create different movements for different objects. For instance, a moving car should be treated individually instead of
modeling a car and background scene as a whole. Recently,
Wang et al. [42] propose a general video-to-video translation
model (vid2vid) that demonstrates future video prediction as
a sub-task. The model takes semantic maps in the past and
estimates future semantic maps to synthesize the next video
frame. With this idea, the generated video can preserve the
structure of objects better, but the shape of objects deforms
unnaturally in the long term. To synthesize more realistic
future videos, we find that the explicit modeling of object
trajectories is highly beneficial.
The key idea of our video prediction model is that we synthesize future video frames conditioned on predicted object
trajectories. The trajectory of an object is defined as its 2D
pixel location in each video frame. In particular, we identify each dynamic object and predict its moving path, scale
change, and shape in the future. Object appearance in the
next few frames can be roughly approximated by applying
an affine transformation on the object segment in the last
input frame. In this way, appearance is highly regularized
and avoids unexpected deformation. For the background
with static objects, we directly predict a motion field between the last frame and each future frame. Then we warp
the background image with the estimated motion field. In
this background image in the future, dynamic objects are
located. Since the future background images may contain
missing regions due to occlusion, we apply refinement steps
to complete missing areas and harmonize components. Our
experiments indicate that our approach can synthesize future videos that are more photo-realistic than state-of-the-art
video prediction methods.

2. Related Work
Future frame synthesis is initially studied at the patch
level [36]. Recent advances in the future prediction from
image sequence can be classified into the three-fold.
Single image prediction. This class of works synthesizes a
single frame for the next time step. Patraucean et al. [29]
use a convolutional version of long short-term memory. Lot15539

