VPLNet: Deep Single View Normal Estimation with Vanishing Points and Lines
Rui Wang1 , David Geraghty2 , Kevin Matzen2 , Richard Szeliski2 , and Jan-Michael Frahm1,2
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
Facebook, Inc.

Abstract
We present a novel single-view surface normal estimation method that combines traditional line and vanishing
point analysis with a deep learning approach. Starting from
a color image and a Manhattan line map, we use a deep
neural network to regress on a dense normal map, and a
dense Manhattan label map that identifies planar regions
aligned with the Manhattan directions. We fuse the normal map and label map in a fully differentiable manner to
produce a refined normal map as final output. To do so,
we softly decompose the output into a Manhattan part and
a non-Manhattan part. The Manhattan part is treated by
discrete classification and vanishing points, while the nonManhattan part is learned by direct supervision.
Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on standard
single-view normal estimation benchmarks. More importantly, we show that by using vanishing points and lines,
our method has better generalization ability than existing
works. In addition, we demonstrate how our surface normal
network can improve the performance of depth estimation
networks, both quantitatively and qualitatively, in particular, in 3D reconstructions of walls and other flat surfaces.

1. Introduction
Single-view surface normal estimation has been extensively studied in the past few decades. A traditional approach for solving this problem is based on vanishing point
and line estimation [14, 22, 16]. However, this approach
has certain limitations, for example: 1) large textureless surfaces, common in indoor scenes, are challenging, 2) due to
degeneracies, it is common to find lines in the image that are
compatible with two distinct vanishing points . Recently, researchers have focused on deep learning methods for tasks
in single-view geometry estimation such as surface normals,
depth, room layout and canonical frames [2, 5, 38, 12].
These methods typically produce dense outputs and work
well for featureless regions, where most traditional methods

Figure 1: Example inputs and outputs of our method. The first row
shows the input image and the Manhattan line map. The second
row shows the output normal and Manhattan label maps. The colors in the Manhattan line and label maps represent the unsigned
Manhattan directions: blue corresponds to vertical, while red and
green correspond to the two orthogonal horizontal directions.

fail. However, deep learning-based methods tend to be datahungry and to not generalize well to unseen datasets. In
contrast, traditional geometric methods do not suffer from
the generalization problem. In this paper, we demonstrate
that the benefits of deep learning-based methods and traditional vision methods are complementary, and that combining them produces significant improvements.
In this paper, we develop a single-view normal estimation framework that combines line and vanishing point analysis with a deep neural network in both the training and
prediction phases. We softly decompose the normal map
into a Manhattan part (treated by discrete classification and
vanishing points) and a non-Manhattan part (learned directly). Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on typical benchmarks and generalizes well to unseen datasets.
In more details, we use a line detection and vanishing
point estimation method to compute the dominant vanish-

689

