PointGMM: a Neural GMM Network for Point Clouds
Amir Hertz

Rana Hanocka

Raja Giryes

Daniel Cohen-Or

Tel Aviv University
Abstract
Point clouds are a popular representation for 3D shapes.
However, they encode a particular sampling without accounting for shape priors or non-local information. We advocate for the use of a hierarchical Gaussian mixture model
(hGMM), which is a compact, adaptive and lightweight
representation that probabilistically defines the underlying
3D surface. We present PointGMM, a neural network that
learns to generate hGMMs which are characteristic of the
shape class, and also coincide with the input point cloud.
PointGMM is trained over a collection of shapes to learn
a class-specific prior. The hierarchical representation has
two main advantages: (i) coarse-to-fine learning, which
avoids converging to poor local-minima; and (ii) (an unsupervised) consistent partitioning of the input shape. We
show that as a generative model, PointGMM learns a meaningful latent space which enables generating consistent interpolations between existing shapes, as well as synthesizing novel shapes. We also present a novel framework for
rigid registration using PointGMM, that learns to disentangle orientation from structure of an input shape.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are a common and simple representation of
3D shapes. They can be directly obtained through scanning devices, which sample the surface of a 3D object. A
major drawback of the point cloud representation is the inherent dependence on the particular sampling pattern, making it sensitive to occlusions, noise and sparse sampling.
Moreover, they are unordered and irregular, and each individual point sample does not carry any non-local information [7, 28, 34, 43].
The Gaussian mixture model (GMM) is an alternative
representation for 3D shapes [4, 13]. Unlike the point cloud,
which uses an arbitrary specific discrete set of samples,
GMMs use a fixed and prescribed number of Gaussians that
probabilistically define the underlying 3D surface. GMMs
are a compact and lightweight representation, which excel
in representing a sparse and non-uniform point cloud. They
are inherently adaptive: representing intricate details with

Figure 1: Shape interpolation using a PointGMM generative
model. The consistent coloring in the hGMM leaf nodes
suggests that an interpretable partitioning has been learned,
without any supervision.

more Gaussians, while large smooth regions can be represented with a smaller number of Gaussians.
In this work, we present the use of GMMs as an intermediate and compact representation for point cloud processing with a neural network, called PointGMM. PointGMM is
trained over a set of shapes to learn a class-specific prior.
For a given point cloud, PointGMM learns a set of Gaussians which are characteristic of the shape class, and also
coincide with the input point cloud. In other words, PointGMM provides additional geometric information which is
otherwise missing from the input point cloud. Moreover,
PointGMM is a structured representation, where subsets of
Gaussians represent semantic spatial regions of the shape.
This provides a means to consistently parse a diverse set
of shapes, which is learned without any explicit groundtruth labels (Figure 1). We demonstrate the advantage of
a learned GMM representation for the task of partial point
cloud registration and shape generation.
We show that a major challenge in training a neural network to directly partition shapes into distinct regions for
each GMM is a loosely defined objective, which is highly
susceptible to local minima. To alleviate this issue, we learn
in a coarse-to-fine manner, through a hierarchical GMM
(hGMM) framework. We propose a network which learns
to subdivide the input points into distinct groups that are
modeled by GMMs at different shape scales. This promotes
and encourages more effective learning; since the GMMs at

12054

