Through Fog High Resolution Imaging Using Millimeter Wave Radar
Junfeng Guan

Sohrab Madani
Suraj Jog
Saurabh Gupta
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Haitham Hassanieh
3

4

5
6

(a) Original Scene

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Camera in Fog

(d) Radar Point Cloud in Fog (e) Radar Heatmap in Fog

(f) Recovered Image

7
8
10
12
14
16
(m)

Figure 1: Millimeter wave radar can image through fog and bad weather. However, specularity, artifacts and low resolution result in poor
perceptual quality as shown in Figure (d) and (e) above. To overcome this limitation, this paper leverages a cGAN architecture to recover
high resolution images from the low resolution mmWave radar heatmaps. The figure above shows (a) the original scene, (b) ground truth
depth map captured with stereo camera and cropped using MaskRCNN (before fog is generated), (c) the scene in fog, (d) the millimeter
wave radar point cloud generated in the presence of fog, (e) the corresponding radar heatmap, and (f) the recovered output of our system.

Abstract
This paper demonstrates high-resolution imaging using
millimeter wave (mmWave) radars that can function even
in dense fog. We leverage the fact that mmWave signals
have favorable propagation characteristics in low visibility conditions, unlike optical sensors like cameras and LiDARs which cannot penetrate through dense fog. Millimeter wave radars, however, suffer from very low resolution,
specularity, and noise artifacts. We introduce HawkEye,
a system that leverages a cGAN architecture to recover
high-frequency shapes from raw low-resolution mmWave
heatmaps. We propose a novel design that addresses challenges specific to the structure and nature of the radar signals involved. We also develop a data synthesizer to aid with
large-scale dataset generation for training. We implement
our system on a custom-built mmWave radar platform and
demonstrate performance improvement over both standard
mmWave radars and other competitive baselines.

1. Introduction
Achieving fully autonomous vehicles, referred to as
Level 5 in the standards for driving automation, has gain
significant interest from major companies like Tesla, Ford,
Honda, Waymo, Toyota, Uber, and NVIDIA [6, 7, 22, 37,
48, 60] Level 5 autonomy requires the ability to operate in
severe weather conditions such as dense fog, smog, snowstorms, and sandstorms [22, 23]. Autonomous vehicles,
however, mainly use cameras or LiDARs, to obtain an ac-

curate and reliable view of the environment, which suffer
in low visibility conditions and bad weather [39, 51, 52, 8,
59, 21]. Cameras also suffer at night in low light conditions. This is problematic as many manufacturers including
Tesla avoid using LiDAR altogether, making cameras their
primary sensory module [58].1
Millimeter wave (mmWave) radars offer more favorable
characteristics due to their ability to work at night and penetrate through fog, snow and dust [25, 11]. However, car
manufacturers today, still use mmWave radar for the sole
purpose of unidirectional ranging, i.e., to determine the distance to other vehicles [24, 9]. Imaging using mmWave
radar is challenging for several reasons. First, the resolution of mmWave is extremely low compared to LiDARs or
cameras. Fig. 1 (d,e) show an example where the mmWave
image appears as blobs of radar reflections and carries little to no contextual and perceptual information as compared
to the corresponding camera shown in Fig. 1 (a). Second,
unlike optical signals, wireless mmWave signals are highly
specular, i.e., the signals exhibit mirror-like reflections from
the car [43]. As a result, not all reflections from the car
propagate back to the mmWave receiver and major parts of
the car do not appear in the image, making it impossible to
detect its shape as can be seen in Fig. 1 (d,e). Finally, wireless reflections from the car can also bounce off the road and
other cars and travel along multiple paths to the mmWave
receiver creating shadow reflections and artifacts in various
1 Other modalities such as thermal imaging also fail in dense fog [5].

111464

