Beyond Short-Term Snippet: Video Relation Detection with Spatio-Temporal
Global Context
∗

Chenchen Liu1 , Yang Jin2 , Kehan Xu1 , Guoqiang Gong1 , Yadong Mu1
1
Peking University, 2 Beihang University
1
{liuchenchen, yurina, gonggq, myd}@pku.edu.cn, 2 jy0205@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract
Video visual relation detection (VidVRD) aims to describe all interacting objects in a video. Different from
relationships in static images, videos contain an addition
temporal channel. A majority of existing works divide a
video into short segments, predict relationships in each
segment, and merge them. Such methods cannot capture
relations involving long motions. Predicting the same
relationship across neighboring video segments is also
inefficient. To address these issues, this work proposes
a novel sliding-window scheme to simultaneously predict
short-term and long-term relationships. We run windows
with different kernel sizes on object tracklets to generate
sub-tracklet proposals with different duration, while the
computational load is similar to that in segment-based
methods. To fully utilize spatial and temporal information
in videos, we construct one spatial and one temporal graph
and employ Graph Convloutional Network to generate
contextual embedding for tracklet proposal compatibility
evaluation. We only predict relationships on highlycompatible proposal pairs. Our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance on both ImageNet-VidVRD and VidOR
dataset across multiple tasks. Especially for ImageNetVidVRD, we obtain an average of 3% (R@50 from 8.07%
to 11.21%) improvement under all evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Booted by the impressive development of deep learning,
we have made unprecedented progress towards machine
comprehension on visual information. A lot of research
efforts have been made on low-level vision tasks such as
object classification/detection [29, 6, 28, 14] and semantic
segmentation [53, 23]. However, understanding visual
contents at a higher semantic level still remains challenging.
To bridge the gap between low-level vision-only tasks and
high-level vision-language ones, visual relation detection
∗ Corresponding author.

Video snippet
sampling

frames 0-30

frames 30-60

frames 60-90

…

…

…

Segment-level
relation proposal

person-next to-dog
person-walk with-dog

dog-run past-person
dog-faster than-person

dog-faster than-person

Relation proposal
refinement

person-next to-dog

dog-run past-person
dog-faster than-person

dog-faster than-person

Greedy relation
association

person-next to-dog (0-30)

dog-run past-person (30-60)
dog-faster than-person (30-90)
dog-run away-person (0-90)

Figure 1. Typical pipeline of existing segment-based video visual
relation detection methods. Relationships are separately detected
in each short segment and merged afterwards. In particular, for the
greedy relation association stage, black, red, and blue bars correspond to directly detected, detected after merging, and missing
relationships (mainly owing to long duration), respectively.

(VRD) serves as a promising intermediate task.
Visual relations between entities, denoted by the
hsubject, predicate, objecti triplet, offers a comprehensive
visual content understanding beyond objects. In order to
localize objects in one scene and recognize their interactions, visual relation detection requires the model to fully
capture fine-grained visual cues, while the dependency on
language priors to output visual relations is relatively minor.
This is a steady first step towards connecting computer
vision and natural language. Early works in visual relation
detection mostly focused on static images (ImgVRD) [21,
20, 8, 58, 47, 44] and achieved exciting results. Recently,
a new task is proposed by [34] as video visual relation
detection (VidVRD). It involves detecting and tracking
pairs of objects in a video, as well as recognizing the
dynamic interaction between them. Effectively capturing
spatial and action relations between objects in a video
is especially useful, improving the results in captioning
[43, 45], video retrieval [2, 13], visual question answer
[1, 39], and many other visual-language tasks.
A direct way to tackle VidVRD problem would be to
110840

