Dynamic Face Video Segmentation via Reinforcement Learning
Yujiang Wang1,2∗ Mingzhi Dong3 Jie Shen1,2† Yang Wu4
Shiyang Cheng2 Maja Pantic1,2
1
Imperial College London 2 Samsung AI Center Cambridge
3
University College London 4 Kyoto University
yujiang.wang14@imperial.ac.uk, mingzhi.dong.13@ucl.ac.uk, jie.shen07@imperial.ac.uk
wu.yang.8c@kyoto-u.ac.jp, shiyang.c@samsung.com, m.pantic@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
For real-time semantic video segmentation, most recent
works utilised a dynamic framework with a key scheduler
to make online key/non-key decisions. Some works used a
fixed key scheduling policy, while others proposed adaptive
key scheduling methods based on heuristic strategies, both
of which may lead to suboptimal global performance. To
overcome this limitation, we model the online key decision
process in dynamic video segmentation as a deep reinforcement learning problem and learn an efficient and effective
scheduling policy from expert information about decision
history and from the process of maximising global return.
Moreover, we study the application of dynamic video segmentation on face videos, a field that has not been investigated
before. By evaluating on the 300VW dataset, we show that
the performance of our reinforcement key scheduler outperforms that of various baselines in terms of both effective
key selections and running speed. Further results on the
Cityscapes dataset demonstrate that our proposed method
can also generalise to other scenarios. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to use reinforcement learning
for online key-frame decision in dynamic video segmentation,
and also the first work on its application on face videos.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, semantic segmentation is a computationally intensive task which performs per-pixel classification on images. Following the pioneering work of Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCN) [25], tremendous progress
has been made in recent years with the propositions of various deep segmentation methods [5, 2, 52, 59, 24, 8, 22,
34, 6, 58, 30]. To achieve accurate result, these image
† Corresponding author.
∗ Yujiang Wang conducted this research during his internship at Samsung AI Center, Cambridge.

segmentation models usually employ heavy-weight deep
architectures and additional steps such as spatial pyramid
pooling [59, 6, 5] and multi-scaled paths of inputs/features
[7, 58, 23, 5, 4, 22, 35], which further increase the computational workload. For real-time applications such as autonomous driving, video surveillance, and facial analysis
[49], it is impractical to apply such methods on a per-frame
basis, which will result in high latency intolerable to those
applications. Therefore, acceleration becomes a necessity for
these models to be applied in real-time video segmentation.
Various methods [40, 64, 54, 20, 16, 29, 17, 31, 11] have
been proposed to accelerate video segmentation. Because
adjacent frames in a video often share a large proportion
of similar pixels, most of these works utilise a dynamic
framework which separates frames into key and non-key
frames and produce their segmentation masks differently. As
illustrated in Fig. 1 (up), a deep image segmentation model
N is divided into a heavy feature extraction part Nf eat and
a light task-related part Ntask . To produce segmentation
masks, key frames would go through both Nf eat and Ntask ,
while a fast feature interpolation method is used to obtain
features for the non-key frames by warping Nf eat ’s output
on the last key frame (LKF), thus to avoid the heavy cost
of running Nf eat on every frame. On top of that, a key
scheduler is used to predict whether an incoming frame
should be a key or non-key frame.
As an essential part of dynamic video segmentation, decisions made by the key scheduler could significantly affect the
overall performance [20, 54, 62] of the video segmentation
framework. However, this topic is somewhat underexplored
by the community. Recent works have either adopted a fixed
key scheduler [29, 64, 17, 16], or proposed adaptive schedulers [54, 20, 62] which are trained to heuristically predict
similarities (or deviations) between two video frames. Those
key schedulers lack awareness of the global video context
and can lead to suboptimal performance in the long run.
To overcome this limitation, we propose to apply Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques to expose the key

6959

