Towards Causal VQA: Revealing and Reducing Spurious Correlations by
Invariant and Covariant Semantic Editing
Vedika Agarwal1,3
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
vedika.agarwal@tomtom.com

2

∗

Rakshith Shetty1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarland Informatics Campus

rakshith.shetty@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Despite significant success in Visual Question Answering (VQA), VQA models have been shown to be notoriously
brittle to linguistic variations in the questions. Due to deficiencies in models and datasets, today’s models often rely
on correlations rather than predictions that are causal w.r.t.
relevant evidence. In this paper, we propose a novel way to
analyze and measure the robustness of the state of the art
models w.r.t semantic visual variations as well as propose
ways to make models more robust against spurious correlations. Our method performs automated semantic image
manipulations and tests for consistency in model predictions to quantify the model robustness as well as generate
synthetic data to counter these problems. We perform our
analysis on three diverse, state of the art VQA models and
diverse question types with a particular focus on challenging counting questions. In addition, we show that models
can be made significantly more robust against inconsistent
predictions using our edited data. Finally, we show that results also translate to real-world error cases of state of the
art models, which results in improved overall performance.

1. Introduction
VQA allows interaction between images and language,
with diverse applications such as interacting with chat bots
to assisting visually impaired people. In these applications
we expect a model to answer truthfully and based on the
evidence in the image and the actual intention of the question. Unfortunately, this is not always the case even for state
of the art methods. Instead of “sticking to the facts”, models
frequently rely on spurious correlations and follow biases
induced by data and/or model. For instance, recent works
[27, 26] have shown that the VQA models are brittle to linguistic variations in questions/answers. Shah et al. in [27]
∗ Work done at Max Planck Institute for Informatics.

Mario Fritz2
3

TomTom

fritz@cispa.saarland

introduced VQA-Rephrasings dataset to expose the brittleness of the VQA models to linguistic variations and proposed cyclic consistency to improve their robustness. They
show that if a model answers ‘Yes’ to the question: ‘Is it
safe to turn left?’, it answers ‘No’ when the question is rephrased to ‘Can one safely turn left?’. Similarly Ray et al.
in [26] introduced ConVQA to quantitatively evaluate the
consistency for VQA towards different generated entailed
questions and proposed data augmentation module to make
the models more consistent.
While previous works have studied linguistic modifications, our contribution is the first systematic study of automatic visual content manipulations at scale. Analogous
to rephrasing questions for VQA, images can also be semantically edited to create different variants where the same
question-answer (QA) pair holds. One sub-task of this
broader semantic editing goal is object removal. One can
remove objects in such a way that the answer remains invariant (wherein only objects irrelevant to the QA are removed) as shown in Figure 1 (top/middle). Alternately one
could also make covariant edits where we remove the object
mentioned in the QA and hence expect the answer to change
in a predictable manner as shown in Figure 1 (bottom). We
explore both invariant and covariant forms of editing and
quantify how consistent models are under these edits.
We employ a GAN-based [28] re-synthesis model to
automatically remove objects. Our data generation technique helps us create exact complementary pairs of the image as shown in Figures 1, 2. We pick three recent models which represent different approaches to VQA to analyze robustness: a simple CNN+LSTM (CL) model, an
attention-based model (SAAA [17]) and a compositional
model (SNMN [11]). We show that all the three models
are brittle to semantic variations in the image, revealing the
false correlation that the models exploit to predict the answer. Furthermore, we show that training data augmentation with our synthetic set can improve models robustness.
Our motivation to create this complementary dataset
19690

