Mixture Dense Regression for Object Detection and Human Pose Estimation
Ali Varamesh, Tinne Tuytelaars
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
{ali.varamesh,tinne.tuytelaars}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract

Cp’ 𝛼1(I) 𝜙1(I) 𝜎1(I)

I
W

Mixture models are well-established learning approaches that, in computer vision, have mostly been applied to inverse or ill-defined problems. However, they
are general-purpose divide-and-conquer techniques, splitting the input space into relatively homogeneous subsets in
a data-driven manner. Not only ill-defined but also welldefined complex problems should benefit from them. To this
end, we devise a framework for spatial regression using
mixture density networks. We realize the framework for object detection and human pose estimation. For both tasks, a
mixture model yields higher accuracy and divides the input
space into interpretable modes. For object detection, mixture components focus on object scale, with the distribution
of components closely following that of ground truth the object scale. This practically alleviates the need for multiscale testing, providing a superior speed-accuracy tradeoff. For human pose estimation, a mixture model divides
the data based on viewpoint and uncertainty – namely, front
and back views, with back view imposing higher uncertainty. We conduct experiments on the MS COCO dataset
and do not face any mode collapse.

1. Introduction
Over the span of a few years, there has been massive progress in designing increasingly efficient architectures, loss functions, and optimization procedures for mainstream computer vision tasks such as image classification,
object detection, semantic segmentation, and pose estimation [18, 37, 39, 31, 25, 16, 3, 14, 35]. However, from a machine learning perspective, there is still a lot to be desired.
For example, when it comes to capturing the multi-modal
nature of visual data, most of the solutions for object detection leave it to the optimizer to figure it all out. Still, given
the fundamental limitations of machine learning [41, 40],
this is an unrealistic expectation. Modeling a multi-modal
distribution using a single-mode model will always lead to
sub-optimal predictions.
As a case in point, let us consider dense object detection.

W’
H

CNN

𝛼M(I) 𝜙M(I) 𝜎M(I)
….
….

C’

Comp. 1

Comps. 2 to M-1 Comp. M

H’

Output cell p’

….

Figure 1: The proposed mixture spatial regression framework. When realized for human pose estimation, two
modes are retrieved based on viewpoint.

For a given input image, at each spatial location, a model
should have a classification output and do a spatial regression. The classification component naturally is a multimodal problem. As such, any solution has to learn different modalities, commonly realized via multinomial classification. For the spatial regression, on the other hand, either there are no such discernible modalities, or it is not
straightforward how to model them. In object detection, it
could be the categories that govern the bounding box regression, mere foreground vs. background segmentation, or
a coarser categorization. We cannot say for sure which one
it is. Similarly, in dense human pose estimation using offset regression, there is a separate output for each body part.
But, given a part, either the scale or the pose of a person
could be the dominant mode for the regression task.
As one can see, explicitly identifying the underlying
modes is often impossible. However, in machine learning, there are well-established techniques for dealing with
multi-modality. For example, mixture models [29], including mixture density networks [4] and mixture of experts
[15], are powerful techniques for imposing structure on a
model’s prediction mechanism, which leads to higher accuracy and model interpretability. In particular, they divide
the input space based on the relationship between input and
output. In other words, depending on the targets, they optimally split the input space so that higher performance can
be achieved. Of course, these techniques are not unknown
to our community, but so far, they have been almost exclu-

13086

