Self-supervised Domain-aware Generative Network for Generalized Zero-shot
Learning
∗

Jiamin Wu1 , Tianzhu Zhang1, , Zheng-Jun Zha1 , Jiebo Luo2 , Yongdong Zhang1 , Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
University of Rochester
jiaminwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, zhazj, zhyd73, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) aims at recognizing both seen and unseen classes by constructing correspondence between visual and semantic embedding. However, existing methods have severely suffered from the strong
bias problem, where unseen instances in target domain tend
to be recognized as seen classes in source domain. To address this issue, we propose an end-to-end Self-supervised
Domain-aware Generative Network (SDGN) by integrating
self-supervised learning into feature generating model for
unbiased GZSL. The proposed SDGN model enjoys several
merits. First, we design a cross-domain feature generating module to synthesize samples with high fidelity based
on class embeddings, which involves a novel target domain
discriminator to preserve the domain consistency. Second,
we propose a self-supervised learning module to investigate
inter-domain relationships, where a set of anchors are introduced as a bridge between seen and unseen categories. In
the shared space, we pull the distribution of target domain
away from source domain, and obtain domain-aware features with high discriminative power for both seen and unseen classes. To our best knowledge, this is the first work to
introduce self-supervised learning into GZSL as a learning
guidance. Extensive experimental results on five standard
benchmarks demonstrate that our model performs favorably
against state-of-the-art GZSL methods.

1. Introduction
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [1, 8, 29, 48, 34] aims to recognize images of unseen classes without any labeled samples available. This requires the ZSL approaches to comprehend images beyond the visual level, which is generally
achieved by semantic bridging and knowledge transferring
between seen and unseen classes, with the aid of semantic
∗ Corresponding Author

Similarity Coefficient
Source
Feature

ሾग࢙૚ , ग࢙૛ …, ग࢙࢑ ሿ

Reconstructed
Feature

Space B

Space A

Anchors
‫ܣ‬ଷ

…

‫ܣ‬ଵ

‫ܣ‬ସ
Target
Feature

(a)

‫ܣ‬ଶ

‫ܣ‬௞

ሾग࢚૚ , ग࢚૛ …, ग࢚࢑ ሿ

Self-supervised
constraint

Reconstructed
Feature

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The t-SNE visualization of features on AwA1. Orange and blue color denote source and target domain. (b) Our motivation. Space A is the visual space generated by common models, while Space B in SDGN is augmented by a self-supervised
constraint, which pushes target data away from source data.

information like attributes [8], word embeddings [23] and
text descriptions [28].
Earlier efforts on ZSL [4, 37, 41, 29] are focused on the
cross-modal mapping between visual feature and semantic
embedding to seek a shared space. Recently, a plethora
of methods [43, 9, 13, 14] propose to utilize generative
models to synthesize visual samples with class embeddings,
which can be used for training a standard classiﬁer for both
seen and unseen classes. Here, the class embedding means
that each class is embedded in the space of attribute vectors. GAN-based ZSL methods [45, 27] show stronger performances compared with cross-modal mapping methods,
since their classiﬁers are directly trained with synthesized
data. However, in a more practical setting, where both seen
and unseen classes will appear at test time, ZSL suffers from
the strong bias problem [5], i.e., instances of unseen classes
are more likely to be wrongly classiﬁed as one of the seen
classes. We call this kind of ZSL as Generalized Zero-Shot
Learning (GZSL), and denote seen classes as source domain
and unseen classes as target domain. Some methods [4, 1]
achieve promising results when test stage comes across only
seen classes, but degenerate sharply in generalized setting.

12767

