Rethinking the Route Towards Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Chen-Lin Zhang
Yun-Hao Cao
Jianxin Wu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{zhangcl,caoyh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to
localize objects with only image-level labels. Previous
methods often try to utilize feature maps and classification
weights to localize objects using image level annotations
indirectly. In this paper, we demonstrate that weakly supervised object localization should be divided into two parts:
the class-agnostic object localization and the object classification. For class-agnostic object localization, we should
use class-agnostic methods to generate noisy pseudo annotations and then perform bounding box regression on them
without class labels. We propose the pseudo supervised
object localization (PSOL) method as a new way to solve
WSOL. Our PSOL models have good transferability across
different datasets without fine-tuning. With the generated
pseudo bounding boxes, we achieve 58.00% localization accuracy on ImageNet and 74.97% localization accuracy on
CUB-200, which have a large edge over previous models.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved enormous success in various computer vision tasks, such as
classification, localization and detection. However, current
deep learning models need a large number of accurate annotations, including image-level labels, location-level labels (bounding boxes and key points) and pixel-level labels (per pixel class labels for semantic segmentation).
Many large-scale datasets are proposed to solve this problem [15, 10, 3]. However, models pre-trained on these largescale datasets cannot be directly applied to a different task
due to the differences between source and target domains.
To relax these restrictions, weakly supervised methods
are proposed. Weakly supervised methods try to perform
detection, localization and segmentation tasks with only
image-level labels, which are relatively easy and cheap to

obtain. Among these tasks, weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) is the most practical task since it only
needs to locate the object with a given class label. Most of
these WSOL methods try to enhance the localization ability
of classification models to conduct WSOL tasks [19, 28, 29,
2, 27] using the class activation map (CAM) [30].
However, in this paper, through ablation studies and
experiments, we demonstrate that the localization part of
WSOL should be class-agnostic, which is not related to
classification labels. Based on these observations, we advocate a paradigm shift which divides WSOL into two
independent sub-tasks: the class-agnostic object localization and the object classification. The overall pipeline of
our method is in Fig. 1. We name this novel pipeline
as Pseudo Supervised Object Localization (PSOL). We
first generate pseudo groundtruth bounding boxes based
on the class-agnostic method deep descriptor transformation (DDT) [26]. By performing bounding box regression
on these generated bounding boxes, our method removes restrictions on most WSOL models, including the restrictions
of allowing only one fully connected layer as classification
weights [30] and the dilemma between classification and localization [19, 2].
We achieve state-of-the-art performances on ImageNet1k [15] and CUB-200 [25] combining the results of these
two independent sub-tasks, obtaining a large edge over previous WSOL models (especially on CUB-200). With classification results of the recent EfficientNet [22] model, we
achieve 58.00% Top-1 localization accuracy on ImageNet1k, which significantly outperforms previous methods.
We summarize our contributions as follows.
• We show that weakly supervised object localization
should be divided into two independent sub-tasks: the
class-agnostic object localization and the object classification. We propose PSOL to solve the drawbacks
and problems in previous WSOL methods.
• Though generated bounding boxes are noisy, we argue
that we should directly optimize on them without using class labels. With the proposed PSOL, we achieve

∗ This research was partially supported by the National Natural Science

Foundation of China (61772256, 61921006). J. Wu is the corresponding
author.

113460

