Boundary-aware 3D Building Reconstruction from a Single Overhead Image
Jisan Mahmud

True Price
Akash Bapat
Jan-Michael Frahm
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jisan,jtprice,akash,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Region
Proposal
Network

Bounding Box
and Mask
Detection

Building Outline Proposal Module (Mask R-CNN)

Building
Refinement

3D Building
Modeling

Modified Signed Distance Function

Pixel-wise Height Prediction
Single
Overhead Image

Pixel-wise Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1: Overview of our method. Given a single overhead image, our multi-task, multi-feature deep network generates
2D building outline proposals, a pixel-wise heightmap, a modified signed distance function (BPSH), and pixel-wise semantic
labels. Building outlines are then refined using the BPSH and combined with the height estimates to produce a 3D model.

Abstract
We propose a boundary-aware multi-task deep-learningbased framework for fast 3D building modeling from a single overhead image. Unlike most existing techniques which
rely on multiple images for 3D scene modeling, we seek to
model the buildings in the scene from a single overhead image by jointly learning a modified signed distance function
(SDF) from the building boundaries, a dense heightmap of
the scene, and scene semantics. To jointly train for these
tasks, we leverage pixel-wise semantic segmentation and
normalized digital surface maps (nDSM) as supervision, in
addition to labeled building outlines. At test time, buildings
in the scene are automatically modeled in 3D using only
an input overhead image. We demonstrate an increase in
building modeling performance using a multi-feature network architecture that improves building outline detection
by considering network features learned for the other jointly
learned tasks. We also introduce a novel mechanism for robustly refining instance-specific building outlines using the
learned modified SDF. We verify the effectiveness of our
method on multiple large-scale satellite and aerial imagery
datasets, where we obtain state-of-the-art performance in
the 3D building reconstruction task.

1. Introduction
Automated scene understanding and detection from
overhead images has long been of interest to the computer
vision community [8, 37, 15, 9, 35, 16, 39, 24, 53]. Identifying and modeling 3D buildings from overhead imagery
plays an important role in a number of applications. After a
major disaster like a hurricane or an earthquake, automated
building modeling from overhead imagery, e.g. satellite and
aerial images and LIDARs, can provide a vital clue indicating the effect on human settlements and can aid in disaster
preparation and assessment. Such modeling can also facilitate urban planning and analysis, digital mapping, overhead
surveillance, and city modeling in video games and movies.
For this task, satellite and aerial imaging services offer a
unique advantage in providing reasonably high-resolution
images while remaining relatively cost-effective to capture.
In comparison, while aerial or satellite LIDAR can provide
highly accurate scene geometry, such scans are often costly
to capture and provide low-resolution geometry. Groundlevel views are also ineffective: dedicated photography can
only efficiently capture a small area, street-view imagery
does not necessarily capture buildings from all sides, and
city-scale reconstruction requires careful registration of potentially millions of images that still may not completely
capture sparsely imaged regions [19, 7]. For large-scale

441

