Lightweight Photometric Stereo for Facial Details Recovery
Xueying Wang1 Yudong Guo1 Bailin Deng2 Juyong Zhang1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Cardiff University
{WXY17719, gyd2011}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, 3D face reconstruction from a single image has
achieved great success with the help of deep learning and
shape prior knowledge, but they often fail to produce accurate geometry details. On the other hand, photometric
stereo methods can recover reliable geometry details, but
require dense inputs and need to solve a complex optimization problem. In this paper, we present a lightweight strategy
that only requires sparse inputs or even a single image to
recover high-fidelity face shapes with images captured under near-field lights. To this end, we construct a dataset
containing 84 different subjects with 29 expressions under
3 different lights. Data augmentation is applied to enrich
the data in terms of diversity in identity, lighting, expression,
etc. With this constructed dataset, we propose a novel neural
network specially designed for photometric stereo based 3D
face reconstruction. Extensive experiments and comparisons
demonstrate that our method can generate high-quality reconstruction results with one to three facial images captured
under near-field lights. Our full framework is available at
https://github.com/Juyong/FacePSNet.

1. Introduction
High-quality 3D face reconstruction is an important problem in computer vision and graphics [38] that is related to
various applications such as digital actor [3], face recognition [5, 48] and animation [3, 21, 40]. Some works have
been devoted to solving this problem at the source, using
either multi-view information [15, 43] or the illumination
conditions [1, 2, 37]. Although some of these methods
are capable of reconstructing high-quality 3D face models with both low-frequency structures and high-frequency
details like wrinkles and pores, the hardware environment
is hard to set up and the underlying optimization problem
is not easy to solve. For this reason, 3D face reconstruction
from a single image has attracted wide attention, with many
works focusing on reconstruction from an “in-the-wild” im∗ Corresponding author

DengB3@cardiff.ac.uk

juyong@ustc.edu.cn

age [35, 17, 14, 18]. Although most of them can reconstruct
accurate low-frequency facial structures, few can recover
fine facial details. In this paper, we turn our attention to the
photometric stereo technique [42], and consider the nearfield point light source setting due to its portability. We aim
to reconstruct high-precision 3D face models with sparse
inputs using photometric stereo under near point lighting.
State-of-the-art sparse photometric 3D reconstruction
methods such as [9, 13] can reconstruct 3D face shapes
with fine geometric details. However, they are mainly based
on conventional optimization approaches with high computational costs. In recent years, great progress has been made
in deep learning-based photometric stereo [22, 12] that can
estimate accurate normals. However, these existing methods
cannot be directly applied to solve our problem. First, they
mainly focus on general objects with dense inputs, making
them not suitable for our 3D face reconstruction problem
with sparse inputs. Second, they assume parallel directional
lights, which is difficult to achieve in practice especially for
indoor lighting conditions. To solve the sparse photometric
stereo problem fast and well, we must address the following
challenges. First, without the parallel lighting assumption,
calibrating the lighting direction of near-field point light
sources is much more complex and needs to solve a nonlinear optimization problem. Moreover, the reconstruction
problem with less than three input images is ill-posed, and
thus prior knowledge of the reconstruction object is needed.
In this paper, we combine deep learning-based sparse
photometric stereo and facial prior information to reconstruct high-accuracy 3D face models. Currently, there is
no publicly available dataset of face images captured under near point lighting conditions and their corresponding
3D geometry. Therefore, we construct such a dataset for
the network training. We use real face images captured using a system composed of three near point light sources
and a fixed camera. Based on this system, we develop an
optimization method to recover 3D geometry along with
calibrating light positions and estimating normals. Using
our reconstructed 3D face models and publicly available
high-quality 3D face datasets, we augment our dataset by
synthesizing a large number of face images with their cor1740

