MemNAS: Memory-Efficient Neural Architecture Search with Grow-Trim
Learning
Peiye Liu†§ , Bo Wu§ , Huadong Ma† , and Mingoo Seok§
†

Beijing Key Lab of Intelligent Telecommunication Software and Multimedia,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
§
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, NY, USA
{liupeiye, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn {bo.wu, ms4415}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Recent studies on automatic neural architecture search
techniques have demonstrated significant performance,
competitive to or even better than hand-crafted neural architectures. However, most of the existing search approaches tend to use residual structures and a concatenation connection between shallow and deep features. A resulted neural network model, therefore, is non-trivial for
resource-constraint devices to execute since such a model
requires large memory to store network parameters and intermediate feature maps along with excessive computing
complexity. To address this challenge, we propose MemNAS, a novel growing and trimming based neural architecture search framework that optimizes not only performance but also memory requirement of an inference network. Specifically, in the search process, we consider running memory use, including network parameters and the
essential intermediate feature maps memory requirement,
as an optimization objective along with performance. Besides, to improve the accuracy of the search, we extract
the correlation information among multiple candidate architectures to rank them and then choose the candidates
with desired performance and memory efficiency. On the
ImageNet classification task, our MemNAS achieves 75.4%
accuracy, 0.7% higher than MobileNetV2 with 42.1% less
memory requirement. Additional experiments confirm that
the proposed MemNAS can perform well across the different targets of the trade-off between accuracy and memory
consumption.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated the
state-of-the-art results in multiple applications including

classification, search, and detection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
However, those state-of-the-art neural networks are extremely deep and also highly complicated, making it a nontrivial task to hand-craft one. This has drawn researchers’
attention to the neural architecture search (NAS), which involves the techniques to construct neural networks without
profound domain knowledge and hand-crafting [8, 9, 10,
11].
On the other hand, whether to design a neural architecture manually or automatically, it becomes increasingly
important to consider the target platform that performs
inference. Today, we consider mainly two platforms, a
data center, and a mobile device. A neural network running on a data center can leverage massive computing resources. Therefore, the NAS works for a data center platform focus on optimizing the speed of the search process
and the performance (accuracy) of an inference neural network [9, 10, 11, 12]. A mobile computing platform, however, has much less memory and energy resources. Hence,
NAS works for a mobile platform have attempted to use
lightweight network layers for reducing memory requirement [13, 14, 15]. Besides, off-chip memory access such as
FLASH and DRAM is 3 or 4 orders of magnitudes powerhungrier and slower than on-chip memory [16]. Therefore,
it is highly preferred to minimize network size to the level
that the network can fit entirely in the on-chip memory of
mobile hardware which is a few MB.
Unfortunately, most of the existing NAS approach,
whether based on reinforcement learning (RL) or evolutionary algorithm (EA), adopts a grow-only strategy for generating new network candidates. Specifically, in each search
round, they add more layers and edges to a base architecture, resulting in a network that uses increasingly more
memory and computational resources.
Instead, we first propose a grow-and-trim strategy in

2108

