Mask Encoding for Single Shot Instance Segmentation∗
Rufeng Zhang1 ,
1

Zhi Tian2 ,

Tongji University, China

2

Chunhua Shen2 ,

Mingyu You1 ,

University of Adelaide, Australia

3

Youliang Yan3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
To date, instance segmentation is dominated by twostage methods, as pioneered by Mask R-CNN. In contrast,
one-stage alternatives cannot compete with Mask R-CNN
in mask AP, mainly due to the difficulty of compactly representing masks, making the design of one-stage methods
very challenging. In this work, we propose a simple singleshot instance segmentation framework, termed mask encoding based instance segmentation (MEInst). Instead of predicting the two-dimensional mask directly, MEInst distills
it into a compact and fixed-dimensional representation vector, which allows the instance segmentation task to be incorporated into one-stage bounding-box detectors and results in a simple yet efficient instance segmentation framework. The proposed one-stage MEInst achieves 36.4% in
mask AP with single-model (ResNeXt-101-FPN backbone)
and single-scale testing on the MS-COCO benchmark. We
show that the much simpler and flexible one-stage instance
segmentation method, can also achieve competitive performance. This framework can be easily adapted for other
instance-level recognition tasks.
Code is available at: git.io/AdelaiDet

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation enables various visual applications like autonomous driving and robot navigation, to name
a few. Instead of separately detecting objects or assigning category labels to pixels, instance segmentation unifies
these tasks together, thus being one of the most challenging
tasks in computer vision.
Recent advances in deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have enabled tremendous progress in instance segmentation, e.g., [13, 15, 17, 22]. One of the mainstream
methods employs a two-stage pipeline that first generates
proposals and then performs pixel classification within each
proposal, as popularized by Mask R-CNN [13]. Almost
all the methods in the top rank on the challenging COCO
benchmark [20] are built upon Mask R-CNN thus far. One
∗ Correspondence shoud be addressed to C. Shen and M. You.

(a) Contour-Based

(b) Mask-Based

Figure 1: Contour-Based [33] vs. Mask-Based. “Hollow Decay” is depicted with red dashed rectangles. The contour-based
methods exhibit systematic artifacts on “disjointed” objects.

drawback of these two-stage solutions is not sufficiently
efficient as their runtime is constrained by the number
of instances in an image. On the other hand, one-stage
paradigms process the full image straightforward, making
the speed stable no matter how many objects present.
Several works have attempted to incorporate mask prediction into fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [24], resulting in single shot instance segmentation frameworks.
These algorithms share a common insight, i.e., encoding
the object shape with a set of contour coefficients. Specifically, ESE-Seg [33] designs an “inner-center radius” shape
signature for each instance and fits it with Chebyshev polynomials. Concurrently, PolarMask [32] regresses the dense
distance of rays between mass-center and contours. These
contour-based methods enjoy the advantages of easy optimization and fast inference. The major issue of these methods is that the predicted masks may exhibit “hollow decay”
inevitably, since they can only depict instances with a single
contour, as shown in Figure 1.
Alternatively, a non-parametric mask representation is
more natural for mask prediction as traditionally done, with
the price of increasing both design and computation complexity. As natural object masks are not random and akin
to natural images, instance masks reside in a much lower
intrinsic dimension than that of the pixel space. This in-

10226

