Diversified Arbitrary Style Transfer via Deep Feature Perturbation
Zhizhong Wang, Lei Zhao∗ , Haibo Chen, Lihong Qiu,
Qihang Mo, Sihuan Lin, Wei Xing, Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{endywon, cszhl, feng123, zjusheldon, moqihang, linsh, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Image style transfer is an underdetermined problem,
where a large number of solutions can satisfy the same constraint (the content and style). Although there have been
some efforts to improve the diversity of style transfer by introducing an alternative diversity loss, they have restricted
generalization, limited diversity and poor scalability. In
this paper, we tackle these limitations and propose a simple
yet effective method for diversified arbitrary style transfer.
The key idea of our method is an operation called deep feature perturbation (DFP), which uses an orthogonal random
noise matrix to perturb the deep image feature maps while
keeping the original style information unchanged. Our
DFP operation can be easily integrated into many existing
WCT (whitening and coloring transform)-based methods,
and empower them to generate diverse results for arbitrary
styles. Experimental results demonstrate that this learningfree and universal method can greatly increase the diversity
while maintaining the quality of stylization.

1. Introduction
Style transfer, or to repaint an existing image with the
style of another, is considered as a challenging but interesting task in both academia and industry. Recently, the
pioneering works of Gatys et al. [7, 6, 8] have proved that
the correlations (i.e., Gram matrix) between feature maps
extracted from a pre-trained deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) can represent the style of an image well.
Since then, significant efforts have been made to improve
in many aspects including efficiency [29, 12, 16], quality [15, 31, 21, 10], generality [2, 5, 11, 19, 26, 22], user
control [1, 9] and photorealism [23, 20, 32], etc. However,
despite the remarkable success, these methods often neglect
an important aspect, i.e., the diversity, since many of the
applications (e.g., art creation and creative design) are re* Corresponding author

quired to satisfy the preferences of different users.
In terms of diversity, one common explanation is that,
image style transfer is an underdetermined problem, where
a large number of solutions can satisfy the same content
and style, just like the results generated by different methods could all be visually pleasing and perceptually correct.
However, the lack of meaningful variations in vanilla style
transfer mechanism [8, 12, 29] hampers the emergence of
diversity, as the optimization-based methods often converge
to the similar local optimum, while the feed-forward networks only produce fixed outputs for the fixed inputs.
Although challenging and meaningful, unfortunately,
this problem has barely received enough attention and there
are only a few efforts to solve it. For instance, based on
the feed-forward networks, Li et al. [18] introduced a diversity loss that penalized the feature similarities of different
samples in a mini-batch. Ulyanov et al. [30] minimized the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the generated distribution and a quasi-uniform distribution on the Julesz ensemble [13, 35]. Although their methods could generate diverse texture samples or stylized images to a certain extent,
they still suffer from three main limitations. (1) Restricted
generalization. Once trained, their feed-forward network
is tied to a specific style, which cannot be generalized to
other styles. (2) Limited diversity. Since their diversity
is learned by penalizing the variations in mini-batches of
a finite dataset and the weight of diversity loss should be
set to a small value, the degree of diversity is limited. (3)
Poor scalability. Extending their approaches to other methods requires the intractable modifications to training strategies and network structures, which might be useful for some
learning-based methods like [11], but not suitable for recent
learning-free methods [19, 26, 20] as these methods transfer
arbitrary styles in a style-agnostic manner.
Facing the aforementioned challenges, we rethink the
problem of diversity and an important insight we will use
is that a Gram matrix [8], which is widely used as the style
representation of an image, can correspond to an infinite
number of different feature maps, and the images recon-

7789

