Instance Guided Proposal Network for Person Search
Wenkai Dong1, 3 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1, 2, 3∗, Chunfeng Song1, 3 , Tieniu Tan 1, 2, 3∗
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, NLPR, CASIA
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{dongwenkai2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {chunfeng.song, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Person detection networks have been widely used in person search. These detectors discriminate persons from the
background and generate proposals of all the persons from
a gallery of scene images for each query. However, such a
large number of proposals have a negative influence on the
following identity matching process because many distractors are involved. In this paper, we propose a new detection
network for person search, named Instance Guided Proposal Network (IGPN), which can learn the similarity between query persons and proposals. Thus, we can decrease
proposals according to the similarity scores. To incorporate information of the query into the detection network, we
introduce the Siamese region proposal network to FasterRCNN and we propose improved cross-correlation layers to
alleviate the imbalance of parameters distribution. Furthermore, we design a local relation block and a global relation branch to leverage the proposal-proposal relations and
query-scene relations, respectively. Extensive experiments
show that our method improves the person search performance through decreasing proposals and achieves competitive performance on two large person search benchmark
datasets, CUHK-SYSU and PRW.

1. Introduction
Person search aims to localize a target matching the
query person in a gallery of whole unconstrained scene
images. It is extended from person re-identification (Reid) whose goal is to match the query in a gallery of manually cropped or carefully filtered auto-detected person
patches. It has many applications in the real world, such as
video surveillance and security, video retrieval and humancomputer interaction. It is a challenging problem because
of raw unrefined detections, camera view changes, low resolution, background clutter and occlusion, etc.
∗ Corresponding Author.

Scene Image

Faster-RCNN
Person
ReID

(a) Search process of previous detection based methods
IGPN

Person
ReID
Fewer Proposals
Query

(b) Search process of our method

Figure 1. Comparison with previous detection based methods.
(a) Previous detection based methods first crop proposals of all
the persons in gallery scene images and feed them into a person
Re-id model to calculate the similarity scores for each proposal.
(b) Our proposed IGPN leverages the appearance information of
the queries and learn the similarity scores between proposals and
queries. Thus, we can decrease the proposals fed into the person
Re-id model by keeping the proposals with high similarity scores.

Following [26], some works [24, 29, 23, 14, 11, 3, 2]
have been proposed to address this problem. According to
the ways of obtaining person patches from scene images,
existing methods can be grouped into two categories: detection based methods [24, 23, 11, 3] and search based methods [14, 2]. Detection based methods are composed of two
parts: person detection and person Re-id networks, which
are trained jointly or separately. Generally, for each query,
the person detection network is used to detect candidate persons within scene images, and then the person Re-id network is applied to calculate the similarity between all pairs
of the query and the candidates. However, this pipeline has
a drawback. In the first stage, the detection network generates proposals of all the persons. In the community of
person Re-id, it is commonly believed that with the gallery
size increasing, person Re-id becomes more challenging because more distractors are involved. Thus, such a large
number of proposals will have a negative influence on the
following identity matching process.
Instead of cropping all the persons, search based meth-

2585

