Transform and Tell: Entity-Aware News Image Captioning
Alasdair Tran, Alexander Mathews, Lexing Xie
Australian National University
{alasdair.tran,alex.mathews,lexing.xie}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end model which generates captions for images embedded in news articles. News images present two key challenges: they rely on real-world
knowledge, especially about named entities; and they typically have linguistically rich captions that include uncommon words. We address the first challenge by associating
words in the caption with faces and objects in the image,
via a multi-modal, multi-head attention mechanism. We
tackle the second challenge with a state-of-the-art transformer language model that uses byte-pair-encoding to generate captions as a sequence of word parts. On the GoodNews dataset [3], our model outperforms the previous state
of the art by a factor of four in CIDEr score (13 → 54).
This performance gain comes from a unique combination of
language models, word representation, image embeddings,
face embeddings, object embeddings, and improvements in
neural network design. We also introduce the NYTimes800k
dataset which is 70% larger than GoodNews, has higher
article quality, and includes the locations of images within
articles as an additional contextual cue.

1. Introduction
The Internet is home to a large number of images, many
of which lack useful captions. While a growing body of
work has developed the capacity to narrate the contents of
generic images [10, 49, 12, 19, 39, 30, 1, 6], these techniques still have two important weaknesses. The first weakness is in world knowledge. Most captioning systems are
aware of generic object categories but unaware of names
and places. Also generated captions are often inconsistent
with commonsense knowledge. The second weakness is
in linguistic expressiveness. The community has observed
that generated captions tend to be shorter and less diverse
than human-written captions [50, 24]. Most captioning systems rely on a fixed vocabulary and cannot correctly place
or spell new or rare words.
News image captioning is an interesting case study for
tackling these two challenges. Not only do news captions

Generated Caption from Our Model
The United States’ Alex Morgan, center, scored the first goal in the match against Thailand.

Figure 1: An example of entity-aware news image captioning. Given a news article and an image (top), our model
generates a relevant caption (bottom) by attending over the
contexts. Here we show the attention scores over the image patches and the article text as the decoder generates the
word “Morgan”. Image patches with higher attention have
a lighter shade, while highly-attended words are in red. The
orange lines point to the highly attended regions.
describe specific people, organizations and places, but the
associated news articles also provide rich contextual information. The language used in news is evolving, with both
the vocabulary and style changing over time. Thus news
captioning approaches need to adapt to new words and concepts that emerge over a longer period of time (e.g. walkman in the 1990s or mp3 player in the 2000s). Existing
approaches [44, 37, 3] rely on text extraction or template
filling, which prevents the results from being linguistically
richer than the template generator and are error-prone due to
the difficulty in ranking entities for gap filling. Successful
strategies for news image captioning can be generalized to
images from domains with other types of rich context, such
as web pages, social media posts, and user comments.
We propose an end-to-end model for news image captioning with a novel combination of sequence-to-sequence
neural networks, language representation learning, and vision subsystems. In particular, we address the knowledge
gap by computing multi-head attention on the words in the
article, along with faces and objects that are extracted from
the image. We address the linguistic gap with a flexible
byte-pair-encoding that can generate unseen words. We

13035

