Multi-mutual Consistency Induced Transfer Subspace Learning
for Human Motion Segmentation
Tao Zhou1 , Huazhu Fu1 , Chen Gong2 , Jianbing Shen1∗, Ling Shao1 , Fatih Porikli3
1

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
The Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information
of Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.
3
Australian National University, Australia.

Abstract
Human motion segmentation based on transfer subspace
learning is a rising interest in action-related tasks. Although progress has been made, there are still several issues
within the existing methods. First, existing methods transfer knowledge from source data to target tasks by learning domain-invariant features, but they ignore to preserve
domain-specific knowledge. Second, the transfer subspace
learning is employed in either low-level or high-level feature spaces, but few methods consider fusing multi-level feature representations for subspace learning. To this end, we
propose a novel multi-mutual consistency induced transfer
subspace learning framework for human motion segmentation. Specifically, our model factorizes the source and target data into distinct multi-layer feature spaces and reduces
the distribution gap between them through a multi-mutual
consistency learning strategy. In this way, the domainspecific knowledge and domain-invariant properties can be
explored in different layers simultaneously. Our model also
conducts the transfer subspace learning on different layers
to capture multi-level structural information. Further, to
preserve the temporal correlations, we project the learned
representations into a block-like space. The proposed model
is efficiently optimized by using the Augmented Lagrange
Multiplier (ALM) algorithm. Experimental results on four
human motion datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method over other state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Human motion segmentation aims to partition visual
data sequences that depict human actions and activities into
a set of preferably non-overlapping and internally coherent
temporal segments. It is an important preprocessing step
before further motion and action related analytical tasks
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbingcg@gmail.com).

[26, 38, 48, 59]. Human motion information is a key factor for temporal segmentation. However, due to the complexity of temporal correlations and the high-dimensional
structure of visual representations, capturing such discriminative temporal information remains as a challenging task
[23]. Therefore, several approaches have been developed
to address this problem, including model-based [49], temporal proximity-based [23], representation-based [22, 25],
and subspace clustering-based approaches [12, 25]. Among
them, the subspace clustering-based methods have attracted
notable attention and obtained promising results.
Subspace clustering is a powerful technique for partitioning data into multiple groups, which holds the assumption that data points are drawn from multiple subspaces corresponding to different classes [4, 24, 33]. Several representative subspace clustering methods [8, 16, 29, 32] have been
developed to learn distinct and low-dimensional data representations, in which the learned representations are then fed
into conventional clustering algorithms. However, it is often
difficult for these unsupervised subspace learning methods
to attain reasonable performance without prior knowledge.
Fortunately, labeled data from related tasks are often easy
to obtain. Thus, transfer learning is an ideal option for borrowing knowledge from relevant source data to improve the
target tasks [5, 52]. In human motion segmentation, recent
transfer subspace learning-based approaches [46, 47] have
reported improved performance.
Although transfer subspace learning has achieved satisfactory results in human motion segmentation, there still
exist several issues as follows. First, the transfer subspace
learning based motion segmentation imposes the data distributions of two domains to be similar. To this end, one
popular strategy is to project both the source and target
data into a common feature space. This strategy explores
domain-invariant properties but ignores the potentially useful domain-specific knowledge. However, both of these two
aspects play essential roles, and it is challenging to balance

10277

