Fast Symmetric Diffeomorphic Image Registration with Convolutional Neural
Networks
Tony C.W. Mok, Albert C.S. Chung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
cwmokab@connect.ust.hk, achung@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Diffeomorphic deformable image registration is crucial
in many medical image studies, as it offers unique, special properties including topology preservation and invertibility of the transformation. Recent deep learning-based
deformable image registration methods achieve fast image
registration by leveraging a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to learn the spatial transformation from the synthetic ground truth or the similarity metric. However, these
approaches often ignore the topology preservation of the
transformation and the smoothness of the transformation
which is enforced by a global smoothing energy function
alone. Moreover, deep learning-based approaches often estimate the displacement field directly, which cannot guarantee the existence of the inverse transformation. In this
paper, we present a novel, efficient unsupervised symmetric
image registration method which maximizes the similarity
between images within the space of diffeomorphic maps and
estimates both forward and inverse transformations simultaneously. We evaluate our method on 3D image registration with a large scale brain image dataset. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art registration accuracy and running
time while maintaining desirable diffeomorphic properties.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration is crucial in a variety of
medical imaging studies and has been a topic of active research for decades. The purpose of deformable image registration is to establish the non-linear correspondence between a pair of images and estimate the appropriate nonlinear transformation to align a pair of images. This maximizes the customized similarity between the aligned images. Deformable image registration can be useful when
analyzing images captured from different sensors, and/or
different subjects and different times as it enables the direct

comparison of anatomical structures across images from
different sources. For example, the manual delineation of
anatomical brain structures by an expert is difficult due to
the large spatial complexity of an MR brain scan. Also, it
usually suffers from the inter-rater variability problem [28],
while deformable image registration enables automatic and
robust delineation of brain anatomical structures by registering the target scan to a well-delineated atlas. Traditional
deformable registration approaches often model this problem as an optimization problem and strive to minimize the
energy function in an iterative fashion. However, this is
computationally intensive and time-consuming in practice.
Recently, several deep learning-based approaches have been
proposed for deformable image registration, which employ
a convolutional neural network (CNN) to directly estimate
the target displacement field that aligns a pair of input images. Although these methods achieve fast registration and
comparable registration accuracy in terms of average Dice
score on the anatomical segmentation map, the substantial
diffeomorphic properties of the transformation are not guaranteed. In other words, some desirable properties, including
topology-preservation and the invertibility of the transformation, for medical imaging studies have been ignored by
these approaches.
In this paper, we propose a novel fast symmetric diffeomorphic image registration method that parametrizes the
symmetric deformations within the space of diffeomorphic
maps using CNN. Specifically, instead of pre-assuming the
fixed/moving identity of the input images and outputting
a single mapping of all voxels of the moving volume to
fixed/target volume, our method learns the symmetric registration function from a collection of n-D dataset and output
a pair of diffeomorphic maps (with the equivalent length)
that map the input images to the middle ground between the
images from both geodesic path. Eventually, the forward
mapping from one image to another image can be obtained
by composing the output diffeomorphic maps and the inverse of the other diffeomorphic map, exploiting the fact
that diffeomorphism is a differentiable map and it guaran14644

