Enhanced Blind Face Restoration with Multi-Exemplar Images
and Adaptive Spatial Feature Fusion
Xiaoming Li1 , Wenyu Li1 , Dongwei Ren2 , Hongzhi Zhang1 , Meng Wang3 , Wangmeng Zuo1(
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
3
Hefei University of Technology, China

)

{csxmli, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
In many real-world face restoration applications, e.g.,
smartphone photo albums and old films, multiple highquality (HQ) images of the same person usually are available for a given degraded low-quality (LQ) observation.
However, most existing guided face restoration methods
are based on single HQ exemplar image, and are limited
in properly exploiting guidance for improving the generalization ability to unknown degradation process. To address these issues, this paper suggests to enhance blind
face restoration performance by utilizing multi-exemplar
images and adaptive fusion of features from guidance and
degraded images. First, given a degraded observation, we
select the optimal guidance based on the weighted affine
distance on landmark sets, where the landmark weights
are learned to make the guidance image optimized to HQ
image reconstruction. Second, moving least-square and
adaptive instance normalization are leveraged for spatial
alignment and illumination translation of guidance image
in the feature space. Finally, for better feature fusion, multiple adaptive spatial feature fusion (ASFF) layers are introduced to incorporate guidance features in an adaptive
and progressive manner, resulting in our ASFFNet. Experiments show that our ASFFNet performs favorably in
terms of quantitative and qualitative evaluation, and is effective in generating photo-realistic results on real-world
LQ images. The source code and models are available at
https://github.com/csxmli2016/ASFFNet.

1. Introduction
Visual quality is always one of the high concerns of
human perception and visual understanding, while recent
years have witnessed the rapid progress in the acquisition
and sharing of visual content. On the one hand, driven
by the development of image capturing and display techniques, more and more high-quality (HQ) visual media are

LQ
LQ image
image

GFRNet
GWAINet[9]
Ours
GFRNet
[24]
GWAINet
Ours
(a) Restoration results of a real-world LQ image.

Bicubic
LQ
image

GFRNet
GWAINet
Ours
GFRNet
[24]
GWAINet
[9]
Ours
(b) Restoration result of a frame from an old film.

Figure 1: Comparison of exemplar-based face restoration methods. Close-up in the bottom right is the selected guidance for each
method. (b) shows the restoration result of a frame from an old
film. An animated figure is shown in our suppl.

currently available. On the other hand, due to the diversity of acquisition devices, the effect of environment and
the motion of objects, low quality (LQ) images and videos
are still ubiquitous and inevitably in most real-world applications. Image restoration aims at estimating the clean HQ
image from its degraded LQ observation [1, 5, 33], and remains a valuable research topic in computer vision.
In this work, we focus on the task of blind face restoration with multiple HQ exemplar images from the same person. The HQ face images play an important role in many applications such as entertainment, surveillance and humancomputer interaction, making face restoration highly de-

2706

