JA-POLS: a Moving-camera Background Model via
Joint Alignment and Partially-overlapping Local Subspaces
Irit Chelly
Ben-Gurion University

Vlad Winter
Ben-Gurion University

Dor Litvak
Ben-Gurion University

tohamy@post.bgu.ac.il

winterv@post.bgu.ac.il

dorlit@post.bgu.ac.il

David Rosen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Oren Freifeld
Ben-Gurion University

dmrosen@mit.edu

orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Background models are widely used in computer vision. While successful Static-camera Background (SCB)
models exist, Moving-camera Background (MCB) models are limited. Seemingly, there is a straightforward solution: 1) align the video frames; 2) learn an SCB model;
3) warp either original or previously-unseen frames toward the model. This approach, however, has drawbacks, especially when the accumulative camera motion
is large and/or the video is long. Here we propose a
purely-2D unsupervised modular method that systematically eliminates those issues. First, to estimate warps
in the original video, we solve a joint-alignment problem while leveraging a certifiably-correct initialization.
Next, we learn both multiple partially-overlapping local
subspaces and how to predict alignments. Lastly, in
test time, we warp a previously-unseen frame, based
on the prediction, and project it on a subset of those
subspaces to obtain a background/foreground separation.
We show the method handles even large scenes with
a relatively-free camera motion (provided the camerato-scene distance does not change much) and that it
not only yields State-of-the-Art results on the original video but also generalizes gracefully to previouslyunseen videos of the same scene. Our code is available at
https: // github. com/ BGU-CS-VIL/ JA-POLS .

1. Introduction
Background modeling is an important video-analysis
tool with applications such as tracking and change detection. In the static-camera case, the problem has been
This work was partially supported by the Lynn and William
Frankel Center for Computer Science at BGU.

Observation

Estimated BG

Estimated FG

Figure 1: JA-POLS’ example results. The foreground
is visualized via the sum of the RGB squared residuals.

solved successfully[42, 11, 5, 1, 19, 6]. Our focus is on
the more challenging case, where the camera is moving.
There, the success has been more modest, as existing
methods are limited to highly-restricted motions (e.g.:
translations; small motions; jitter) and/or a small accumulative motion across the video; moreover, they do
not directly generalize to previously-unseen misaligned
videos. This raises a natural question: why not employ
the following seemingly-simple 3-step solution? 1) align
all the video frames (via, e.g., [4, 27, 22, 8, 9, 21]); 2)
learn a Static-camera Background (SCB) model of the
global scene from the aligned frames; 3) warp previouslyunseen frames toward the SCB model and apply the
latter to the former, where the warping is done using,
e.g., either classical tools (see [44] and references therein)
or methods such as PoseNet [25]. Unfortunately, this
logical approach, whose first two steps are exemplified
by the clever PRPCA [30], suffers from severe drawbacks (related to, among other things, scalability and
optimization challenges) that hinder its applicability,
especially for large scenes (i.e., a large accumulative
camera motion) and/or long videos. A more popular
112585

