Show, Edit and Tell:
A Framework for Editing Image Captions

1

Fawaz Sammani1 , Luke Melas-Kyriazi2
Multimedia University, 2 Harvard University

fawaz.sammani@aol.com, lmelaskyriazi@college.harvard.edu

Abstract
Most image captioning frameworks generate captions directly from images, learning a mapping from visual features to natural language. However, editing existing captions can be easier than generating new ones from scratch.
Intuitively, when editing captions, a model is not required
to learn information that is already present in the caption
(i.e. sentence structure), enabling it to focus on fixing details (e.g. replacing repetitive words). This paper proposes
a novel approach to image captioning based on iterative
adaptive refinement of an existing caption. Specifically, our
caption-editing model consisting of two sub-modules: (1)
EditNet, a language module with an adaptive copy mechanism (Copy-LSTM) and a Selective Copy Memory Attention
mechanism (SCMA), and (2) DCNet, an LSTM-based denoising auto-encoder. These components enable our model
to directly copy from and modify existing captions. Experiments demonstrate that our new approach achieves stateof-art performance on the MS COCO dataset both with
and without sequence-level training. Code can be found at
https://github.com/fawazsammani/show-edit-tell.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is the task of producing a natural language description of a visual scene. As one of the prototypical examples of multimodal learning, image captioning
combines techniques from computer vision (e.g. recognizing salient objects in an image), with those from natural
language processing (e.g. generating coherent sentences
describing these objects). Applications of image captioning include content-based image retrieval [18] and assisting the visually impaired by converting visual signals into
text, which can then be transformed to speech using text-tospeech technologies [17].
Over the past five years, neural encoder-decoder systems have gained immense popularity in the field of image captioning due to their superior performance compared

Figure 1. Our model learns how to edit existing image captions. At
each decoding step, attention weights (grey) are generated; these
correspond to the importance of each word in the existing caption
for the word currently being generated in the new caption. Using a selective copy memory attention (SCMA) mechanism, we
select the word with the highest probability and directly copy its
corresponding LSTM memory state to our language LSTM (CopyLSTM). That is, rather than learning to copy words directly from
the input caption, we learn whether to copy the hidden states corresponding to these words. We then generate our new caption from
this (possibly copied) hidden state. Best viewed in color.

to previous image processing-based techniques. The current state-of-art image captioning models are composed of a
CNN encoder, an LSTM (or Transformer) decoder, and one
or more attention mechanisms. The input image is first encoded by a CNN into a set of feature vectors, each of which
captures semantic information about an image region, and
these feature vectors are decoded using an LSTM-based
or Transformer-based network, which generates words sequentially. Attention mechanisms enable the decoding process to “focus” on particular image regions during generation, and the specific formulation of these mechanisms has
been the center of much research [8, 2, 28, 16, 30].
High-quality captions consist of two elements: coherent natural language sentences (i.e. sentence/caption structure), and visually-grounded content (i.e. accurate details).
Current image captioning models learn a ground-up map14808

