Learning to Segment the Tail
Xinting Hu1 ,

Yi Jiang2 ,
1

Kaihua Tang1 ,

Nanyang Technological University,

Jingyuan Chen3 ,
2

Alibaba Group,

3

Chunyan Miao1 ,

Hanwang Zhang1

Damo Academy, Alibaba Group

xinting001@e.ntu.edu.sg,

jiangyi0425@gmail.com,

kaihua001@e.ntu.edu.sg

jingyuanchen91@gmail.com ,

ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg,

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Real-world visual recognition requires handling the extreme sample imbalance in large-scale long-tailed data. We
propose a “divide&conquer” strategy for the challenging
LVIS task: divide the whole data into balanced parts and
then apply incremental learning to conquer each one. This
derives a novel learning paradigm: class-incremental fewshot learning, which is especially effective for the challenge
evolving over time: 1) the class imbalance among the oldclass knowledge review and 2) the few-shot data in newclass learning. We call our approach Learning to Segment
the Tail (LST). In particular, we design an instance-level
balanced replay scheme, which is a memory-efficient approximation to balance the instance-level samples from the
old-class images. We also propose to use a meta-module
for new-class learning, where the module parameters are
shared across incremental phases, gaining the learning-tolearn knowledge incrementally, from the data-rich head to
the data-poor tail. We empirically show that: at the expense
of a little sacrifice of head-class forgetting, we can gain a
significant 8.3% AP improvement for the tail classes with
less than 10 instances, achieving an overall 2.0% AP boost
for the whole 1,230 classes1 .

1. Introduction
The long-tail distribution inherently exists in our visual
world, where a few head classes occupy most of the instances [48, 1, 37, 44]. This is inevitable when we are interested in modeling large-scale datasets, because the class
observational probability in nature follows Zipf’s law [31].
Therefore, it is prohibitively expensive to counter the nature and collect a balanced sample-rich large-scale dataset,
catering for training a robust visual recognition system using the prevailing models [13, 9, 34, 4].
In this paper, we study a practical large-scale visual
1 Code is available at https://github.com/JoyHuYY1412/
LST_LVIS

~𝟏𝟎𝟒

Imbalanced #Instances

Abstract

~𝟏𝟎𝟎

Base Classes Training

Distillation

Replayed + New Data

𝜽𝟏

𝜽𝟎
banana

Balanced Replay

𝓓𝟎

banana cat

cat
lantern

+

Few-Shot Learning

𝜽𝟐
𝓓𝟏

banana

cat

lantern

𝜽𝟑
𝓓𝟐

banana

cat

lantern

CD player

+
+

CD player
drone

Frequent

1000+ category index

𝓓𝟑

+

Rare

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed Learning to Segment the
Tail (LST) method for LVIS [10]. To tackle the severe imbalance,
we divide the overall dataset into balanced sub-parts Di and train
the instance segmentation model θi phase-by-phase incrementally.
We use knowledge distillation and the proposed balanced replay to
confront the catastrophic forgetting [28] in the fewer- and fewershot learning over time. Here, θ3 is the resultant model.

recognition task on the challenging real-world dataset:
Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation (LVIS) [10]. As
shown in Figure 1, across the 1k+ instance object classes,
the number of training instances per class drops from thousands in the head to only a few in the tail (i.e., 26k+ “banana” vs. only 1 “drone”). Empirical studies show that
the models trained using such a long-tailed dataset tend to
please the common classes but neglect the rare ones [10].
The reasons are two-fold: 1) class imbalance causes the
head classes trained thousand times more than the tail
classes, and 2) the few-shot samples in the long tail render
the generalization a great challenge (i.e., around 300 classes
with less than 10 samples). Therefore, the key solution for
LVIS is to well address not only the imbalance but also the
few-shot learning at a large scale.
Unfortunately, conventional works on either “imbalance” or “few-shot” are fundamentally not scalable to LVIS.
On the one hand, it is well-known that works on data resampling [12, 3, 11] — up-sampling the rare tail classes
or down-sampling the frequent head classes — can prevent
the training from being dominated by the head. Nonetheless, as they do not introduce any new diversity, they struggle in the trade-off between the tail over-fit — the heavy

14045

