Central Similarity Quantization for Efficient Image and Video Retrieval
Li Yuan1 Tao Wang1 Xiaopeng Zhang3 Francis EH Tay1 Zequn Jie2 Wei Liu2 Jiashi Feng1
1

National University of Singapore 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{ylustcnus, twangnh, zequn.nus}@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu, {mpetayeh,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Existing data-dependent hashing methods usually learn
hash functions from pairwise or triplet data relationships,
which only capture the data similarity locally, and often
suffer from low learning efficiency and low collision rate.
In this work, we propose a new global similarity metric,
termed as central similarity, with which the hash codes of
similar data pairs are encouraged to approach a common
center and those for dissimilar pairs to converge to different centers, to improve hash learning efficiency and retrieval accuracy. We principally formulate the computation of the proposed central similarity metric by introducing a new concept, i.e., hash center that refers to a set of
data points scattered in the Hamming space with a sufficient mutual distance between each other. We then provide
an efficient method to construct well separated hash centers
by leveraging the Hadamard matrix and Bernoulli distributions. Finally, we propose the Central Similarity Quantization (CSQ) that optimizes the central similarity between
data points w.r.t. their hash centers instead of optimizing
the local similarity. CSQ is generic and applicable to both
image and video hashing scenarios. Extensive experiments
on large-scale image and video retrieval tasks demonstrate
that CSQ can generate cohesive hash codes for similar data
pairs and dispersed hash codes for dissimilar pairs, achieving a noticeable boost in retrieval performance, i.e. 3%20% in mAP over the previous state-of-the-arts 1 .

1. Introduction
By transforming high-dimensional data to compact binary hash codes in the Hamming space via a proper hash
function [37], hashing offers remarkable efficiency for data
storage and retrieval. Recently, “deep learning to hash”
methods [14, 32, 21, 18, 22, 44] have been successfully applied to large-scale image retrieval [44, 48] and video retrieval [8, 28, 21], which can naturally represent a nonlinear
1 The code is at:
https://github.com/yuanli2333/
Hadamard-Matrix-for-hashing

(a) Doublet(pairwise)

(b) Triplet

(c) Central similarity

Figure 1. The intuition behind pairwise/triplet similarity based
hashing methods and the proposed center similarity quantization.
Pairwise and triplet learnings only consider a pair/triplet of data
at once, while our central similarity encourages all similar data
points to collapse to the corresponding hash centers (red stars).

hash function for producing hash codes of input data.
Most deep hashing methods [2, 48, 27, 18] learn hash
functions by utilizing pairwise or triplet data similarity,
where the data relationships are captured from a local perspective. Such pairwise/triplet based hash learning intrinsically leads to the following issues. 1) Low-efficiency in
profiling similarity among the whole training dataset. The
commonly used pairwise similarity [2, 48, 18] or triplet similarity metrics [27, 14] have a time complexity at an order
of O(n!) for n data points. Thus, it is impractical to exhaustively learn from all the possible data pairs/triplets for
large-scale image or video data. 2) Insufficient coverage of
data distribution. Pairwise/triplet similarity based methods
utilize only partial relationships between data pairs, which
may harm the discriminability of the generated hash codes.
3) Low effectiveness on imbalanced data. In real-world
scenarios, the number of dissimilar pairs is much larger
than that of similar pairs. Hence, pairwise/triplet similarity
based hashing methods cannot learn similarity relationships
adequately to generate sufficiently good hash codes, leading
to restricted performance.
To address the above issues, we propose a new global
similarity metric, termed as central similarity, which we

3083

