Polarized Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
Kenichiro Tanaka1,2
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa1
Achuta Kadambi2
1
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), Japan
2
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA
{ktanaka, mukaigawa}@is.naist.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a method of passive non-line-ofsight (NLOS) imaging using polarization cues. A key observation is that the oblique light has a different polarimetric
signal. It turns out this effect is due to the polarization axis
rotation, a phenomena which can be used to better condition the light transport matrix for non-line-of-sight imaging.
Our analysis and results show that the use of a polarization
for NLOS is both a standalone technique, as well as an enhancement technique to boost the results of other forms of
passive NLOS imaging. We make a surprising finding that,
despite 50% light attenuation from polarization optics, the
gains from polarized NLOS are overall superior to unpolarized NLOS.

1. Introduction
Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) imaging is an active research
topic in computational imaging. The goal is to visualize a
scene that is hidden from the camera’s line of sight, e.g.,
“looking around the corners”. Several prior works have
tackled this problem, using methods that range from (a)
time of flight imaging [49, 22, 33, 37, 32, 35, 46, 6, 17,
11, 52, 47, 36, 2]; (b) wave optics [25, 12, 11, 52]; (c)
shadows [5, 44, 53, 3, 43]; and even (d) machine learning [42, 10, 8]. This paper takes a different tack, proposing
the use of polarization cues to re-examine the NLOS problem.
Of particular interest is passive NLOS imaging where
one is unable to control the probing illumination. Such
limited programmable control makes scene reconstruction
very challenging—existing passive NLOS methods [39] offer blurry reconstructions, as compared to active NLOS.
This “blur” in existing passive NLOS methods can be mathematically linked to the scene’s light transport matrix. To
obtain better recovery, previous work aims to reduce the
condition number of the light transport matrix. This has
been done, for example, by placing a partial occluder in the
scene to create high-frequency shadows [39].

achuta@ee.ucla.edu

Our method is analogous to prior approaches in passive
NLOS, but we make a first attempt to use (linear) polarization cues to improve the conditioning of the light transport
matrix. Our method creates high-frequency variation in the
light transport matrix by, ideally placing the camera at the
Brewster angle of polarization.
In this angle, the reflected light is linear polarized and
can be analyzed by the polarizer. We also found that the
polarizer’s blocking axis varies depending on the oblique
viewing angle and changes the intensity. We refer this effect as effective angle of polarizer. We show in the paper
that this oblique observation provably changes the conditioning of the light transport matrix. Further, these benefits of polarization can apply to multiple configurations
for passive NLOS. For example, polarization can be used
to enhance occluder-based passive NLOS or direct passive
NLOS imaging.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We bring the polarizer’s effective angle theory to
the computer vision field. The polarizer’s transmitting/blocking axis depends on both zenith and azimuth
angle of the light ray, which conveys rich angular information;
• We demonstrate that the polarization cues are able to
improve the conditioning of the light transport for passive NLOS imaging without scene modifications; and
• We demonstrate that the same polarization cues also
improve other passive NLOS approaches, including
those that use partial occluders.
Scope: While polarization is a fresh signal for use in
NLOS imaging, the quality of passive NLOS (after polarization enhancement) does not approach that of active
methods, which have been shown to obtain extremely highfidelity reconstructions. However, our polarization enhancement is fundamentally more general than the results
we present here. A future extension details how the proposed technique could apply to active NLOS imaging, covered in the appendix.

2136

