Deep Homography Estimation for Dynamic Scenes
Hoang Le
Feng Liu∗
Portland State University

Shu Zhang
Google

Aseem Agarwala∗
Adobe Research

{hoanl,fliu}@cs.pdx.edu

shzhang@google.com

aseem@agarwala.org

Abstract
Homography estimation is an important step in many
computer vision problems. Recently, deep neural network
methods have shown to be favorable for this problem when
compared to traditional methods. However, these new methods do not consider dynamic content in input images. They
train neural networks with only image pairs that can be
perfectly aligned using homographies. This paper investigates and discusses how to design and train a deep neural network that handles dynamic scenes. We first collect
a large video dataset with dynamic content1 . We then develop a multi-scale neural network and show that when
properly trained using our new dataset, this neural network
can already handle dynamic scenes to some extent. To estimate a homography of a dynamic scene in a more principled way, we need to identify the dynamic content. Since
dynamic content detection and homography estimation are
two tightly coupled tasks, we follow the multi-task learning
principles and augment our multi-scale network such that
it jointly estimates the dynamics masks and homographies.
Our experiments show that our method can robustly estimate homography for challenging scenarios with dynamic
scenes, blur artifacts, or lack of textures.

1. Introduction
A homography models the global geometric transformation between two images. It not only directly serves as a
motion model for many applications like video stabilization [14, 24] and image stitching [31, 33], but also is used
to estimate 3D motion and scene structure in algorithms,
such as SLAM [10] and visual odometry [13].
There are two categories of methods for homography estimation [31]. Direct photometric-based approaches search
for an optimal homography that minimizes the alignment
error between two input images. Sparse feature-based approaches first estimate sparse feature correspondences between the input images and then compute the homography
∗ Work mostly done while Feng and Aseem were at Google Research.
1 Dataset: https://github.com/lcmhoang/hmg-dynamics

SIFT+RANSAC [21]

DHN [9]

Our results

Figure 1. Challenging examples for homography estimation. Each
figure shows one of the two input images. Each white box indicates where the other image in the pair will be warped to in the
first image according to the ground truth homography and each
red box indicates the result using the estimated homography. As
shown in the top row, the lack of texture fails the traditional SIFT
+ RANSAC method while the deep learning methods work well.
The example at the bottom is difficult as the moving person dominates the image. Compared to both the SIFT-based method and
the deep homography estimation method [9] , our dynamics-aware
method can better estimate homography for a dynamic scene.

from them. The direct approaches are robust to images with
large textureless regions but are challenged by large motion.
In contrast, while sparse feature-based approaches are more
robust to large motion, they heavily depend on the quality of
feature correspondences, which are often difficult to obtain
in textureless regions or blurry images.
Recent deep homography estimation methods train a
convolutional neural network to compute a homography between two images [8, 9, 11, 26]. These deep neural network methods leverage both local and global features and
can often perform better than the traditional methods on
challenging scenarios, such as images lacking texture, as
shown in the first example of Fig. 1. However, how they
handle challenging scenarios such as dynamic scenes has
not been studied, as existing methods focus on image pairs
that can be fully aligned using homographies. In prac17652

