Learning to Detect Important People in Unlabelled Images for
Semi-supervised Important People Detection
Fa-Ting Hong1,4,5∗ , Wei-Hong Li3∗ , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,5†
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
VICO Group, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
4
Accuvision Technology Co. Ltd.
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China.
hongft3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, w.h.li@ed.ac.uk, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

input labelled image
input unlabelled image

labelled
images

Important people detection is to automatically detect the
individuals who play the most important roles in a social
event image, which requires the designed model to understand a high-level pattern. However, existing methods rely
heavily on supervised learning using large quantities of annotated image samples, which are more costly to collect for
important people detection than for individual entity recognition (e.g., object recognition). To overcome this problem,
we propose learning important people detection on partially annotated images. Our approach iteratively learns to
assign pseudo-labels to individuals in un-annotated images
and learns to update the important people detection model
based on data with both labels and pseudo-labels. To alleviate the pseudo-labelling imbalance problem, we introduce a ranking strategy for pseudo-label estimation, and
also introduce two weighting strategies: one for weighting the confidence that individuals are important people to
strengthen the learning on important people and the other
for neglecting noisy unlabelled images (i.e., images without
any important people). We have collected two large-scale
datasets for evaluation. The extensive experimental results
clearly confirm the efficacy of our method attained by leveraging unlabelled images for improving the performance of
important people detection.

1. Introduction
The objective of important people detection is to automatically recognize the most important people who play the
most important role in a social event image. Performing this
task is natural and easy for a human. This topic has attracted
increasing attention, as it has a wide range of realistic appli∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

pseudo-labelling via
Ranking-based Sampling
stop using noisy image
labelled important person
non-important person
from unlabelled image

𝑓"

adapting the
hyperplane using
unlabelled data
classification space
unlabelled images

noisy
image

Figure 1. Collecting large quantities of labelled data for important
people detection is difficult and costly. Additionally, since there
are always important people in social event images, we design a
semi-supervised method that learns to automatically select available unlabelled images as well as prevent the noisy unlabelled images and detecting important people in unlabeled images to adapt
the hyperplane of importance classification initialized by model
trained with only labelled data.

cations including event detection [21], activity/event recognition [24, 21], image captioning [23], an so on.
Developing a model to detect important people in images
remains challenging, as it requires the model to understand
a higher-level pattern (e.g., relation among people in an image) in each image compared with the information needed
in other vision tasks (e.g., object-level information in classification or object detection). Existing methods of important
people detection require massive quantities of labelled data,
which are difficult and very costly to collect for this task, as
it requires humans to vote on the important people [18, 6].
Since there always are important people in social event im-

4146

