Assessing Image Quality Issues for Real-World Problems
Tai-Yin Chiu, Yinan Zhao, Danna Gurari
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
We introduce a new large-scale dataset that links the
assessment of image quality issues to two practical vision
tasks: image captioning and visual question answering.
First, we identify for 39,181 images taken by people who
are blind whether each is sufficient quality to recognize the
content as well as what quality flaws are observed from six
options. These labels serve as a critical foundation for us to
make the following contributions: (1) a new problem and algorithms for deciding whether an image is insufficient quality to recognize the content and so not captionable, (2) a
new problem and algorithms for deciding which of six quality flaws an image contains, (3) a new problem and algorithms for deciding whether a visual question is unanswerable due to unrecognizable content versus the content of interest being missing from the field of view, and (4) a novel
application of more efficiently creating a large-scale image
captioning dataset by automatically deciding whether an
image is insufficient quality and so should not be captioned.
We publicly-share our datasets and code to facilitate future
extensions of this work: https://vizwiz.org.

1. Introduction
Low-quality images are an inevitable, intermittent reality
for many real-world, computer vision applications. At one
extreme, they can be life threatening, such as when they
impede the ability of autonomous vehicles [60] and traffic
controllers [30] to safely navigate environments. In other
cases, they can serve as irritants when they convey a negative impression to the viewing audiences, such as on social
media or dating websites.
Despite that low-quality images often emerge in practical settings, there has largely been a disconnect between
research aimed at recognizing quality issues and research
aimed at performing downstream vision tasks. For researchers focused on uncovering what quality issues are
observed in an image, their progress largely has grown
from artificially-constructed settings where they train and
evaluate algorithms on publicly-available datasets that were
constructed by distorting high quality images to simulate

quality issues (e.g., using JPEG compression or Gaussian
blur) [41, 48, 12, 21, 37, 36, 25, 31]. Yet, these contrived
environments typically lack sufficient sophistication to capture the plethora of factors that contribute to quality issues
in natural settings (e.g., camera hardware, lighting, camera
shake, scene obstructions). Moreover, the quality issues are
detangled from whether they relate to the ability to complete
specific vision tasks. As for researchers focusing on specific
tasks, much of their progress has developed from environments that lack low-quality images. That is because the creators of popular publicly-available datasets that support the
development of such algorithms typically included a step to
filter out any candidate images that are deemed insufficient
quality for the final dataset [11, 14, 23, 9, 53, 28, 59]. Consequently, such datasets lack data that would enable training
algorithms to identify when images are of insufficient quality to complete a given task.
Motivated by the aim to tie the assessment of image quality to practical vision tasks, we introduce a new image quality assessment (IQA) dataset that emerges from a real use
case. Specifically, our dataset is built around 39,181 images that were taken by people who are blind who were
authentically trying to learn about images they took using
the VizWiz mobile phone application [5]. Of these images,
17% were submitted to collect image captions from remote
humans. The remaining 83% were submitted with a question to collect answers to their visual questions. As discussed in prior work [7, 17], users submitted these images
and visual questions (i.e., images with questions) to overcome real visual challenges that they faced in their daily
lives. They typically waited nearly two minutes to receive a
response from the remote humans [5]. For each image, we
asked crowdworkers to either supply a caption describing it
or clarify that the quality issues are too severe for them to
be able to create a caption. We call this task the unrecognizability classification task. We also ask crowdworkers to
label each image with quality flaws that are more traditionally discussed in the literature [7, 12]: blur, overexposure
(bright), underexposure (dark), improper framing, obstructions, and rotated views. We call this task the quality flaws
classification task. Examples of resulting labeled images in
our dataset are shown in Figure 1. Altogether, we call this
13646

