Stylization-Based Architecture for Fast Deep Exemplar Colorization
Zhongyou Xu† , Tingting Wang† , ∗Faming Fang†∗ , Yun Sheng§ , Guixu Zhang†
†

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
and the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
§
Liverpool John Moores University

Abstract
Exemplar-based colorization aims to add colors to a
grayscale image guided by a content related reference image. Existing methods are either sensitive to the selection of
reference images (content, position) or extremely time and
resource consuming, which limits their practical application. To tackle these problems, we propose a deep exemplar
colorization architecture inspired by the characteristics of
stylization in feature extracting and blending. Our coarseto-fine architecture consists of two parts: a fast transfer
sub-net and a robust colorization sub-net. The transfer subnet obtains a coarse chrominance map via matching basic
feature statistics of the input pairs in a progressive way. The
colorization sub-net refines the map to generate the final results. The proposed end-to-end network can jointly learn
faithful colorization with a related reference and plausible
color prediction with unrelated reference. Extensive experimental validation demonstrates that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in less time whether in
exemplar-based colorization or image stylization tasks.

1. Introduction
Colorization is a classic task in computer vision which
aims at adding colors to a gray image. It is of great significance since color image is visually plausible and perceptually meaningful, and has enormous potential in practical applications such as painting creation, black and white movie
rendering, 3D modeling, etc. It is worth noting that there
is no “correct ” solution for colorization (e.g., flowers in
white, red, or purple are common in nature). The ambiguity
and diversity make the colorization task challenging.
In order to achieve a convincing result, human interven∗ Corresponding Author. Email address: fmfang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn. This
work was sponsored by the Key Project of the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61731009 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61871185, and ”Chenguang Program” supported by Shanghai Education Development Foundation and
Shanghai Municipal Education Commission under Grant 17CG25.

tion often plays an important role in the previous colorization works. Some papers [18, 39, 25] propose to manually
add color scribbles over a grayscale image carefully, then
propagate these known colors to the whole image, which
is, however a challenging task for an untrained user who
lacks professional skills and artistic sensitivity. Other researches [23, 3] try to alleviate such empirical problem by
replacing the color scribbles with a closely related reference
image. Credible correspondences are established between
the target gray image and the reference image for propagating and coloring directly. The fragile model usually generates an inferior result for the dissimilarity caused by lighting, viewpoints and content differences. In recent years,
deep learning-based colorization techniques [17, 2, 40] have
achieved remarkable results. The colorization network is
trained on a large number of image dataset to learn the relationship between grayscale image and its corresponding
color version. Once the net parameters are determined,
the colorization result can be easily obtained. Although
such automatic colorization models make a huge success,
the colorized result is sort of uncontrollable without any
user intervention. More recent works [31, 41, 8] attempt to
combine the controllability from interaction and robustness
from learning to achieve more promising colorization.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning approach
for fast exemplar-based colorization inspired by stylization
networks [9, 20]. The proposed architecture consists of two
parts: transfer sub-net and colorization sub-net. The transfer sub-net is an arbitrary fast photorealistic image stylization network which can solve the distoration problem and
alleviate artifacts compared with current stylization methods. It is designed to obtain a coarse chrominance map
for the target by fusing its features with the reference in
a progressive way. Then the map is refined by the colorization sub-net to get the final colorization result. Experiments
show that our proposed network outperforms state-of-theart exemplar-based colorization methods in less time. Besides, the transfer sub-net presents amazing effects in photorealistic image stylization tasks.
The main contributions of this work are threefold.
19363

