Transferring Cross-domain Knowledge for Video Sign Language Recognition
Dongxu Li1,2 , Xin Yu1,2,3 , Chenchen Xu1,4 , Lars Petersson1,4 , Hongdong Li1,2
1
The Australian National University, 2 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision (ACRV),
3
University of Technology Sydney, 4 DATA61-CSIRO
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Word-level sign language recognition (WSLR) is a fundamental task in sign language interpretation. It requires
models to recognize isolated sign words from videos. However, annotating WSLR data needs expert knowledge, thus
limiting WSLR dataset acquisition. On the contrary, there
are abundant subtitled sign news videos on the internet.
Since these videos have no word-level annotation and exhibit a large domain gap from isolated signs, they cannot
be directly used for training WSLR models.
We observe that despite the existence of large domain
gaps, isolated and news signs share the same visual concepts, such as hand gestures and body movements. Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel method that
learns domain-invariant descriptors and fertilizes WSLR
models by transferring knowledge of subtitled news sign to
them. To this end, we extract news signs using a base WSLR
model, and then design a classifier jointly trained on news
and isolated signs to coarsely align these two domains. In
order to learn domain-invariant features within each class
and suppress domain-specific features, our method further
resorts to an external memory to store the class centroids of
the aligned news signs. We then design a temporal attention
based on the learnt descriptor to improve recognition performance. Experimental results on standard WSLR datasets
show that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods significantly. We also demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method on automatically localizing signs from sign
news, achieving 28.1 for AP@0.5.

1. Introduction
Word-level sign language recognition (WSLR), as a fundamental sign language interpretation task, aims to overcome the communication barrier for deaf people. However,
WSLR is very challenging because it consists of complex
and fine-grained hand gestures in quick motion, body movements and facial expressions.
Recently, deep learning techniques have demonstrated

Isolated Sign Words

Web News Sign Words
Localizer

Domaininvariant
Features

Knowledge
Transferring

Figure 1: Our model transfers the knowledge from web
news signs to WSLR models by learning domain-invariant
features. Example frames in the figure are identified by our
model as the signature that best summarizes the gesture.
their advantages on the WSLR task [21, 14, 28, 16]. However, annotating WSLR datasets requires domain-specific
knowledge, therefore even the largest existing datasets have
a limited number of instances, e.g., on average 10 to 50 instances per word [21, 14, 26]. This is in an order of magnitude fewer than common video datasets [5] on e.g. action learning and recognition [5, 44]. The limited amount
of training data for the sign recognition task may lead to
overfitting or otherwise restrict the performance of WSLR
models in real-world scenarios. On the other hand, there are
abundant subtitled sign news videos easily attainable from
the web which may potentially be beneficial for WSLR.
Despite the availability of sign news videos, transferring
such knowledge to WSLR is very challenging. First, subtitles only provide weak labels for the occurrence of signs
and there is no annotation of temporal location or categories. Second, such labels are noisy. For example, a subtitle word does not necessarily indicate if the word is signed.
Third, news signs typically span over 9-16 frames [4],
which is significantly different from the videos (on average
60 frames [21, 14]) used to train WSLR models in terms
of gesture speed. Therefore, directly augmenting WSLR
16205

