Multi-scale Domain-adversarial Multiple-instance CNN for Cancer Subtype
Classification with Unannotated Histopathological Images
Noriaki Hashimoto1† , Daisuke Fukushima1† , Ryoichi Koga1 , Yusuke Takagi1 , Kaho Ko1
Kei Kohno2 , Masato Nakaguro2 , Shigeo Nakamura2 , Hidekata Hontani1 , Ichiro Takeuchi1,3*
1
Nagoya Institute of Technology, 2 Nagoya University Hospital, 3 RIKEN

Abstract
We propose a new method for cancer subtype classification from histopathological images, which can automatically detect tumor-specific features in a given whole slide
image (WSI). The cancer subtype should be classified by referring to a WSI, i.e., a large-sized image (typically 40,000
× 40,000 pixels) of an entire pathological tissue slide,
which consists of cancer and non-cancer portions. One difficulty arises from the high cost associated with annotating
tumor regions in WSIs. Furthermore, both global and local
image features must be extracted from the WSI by changing the magnifications of the image. In addition, the image
features should be stably detected against the differences of
staining conditions among the hospitals/specimens. In this
paper, we develop a new CNN-based cancer subtype classification method by effectively combining multiple-instance,
domain adversarial, and multi-scale learning frameworks
in order to overcome these practical difficulties. When the
proposed method was applied to malignant lymphoma subtype classifications of 196 cases collected from multiple
hospitals, the classification performance was significantly
better than the standard CNN or other conventional methods, and the accuracy compared favorably with that of standard pathologists.

1. Introduction
In this study, we propose a novel convolutional neural
network (CNN)-based method for cancer subtype classification by using digital pathological images of hematoxylinand-eosin (H&E) stained tissue specimens as inputs. Since
a whole slide image (WSI) obtained by digitizing an entire pathological tissue slide is too large to feed into a
CNN [22, 31, 18, 8], it is common to extract a large number
of patches from the WSI [9, 12, 27, 37, 19, 34, 5, 38, 2, 17].
If it can be known whether each patch is a tumor region or
† N.H. and D.F. contributed equally. * Correspondence to I.T. (e-mail:
takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp).

not, the CNN can be trained by using each patch as a labeled training instance. However, the cost to annotate each
of a large number of patch labels is too high. When patch label annotation is not available, cancer subtype classification
tasks are challenging in the following three respects.
The first difficulty is that tumor and non-tumor regions
are mixed in a WSI. Therefore, when pathologists actually
conduct subtype classification, it is necessary to find out
which part of the slide contains the tumor region, and perform subtype classification based on the features of the tumor region. The second practical difficulty is that staining
conditions vary greatly depending on the specimen conditions and the hospital from which the specimen was taken.
Therefore, pathologists perform tumor region identification
and subtype classification by carefully considering the different staining conditions. The last difficulty is that different features of tissues are observed when the magnification
of the pathological image is changed. Pathologists conduct
diagnosis by changing the magnification of a microscope
repeatedly to find out various features of the tissues.
In order to develop a practical CNN-based subtype classification system, our main idea is to introduce mechanisms
that mimic these pathologist’s actual practices. To address
the above three difficulties simultaneously, we effectively
combine multiple instance learning (MIL), domain adversarial (DA) normalization, and multi-scale (MS) learning
techniques. Although each of these techniques has been
studied in the literatures, we demonstrate that their effective
and careful combination enables us to develop a CNN-based
system that performs significantly better than the standard
CNN or other conventional methods.
We applied the proposed method to malignant lymphoma subtype classifications of 196 cases collected from
80 hospitals, and demonstrated that the accuracy of the proposed method compared favorably with standard pathologists. It was also confirmed that the proposed method not
only performed better than conventional methods, but also
performed subtype classification in a similar way to pathologists in the sense that the method correctly paid attention
to tumor regions in images of various different scales.

3852

