xMUDA: Cross-Modal Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
for 3D Semantic Segmentation
Maximilian Jaritz1,2,3 , Tuan-Hung Vu3 , Raoul de Charette1 , Émilie Wirbel2,3 , Patrick Pérez3
1

UDA Baseline
Uni-Modal Learning
Errors

Inria, 2 Valeo DAR, 3 Valeo.ai
Target
(night)

xMUDA

Cross-Modal Learning

Car not recognized

2D image
False prediction

Vehicle

Pedestrian

3D point cloud

Figure 1: Advantages of cross-modal UDA (xMUDA) in presence of domain gap (day-to-night). On this 3D semantic
segmentation example, the UDA Baseline [16] prediction from 2D camera image does not detect the car on the right due to
the day/night domain shift. With xMUDA, 2D learns the appearance of cars in the dark from information exchange with the
3D LiDAR point cloud, and 3D learns to reduce false predictions.

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is crucial to
tackle the lack of annotations in a new domain. There are
many multi-modal datasets, but most UDA approaches are
uni-modal. In this work, we explore how to learn from
multi-modality and propose cross-modal UDA (xMUDA)
where we assume the presence of 2D images and 3D
point clouds for 3D semantic segmentation. This is challenging as the two input spaces are heterogeneous and
can be impacted differently by domain shift. In xMUDA,
modalities learn from each other through mutual mimicking, disentangled from the segmentation objective, to prevent the stronger modality from adopting false predictions
from the weaker one. We evaluate on new UDA scenarios including day-to-night, country-to-country and datasetto-dataset, leveraging recent autonomous driving datasets.
xMUDA brings large improvements over uni-modal UDA
on all tested scenarios, and is complementary to state-ofthe-art UDA techniques. Code is available at https:
//github.com/valeoai/xmuda.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional scene understanding is required in
numerous applications, in particular robotics, autonomous
driving and virtual reality. Among the different tasks under concern, 3D semantic segmentation is gaining more and
more traction as new datasets are being released [1, 5, 6].
Like other perception tasks, 3D semantic segmentation can
encounter the problem of domain shift between supervised
training and test time, for example between day and night,
different countries or datasets. Domain adaptation aims at
addressing this gap, but existing work concerns mostly 2D
semantic segmentation [11, 16, 28, 34] and rarely 3D [32].
We also observe that previous domain adaptation work focuses on single modality, whereas 3D datasets are often
multi-modal, consisting of 3D point clouds and 2D images.
While the complementarity between these two modalities
is already exploited by both human annotators and learned
models to localize objects in 3D scenes [18, 21], we consider it through a new angle, asking the question: If 3D and
2D data are available in the source and target domain, can
we capitalize on multi-modality to address Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA)?
112605

