What it Thinks is Important is Important:
Robustness Transfers through Input Gradients

1

Alvin Chan1⇤, Yi Tay1 , Yew-Soon Ong1,2
Nanyang Technological University, 2 AI3, A⇤ STAR, Singapore

Abstract
Adversarial perturbations are imperceptible changes to
input pixels that can change the prediction of deep learning models. Learned weights of models robust to such perturbations are previously found to be transferable across
different tasks but this applies only if the model architecture for the source and target tasks is the same. Input
gradients characterize how small changes at each input
pixel affect the model output. Using only natural images,
we show here that training a student model’s input gradients to match those of a robust teacher model can gain robustness close to a strong baseline that is robustly trained
from scratch. Through experiments in MNIST, CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100 and Tiny-ImageNet, we show that our proposed
method, input gradient adversarial matching, can transfer
robustness across different tasks and even across different
model architectures. This demonstrates that directly targeting the semantics of input gradients is a feasible way towards adversarial robustness.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have shown remarkable performances in a wide range of computer vision tasks [15, 28, 17]
but can be easily fooled by adversarial examples [27].
These examples are crafted by imperceptible perturbations
and can manipulate a model’s prediction during test time.
Due to its potential security risk in deployment of deep neural networks, adversarial examples have received much research attention with many new attacks [2, 19, 4] and defenses [24, 20, 16, 9, 33, 1] proposed recently.
While there is still a wide gap between accuracy on clean
and adversarial samples, the strongest defenses rely mostly
on adversarial training (AT) [8, 18, 25]. Adversarial training’s main idea, simple yet effective, involves training the
model with adversarial samples generated in each training
loop. However, crafting strong adversarial training samples
is computationally expensive as it entails iterative gradient
⇤ Corresponding author: guoweial001@ntu.edu.sg

steps with respect to the loss function [13, 31].
To circumvent the cost of AT, a recent line of work explores transferring adversarial robustness from robust models to new tasks [11, 26]. To transfer to a target task, current such techniques involve finetuning new layers on top
of robust feature extractors that were pre-trained on other
domains (source task). While this approach is effective
in transferring robustness across different tasks, it assumes
that the source task and target task models have similar architecture as pre-trained weights are the medium of transfer.
Here, we propose a robustness transfer method that is
both task- and architecture-agnostic with input gradient as
the medium of transfer. Our approach, input gradient adversarial matching (IGAM), is inspired by observations [29, 6]
that robust AT-trained models display visibly salient input
gradients while their non-robust standard trained models
have noisy input gradients (Figure 1). The value of input
gradient at each pixel defines how a small change there can
affect the model’s output and can be loosely thought as to
how important each pixel is for prediction. Here, we show
that learning to emulate how robust models view ‘importance’ on images through input gradients can result in robust models even without adversarial training examples.
The core idea behind our approach is to train a student
model with an adversarial objective to fool a discriminator
into perceiving the student’s input gradients as those from
a robust teacher model. To transfer across different tasks,
the teacher model’s logit layer is first briefly finetuned on
the target task’s data, like in [26]. Subsequently, the teacher
model’s weights are frozen while a student model is adversarially trained with a separate discriminator network in a
min-max game so that the input gradients from the student
and teacher models are semantically similar, i.e., indistinguishable for the discriminator model [7].
Through experiments in MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100
and Tiny-ImageNet, we show that input gradients are a feasible medium to transfer robustness, outperforming finetuning on transferred weights. Surprisingly, student models
even outperform their teacher models in both clean accuracy and adversarial robustness. In some cases, the student
model’s adversarial robustness is close to that of a strong
1332

