Mnemonics Training: Multi-Class Incremental Learning without Forgetting
Yaoyao Liu1,2∗ Yuting Su1† An-An Liu1† Bernt Schiele2
1

Qianru Sun3

School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

3

School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{yaoyao.liu, schiele, qsun}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

{liuyaoyao, ytsu, liuanan}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-Class Incremental Learning (MCIL) aims to learn
new concepts by incrementally updating a model trained on
previous concepts. However, there is an inherent trade-off
to effectively learning new concepts without catastrophic
forgetting of previous ones. To alleviate this issue, it has
been proposed to keep around a few examples of the previous concepts but the effectiveness of this approach heavily
depends on the representativeness of these examples. This
paper proposes a novel and automatic framework we call
mnemonics, where we parameterize exemplars and make
them optimizable in an end-to-end manner. We train the
framework through bilevel optimizations, i.e., model-level
and exemplar-level. We conduct extensive experiments on
three MCIL benchmarks, CIFAR-100, ImageNet-Subset and
ImageNet, and show that using mnemonics exemplars can
surpass the state-of-the-art by a large margin. Interestingly
and quite intriguingly, the mnemonics exemplars tend to be
on the boundaries between different classes1 .

1. Introduction
Natural learning systems such as humans inherently
work in an incremental manner as the number of concepts
increases over time. They naturally learn new concepts
while not forgetting previous ones. In contrast, current
machine learning systems, when continuously updated using novel incoming data, suffer from catastrophic forgetting
(or catastrophic interference), as the updates can override
knowledge acquired from previous data [12, 20, 21, 24, 28].
This is especially true for multi-class incremental learning
(MCIL) where one cannot replay all previous inputs. Catas∗ This work was done during Yaoyao’s internship supervised by Qianru.
† Corresponding authors.
1 Code: https://github.com/yaoyao-liu/mnemonics

qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Early phase (50 classes used, 5 classes visualized in color):

Late phase (100 classes used, 5 classes visualized in color):

random (baseline)

herding (related)

mnemonics (ours)

Figure 1. The t-SNE [18] results of three exemplar methods in
two phases. The original data of 5 colored classes occur in the
early phase. In each colored class, deep-color points are exemplars, and light-color ones show the original data as reference of
the real data distribution. Gray crosses represent other participating classes, and each cross for one class. We have two main observations. (1) Our approach results in much clearer separation in the
data, than random (where exemplars are randomly sampled in the
early phase) and herding (where exemplars are nearest neighbors
of the mean sample in the early phase) [2,9,25,36]. (2) Our learned
exemplars mostly locate on the boundaries between classes.

trophic forgetting, therefore, becomes a major problem for
MCIL systems.
Motivated by this, a number of works have recently
emerged [2, 9, 16, 17, 25, 36]. Rebuffi et al. [25] firstly defined a protocol for evaluating MCIL methods, i.e., to tackle
the image classification task where the training data for different classes comes in sequential training phases. As it is
neither desirable nor scaleable to retain all data from previous concepts, in their protocol, they restrict the number
of exemplars that can be kept around per class, e.g., only
20 exemplars per class can be stored and passed to the subsequent training phases. These “20 exemplars” are important to MCIL as they are the key resource for the model

12245

