Implicit Functions in Feature Space for 3D Shape
Reconstruction and Completion
Julian Chibane1,2
1

Thiemo Alldieck1,3

Gerard Pons-Moll1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
2
University of Würzburg, Germany
3
Computer Graphics Lab, TU Braunschweig, Germany
{jchibane,gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de alldieck@cg.cs.tu-bs.de

Figure 1: Results using our method. Left: sparse voxel reconstruction, middle: dense voxel reconstruction, right: 3D single-view point
cloud reconstruction (back occluded). Our method delivers continuous outputs, handles multiple topologies (right) and unlike prior work,
retains detail in the input (middle and right), and performs well with articulated humans.

Abstract
While many works focus on 3D reconstruction from images, in this paper, we focus on 3D shape reconstruction
and completion from a variety of 3D inputs, which are deficient in some respect: low and high resolution voxels,
sparse and dense point clouds, complete or incomplete.
Processing of such 3D inputs is an increasingly important
problem as they are the output of 3D scanners, which are
becoming more accessible, and are the intermediate output
of 3D computer vision algorithms. Recently, learned implicit functions have shown great promise as they produce
continuous reconstructions. However, we identified two limitations in reconstruction from 3D inputs: 1) details present
in the input data are not retained, and 2) poor reconstruction of articulated humans. To solve this, we propose Implicit Feature Networks (IF-Nets), which deliver continuous outputs, can handle multiple topologies, and complete
shapes for missing or sparse input data retaining the nice
properties of recent learned implicit functions, but critically
they can also retain detail when it is present in the input
data, and can reconstruct articulated humans. Our work
differs from prior work in two crucial aspects. First, instead
of using a single vector to encode a 3D shape, we extract
a learnable 3-dimensional multi-scale tensor of deep fea-

tures, which is aligned with the original Euclidean space
embedding the shape. Second, instead of classifying x-yz point coordinates directly, we classify deep features extracted from the tensor at a continuous query point. We
show that this forces our model to make decisions based on
global and local shape structure, as opposed to point coordinates, which are arbitrary under Euclidean transformations. Experiments demonstrate that IF-Nets clearly outperform prior work in 3D object reconstruction in ShapeNet,
and obtain significantly more accurate 3D human reconstructions. Code is available at https://virtualhumans.mpiinf.mpg.de/ifnets/.

1. Introduction
While many works focus on image-based 3D reconstruction [23], in this paper, we focus on 3D surface reconstruction and shape completion from a variety of 3D inputs, which are deficient in some respect: low-resolution
voxel-grids, high-resolution voxel-grids, sparse and dense
point-clouds, complete or incomplete. Such inputs are becoming ubiquitous as 3D scanning technology is increasingly accessible, and they are often an intermediate output
of 3D computer vision algorithms. However, the final output for most applications should be a renderable continuous

6970

