Learning multiview 3D point cloud registration
Zan Gojcic∗§

Caifa Zhou∗§
§

Jan D. Wegner§

ETH Zurich

†

Leonidas J. Guibas†

Tolga Birdal†

Stanford University

Abstract
We present a novel, end-to-end learnable, multiview 3D
point cloud registration algorithm. Registration of multiple scans typically follows a two-stage pipeline: the initial
pairwise alignment and the globally consistent refinement.
The former is often ambiguous due to the low overlap of
neighboring point clouds, symmetries and repetitive scene
parts. Therefore, the latter global refinement aims at establishing the cyclic consistency across multiple scans and
helps in resolving the ambiguous cases. In this paper we
propose, to the best of our knowledge, the first end-to-end
algorithm for joint learning of both parts of this two-stage
problem. Experimental evaluation on well accepted benchmark datasets shows that our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art by a significant margin, while being end-toend trainable and computationally less costly. Moreover, we
present detailed analysis and an ablation study that validate
the novel components of our approach. The source code and
pretrained models are publicly available under https:
//github.com/zgojcic/3D_multiview_reg.

1. Introduction
Downstream tasks in 3D computer vision, such as semantic segmentation and object detection typically require
a holistic representation of the scene. The capability of
aligning and fusing individual point cloud fragments, which
cover only small parts of the environment, into a globally
consistent holistic representation is therefore essential and
has several use cases in augmented reality and robotics.
Pairwise registration of adjacent fragments is a well studied problem and traditional approaches based on geometric constraints [51, 66, 56] and hand-engineered feature descriptors [37, 27, 54, 59] have shown successful results to
some extent. Nevertheless, in the recent years, research on
local descriptors for pairwise registration of 3D point clouds
is centered on deep learning approaches [67, 38, 21, 64, 19,
28] that succeed in capturing and encoding evidence hidden
to hand-engineered descriptors. Furthermore, novel endto-end methods for pairwise point cloud registration were

Figure 1. Result of our end-to-end reconstruction on the 60 scans
of Kitchen scene from 3DMatch benchmark [67].

recently proposed [62, 42]. While demonstrating good performance for many tasks, pairwise registration of individual
views of a scene has some conceptual drawbacks: (i) low
overlap of adjacent point clouds can lead to inaccurate or
wrong matches, (ii) point cloud registration has to rely on
very local evidence, which can be harmful if 3D scene structure is scarce or repetitive, (iii) separate post-processing is
required to combine all pair-wise matches into a global representation. Compared to the pairwise methods, globally
consistent multiview alignment of unorganized point cloud
fragments is yet to fully benefit from the recent advances
achieved by the deep learning methods. State-of-the art
methods typically still rely on a good initialization of the
pairwise maps, which they try to refine globally in a subsequent decoupled step [30, 61, 2, 3, 5, 4, 43, 11]. A general
drawback of this hierarchical procedure is that global noise
distribution over all nodes of the pose graph ends up being
far from random, i.e. significant biases persist due to the
highly correlated initial pairwise maps.
In this paper, we present, to the best of our knowledge, the first end-to-end data driven multiview point cloud
registration algorithm. Our method takes a set of potentially overlapping point clouds as input and outputs a
global/absolute transformation matrix per each of the input scans (c.f . Fig. 1). We depart from a traditional twostage approach where the individual stages are detached
from each other and directly learn to register all views of
a scene in a globally consistent manner.
The main contributions of our work are:
• We formulate the traditional two-stage approach in an

∗ First two authors contributed equally to this work.

11759

