Adversarial Feature Hallucination Networks for Few-Shot Learning
Kai Li1 , Yulun Zhang1 , Kunpeng Li1 , Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{kaili,kunpengli,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu, yulun100@gmail.com

Abstract
The recent flourish of deep learning in various tasks
is largely accredited to the rich and accessible labeled
data. Nonetheless, massive supervision remains a luxury
for many real applications, boosting great interest in labelscarce techniques such as few-shot learning (FSL), which
aims to learn concept of new classes with a few labeled samples. A natural approach to FSL is data augmentation and
many recent works have proved the feasibility by proposing
various data synthesis models. However, these models fail
to well secure the discriminability and diversity of the synthesized data and thus often produce undesirable results. In
this paper, we propose Adversarial Feature Hallucination
Networks (AFHN) which is based on conditional Wasserstein Generative Adversarial networks (cWGAN) and hallucinates diverse and discriminative features conditioned on
the few labeled samples. Two novel regularizers, i.e., the
classification regularizer and the anti-collapse regularizer,
are incorporated into AFHN to encourage discriminability
and diversity of the synthesized features, respectively. Ablation study verifies the effectiveness of the proposed cWGAN based feature hallucination framework and the proposed regularizers. Comparative results on three common
benchmark datasets substantiate the superiority of AFHN
to existing data augmentation based FSL approaches and
other state-of-the-art ones.

1. Introduction
The rich and accessible labeled data fuel the revolutionary success of deep learning [7, 46, 20]. However, in
many specific real applications, only limited labeled data
are available. This motivates the investigation of fewshot learning (FSL) where we need to learn concept of
new classes based on a few labeled samples. To combat
with deficiency of labeled data, some FSL methods resort
to enhance the discriminability of the feature representations such that a simple linear classifier learned from a
few labeled samples can reach satisfactory classification re-

sults [39, 36, 38]. Another category of methods investigate techniques of quickly and effectively updating a deep
neural network with a few labeled data, either by learning a meta-network and the corresponding updating rules
[9, 24, 32, 28], or by learning a meta-learner model that generates some components of a classification network directly
from the labeled samples [21, 12, 34]. Alternatively, the
third group of methods address this problem with data augmentation by distorting the labeled images or synthesizing
new images/features based on the labeled ones [4, 10, 35, 5].
Our proposed method falls into the data augmentation
based category. The basic assumption of approaches in
this category is that the intra-class cross-sample relationship learned from seen (training) classes can be applied to
unseen (test) classes. Once the cross-sample relationship is
modeled and learned from seen classes, it can be applied
on the few labeled samples of unseen class to hallucinated
new ones. It is believed that the augmented samples can diversify the intra-class variance and thus help reach sharper
classification boundaries [45]. Whatever data augmentation
technique is used, it is critical to secure discriminability of
the augmented samples, as otherwise they shall cast catastrophic impact on the classifier. On the other hand, the
decision boundary of a classifier can be determined precisely only when labeled samples exhibit sufficient intraclass variance. Thus, diversity of the augmented samples is
also of a crucial role. This is in fact the essential motivation
of investigating data augmentation for FSL, as a few labeled
samples encapsulate limited intra-class variance.
Though various data augmentation based FSL methods
have been proposed recently, they fail to simultaneously
guarantee discriminability and diversity of the synthesized
samples. Some methods learn a finite set of transformation
mappings between samples in each base (label-rich) classes
and directly apply them to seed samples of novel (labelscarce) classes. However, the arbitrary mapping may destroy discriminability of the synthesized samples [6, 15, 35].
Other methods synthesize samples specifically for certain
tasks which regularize the synthesis process [41, 28]. Thus,
these methods can guarantee discriminability of the synthe-

13470

