Unpaired Image Super-Resolution using Pseudo-Supervision
Shunta Maeda
Navier Inc.
shunta@navier.co.jp

Abstract
In most studies on learning-based image superresolution (SR), the paired training dataset is created by
downscaling high-resolution (HR) images with a predetermined operation (e.g., bicubic). However, these methods
fail to super-resolve real-world low-resolution (LR) images,
for which the degradation process is much more complicated and unknown. In this paper, we propose an unpaired
SR method using a generative adversarial network that does
not require a paired/aligned training dataset. Our network
consists of an unpaired kernel/noise correction network and
a pseudo-paired SR network. The correction network removes noise and adjusts the kernel of the inputted LR image; then, the corrected clean LR image is upscaled by the
SR network. In the training phase, the correction network
also produces a pseudo-clean LR image from the inputted
HR image, and then a mapping from the pseudo-clean LR
image to the inputted HR image is learned by the SR network in a paired manner. Because our SR network is independent of the correction network, well-studied existing
network architectures and pixel-wise loss functions can be
integrated with the proposed framework. Experiments on
diverse datasets show that the proposed method is superior
to existing solutions to the unpaired SR problem.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental ill-posed
problem in low-level vision that reconstructs a highresolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) observation. Recent progress in the on deep learning-based methods has significantly improved the performance of SR, increasing attention from the practical perspective. However,
in many studies, training image pairs are generated by a predetermined downscaling operation (e.g., bicubic) on the HR
images. This method of dataset preparation is not practical
in real-world scenarios because there is usually no HR image corresponding to the given LR one.
Some recent studies have proposed methods to overcome
the absence of HR–LR image pairs, such as blind SR meth-

Figure 1: Unpaired SR results on diverse datasets. From left to
right: ×4 SR result for a synthetically degraded LR image from
DIV2K realistic-wild set [42], ×4 SR result for a real-world LR
face image from Widerface [48], and ×2 SR result for a real-world
LR aerial image from DOTA [47]. Zoom in for better view.

ods [39, 12, 57] and generative adversarial network (GAN)based unpaired SR methods [51, 4, 56, 32]. Blind SR aims
to reconstruct HR images from LR ones degraded by arbitrary kernels. Although recent studies have achieved “blindness” for limited forms of degradation (e.g., blur), real LR
images are not always represented with such degradation;
thus, they perform poorly on the images degraded by not
expected processes. By contrast, GAN-based unpaired SR
methods can directly learn a mapping from LR to HR images without assuming any degradation processes.
GANs learn to generate images with the same distribution as the target domain through a minimax game between a generator and discriminator [11, 37]. GAN-based
unpaired SR methods can be roughly classified according
to whether they start from an LR image (direct approach;
Fig. 2a) or an HR image (indirect approach; Fig. 2b).
Direct approach. In this approach, a generator upscales
source LR images to fool an HR discriminator [51]. The
main drawback of this approach is that the pixel-wise loss
functions cannot be used to train the generator, i.e., SR network. In paired SR methods, the pixel-wise loss between
reconstructed images and HR target images plays a crucial role not only in distortion-oriented methods but also in
perception-oriented methods [28, 2].

291

