Sequential 3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation from Point Clouds
Kangkan Wang∗1,2 , Jin Xie1,2 , Guofeng Zhang3,4 , Lei Liu1 , Jian Yang1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
3
State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, China
4
ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision
Abstract

This work addresses the problem of 3D human pose and
shape estimation from a sequence of point clouds. Existing sequential 3D human shape estimation methods mainly focus on the template model fitting from a sequence of
depth images or the parametric model regression from a sequence of RGB images. In this paper, we propose a novel sequential 3D human pose and shape estimation framework from a sequence of point clouds. Specifically, the proposed framework can regress 3D coordinates of mesh vertices at different resolutions from the latent features of point
clouds. Based on the estimated 3D coordinates and features at the low resolution, we develop a spatial-temporal
mesh attention convolution (MAC) to predict the 3D coordinates of mesh vertices at the high resolution. By assigning
specific attentional weights to different neighboring points
in the spatial and temporal domains, our spatial-temporal
MAC can capture structured spatial and temporal features
of point clouds. We further generalize our framework to the
real data of human bodies with a weakly supervised finetuning method. The experimental results on SURREAL, Human3.6M, DFAUST and the real detailed data demonstrate
that the proposed approach can accurately recover the 3D
body model sequence from a sequence of point clouds.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D human shapes has numerous real-world
applications in robotics, augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR). Particularly, with the recent advancement of depth sensors such as Microsoft Kinect, 3D human
shape estimation from depth images has gained popularity
in the 3D computer vision community. 3D human shape
estimation from depth images aims to recover 3D meshes of human bodies [26, 8, 44, 29]. However, accurately estimating 3D human body shapes from depth images
∗ Corresponding author: wangkangkan@njust.edu.cn

is highly challenging since there are arbitrary deformations
and self-occlusions with human bodies. In addition, viewpoint changes of depth cameras and severe random noises
on depth images make the problem more difficult.
Most of 3D body shape estimation methods from depth
images [16, 12, 11, 5, 41, 42] mainly focus on utilizing temporal information to build point correspondences between
consecutive frames and recover the 3D model of each frame
with the correspondences. In the case of large discrepancy
between the 3D template model and an input depth image, it
is difficult to establish correct correspondences using the nearest neighboring search method. Thus, these methods are
not effective to recover the 3D body model from a single
depth image. In addition, since these methods sequentially
recover 3D human body models from depth images, the correspondence errors are accumulated over the sequences. In
[38], the local descriptors of 3D human shapes are learned
to construct the dense correspondences and the 3D models are then recovered by fitting the template model to input
depths. Nonetheless, these works mainly focus on recovering 3D human body models from a sequence of depth images. Few efforts are made on the 3D body model recovery
from a sequence of point clouds.
Point clouds can provide more geometry information
than depth images. It is desirable to recover the 3D human body models from a sequence of point clouds so that
3D geometric structures of point clouds can be exploited.
We aim to directly infer sequential 3D body models by extracting local features of a sequence of point clouds. Thus,
we do not need to construct point correspondences between
consecutive frames and avoid the error accumulation during
the process of sequential 3D body model recovery.
Instead of estimating the SMPL [25] model parameters
of human bodies, in this paper, we propose a sequential 3D
human shape estimation method from point clouds by predicting the vertex coordinates of multi-resolution 3D body
meshes. First, we employ PointNet++ [31] to extract the latent features of point clouds of sequential frames separately.

7275

