Speech2Action: Cross-modal Supervision for Action Recognition
Arsha Nagrani1,2 Chen Sun2 David Ross2
Rahul Sukthankar2 Cordelia Schmid2 Andrew Zisserman1,3
1

VGG, Oxford

2

Google Research

3

DeepMind

https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/speech2action/
She knows he's right. Jane's
cell RINGS. She lets it ring
again, then answers it.
JANE
(into phone)
Hello, it’s me.

Speech2Action
classiﬁer

action: [answers] phone
dialogue: Hello, it’s me

Caption: Hello, it’s me

Weak label: [answer] phone

action: [answers] phone
dialogue: Thanks for calling so
soon
action: [answers] phone
dialogue Hello Dad, are you
still there?

Movie screenplays

Unlabelled videos

Figure 1. Weakly Supervised Learning of Actions from Speech Alone: The co-occurrence of speech and scene descriptions in movie
screenplays (text) is used to learn a Speech2Action model that predicts actions from transcribed speech alone. Weak labels for visual
actions can then be obtained by applying this model to the speech in a large unlabelled set of movies.

Abstract
Is it possible to guess human action from dialogue
alone? In this work we investigate the link between spoken
words and actions in movies. We note that movie screenplays describe actions, as well as contain the speech of
characters and hence can be used to learn this correlation with no additional supervision. We train a BERTbased Speech2Action classifier on over a thousand
movie screenplays, to predict action labels from transcribed
speech segments.
We then apply this model to the speech segments of a
large unlabelled movie corpus (188M speech segments
from 288K movies). Using the predictions of this model,
we obtain weak action labels for over 800K video clips. By
training on these video clips, we demonstrate superior action recognition performance on standard action recognition benchmarks, without using a single manually labelled
action example.

1. Introduction
Often, you can get a sense of human activity in a movie
by listening to the dialogue alone. For example, the sentence ‘Look at that spot over there’, is an indication that
somebody is pointing at something. Similarly, the words
‘Hello, thanks for calling’, is a good indication that some-

body is speaking on the phone. Could this be a valuable
source of information for learning good action recognition
models?
Obtaining large scale human labelled video datasets to
train models for visual action recognition is a notoriously
challenging task. While large datasets, such as Kinetics [19]
or Moments in Time [29] consisting of individual short
clips (e.g. 10s) are now available, these datasets come at
formidable human cost and effort. Furthermore, many such
datasets suffer from heavily skewed distributions with long
tails – i.e. it is difficult to obtain manual labels for rare or
infrequent actions [14].
Recently, a number of works have creatively identified
certain domains of videos, such as narrated instructional
videos [27, 38, 51] and lifestyle vlogs [11, 17] that are available in huge numbers (e.g. on YouTube) and often contain
narration with the explicit intention of explaining the visual
content on screen. In these video domains, there is a direct
link between the action being performed, and the speech
accompanying the video – though this link, and the visual
supervision it provides, can be quite weak and ‘noisy’ as the
speech may refer to previous or forthcoming visual events,
or be about something else entirely [27].
In this paper we explore a complementary link between
speech and actions in the more general domain of movies
and TV shows (not restricted to instructional videos and
vlogs). We ask: is it possible given only a speech sentence
to predict whether an action is happening, and, if so, what
110317

