Something-Else: Compositional Action Recognition with
Spatial-Temporal Interaction Networks
Joanna Materzynska
University of Oxford, TwentyBN

Tete Xiao
UC Berkeley

Roei Herzig
Tel Aviv University

Huijuan Xu∗
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell∗
UC Berkeley

Xiaolong Wang∗
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Human action is naturally compositional: humans can
easily recognize and perform actions with objects that are
different from those used in training demonstrations. In
this paper, we study the compositionality of action by looking into the dynamics of subject-object interactions. We
propose a novel model which can explicitly reason about
the geometric relations between constituent objects and an
agent performing an action. To train our model, we collect
dense object box annotations on the Something-Something
dataset. We propose a novel compositional action recognition task where the training combinations of verbs and
nouns do not overlap with the test set. The novel aspects of our model are applicable to activities with prominent object interaction dynamics and to objects which can
be tracked using state-of-the-art approaches; for activities
without clearly defined spatial object-agent interactions,
we rely on baseline scene-level spatio-temporal representations. We show the effectiveness of our approach not only
on the proposed compositional action recognition task, but
also in a few-shot compositional setting which requires the
model to generalize across both object appearance and action category.1

STIN: Taking smth out of smth

I3D: Taking smth out of smth

(a) Seen verb and object combination

STIN: Taking smth out of smth I3D: Poking a hole into sthm soft

(b) Unseen verb and object combination
Figure 1. Two example videos of an action class “taking something out of something”: the activity defines the relative change in
object and agent (hand) positions over time. Most current methods
(I3D-based) over-rely on object appearance. While it works well
on seen verb and object combination in (a), it cannot generalize
to unseen combinations in (b). Our Spatial-Temporal Interaction
Networks (STIN) is designed for generalizing action recognition
regardless of the object appearance in the training set. (Correct
predictions are in green, incorrect in red.)

1. Introduction
Let’s look at the simple action of “taking something out
of something” in Figure 1. Even though these two videos
show human hands interacting with different objects, we
recognize that they are the same action based on changes
in the relative positions of the objects and hands involved
in the activity. Further, we can easily recognize the action
even when it is presented with previously unseen objects
∗ Equal advising
1 Project page: https://joaanna.github.io/something else/.

and tools. We ask, do current machine learning algorithms
have the capability to generalize across different combinations of verbs and nouns?
We investigate actions represented by the changes in geometric arrangements between subjects (agents) and objects. We propose a compositional action recognition setting in which we decompose each action into a combination
of a verb, a subject, and one or more objects. Instead of
the traditional setting where training and testing splits include the same combinations of verbs and nouns, we train

1049

