Harmonizing Transferability and Discriminability for
Adapting Object Detectors
Chaoqi Chen1 , Zebiao Zheng1 , Xinghao Ding1 , Yue Huang1∗, Qi Dou2
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
cqchen94@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zbzheng@stu.xmu.edu.cn
dxh@xmu.edu.cn, huangyue05@gmail.com, qdou@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent advances in adaptive object detection have
achieved compelling results in virtue of adversarial feature
adaptation to mitigate the distributional shifts along the detection pipeline. Whilst adversarial adaptation significantly enhances the transferability of feature representations,
the feature discriminability of object detectors remains less
investigated. Moreover, transferability and discriminability may come at a contradiction in adversarial adaptation
given the complex combinations of objects and the differentiated scene layouts between domains. In this paper, we
propose a Hierarchical Transferability Calibration Network
(HTCN) that hierarchically (local-region/image/instance)
calibrates the transferability of feature representations for
harmonizing transferability and discriminability. The proposed model consists of three components: (1) Importance Weighted Adversarial Training with input Interpolation (IWAT-I), which strengthens the global discriminability
by re-weighting the interpolated image-level features; (2)
Context-aware Instance-Level Alignment (CILA) module,
which enhances the local discriminability by capturing the
underlying complementary effect between the instance-level
feature and the global context information for the instancelevel feature alignment; (3) local feature masks that calibrate the local transferability to provide semantic guidance
for the following discriminative pattern alignment. Experimental results show that HTCN significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection has shown great success in the deep
learning era, relying on representative features learned from
∗ Corresponding author

large amount of labeled training data. Nevertheless, the object detectors trained on the source domain do not generalize well to a new target domain, due to the presence of
domain shift [50]. This hinders the deployment of models in real-world situations where data distributions typically
vary from one domain to another. Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) [36] serves as a promising solution to
solve this problem by transferring knowledge from a labeled
source domain to a fully unlabeled target domain.
A general practice in UDA is to bridge the domain gap
by explicitly learning invariant representations between domains and achieving small error on the source domain,
which have achieved compelling performance on image
classification [15, 55, 13, 49, 54, 45, 23, 5] and semantic
segmentation [52, 19, 64, 63, 28, 29]. These UDA methods can fall into two main categories. The first category
is statistics matching, which aims to match features across
domains with statistical distribution divergence [15, 12, 33,
35, 60, 40]. The second category is adversarial learning,
which aims to learn domain-invariant representations via
domain adversarial training [13, 54, 47, 34, 58, 5] or GANbased pixel-level adaptation [3, 31, 43, 20, 19].
Regarding UDA for cross-domain object detection, several works [7, 44, 62, 4, 26, 18] have recently attempted
to incorporate adversarial learning within de facto detection
frameworks, e.g., Faster R-CNN [42]. With the local nature
of detection tasks, current methods typically minimize the
domain disparity at multiple levels via adversarial feature
adaptation, such as image and instance levels alignment [7],
strong-local and weak-global alignment [44], local-region
alignment based on region proposal [62], multi-level feature alignment with prediction-guided instance-level constraint [18]. They hold a common belief that harnessing
adversarial adaptation helps yield appealing transferability.
However, transferability comes at a cost, i.e., adversarial adaptation would potentially impair the discriminability

8869

