On Translation Invariance in CNNs:
Convolutional Layers can Exploit Absolute Spatial Location
Osman Semih Kayhan
Computer Vision Lab
Delft University of Technology

Jan C. van Gemert
Computer Vision Lab
Delft University of Technology

Class 1: Top-left

Abstract
In this paper we challenge the common assumption that
convolutional layers in modern CNNs are translation invariant. We show that CNNs can and will exploit the absolute spatial location by learning filters that respond exclusively to particular absolute locations by exploiting image
boundary effects. Because modern CNNs filters have a huge
receptive field, these boundary effects operate even far from
the image boundary, allowing the network to exploit absolute spatial location all over the image. We give a simple solution to remove spatial location encoding which improves
translation invariance and thus gives a stronger visual inductive bias which particularly benefits small data sets. We
broadly demonstrate these benefits on several architectures
and various applications such as image classification, patch
matching, and two video classification datasets.

1. Introduction
The marriage of the convolution operator and deep learning yields the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The
CNN arguably spawned the deep learning revolution with
AlexNet [54] and convolutional layers are now the standard
backbone for various Computer Vision domains such as image classification [35, 89, 95], object detection [65, 77, 79],
semantic segmentation [34, 52, 81], matching [66, 32, 107],
video [12, 33, 88], generative models [25, 29, 51], etc.
The CNN is now even used in other modalities such as
speech [1, 58, 73], audio [15, 40, 82], text [14, 20, 56],
graphs [11, 21, 84], etc. It is difficult to overstate the importance of the convolution operator in deep learning. In this
paper we analyze convolutional layers in CNNs which is
broadly relevant for the entire deep learning research field.
For images, adding convolution to neural networks adds
a visual inductive prior that objects can appear anywhere.
Convolution can informally be described as the dot product between the input image and a small patch of learnable
weights –the kernel– sliding over all image locations. This

Class 2: Bottom-right

Figure 1. We place an identical image patch on the top-left or on
the bottom-right of an image. We evaluate a standard fully convolutional network [35, 43, 61, 93, 95, 105] if it can classify the
patch location (top-left vs bottom-right). We use 1 layer, a single
5x5 kernel, zero-padding, same-convolution, ReLu, global max
pooling, SGD, and a soft-max loss. Surprisingly, this network can
classify perfectly, demonstrating that current convolutional layers
can exploit the absolute spatial location in an image.

shares the weights over locations yielding a huge reduction
in learnable parameters. Convolution is equivariant to translation: If an object is shifted in an image then the convolution outcome is shifted equally. When convolution is followed by an operator that does not depend on the position,
such as taking the global average or global maximum, that
gives translation invariance and absolute location is lost.
Translation invariance powers the visual inductive prior of
the convolution operator, and we will demonstrate that improving translation invariance improves the prior, leading to
increased data efficiency in the small data setting.
In this paper we challenge standard assumptions about
translation invariance and show that currently used convolutional layers can exploit the absolute location of an object
in an image. Consider Fig. 1, where the exactly identical
image patch is positioned on the top left (class 1) or on
the bottom right (class 2) in an image. If a fully convolutional CNN is invariant, it should not be able to classify and
give random performance on this task. Yet, surprisingly, a
simple standard 1-layer fully convolutional network with a
global max pooling operator can perfectly classify the location of the patch and thus exploit absolute spatial location.

14274

