Attention-Guided Hierarchical Structure Aggregation for Image Matting
Yu Qiao1, *, Yuhao Liu1, *,Xin Yang1,4,†,Dongsheng Zhou2 ,Mingliang Xu3 ,Qiang Zhang2 ,Xiaopeng Wei1,†
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Dalian University, 3 Zhengzhou University
4
Beijing Technology and Business University
{coachqiao2018,yuhaoLiu7456}@gmail.com,{xinyang,zhangq,xpwei}@dlut.edu.cn,donyson@126.com
iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing deep learning based matting algorithms primarily resort to high-level semantic features to improve the
overall structure of alpha mattes. However, we argue that
advanced semantics extracted from CNNs contribute unequally for alpha perception and we are supposed to reconcile advanced semantic information with low-level appearance cues to refine the foreground details. In this paper,
we propose an end-to-end Hierarchical Attention Matting
Network (HAttMatting), which can predict the better structure of alpha mattes from single RGB images without additional input. Specifically, we employ spatial and channelwise attention to integrate appearance cues and pyramidal
features in a novel fashion. This blended attention mechanism can perceive alpha mattes from refined boundaries
and adaptive semantics. We also introduce a hybrid loss
function fusing Structural SIMilarity (SSIM), Mean Square
Error (MSE) and Adversarial loss to guide the network to
further improve the overall foreground structure. Besides,
we construct a large-scale image matting dataset comprised
of 59, 600 training images and 1000 test images (total 646
distinct foreground alpha mattes), which can further improve the robustness of our hierarchical structure aggregation model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed HAttMatting can capture sophisticated foreground
structure and achieve state-of-the-art performance with single RGB images as input.

1. Introduction
Image matting refers to precisely estimate the foreground opacity from an input image. This problem as well
as its inverse process (known as image composition) have
been well studied by both academia and industry. Image
matting serves as a prerequisite technology for a broad set
* Joint first authors. † Joint corresponding authors, and they led this
project. Project page: https://wukaoliu.github.io/HAttMatting/.

Input Image

HAttMatting (Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1: The alpha mattes produced by our HAttMatting
on the Composition-1k test set [37].
of applications, including online image editing, mixed reality and film production. Formally, it is modeled by solving
the following image synthesis equation:
Iz = αz Fz + (1 − αz )Bz ,

αz ∈ [0, 1]

(1)

where z denotes the pixel position in the input image I. αz ,
Fz and Bz refer to the alpha estimation, foreground (FG)
and background (BG) at pixel z separately. The problem
is highly ill-posed, for each pixel in a given RGB image, 7
values need to be solved but only 3 values are known.
The digital matting is a pixel-wise FG regression essentially, and we hold that the structure of FG resides two
aspects: adaptive semantics and refined boundaries, corresponding to αz = 1 and αz ∈ (0, 1) in Eq. 1. Existing
matting methods usually solve Eq. 1 by introducing userprovided trimaps as assistant input. The trimap is composed
of black, gray and white, representing BG, transition region
and absolute FG respectively. The transition region indicates FG boundaries, combined with FG to jointly guide
matting algorithms. Given an RGB image and the corresponding trimap, traditional matting methods explore color
distribution to predict an alpha matte. However, the color
features are inapplicable for structure representation, possibly resulting in artifacts and loss of details when FG and
BG have indistinguishable colors.

13676

