VSGNet: Spatial Attention Network for Detecting Human Object Interactions
Using Graph Convolutions
Oytun Ulutan∗ †
A S M Iftekhar*
B. S. Manjunath
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA

Abstract
Comprehensive visual understanding requires detection
frameworks that can effectively learn and utilize object interactions while analyzing objects individually. This is the
main objective in Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection task. In particular, relative spatial reasoning and structural connections between objects are essential cues for analyzing interactions, which is addressed by the proposed
Visual-Spatial-Graph Network (VSGNet) architecture. VSGNet extracts visual features from the human-object pairs,
refines the features with spatial configurations of the pair,
and utilizes the structural connections between the pair via
graph convolutions. The performance of VSGNet is thoroughly evaluated using the Verbs in COCO (V-COCO) and
HICO-DET datasets. Experimental results indicate that
VSGNet outperforms state-of-the-art solutions by 8% or 4
mAP in V-COCO and 16% or 3 mAP in HICO-DET. Code
is available online.1

1. Introduction
The task of detecting human object interaction (HOI) in
images refers to detecting the interactions between a human
and object pair and localizing them. HOI detection can be
considered a part of the task of visual scene understanding
[2, 33, 31], visual question answering[3, 32, 20, 27], and activity recognition in videos [19, 30, 28]. Although there has
been significant improvements in recent years for detecting and recognizing objects [6, 23, 10], HOI detection still
poses various challenges. For example, interactions usually happen in a subtle way, same types of relations vary
significantly across different settings, multiple humans can
interact with the same object or vice-versa, and different relations might have visually subtle differences [8, 1].
Most of the existing methods in HOI detection task [15,
4, 7] follow a similar structure. Using an object detection
framework, human and object features are extracted. These
∗ Authors Contributed Equally
† Ulutan is currently with the Vision team of Zoox, Inc.
1 https://github.com/ASMIftekhar/VSGNet

Figure 1. Visual, Spatial and Graph branches of our proposed
VSGNet model. Visual branch analyzes humans/objects/context
individually, Spatial branch uses spatial configurations of the pairs
to refine visual features and the Graph branch utilizes the structural connections by Graph convolutions which uses interaction
proposal scores as edge intensities between human-object nodes.

features are paired exhaustively along with some other features (e.g. pose, relative geometric locations) [15, 4] and
then fed into a multi-branch deep neural network to detect
the relationship between humans and objects. Even though
this approach achieves good results for detecting HOIs, it
does not explicitly utilize the interaction information or the
spatial relations between pairs. HOIs such as person on
a skateboard or a person holding a bat have well defined
spatial relations and structural interactions which should be
leveraged in this detection task.
For utilizing spatial configurations, VSGNet uses a spatial attention branch that explicitly uses the spatial relations
of the pairs to refine the visual features. Instead of modeling
humans and objects individually, our attention module uses
the spatial configurations of the pairs to extract attention
weights which refine the visual features. Although a few
past works [1, 4] have used these types of spatial configurations as features for classification directly, these models
do not combine the visual information with spatial informa-

13617

