A Uniﬁed Object Motion and Afﬁnity Model for Online Multi-Object Tracking
Junbo Yin1 , Wenguan Wang2∗, Qinghao Meng1 , Ruigang Yang3,4,6 , Jianbing Shen5,1
1
2

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China

ETH Zurich, Switzerland
5

3

Baidu Research

4

National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China

Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAE
yinjunbo@bit.edu.cn

6

University of Kentucky, Kentucky, USA

wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com

https://github.com/yinjunbo/UMA-MOT

Abstract
Current popular online multi-object tracking (MOT) solutions apply single object trackers (SOTs) to capture object
motions, while often requiring an extra afﬁnity network to
associate objects, especially for the occluded ones. This
brings extra computational overhead due to repetitive feature extraction for SOT and afﬁnity computation. Meanwhile, the model size of the sophisticated afﬁnity network is
usually non-trivial. In this paper, we propose a novel MOT
framework that uniﬁes object motion and afﬁnity model into
a single network, named UMA, in order to learn a compact feature that is discriminative for both object motion
and afﬁnity measure. In particular, UMA integrates single
object tracking and metric learning into a uniﬁed triplet network by means of multi-task learning. Such design brings
advantages of improved computation efﬁciency, low memory requirement and simpliﬁed training procedure. In addition, we equip our model with a task-speciﬁc attention
module, which is used to boost task-aware feature learning. The proposed UMA can be easily trained end-to-end,
and is elegant – requiring only one training stage. Experimental results show that it achieves promising performance
on several MOT Challenge benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Online multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to accurately
locate trajectory of each target while maintaining their identities with information accumulated up to the current frame.
In the last decades, MOT has attracted increasing attentions,
as it beneﬁts a wide range of applications, such as video
surveillance analyses and autonomous driving [48, 56, 57].
Current MOT solutions typically involve an object motion model and an afﬁnity model. The former one leverages
temporal information for object instance localization and
tracklet generation, while the latter deals with distractors
∗ Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

(e.g., targets with similar appearance) or occlusions by measuring object similarity in data association. Speciﬁcally,
some online MOT algorithms are based on a tracking-bydetection paradigm [25, 39, 52, 1, 29], i.e., associating detections across frames by computing pairwise afﬁnity. Thus
they mainly focus on the design of the afﬁnity model. However, as temporal cues are not explored in the object detection phase, the quality of detections is often limited, further
decreasing the MOT performance. MOT scenarios, e.g., the
video sequences in MOT Challenge [32, 38], often yield
crowded people with rare poses or various sizes. In such
cases, even the leading detectors [43] may produce many
False Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) results, causing
adverse impact on the subsequent data association stage.
This calls for better leveraging motion cues in MOT.
Thus another trend is to apply single object trackers (SOTs)
in online MOT [11, 61]. They take advantage of SOTs to
address the value of temporal information and recover the
missing candidate detections. Such paradigm yields more
natural tracklets and usually leads to better tracking results
according to the FN metric. However, crowded distractors and their frequent interactions often lead to occlusion
situations, which are quite challenging for these solutions.
To tackle this issue, follow-up methods [44, 11, 68, 9, 10]
integrate SOT based motion model with afﬁnity estimation. In particular, they ﬁrst recognize the state of the targets according to the conﬁdence of SOTs, then update the
tracked targets and maintain the identities of the occluded
targets through afﬁnity measure for tracklet-detection pairs
in data association phase. Though inspired, they still suffer from several limitations. First, features used for SOTs
and afﬁnity measure are extracted from two separate models, which incurs expensive computational overhead. Second, since they do not make use of SOT features in afﬁnity
computation, they have to train an extra afﬁnity network
(e.g., ResNet50 in [68] and ResNet101 in [10]) to remedy
this. This further increases their memory demand, which
critically limits their applicability in source-constrained en-

6768

