Real-world Person Re-Identification via Degradation Invariance Learning
Yukun Huang1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1∗, Xueyang Fu1 , Richang Hong2 , Liang Li3
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Hefei University of Technology, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
kevinh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhazj, xyfu}@ustc.edu.cn, hongrc.hfut@gmail.com, liang.li@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) in real-world scenarios
usually suffers from various degradation factors, e.g., lowresolution, weak illumination, blurring and adverse weather. On the one hand, these degradations lead to severe discriminative information loss, which significantly obstructs identity representation learning; on the other hand, the
feature mismatch problem caused by low-level visual variations greatly reduces retrieval performance. An intuitive
solution to this problem is to utilize low-level image restoration methods to improve the image quality. However, existing restoration methods cannot directly serve to real-world
Re-ID due to various limitations, e.g., the requirements of
reference samples, domain gap between synthesis and reality, and incompatibility between low-level and high-level
methods. In this paper, to solve the above problem, we propose a degradation invariance learning framework for realworld person Re-ID. By introducing a self-supervised disentangled representation learning strategy, our method is
able to simultaneously extract identity-related robust features and remove real-world degradations without extra
supervision. We use low-resolution images as the main
demonstration, and experiments show that our approach is
able to achieve state-of-the-art performance on several ReID benchmarks. In addition, our framework can be easily
extended to other real-world degradation factors, such as
weak illumination, with only a few modifications.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is a pedestrian retrieval
task for non-overlapping camera networks. It is very challenging since the same identity captured by different cameras usually have significant variations in human pose, view,
illumination conditions, resolution and so on. To withstand
the interference of identity-independent variations, the ma∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Existing methods [28, 20, 18] only use simple synthetic
techniques, such as down-sampling for low resolution or gamma
correction for low illumination, to alleviate the image degradation
issue in Re-ID. This is far from the complex degradation in realworld scenarios, which leads to the domain gap.

jor target of person Re-ID is to extract robust identity representations. With the powerful representation learning capability, deep convolutional neural networks-based methods
have achieved remarkable performance on publicly available benchmarks. For example, the rank-1 accuracy on
Market-1501 [57] has reached 94.8% [58], which is very
close to the human-level performance.
However, there are still some practical issues that need
to be solved for real-world surveillance scenarios, and low
quality images caused by various degradation factors are
one of them. Several previous works [18, 38] have demonstrated that such degradations have a serious negative impact on the person Re-ID task. On the one hand, these
degradations lead to pool visual appearances and discriminative information loss, making representation learning
more difficult; on the other hand, it brings the feature mismatch problem and greatly reduces the retrieval performance.

14084

