Synthetic Learning: Learn From Distributed Asynchronized Discriminator GAN
Without Sharing Medical Image Data
Qi Chang1∗, Hui Qu1∗, Yikai Zhang1∗, Mert Sabuncu2 ,
Chao Chen3 , Tong Zhang4 and Dimitris Metaxas2
1
Rutgers University 2 Cornell University
3
Stony Brook University 4 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{qc58,hq43,yz422,dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu , msabuncu@cornell.edu,
chao.chen.cchen@gmail.com, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a data privacy-preserving and
communication efficient distributed GAN learning framework named Distributed Asynchronized Discriminator GAN
(AsynDGAN). Our proposed framework aims to train a central generator learns from distributed discriminator, and
use the generated synthetic image solely to train the segmentation model. We validate the proposed framework on
the application of health entities learning problem which is
known to be privacy sensitive. Our experiments show that
our approach: 1) could learn the real image’s distribution
from multiple datasets without sharing the patient’s raw
data. 2) is more efficient and requires lower bandwidth than
other distributed deep learning methods. 3) achieves higher
performance compared to the model trained by one real
dataset, and almost the same performance compared to the
model trained by all real datasets. 4) has provable guarantees that the generator could learn the distributed distribution in an all important fashion thus is unbiased.We release
our AsynDGAN source code at: https://github.com/tommyqichang/AsynDGAN

ropean Union and many other countries do not allow patient
data leave their country [25, 47]. As a result, many hospitals
and research institutions are wary of cloud platforms and
prefer to use their own server. Even if in the same country
the medical data collaborate still face a big hurdle.

1.2. The restriction of the medical data accessibility
It’s widely known that sufficient data volume is necessary for training a successful machine learning algorithm [10] for medical image analysis. However, due to
the policies and challenges mentioned above, it is hard to
acquire enough medical scans for training a machine learning model. In 2016, there were approximately 38 million
MRI scans and 79 million CT scans performed in the United
States [41]. Even so, the available datasets for machine
learning research are still very limited: the largest set of
medical image data available to public is 32 thousand [51]
CT images, only 0.02% of the annual acquired images in the
United States. In contrast, the ImageNet [9] project, which
is the large visual dataset designed for use in visual object
recognition research, has more than 14 million images that
have been annotated in more than 20,000 categories.

1. Introduction

1.3. Learning from synthetic images: a solution

1.1. The privacy policies and challenges in medical
intelligence

In this work, we design a framework using centralized
generator and distributed discriminators to learn the generative distribution of target dataset. In the health entities learning context, our proposed framework can aggregate datasets
from multiple hospitals to obtain a faithful estimation of the
overall distribution. The specific task (e.g., segmentation
and classification) can be accomplished locally by acquiring data from the generator. Learning from synthetic images has several advantages:
Privacy mechanism: The central generator has limited
information for the raw images in each hospital. When the
generator communicates with discriminators in hospitals,

The privacy issue, while important in every domain, is
enforced vigorously for medical data. Multiple level of regulations such as HIPAA [2, 11, 36, 13] and the approval
process for the Institutional Review Board (IRB) [6] protect the patients’ sensitive data from malicious copy or even
tamper evidence of medical conditions [38]. Like a doubleedge sword, these regulations objectively cause insufficient
collaborations in health records. For instance, America, Eu∗ equal contribution

113856

