A Real-Time Cross-modality Correlation Filtering Method for Referring
Expression Comprehension
Yue Liao1,3
1

Si Liu1∗ Guanbin Li2 Fei Wang3 Yanjie Chen3 Chen Qian3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Sun Yat-sen University 3 SenseTime Research

Bo Li1

liaoyue.ai@gmail.com; {liusi, boli}@buaa.edu.cn; liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn;
{wangfei, chenyanjie, qianchen}@sensetime.com

82

Abstract

81

1. Introduction
Referring expression comprehension [34, 32, 27] has attracted much attention in recent years. A referring expression is a natural language description of a particular object
∗ Corresponding author

MAttNet

MAttNet (3.2fps)

DGA

Precision@0.5 (%)

Referring expression comprehension aims to localize the
object instance described by a natural language expression.
Current referring expression methods have achieved good
performance. However, none of them is able to achieve realtime inference without accuracy drop. The reason for the
relatively slow inference speed is that these methods artificially split the referring expression comprehension into two
sequential stages including proposal generation and proposal ranking. It does not exactly conform to the habit of
human cognition. To this end, we propose a novel Realtime Cross-modality Correlation Filtering method (RCCF).
RCCF reformulates the referring expression comprehension
as a correlation filtering process. The expression is first
mapped from the language domain to the visual domain and
then treated as a template (kernel) to perform correlation
filtering on the image feature map. The peak value in the
correlation heatmap indicates the center points of the target box. In addition, RCCF also regresses a 2-D object size
and 2-D offset. The center point coordinates, object size
and center point offset together to form the target bounding
box. Our method runs at 40 FPS while achieving leading
performance in RefClef, RefCOCO, RefCOCO+ and RefCOCOg benchmarks. In the challenging RefClef dataset,
our methods almost double the state-of-the-art performance
(34.70% increased to 63.79%). We hope this work can
arouse more attention and studies to the new cross-modality
correlation filtering framework as well as the one-stage
framework for referring expression comprehension.

RCCF (ours)

RCCF (40fps)

80
79

DGA (3fps)

78
77

+

VC

×

Speaker
Listener

76
75

Real-time

74
73
72
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

Seconds per image

Figure 1. Precision (IOU>0.5) versus inference time on the RefCOCO testA set at single Titan Xp GPU. Our method RCCF
achieves 40 fps (0.25ms per image), which exceeds the real-time
speed of 25 fps and is significantly faster than existing methods
by a significant margin (12 times). The precision of RCCF also
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

in an image. Given such a referring expression, the target of
referring expression comprehension is to localize the object
instance in the image. It is one of the key tasks in the field
of machine intelligence to realize human-computer interaction, robotics and early education.
Conventional methods for referring expression comprehension mostly formulate this problem as an object retrieval
task, where an object that best matches the referring expression is retrieved from a set of object proposals. These methods [32, 29, 28, 27] are mainly composed of two stages. In
the first stage, given an input image, a pre-trained object detection network is applied to generate a set of object proposals. In the second stage, given an input expression, the best
matching region from the detected object proposals is selected. Although existing two-stage methods have achieved
great advance, there are still some problems. 1) The performance of the two-stage methods is very limited to the qual-

10880

