Learning Temporal Co-Attention Models for Unsupervised Video Action
Localization
Guoqiang Gong, Xinghan Wang, Yadong Mu ∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University

Qi Tian
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei

{gonggq,xinghan wang,myd}@pku.edu.cn

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Temporal action localization (TAL) in untrimmed videos
recently receives tremendous research enthusiasm. To our
best knowledge, this is the first attempt in the literature
to explore this task under an unsupervised setting, hereafter referred to as action co-localization (ACL), where
only the total count of unique actions that appear in the
video set is known. To solve ACL, we propose a two-step
“clustering + localization” iterative procedure. The clustering step provides noisy pseudo-labels for the localization step, and the localization step provides temporal coattention models that in turn improve the clustering performance. Using such two-step procedure, weakly-supervised
TAL can be regarded as a direct extension of our ACL
model. Technically, our contributions are two-folds: 1)
temporal co-attention models, either class-specific or classagnostic, learned from video-level labels or pseudo-labels
in an iterative reinforced fashion; 2) new losses specially
designed for ACL, including action-background separation
loss and cluster-based triplet loss. Comprehensive evaluations are conducted on 20-action THUMOS14 and 100action ActivityNet-1.2. On both benchmarks, the proposed
model for ACL exhibits strong performances, even surprisingly comparable with state-of-the-art weakly-supervised
methods. For example, previous best weakly-supervised
model achieves 26.8% under mAP@0.5 on THUMOS14,
our new records are 30.1% (weakly-supervised) and 25.0%
(unsupervised).

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (or action detection) [54,
39, 57, 48, 23, 30, 56] is a fundamental challenge in video
understanding. The goal of temporal action localization is
to precisely find the starting and ending time for each action instance from a long, untrimmed video. It has a variety
of potential applications in real-world scenarios, including
∗ Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Illustration of two co-attention models. Class-agnostic
attention helps to find the important frames of a video. Classspecific attention models the temporal distribution of actions,
which can be used for action localization. Note that actions are
anonymous (obtained via co-attention piloted clustering) in ACL.

video summarization, video highlight detection, surgical
skill assessment and others. To learn an effective action localization model, it is crucial to collect a sufficient number
of annotated videos. In comparison with the benchmarks
mainly designed for image recognition (e.g., ImageNet[35])
or video classification (e.g., Kinetics[3]), the largest video
benchmarks for action localization, known as ActivityNet
v1.3[10], has only about 20,000 annotated videos. This
partly attributes to the fact that labeling an action instance
is more tedious and prone to errors, since accurately delimiting the temporal boundary of an action instance is both
time-consuming and subjective to different annotators. The
scarcity of instance-level annotation has inspired recent endeavors on weakly-supervised temporal action localization
methods. Specifically, for every training video, only a rough
video-level action category yet not frame-wise labels are
available.
This main scope of this work is an unexplored problem setting of unsupervised temporal action localization. In

9819

