Collaborative Motion Prediction via Neural Motion Message Passing
Yue Hu1 , Siheng Chen2 , Ya Zhang1 , and Xiao Gu1
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
{18671129361, ya zhang, gugu97} @sjtu.edu.cn, schen@merl.com

Abstract
Motion prediction is essential and challenging for autonomous vehicles and social robots. One challenge of motion prediction is to model the interaction among traffic actors, which could cooperate with each other to avoid collisions or form groups. To address this challenge, we propose
neural motion message passing (NMMP) to explicitly model
the interaction and learn representations for directed interactions between actors. Based on the proposed NMMP, we
design the motion prediction systems for two settings: the
pedestrian setting and the joint pedestrian and vehicle setting. Both systems share a common pattern: we use an individual branch to model the behavior of a single actor and an
interactive branch to model the interaction between actors,
while with different wrappers to handle the varied input formats and characteristics. The experimental results show
that both systems outperform the previous state-of-the-art
methods on several existing benchmarks. Besides, we provide interpretability for interaction learning. Code is available at https://github.com/PhyllisH/NMMP.

1. Introduction
Forecasting the future motion for the interacting actors
in the scene has been a crucial problem in many real-world
scenarios. For example, self-driving vehicles and interactive robotics need to understand human and other traffic
actors’ future behaviors to avoid collisions and for better
planning [5, 6, 8, 9]. The intelligent tracking modules in
surveillance systems also need to understand the pedestrians’ motion to optimize resource allocation [31]. Scientifically, motion prediction is also useful for understanding
human behaviors [22] and motion dynamics [27].
One of the fundamental challenges of this task is to
model the scene constraints, especially the hidden interactions between actors. For example, in the driving scenarios,
traffic actors, such as vehicles and pedestrians, are influ-

Figure 1. Neural motion massage passing is proposed to capture
directed interactions among traffic actors, which can serve as a
plugin module to guide motion prediction.

enced by each other, as well as the traffic conditions and
rules; see Figure 1. Previous works have tried to model
such interactions through three mechanisms: spatial-centric
mechanism, social mechanism, and graph-based mechanism. The spatial-centric mechanism uses the spatial relationship to implicitly model the interaction between actors [7, 40, 3, 8, 6, 5]. The social mechanism explicitly
aggregates the neighboring actors’ information involved in
the scene through social pooling [1, 11], or attention operation [34, 28]; however, both mechanisms model the interactions according to the static spatial locations of the actors
and ignore the temporal horizon. The graph-based mechanism constructs a graph to explicitly model the pairwise
interactions between actors according to their observed trajectories [16, 34, 14]; however, the previous graph-based
methods only consider features for actors, but do not explicitly learn features for in-between interactions.
To comprehensively represent the interactions between
actors, we extend the current graph-based mechanism and
propose neural motion message passing (NMMP). The
NMMP infers an interaction graph from actors’ trajectories, whose nodes are the actors and edges are the interactions. This module updates the neural message passing
framework [15] to the context of motion prediction. It takes
the observed trajectories of traffic actors as input, and pro-

6319

