Connect-and-Slice: an hybrid approach for reconstructing 3D objects
Hao Fang
Florent Lafarge
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria
Firstname.Lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Converting point clouds generated by Laser scanning,
multiview stereo imagery or depth cameras into compact
polygon meshes is a challenging problem in vision. Existing methods are either robust to imperfect data or scalable,
but rarely both. In this paper, we address this issue with an
hybrid method that successively connects and slices planes
detected from 3D data. The core idea consists in constructing an efficient and compact partitioning data structure.
The later is i) spatially-adaptive in the sense that a plane
slices a restricted number of relevant planes only, and ii)
composed of components with different structural meaning
resulting from a preliminary analysis of the plane connectivity. Our experiments on a variety of objects and sensors
show the versatility of our approach as well as its competitiveness with respect to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from 3D data is still one of
the biggest challenges in computer vision. Most of existing methods, as the popular Poisson algorithm [15], are
designed to approximate free-form shapes by dense triangular meshes. When the observed scenes contained geometric regularities, typically man-made objects and urban
environments, these methods do not provide optimal results in terms of storage, rendering or editing capacity [2].
One prefers representing such scenes by more compact and
structure-aware Computer-Aided Design style models, i.e.
with concise polygon meshes in which each facet corresponds to a large polygon [4].
Reconstructing concise polygon meshes is usually operated in two steps. First, planar primitives are detected from
input 3D data. A planar primitive is defined as the association of a plane and a subset of input data called inliers
from which the plane has been fitted to. Primitives are disconnected from each others and constitute an intermediate
representation between input 3D data and the output mesh.
The second step then consists in assembling primitives into
a surface mesh. This step constitutes the difficult part of

the problem. One strategy is to connect the primitives using proximity and structural considerations [1, 8, 17, 29].
Despite being fast and scalable, this solution is not robust
to defect-laden data, in particular when primitives are overor under-detected or when erroneous connections between
primitives exist. A more robust strategy consists in slicing
a 3D domain by extending the primitives. This leads to the
creation of a partition of polyhedral cells or polygonal facets
[5, 7, 24, 34]. The surface is then extracted by labeling the
cells as inside or outside the surface, or equivalently, by selecting facets to be part of the surface. Because each primitive exhaustively slices all the others, this solution is more
robust to defect-laden data than the first strategy. However,
its main shortcoming is the computational burden for slicing
the primitives into a partition of atomic surface and volume
elements, with typically unreasonable timing and memory
issues when more than one hundred primitives are handled.
None of these two strategies are both robust and scalable.
We address this problem with an hybrid method that successively connects and slices primitives in a robust and scalable manner. The method is built on three important technical ingredients.
First, our algorithm has a preliminary step that analyzes the connectivity of primitives in order to search for
structurally-valid surface components. This allows us to
quickly process a part of the input primitives and solve obvious primitive assembling situations.
Second, we construct a more flexible and lighter partition
data structure than the slicing methods. Our data structure
is spatially-adaptive in the sense that a primitive slices a restricted number of relevant primitives based on spatial proximity considerations. Moreover, its atomic elements have
different structural meanings that will guide the extraction
of the output surface.
Third, we propose a surface extraction mechanism that
operates from such an irregular data-structure in which cells
are not necessarily convex and free of intersection with
other cells. In particular, we do not measure data fidelity
to input 3D data directly, but instead to primitives: it allows
output models not to suffer from artifacts frequently found
with existing methods.
113490

