Affinity Graph Supervision for Visual Recognition
Chu Wang 1

Babak Samari 1 Vladimir G. Kim 2 Siddhartha Chaudhuri 2,3
1
McGill University 2 Adobe Research 3 IIT Bombay
{chuwang,babak,siddiqi}@cim.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Affinity graphs are widely used in deep architectures, including graph convolutional neural networks and attention
networks. Thus far, the literature has focused on abstracting features from such graphs, while the learning of the
affinities themselves has been overlooked. Here we propose a principled method to directly supervise the learning
of weights in affinity graphs, to exploit meaningful connections between entities in the data source. Applied to a visual
attention network [9], our affinity supervision improves relationship recovery between objects, even without the use
of manually annotated relationship labels. We further show
that affinity learning between objects boosts scene categorization performance and that the supervision of affinity can
also be applied to graphs built from mini-batches, for neural network training. In an image classification task we
demonstrate consistent improvement over the baseline, with
diverse network architectures and datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in graph representation learning have
led to principled approaches for abstracting features from
such structures. In the context of deep learning, graph
convolutional neural networks (GCNs) have shown great
promise [3, 15]. The affinity graphs in GCNs, whose nodes
represent entities in the data source and whose edges represent pairwise affinity, are usually constructed from a predefined metric space and are therefore fixed during the training
process [3, 15, 22, 29]. In related work, self-attention mechanisms [26] and graph attention networks [27] have been
proposed. Here, using pairwise weights between entities, a
fully connected affinity graph is used for feature aggregation. In contrast to the graphs in GCNs, the parametrized
edge weights change during the training of the graph attention module. More recent approaches also consider elaborate edge weight parametrization strategies [13, 18] to
further improve the flexibility of graph structure learning.
∗ Corresponding author.

Kaleem Siddiqi 1∗

{vokim,sidch}@adobe.com

However, the learning of edge (attention) weights in the
graph is entirely supervised by a main objective loss, to improve performance in a downstream task.
Whereas representation learning from affinity graphs has
demonstrated great success in various applications [9, 34,
30, 11, 10], little work has been done thus far to directly
supervise the learning of affinity weights. In the present
article, we propose to explicitly supervise the learning of
the affinity graph weights by introducing a notion of target
affinity mass, which is a collection of affinity weights that
need to be emphasized. We further propose to optimize a
novel loss function to increase the target affinity mass during the training of a neural network, to benefit various visual
recognition tasks. Our affinity supervision method is generalizable and supports the flexible design of supervision
targets according to the needs of particular tasks. This feature is absent in related work, where the learning of affinity
graphs is either constrained by distance metrics [13] or is
dependent on the main objective loss [26, 27, 18].
With the proposed supervision of the learning of affinity
weights, a visual attention network [9] is able to compete
in a relationship proposal task with the present state-of-theart [33] without any explicit use of relationship labels. Enabling relationship labels provides an additional 25% boost
over [33] in relative terms. This improved relationship recovery is particularly beneficial when applied to a scene
categorization task, since scenes are comprised of collections of distinct objects. We also explore the general idea
of affinity supervised mini-batch training of a neural network, which is common to a vast number of computer vision and other applications. For image classification tasks
we demonstrate a consistent improvement over the baseline,
across multiple architectures and datasets. Our proposed
affinity supervision method leads to no computational overhead, since we do not introduce additional parameters.

2. Related Work
2.1. Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
In GCNs layer-wise convolutional operations are applied
to abstract features in graph structures. Current approaches

8247

