Distribution-Aware Coordinate Representation for Human Pose Estimation
Feng Zhang1

Xiatian Zhu2

Hanbin Dai3

Mao Ye1

Ce Zhu4

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
3
School of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhangfengwcy,daihanbin.ac,cvlab.uestc}@gmail.com,xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk,eczhu@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a fundamental computer vision problem that aims to detect the spatial location (i.e. coordinate) of human body joints in unconstrained images [1].
It is a non-trivial task as the appearance of body joints vary
dramatically due to diverse styles of clothes, arbitrary occlusion, and unconstrained background contexts, whilst it
is needed to identify the fine-grained joint coordinates. As
strong image processing models, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) excel at this task [15]. Existing works typically focus on designing the CNN architecture tailored particularly for human pose inference [20, 25].
Analogous to the common one-hot vectors as the object

…

…

Ground-Truth
Heatmaps
Resolution
Reduction
Input Image

Source Image
(c) Model Training
…

(b) Human Pose Estimation Model

Input
Image

(d) Model Testing
Predicted
Heatmaps

Resolution
Recovery

…

CNN

Ground-Truth
Heatmaps

…

While being the de facto standard coordinate representation for human pose estimation, heatmap has not been investigated in-depth. This work fills this gap. For the first time,
we find that the process of decoding the predicted heatmaps
into the final joint coordinates in the original image space
is surprisingly significant for the performance. We further
probe the design limitations of the standard coordinate decoding method, and propose a more principled distributionaware decoding method. Also, we improve the standard coordinate encoding process (i.e. transforming ground-truth
coordinates to heatmaps) by generating unbiased/accurate
heatmaps. Taking the two together, we formulate a novel
Distribution-Aware coordinate Representation of Keypoints
(DARK) method. Serving as a model-agnostic plug-in,
DARK brings about significant performance boost to existing human pose estimation models. Extensive experiments
show that DARK yields the best results on two common
benchmarks, MPII and COCO. Besides, DARK achieves the
2nd place entry in the ICCV 2019 COCO Keypoints Challenge. The code is available online [36].

(a) Data Preprocessing

Original Image Space

Figure 1. Pipeline of a human pose estimation system. For efficiency, resolution reduction is often applied on the original person
detection bounding boxes as well as the ground-truth heatmap supervision. So, the model operates in a low-resolution image space
which reduces model inference cost significantly. At test time,
a corresponding resolution recovery is therefore necessary in order to obtain the joint coordinate prediction in the original image
space.

class label representation in image classification, a human
pose CNN model also requires a label representation for
encoding the body joint coordinate labels, so that the supervised learning loss can be quantified and computed during training and the joint coordinates can be inferred properly1 . The de facto standard label representation is coordi1 The label representation is for encoding the label annotations
(e.g. 1,000 one-hot vectors for 1,000 object class labels in ImageNet), totally different from the data representation for encoding the data samples

7093

