Group Sparsity: The Hinge Between Filter Pruning and Decomposition for
Network Compression
Yawei Li1 , Shuhang Gu1 , Christoph Mayer1 , Luc Van Gool1,2 , Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland, 2 KU Leuven, Belgium
{yawei.li, shuhang.gu, chmayer, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze two popular network compression techniques, i.e. filter pruning and low-rank decomposition, in a unified sense. By simply changing the way the
sparsity regularization is enforced, filter pruning and lowrank decomposition can be derived accordingly. This provides another flexible choice for network compression because the techniques complement each other. For example,
in popular network architectures with shortcut connections
(e.g. ResNet), filter pruning cannot deal with the last convolutional layer in a ResBlock while the low-rank decomposition methods can. In addition, we propose to compress
the whole network jointly instead of in a layer-wise manner. Our approach proves its potential as it compares favorably to the state-of-the-art on several benchmarks. Code
is available at https://github.com/ofsoundof/
group_sparsity.

1. Introduction
During the past years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have reached state-of-the-art performance in a variety of computer vision tasks [22, 12, 17, 32, 6, 39, 53, 28].
However, millions of parameters and heavy computational
burdens are indispensable for new advances in this field.
This is not practical for the deployment of neural network
solutions on edge devices and mobile devices.
To overcome this problem, neural network compression
emerges as a promising solution, aiming at a lightweight
and efficient version of the original model. Among the various network compression methods, filter pruning and filter
decomposition (also termed low-rank approximation) have
been developing steadily. Filter pruning nullifies the weak
filter connections that have the least influence on the accuracy of the network while low-rank decomposition converts
a heavy convolution to a lightweight one and a linear combination [15, 13, 26]. Despite their success, both the pruningbased and decomposition-based approaches have their re-

spective limitations. Filter pruning can only take effect in
pruning output channels of a tensor and equivalently cancelling out inactive filters. This is not feasible under some
circumstances. The skip connection in a block is such a
case where the output feature map of the block is added to
the input. Thus, pruning the output could amount to cancelling a possible important input feature map. This is the
reason why many pruning methods fail to deal with the second convolution of the ResNet [12] basic block. As for filter
decomposition, it always introduces another 1 × 1 convolutional layer, which means additional overhead of calling
CUDA kernels.
Previously, filter pruning and decomposition were developed separately. In this paper, we unveil the fact that filter pruning and decomposition are highly related from the
viewpoint of compact tensor approximation. Specifically,
both filter pruning and filter decomposition seek a compact
approximation of the parameter tensors despite their different operation forms to cope with the application scenarios.
Consider a vectorized image patch x ∈ Rm×1 and a group
of n filters W = {w1 , . . . , wn } ∈ Rm×n . The pruning
methods remove output channels and approximate the original output xT W as xT C, where C ∈ Rm×k only has
k output channels. Filter decomposition methods approximate W as two filters A ∈ Rm×k and B ∈ Rk×n and AB
is the rank k approximation of W. Thus, both the pruning and decomposition based methods seek a compact approximation to the original network parameters, but adopt
different strategies for the approximation.
The above observation shows that filter pruning and decomposition constitute complementary components of each
other. This fact encourages us to design a unified framework that is able to incorporate the pruning-based and
decomposition-based approaches simultaneously. This simple yet effective measure can endow the devised algorithm
with the ability of flexibly switching between the two operation modes, i.e. filter pruning and decomposition, depending on the layer-wise configurations. This makes it possible
to leverage the benefits of both methods.
The hinge point between pruning and decomposition is
4321
8018

