Learning by Analogy: Reliable Supervision from Transformations
for Unsupervised Optical Flow Estimation
Liang Liu1∗ Jiangning Zhang1 Ruifei He1 Yong Liu1† Yabiao Wang2
Ying Tai2 Donghao Luo2 Chengjie Wang2 Jilin Li2 Feiyue Huang2
1

Zhejiang University

2

Youtu Lab, Tencent

{leonliuz, 186368, rfhe}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
{casewang, yingtai, michaelluo, jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Optical flow, as a motion description of images, has been
widely used in high-level video tasks [47, 48, 52, 3, 2, 31].
Benefitting from the growth of deep learning, learningbased optical flow methods [39, 30] with considerable accuracy and efficient inference are gradually replacing the
classical variational-based approaches [36, 25, 44]. However, it is tough to collect the ground truth of dense optical
flow in reality, which makes most supervised methods heavily dependent on the large-scale synthetic datasets [7, 26],
and the domain difference leads to an underlying degradation when the model is transferred to the real-world.
In another point of view, many works proposed to learn
optical flow in an unsupervised way [37, 27, 42, 24], in
which the ground truth is not necessary. These works aim to
train networks with objective from view synthesis [51, 49],
∗ Work mainly done during an internship at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author.

AEPE on Sintel Test Clean

Unsupervised learning of optical flow, which leverages
the supervision from view synthesis, has emerged as a
promising alternative to supervised methods. However, the
objective of unsupervised learning is likely to be unreliable
in challenging scenes. In this work, we present a framework
to use more reliable supervision from transformations. It
simply twists the general unsupervised learning pipeline by
running another forward pass with transformed data from
augmentation, along with using transformed predictions of
original data as the self-supervision signal. Besides, we further introduce a lightweight network with multiple frames
by a highly-shared flow decoder. Our method consistently
gets a leap of performance on several benchmarks with the
best accuracy among deep unsupervised methods. Also, our
method achieves competitive results to recent fully supervised methods while with much fewer parameters.

9

OccAwareFlow

8
7

Unsupervised
Supervised

UnFlow-CSS

FlowNet-S

MFOccFlow

6
5
4
3 before

LiteFlowNet
PWC-Net
2018

Year

EpiFlow
SelFlow
DDFlow
Ours
Ours-MV
IRR-PWC
SelFlow-ft
ContinualFlow

2019

2020

Figure 1. Timeline of average end-point error (AEPE) advances in
deep optical flow. Marker size indicates network size, and oversized markers have been adjusted. Our method outperforms all of
the previous unsupervised methods, also yields comparable accuracy to supervised methods while with fewer parameters. † indicates the model using more than two frames.

i.e. optimizing the difference between reference images and
the flow warped target images. This objective is based on
the assumption of brightness constancy, which will be violated for challenging scenes, e.g. with extreme brightness or
partial occlusion. Hence, proper regularization such as occlusion handling [42, 17] or local smooth [27] is required.
Recent studies have focused on more complicate regularizations such as 3D geometry constraints [34, 41, 22] and
global epipolar constraints [50]. As shown in Fig. 1, there is
still a large gap between these works and supervised methods. In this paper, we do not rely on the geometrical regularizations but rethink the task itself to improve accuracy.
Interestingly, we notice that almost all of the unsupervised works, such as [42, 24, 41], avoid using a heavy combination of augmentations, even if it has been proven effective in supervised flow works [15, 38, 14]. The reason we
conclude is two-fold: (i) Data augmentation is essentially a
trade-off between diversity and validity. It can improve the
model by increasing the diversity of data, while also leads
to a shift of data distribution which decreases the accuracy.

6489

