DeepFaceFlow: In-the-wild Dense 3D Facial Motion Estimation
Mohammad Rami Koujan1,4 , Anastasios Roussos1,3,4 , Stefanos Zafeiriou2,4
1

College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, UK
2
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
3
Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas (FORTH-ICS), Greece
4
FaceSoft.io, London, UK

Abstract
Dense 3D facial motion capture from only monocular inthe-wild pairs of RGB images is a highly challenging problem with numerous applications, ranging from facial expression recognition to facial reenactment. In this work, we
propose DeepFaceFlow, a robust, fast, and highly-accurate
framework for the dense estimation of 3D non-rigid facial
flow between pairs of monocular images. Our DeepFaceFlow framework was trained and tested on two very largescale facial video datasets, one of them of our own collection and annotation, with the aid of occlusion-aware and
3D-based loss function. We conduct comprehensive experiments probing different aspects of our approach and demonstrating its improved performance against state-of-the-art
flow and 3D reconstruction methods. Furthermore, we incorporate our framework in a full-head state-of-the-art facial video synthesis method and demonstrate the ability of
our method in better representing and capturing the facial
dynamics, resulting in a highly-realistic facial video synthesis. Given registered pairs of images, our framework generates 3D flow maps at ∼ 60 fps.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a challenging computer vision
task that has been targeted substantially since the seminal
work of Horn and Schunck [16]. The amount of effort dedicated for tackling such a problem is largely justified by the
potential applications in the field, e.g. 3D facial reconstruction [11, 23, 36], autonomous driving [19], action and expression recognition [30, 21], human motion and head pose
estimation [1, 41], and video-to-video translation [37, 22].
While optical flow tracks pixels between consecutive images in the 2D image plane, scene flow, its 3D counterpart,
aims at estimating the 3D motion field of scene points at
different time steps in the 3 dimensional space. Therefore,
scene flow combines two challenges: 1) 3D shape reconstruction, and 2) dense motion estimation. Scene flow esti-

Figure 1. We propose a framework for the high-fidelity 3D flow
estimation between a pair of monocular facial images. Left-toright: 1 and 2) input pair of RGB images, 3) estimated 3D facial
shape of first image rendered with 3D motion vectors from first to
second image, 4) warped 3D shape of (1) based on estimated 3D
flow in (3), 5) color-coded 3D flow map of each pixel in (1). For
the color coding, see the Supplementary Material.

mation, which can be traced back to the work of of vedula
et al. [34], is a highly ill-posed problem due to the depth
ambiguity and the aperture problem, as well as occlusions
and variations of illumination and pose, etc. which are very
typical of in-the-wild images. To address all these challenges, the majority of methods in the literature use stereo
or RGB-D images and enforce priors on either the smoothness of the reconstructed surfaces and estimated motion
fields [2, 27, 39, 33] or the rigidity of the motion [35].
In this work, we seek to estimate the 3D motion field
of human faces from in-the-wild pairs of monocular images, see Fig. 1. The output in our method is the same
as in scene flow methods, but the fundamental difference
is that we use simple RGB images instead of stereo pairs
or RGB-D images as input. Furthermore, our method is
tailored for human faces instead of arbitrary scenes. For
the problem that we are solving, we use the term “3D face
flow estimation”. Our designed framework delivers accurate flow estimation in the 3D world rather than the 2D image space. We focus on the human face and the modelling
of its dynamics due to its centrality in myriad of applications, e.g. facial expression recognition, head motion and
pose estimation, 3D dense facial reconstruction, full head
reenactment, etc. Human facial motion emerges from two
main sources: 1) rigid motion due to the head pose variation, and 2) non-rigid motion caused by elicited facial expressions and mouth motions during speech. The reliance
16618

