A Neural Rendering Framework for Free-Viewpoint Relighting
Zhang Chen1,2,3

Anpei Chen1
Guli Zhang1
Chengyuan Wang4
Yu Ji5
Kiriakos N. Kutulakos6
Jingyi Yu1
2
1
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology
3
4
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai University
DGene, Inc.
6
University of Toronto
{chenzhang,chenap,zhanggl,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
yu.ji@dgene.com

ericw385@i.shu.edu.cn

kyros@cs.toronto.edu

github.com/LansburyCH/relightable-nr

Abstract
We present a novel Relightable Neural Renderer (RNR)
for simultaneous view synthesis and relighting using multiview image inputs. Existing neural rendering (NR) does not
explicitly model the physical rendering process and hence
has limited capabilities on relighting. RNR instead models image formation in terms of environment lighting, object intrinsic attributes, and light transport function (LTF),
each corresponding to a learnable component. In particular, the incorporation of a physically based rendering process not only enables relighting but also improves the quality of view synthesis. Comprehensive experiments on synthetic and real data show that RNR provides a practical and
effective solution for conducting free-viewpoint relighting.

1. Introduction
Neural rendering (NR) has shown great success in the
past few years on producing photorealistic images under
complex geometry, surface reflectance, and environment
lighting. Unlike traditional modeling and rendering techniques that rely on elaborate setups to capture detailed object geometry and accurate surface reflectance properties,
often also with excessive artistic manipulations, NR can
produce compelling results by using only images captured
under uncontrolled illumination. By far, most existing NR
methods have focused on either free-viewpoint rendering
under fixed illumination or image-based relighting under
fixed viewpoint. In this paper, we explore the problem of
simultaneous novel view synthesis and relighting using NR.
State-of-the-art deep view synthesis techniques follow
the pipeline that first extracts deep features from input images and 3D models, then projects the features to the image space via traditional camera projection, and finally ap-

Figure 1. Results from our Relightable Neural Renderer (RNR).
Top row shows the relighting results for a synthetic sphere composed of complex materials. Bottom row shows free-viewpoint
relighting results for real captured data.

plies a rendering network to render the projected features to
a RGB image. Such approaches exploit learnable components to both encode 3D representations and model the rendering process. Approaches such as neural point cloud [2],
neural volume [63] and neural texture [69] utilize deep representations for 3D content. With rich training data, these
methods can tolerate inaccuracies in geometry and maintain reasonable rendering quality. For example, DeepVoxels [63] uses a learnable volume as an alternative to standard 3D representation while combining physically based
forward/backward projection operators for view synthesis.
Using NR to produce visually plausible free-viewpoint
relighting is more difficult compared with changing viewpoints under fixed illumination. This is because under fixed
illumination, existing NRs manage to model 2D/3D geometry as learnable components to directly encode appearance
of different views. Relighting, in contrast, requires further
separating appearance into object intrinsic attributes and illumination. From a NR perspective, the final rendering step

5599

