Structure Aware Single-stage 3D Object Detection from Point Cloud
Chenhang He1,2 , Hui Zeng1,2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2 , Lei Zhang1,2 ∗
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{csche, cshzeng}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, jianqiang.hjq@alibaba-inc.com
huaxiansheng@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
3D object detection from point cloud data plays an essential role in autonomous driving. Current single-stage
detectors are efficient by progressively downscaling the 3D
point clouds in a fully convolutional manner. However,
the downscaled features inevitably lose spatial information
and cannot make full use of the structure information of
3D point cloud, degrading their localization precision. In
this work, we propose to improve the localization precision
of single-stage detectors by explicitly leveraging the structure information of 3D point cloud. Specifically, we design
an auxiliary network which converts the convolutional features in the backbone network back to point-level representations. The auxiliary network is jointly optimized, by two
point-level supervisions, to guide the convolutional features
in the backbone network to be aware of the object structure. The auxiliary network can be detached after training
and therefore introduces no extra computation in the inference stage. Besides, considering that single-stage detectors
suffer from the discordance between the predicted bounding
boxes and corresponding classification confidences, we develop an efficient part-sensitive warping operation to align
the confidences to the predicted bounding boxes. Our proposed detector ranks at the top of KITTI 3D/BEV detection
leaderboards and runs at 25 FPS for inference.

1. Introduction
3D object detection from point cloud data is a key component in Autonomous Vehicle (AV) system. Unlike the ordinary 2D object detection which only estimates 2D bounding box from an image plane, AV requires to estimate a
more informative 3D bounding box from the real world to
fulfill the high-level tasks like path planning and collision
avoidance. This motivates the recently emerged 3D object
detection approaches which apply the convolutional neural
∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported by China NSFC grant
(no. 61672446) and Hong Kong RGC GRF grant (PolyU 152135/16E).

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Predicted bounding boxes from sparse 3D point cloud by
(a) the representative single-stage detector SECOND [25] and (b)
our single-stage method guided by auxiliary tasks and point-level
supervisions. The object points, ground-truth box, center points
predicted by the auxiliary network and the final detection results
are shown in green, white, yellow and red colors, respectively.

network (CNN) to process more representative point cloud
data from a high-end LiDAR sensor.
Current 3D object detection from point cloud can be divided into two streams, i.e., single-stage approaches and
two-stage approaches. Single-stage approaches [25, 30, 27,
8, 22, 9] parse the sparse 3D point cloud into a compact representation, such as voxel grid or birds-eye-view (BEV) image, and employ a CNN to directly predict the bounding box
in a fully convolutional manner. This makes the single-stage
approaches typically simple and efficient. However, the
progressively downscaled feature maps inevitably lose the
spatial resolution and cannot explicitly consider the structure information of point cloud data, making the singlestage detectors less accurate to process the sparse point
cloud. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the single-stage detector fails
to achieve accurate localization when the object contains
insufficient points.
Compared to single-stage approaches, two-stage meth111873

