Reusing Discriminators for Encoding:
Towards Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Runfa Chen, Wenbing Huang, Binghui Huang, Fuchun Sun∗, Bin Fang
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI)
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P.R.China
crf18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com
{hbh18@mails., fcsun@, fangbin@mail.}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation is a central
task in computer vision. Current translation frameworks
will abandon the discriminator once the training process
is completed. This paper contends a novel role of the discriminator by reusing it for encoding the images of the target domain. The proposed architecture, termed as NICEGAN, exhibits two advantageous patterns over previous approaches: First, it is more compact since no independent
encoding component is required; Second, this plug-in encoder is directly trained by the adversary loss, making it
more informative and trained more effectively if a multiscale discriminator is applied. The main issue in NICEGAN is the coupling of translation with discrimination
along the encoder, which could incur training inconsistency
when we play the min-max game via GAN. To tackle this issue, we develop a decoupled training strategy by which the
encoder is only trained when maximizing the adversary loss
while keeping frozen otherwise. Extensive experiments on
four popular benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of NICE-GAN over state-of-the-art methods in terms
of FID, KID, and also human preference. Comprehensive
ablation studies are also carried out to isolate the validity
of each proposed component. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/alpc91/NICE-GAN-pytorch.

1. Introduction
Image-to-Image translation transforming images from
one domain to the other has boosted a variety of applications
in vision tasks, from colorization [39], image editing [6],
super-resolution [20] to video generation [35]. Given the
extensive effort of collecting paired images between do∗ Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.

Figure 1: Illustrative difference between CycleGAN-alike
methods and our NICE-GAN.
mains, a more practical line of research [40, 25, 12, 21, 16]
directs the goal to unsupervised scenario where no paired
information is characterized. Due to the non-identifiability
problem [25] in unsupervised translation, various methods
have been proposed to address this issue by using additional regulations including weight-coupling [25], cycleconsistency [40, 17, 38], forcing the generator to the identity function [34], or more commonly, combination of them.
When we revisit current successful translation frameworks (such as the one proposed by CycleGAN [40]), most
of them consist of three components for each domain: an
encoder to embed the input image to a low-dimension hidden space, a generator to translate hidden vectors to images
of the other domain, and a discriminator for domain alignment by using GAN training [9]. While this piled-up way is
standard, we are still interested in asking: is there any possibility to rethink the role of each component in current translation frameworks? and more importantly, can we change
the current formulation (for example, to a more compact
architecture) based on our rethinking?

8168

