Fast Template Matching and Update for Video Object Tracking and
Segmentation
Mingjie Sun1,2 , Jimin Xiao1,*, Eng Gee Lim1 , Bingfeng Zhang1,2 , Yao Zhao3
1
XJTLU, 2 University of Liverpool, 3 Beijing Jiaotong University
mingjie.sun@liverpool.ac.uk, {jimin.xiao, enggee.lim, bingfeng.zhang}@xjtlu.edu.cn,

yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, the main task we aim to tackle is the multiinstance semi-supervised video object segmentation across
a sequence of frames where only the first-frame box-level
ground-truth is provided. Detection-based algorithms are
widely adopted to handle this task, and the challenges lie in
the selection of the matching method to predict the result as
well as to decide whether to update the target template using the newly predicted result. The existing methods, however, make these selections in a rough and inflexible way,
compromising their performance. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel approach which utilizes reinforcement learning to make these two decisions at the same time.
Specifically, the reinforcement learning agent learns to decide whether to update the target template according to the
quality of the predicted result. The choice of the matching
method will be determined at the same time, based on the
action history of the reinforcement learning agent. Experiments show that our method is almost 10 times faster than
the previous state-of-the-art method with even higher accuracy (region similarity of 69.1% on DAVIS 2017 dataset).

1. Introduction
Multi-instance semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) is an important computer vision task, serving
as the basis of many other related tasks including scene understand, video surveillance and video editing. The task of
VOS is to produce instance segmentation masks for each
frame in a video sequence where the first-frame groundtruth is provided in advance. It turns out to be a challenging
task especially in the situations of deformation, motion blur,
illumination change, background clutter, and so on.
* corresponding author
1 The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of

China under 61972323,61532005 and U1936212, and Key Program Special Fund in XJTLU under KSF-T-02, KSF-P-02.
https://github.com/insomnia94/FTMU

Figure 1. Speed-accuracy trade-off for various multi-instance
semi-supervised VOS methods on DAVIS 2017 dataset. Methods
in green only rely on the first-frame box-level ground-truth while
methods in red rely on the first-frame pixel-level ground-truth.

There are two common ways to provide the first-frame
ground-truth, including masks and bounding boxes. Providing the first-frame masks is a conventional way, which has
been widely adopted nowadays [32, 27]. Although these
methods have already achieved good performance with the
pixel-level accurate target object information, it turns to a
hard task to utilize these methods to solve practical VOS
problems, especially when numerous video sequences need
to be processed in a short time, because annotating pixellevel ground-truth masks for each video sequence is timeconsuming. To overcome this problem, inspired by the
rapid progress in the task of video object tracking (VOT) at
bounding box level, some works attempt to rely on the firstframe bounding boxes to provide target object information
instead of using the first-frame masks, which dramatically
accelerates the annotation process and increases scalability.
This kind of acceleration is, however, built on the sacrifice of ground-truth “accuracy”. The reason is that some
background area will be incorporated into the bounding box
as well, which greatly increases the difficulty of the VOS
110791

