Non-Local Neural Networks with Grouped Bilinear Attentional Transforms
Lu Chi1,2 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Yadong Mu1∗ , Changhu Wang2
1
Peking University, Beijing, China, 2 ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing, China
{chilu,myd}@pku.edu.cn, {yuanzehuan,wangchanghu}@bytedance.com

1. Introduction
This era has witnessed the vigorous development of deep
neural networks, with significant empirical success in a
plethora of important real-life vision tasks [28, 36, 45, 56].
The neural architectures of convolutional networks are still
∗ Corresponding author.

Conv

NL-Block

Conv

Conv

Conv

NL-Block

Conv

Conv

Conv

NL-Block

(a)

Conv

Modeling spatial or temporal long-range dependency
plays a key role in deep neural networks. Conventional
dominant solutions include recurrent operations on sequential data or deeply stacking convolutional layers with small
kernel size. Recently, a number of non-local operators
(such as self-attention based [57]) have been devised.
They are typically generic and can be plugged into many
existing network pipelines for globally computing among
any two neurons in a feature map. This work proposes a
novel non-local operator. It is inspired by the attention
mechanism of human visual system, which can quickly
attend to important local parts in sight and suppress other
less-relevant information. The core of our method is
learnable and data-adaptive bilinear attentional transform
(BA-Transform), whose merits are three-folds: first, BATransform is versatile to model a wide spectrum of local or
global attentional operations, such as emphasizing specific
local regions. Each BA-Transform is learned in a dataadaptive way; Secondly, to address the discrepancy among
features, we further design grouped BA-Transforms, which
essentially apply different attentional operations to different
groups of feature channels; Thirdly, many existing nonlocal operators are computation-intensive. The proposed
BA-Transform is implemented by simple matrix multiplication and admits better efficacy. For empirical evaluation,
we perform comprehensive experiments on two large-scale
benchmarks, ImageNet and Kinetics, for image / video classification respectively. The achieved accuracies and various
ablation experiments consistently demonstrate significant
improvement by large margins.

Conv

Abstract
Flower

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Typical architecture of neural networks with nonlocal operators, where non-local neural blocks (highlighted in
blue) are sparsely added into original network pipeline to instantaneously achieve large receptive fields. (b) Illustration of our
proposed bilinear attentional transform (BA-Transform). With
properly-learned matrices P(X) , Q(X) in the transformation formula Y = P(X) XQ(X) , BA-Transform can conduct a variety of
operations (selective zooming and dispersing to distant positions
as shown in this sub-figure) on attended features. The super-scripts
in P, Q emphasize their dependence on X.

undergoing rapid evolution. Much of recent endeavor has
been devoted to designing deeper [48, 17] or wider [61,
14] network architectures, or more effective atomic convolutional operators [6, 20]. The main interest of this
work is modeling long-range spatial [57] or temporal [56]
dependencies in deep convolutional networks. To this
end, classic neural networks, such as VGG-Net [48] or
ResNet [17], mostly adopt a scheme of deeply stacking
many convolutional layers with small receptive fields (e.g.,
3 × 3 kernels in ResNet [17] and 3 × 3 × 3 spatio-temporal
kernels in C3D [52]).
One of current research fronts regarding effectively enlarging neural receptive fields is to sparsely insert non-local
operators into an existing network pipeline. An illustration
of such a architecture is shown in Figure 1(a). The main
challenge for sparse insertion of non-local operators is their

11804

