ZeroQ: A Novel Zero Shot Quantization Framework
Yaohui Cai∗,1 , Zhewei Yao∗,2 , Zhen Dong∗,2 ,
Amir Gholami2 , Michael W. Mahoney2 , Kurt Keutzer2
1
Peking University; 2 University of California, Berkeley
caiyaohui@pku.edu.cn {zheweiy, zhendong, amirgh, mahoneymw, and keutzer}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Quantization is a promising approach for reducing the
inference time and memory footprint of neural networks.
However, most existing quantization methods require access to the original training dataset for retraining during
quantization. This is often not possible for applications
with sensitive or proprietary data, e.g., due to privacy and
security concerns. Existing zero-shot quantization methods use different heuristics to address this, but they result
in poor performance, especially when quantizing to ultralow precision. Here, we propose Z ERO Q, a novel zeroshot quantization framework to address this. Z ERO Q enables mixed-precision quantization without any access to
the training or validation data. This is achieved by optimizing for a Distilled Dataset, which is engineered to match
the statistics of batch normalization across different layers
of the network. Z ERO Q supports both uniform and mixedprecision quantization. For the latter, we introduce a novel
Pareto frontier based method to automatically determine
the mixed-precision bit setting for all layers, with no manual
search involved. We extensively test our proposed method
on a diverse set of models, including ResNet18/50/152, MobileNetV2, ShuffleNet, SqueezeNext, and InceptionV3 on
ImageNet, as well as RetinaNet-ResNet50 on the Microsoft
COCO dataset. In particular, we show that Z ERO Q can
achieve 1.71% higher accuracy on MobileNetV2, as compared to the recently proposed DFQ [32] method. Importantly, Z ERO Q has a very low computational overhead, and
it can finish the entire quantization process in less than 30s
(0.5% of one epoch training time of ResNet50 on ImageNet).
We have open-sourced the Z ERO Q framework1 .

1. Introduction
Despite the great success of deep Neural Network (NN)
models in various domains, the deployment of modern NN
models at the edge has been challenging due to their proEqual contribution.
1 https://github.com/amirgholami/ZeroQ

hibitive memory footprint, inference time, and/or energy
consumption. With the current hardware support for lowprecision computations, quantization has become a popular procedure to address these challenges. By quantizing
the floating point values of weights and/or activations in a
NN to integers, the model size can be shrunk significantly,
without any modification to the architecture. This also allows one to use reduced-precision Arithmetic Logic Units
(ALUs) which are faster and more power-efficient, as compared to floating point ALUs. More importantly, quantization reduces memory traffic volume, which is a significant
source of energy consumption [15].
However, quantizing a model from single precision to
low-precision often results in significant accuracy degradation. One way to alleviate this is to perform the so-called
quantization-aware fine-tuning [46, 34, 5, 42, 45, 18] to reduce the performance gap between the original model and
the quantized model. Basically, this is a retraining procedure that is performed for a few epochs to adjust the NN parameters to reduce accuracy drop. However, quantizationaware fine-tuning can be computationally expensive and
time-consuming. For example, in online learning situations,
where a model needs to be constantly updated on new data
and deployed every few hours, there may not be enough
time for the fine-tuning procedure to finish. More importantly, in many real-world scenarios, the training dataset is
sensitive or proprietary, meaning that it is not possible to access the dataset that was used to train the model. Good examples are medical data, bio-metric data, or user data used
in recommendation systems.
To address this, recent work has proposed post-training
quantization [19, 32, 44, 3], which directly quantizes NN
models without fine-tuning. However, as mentioned above,
these methods result in non-trivial performance degradation, especially for low-precision quantization. Furthermore, previous post-training quantization methods usually
require limited (unlabeled) data to assist the post-training
quantization. However, for cases such as MLaaS (e.g.,
Amazon AWS and Google Cloud), it may not be possible
to access any of the training data from users. An example application case is health care information which can113169

