Evaluating Weakly Supervised Object Localization Methods Right
Seong Joon Oh2∗

Seungho Lee1

Sanghyuk Chun3

Zeynep Akata4

Hyunjung Shim1†

School of Integrated Technology,
Yonsei University

2

Clova AI Research,
LINE Plus Corp.

Abstract
Weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL) has
gained popularity over the last years for its promise to train
localization models with only image-level labels. Since the
seminal WSOL work of class activation mapping (CAM),
the field has focused on how to expand the attention regions to cover objects more broadly and localize them better. However, these strategies rely on full localization supervision to validate hyperparameters and for model selection, which is in principle prohibited under the WSOL
setup. In this paper, we argue that WSOL task is ill-posed
with only image-level labels, and propose a new evaluation
protocol where full supervision is limited to only a small
held-out set not overlapping with the test set. We observe
that, under our protocol, the five most recent WSOL methods have not made a major improvement over the CAM
baseline. Moreover, we report that existing WSOL methods
have not reached the few-shot learning baseline, where the
full-supervision at validation time is used for model training instead. Based on our findings, we discuss some future
directions for WSOL. Source code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/clovaai/wsolevaluation.

1. Introduction
As human labeling for every object is too costly and
weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL) requires
only image-level labels, the WSOL research has gained significant momentum [58, 56, 57, 6, 25, 55] recently.
Among these, class activation mapping (CAM) [58] uses
the intermediate classifier activations focusing on the most
discriminative parts of the objects to localize the objects
of the target class. As the aim in object localization is to
cover the full extent of the object, focusing only on the most
discriminative parts of the objects is a limitation. WSOL
∗ Equal contribution. Work done at Clova AI Research.
† Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.

Localization Accuracy (Known GT Class)

1

Junsuk Choe1,3∗

3

Clova AI Research,
NAVER Corp.

70

4

University of Tuebingen

Few-shot learning performance
Maximal WSOL performance

CAM (CVPR’16)

60

No-learning: center gaussian
50

40

CVPR’18
ICCV’17

Popular
threshold
0.0

0.1

0.2

ICCV’19
0.3

ECCV’18
CVPR’19
0.4

Operating threshold τ

Figure 1. WSOL 2016-2019. Recent improvements in WSOL
are illusory due to (1) different amount of implicit full supervision
through validation and (2) a fixed score-map threshold (usually
τ = 0.2) to generate object boxes. Under our evaluation protocol
with the same validation set sizes and oracle τ for each method,
CAM is still the best. In fact, our few-shot learning baseline,
i.e. using the validation supervision (10 samples/class) at training
time, outperforms existing WSOL methods. Results on ImageNet.

techniques since CAM have focused on this limitation and
have proposed different architectural [56, 57, 6] and dataaugmentation [25, 55] solutions. The reported state-of-theart WSOL performances have made a significant improvement over the CAM baseline, from 49.4% to 62.3% [6]
and 43.6% to 48.7% [6] top-1 localization performances on
Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 [52] and ImageNet [41], respectively. However, these techniques have introduced a set
of hyperparameters for suppressing the discriminative cues
of CAM and different ways for selecting these hyperparameters. One of such hyperparameters is the operating threshold τ for generating object bounding boxes from the score
maps. Among others, the mixed policies for selecting τ has
contributed to the illusory improvement of WSOL performances over the years; see Figure 1.
Due to the lack of a unified definition of the WSOL task,
we revisit the problem formulation of WSOL and show that
WSOL problem is ill-posed in general without any localiza13133

