GP-NAS: Gaussian Process based Neural Architecture Search
Zhihang Li2∗, Teng Xi3,5∗ , Jiankang Deng4 , Gang Zhang3 , Shengzhao Wen3 , Ran He1†
1
NLPR & CEBSIT, CAS 2 NLPR & AIR, CAS
3
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc. 4 Imperial College London
5
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University.
Email: {zhihang.li, rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk
{xiteng01, zhanggang03, wenshengzhao}@baidu.com, xiteng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) advances beyond the
state-of-the-art in various computer vision tasks by automating the designs of deep neural networks. In this paper,
we aim to address three important questions in NAS: (1)
How to measure the correlation between architectures and
their performances? (2) How to evaluate the correlation
between different architectures? (3) How to learn these correlations with a small number of samples? To this end, we
first model these correlations from a Bayesian perspective.
Specifically, by introducing a novel Gaussian Process based
NAS (GP-NAS) method, the correlations are modeled by
the kernel function and mean function. The kernel function
is also learnable to enable adaptive modeling for complex
correlations in different search spaces. Furthermore, by incorporating a mutual information based sampling method,
we can theoretically ensure the high-performance architecture with only a small set of samples. After addressing
these problems, training GP-NAS once enables direct performance prediction of any architecture in different scenarios and may obtain efficient networks for different deployment platforms. Extensive experiments on both image classification and face recognition tasks verify the effectiveness
of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
NAS targets on automating the design of deep neural
networks. It has promoted remarkable progress in various
tasks, including image classification [55, 31, 38, 53, 16, 45],
object detection [19] and semantic segmentation [29, 34,
51]. However, conventional early NAS methods that are
based on reinforcement learning (RL) [55] and evolution∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when the first author was an
intern at Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
† corresponding author

ary algorithm (EA) [38] are often computationally intensive
and just search a specified architecture each time for a target task. Many recent works focus on accelerating NAS by
weight sharing [35, 5, 52, 13] and achieve great improvements. But the relationship between the performance and
the neural architecture is not clear enough and they may
lead to the well known performance inconsistency problem between the supernet model and the fully trained stand
alone model. In addition, they require repeated sampling
to obtain efficient networks for different tasks and hardware
platforms.
We aim to learn a performance predictor with high efficacy and identify efficient model with high performance for
different platforms without repeated search process. This
performance predictor would have the following properties: (1) It may model the correlation between architectures and the corresponding performances. As such, it can
infer performance of any deep model (without retraining)
in a given search space. (2) The predictor may be learned
with a small set of samples. The training process will thus
be computationally efficient. (3) It may measure the correlation between different architectures such that architectures with similar performances can be easily found. It can
also provide some insights about what micro- or macroarchitectures would be beneficial for learning.
To this end, we propose a theoretical modeling framework for NAS. Specifically, we model the distribution of
performances conditioned on given architectures by a Gaussian Process (GP). Under this framework, the correlation
between performances and architectures can be modeled by
a mean function in the GP. The correlation between different architectures is measured by the kernel functions as
well. Moreover, the kernel function is learnable to measure
complex correlations in different search spaces. In order to
speed up the search process in our proposed method , we
further propose an efficient mutual information based sampling method. This sampling method intuitively enlarges
the distance between obtained samples. We theoretically
111933

