Learning from Synthetic Animals
Jiteng Mu∗, Weichao Qiu∗, Gregory Hager, Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University
jitengmu@jhu.edu, hager@cs.jhu.edu, {qiuwch, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite great success in human parsing, progress for
parsing other deformable articulated objects, like animals,
is still limited by the lack of labeled data. In this paper, we
use synthetic images and ground truth generated from CAD
animal models to address this challenge. To bridge the domain gap between real and synthetic images, we propose
a novel consistency-constrained semi-supervised learning
method (CC-SSL). Our method leverages both spatial and
temporal consistencies, to bootstrap weak models trained
on synthetic data with unlabeled real images. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on highly deformable
animals, such as horses and tigers. Without using any real
image label, our method allows for accurate keypoint prediction on real images. Moreover, we quantitatively show
that models using synthetic data achieve better generalization performance than models trained on real images across
different domains in the Visual Domain Adaptation Challenge dataset. Our synthetic dataset contains 10+ animals
with diverse poses and rich ground truth, which enables us
to use the multi-task learning strategy to further boost models’ performance.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the presence of large scale annotated datasets
and powerful Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs), the
state of human parsing has advanced rapidly. By contrast,
there is little previous work on parsing animals. Parsing
animals is important for many tasks, including, but not limited to monitoring wild animal behaviors, developing bioinspired robots, building motion capture systems, etc.
One main problem for parsing animals is the limit of
datasets. Though many datasets containing animals are built
for classification, bounding box detection, and instance segmentation, only a small number of datasets are built for
parsing animal keypoints and parts. Annotating large scale
datasets for animals is prohibitively expensive. Therefore,
∗ Indicates equal contributions.

most existing approaches for parsing humans, which often
require enormous annotated data [1, 32], are less suited for
parsing animals.
In this work, we use synthetic data to address this challenge. Many works [34, 29] show that by jointly using synthetic images and real images, models can yield supreme
results. In addition, synthetic data also has many unique advantages compared to real-world datasets. First, rendering
synthetic data with rich ground truth at scale is easier and
cheaper compared with capturing and annotating real-world
images. Second, synthetic data can also provide accurate
ground truth for cases where annotations are hard to acquire
for natural images, such as labeling optical flow [11] or under occlusion and low-resolution. Third, real-world datasets
usually suffer from the long-tail problem where rare cases
are less represented. Generated synthetic datasets can avoid
this problem by sampling rendering parameters.
However, there are large domain gaps [7, 38, 14] between synthetic images and real images, which prevent
models trained on synthetic data from generalizing well to
real-world images. Moreover, synthetic data is also limited by object diversity. ShapeNet [6] has been created to
include diverse 3D models and SMPL [24] has been built
for humans. Nevertheless, creating such diverse synthetic
models is a difficult task, which requires capturing the appearance and attaching a skeleton to the object. Besides,
considering the number of animal categories in the world,
creating diverse synthetic models along with realistic textures for each animal is almost infeasible.
In this paper, we propose a method where models are
trained using synthetic CAD models. Our method can
achieve high performance with only a single CAD animal
model. We generate pseudo-labels on unlabeled real images for semi-supervised learning. To handle noisy pseudolabels, we design three consistency-check criteria to evaluate the quality of the predicted labels, which we refer to
as consistency-constrained semi-supervised learning (CCSSL). Through extensive experiments, we show that our
models achieve similar performance to models trained on
real data, but without using any annotation of real images. It also outperforms other domain adaptation meth112386

