ActionBytes: Learning from Trimmed Videos to Localize Actions
Mihir Jain1∗ , Amir Ghodrati1∗ , Cees G. M. Snoek2
1
Qualcomm AI Research†, Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.
2
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
mijain@qti.qualcomm.com

ghodrati@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to determine the start, the end
and the class of each action instance in a long untrimmed
video. State-of-the-art approaches for action localization
slide a trained model over an untrimmed video to produce
classification score sequences over time [5, 18, 40]. They
depend on start, end, and action class labels at training time.
Weakly-supervised approaches [28, 32, 34] have demonstrated this even works when the long untrimmed training
videos come with action class labels only. Different from
all these works, we will localize action instances in long
untrimmed videos by learning from short trimmed videos
labeled with just their action class.
∗
†

equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc

Training

Testing

Generate
ActionByte
Pseudo-labels

Localizing actions in long videos

…

This paper tackles the problem of localizing actions
in long untrimmed videos. Different from existing works,
which all use annotated untrimmed videos during training,
we learn only from short trimmed videos. This enables
learning from large-scale datasets originally designed for
action classification. We propose a method to train an
action localization network that segments a video into interpretable fragments, we call ActionBytes. Our method
jointly learns to cluster ActionBytes and trains the localization network using the cluster assignments as pseudolabels. By doing so, we train on short trimmed videos that
become untrimmed for ActionBytes. In isolation, or when
merged, the ActionBytes also serve as effective action proposals. Experiments demonstrate that our boundary-guided
training generalizes to unknown action classes and localizes actions in long videos of Thumos14, MultiThumos, and
ActivityNet1.2. Furthermore, we show the advantage of ActionBytes for zero-shot localization as well as traditional
weakly supervised localization, that train on long videos, to
achieve state-of-the-art results.

Trimmed video
dataset

cgmsnoek@uva.nl

Train
localization
model

Action class
query

Knowledge
transfer

…

…
0

Figure 1: From short, trimmed videos we learn to localize actions in long, untrimmed video. During training, our
method jointly learns to generate pseudo-labels from ActionBytes, and to localize them in the short video. During
testing, our localization model detects the instances of the
query action class in the untrimmed video.

Short trimmed videos are highly popular and easy to
access for action classification. Datasets in this domain
come with a large number of samples and labels [3, 4, 8,
24]. Kinetics-700 [3], for example, has nearly 650k short
trimmed video clips categorized into as many as 700 action
classes. In this work, we leverage datasets commonly used
for action classification, the what, for tackling the task of action localization, the when. This opens up opportunities for
1) learning from larger datasets with more action classes,
and 2) localizing unknown classes by transferring knowledge between trimmed and untrimmed video datasets.
However, given just short trimmed videos during training
provides virtually no scope to learn about action boundaries.
To overcome this limitation, we adopt a self-supervised approach to regularize our network to learn boundary-aware
models. Specifically, we use intermediate layers of a CNN
model to decompose a trimmed video into multiple atomic
actions called ActionBytes. From these we generate pseudolabels to train a CNN to localize ActionBytes within videos.
This model can be used to extract a new set of ActionBytes,
so we iterate between updating ActionBytes and training the
localization model using new pseudo-labels. Given a long
test video, we slide our trained model over it to generate a
classification score sequence for the query action, and thus
localize its instances, see Figure 1.
11171

