Deep Fair Clustering for Visual Learning
Peizhao Li
Brandeis University

Han Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University

Hongfu Liu
Brandeis University

peizhaoli@brandeis.edu

han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

hongfuliu@brandeis.edu

Abstract
Fair clustering aims to hide sensitive attributes during
data partition by balancing the distribution of protected
subgroups in each cluster. Existing work attempts to address this problem by reducing it to a classical balanced
clustering with a constraint on the proportion of protected
subgroups of the input space. However, the input space
may limit the clustering performance, and so far only lowdimensional datasets have been considered. In light of these
limitations, in this paper, we propose Deep Fair Clustering
(DFC) to learn fair and clustering-favorable representations for clustering simultaneously. Our approach could effectively filter out sensitive attributes from representations,
and also lead to representations that are amenable for the
following cluster analysis. Theoretically, we show that our
fairness constraint in DFC will not incur much loss in terms
of several clustering metrics. Empirically, we provide extensive experimental demonstrations on four visual datasets
to corroborate the superior performance of the proposed
approach over existing fair clustering and deep clustering
methods on both cluster validity and fairness criterion.

1. Introduction
With the prevalence of machine learning based decision
support systems in high-stakes domains, including college
admission, loan approval, bail/parole judgments, and hiring processes, it has already become an imperative object
of study to guarantee that individuals are treated equally in
such automated decision processes [9, 8, 15]. The area of
algorithmic fairness is precisely devoted to the study of algorithms and learning systems to ensure fairness in the execution of these processes while at the same time preserving
utility as much as possible. Consider race as a sensitive attribute in visual applications such as facial recognition. In
this case, a learning system may have a high recognition
accuracy for one group of race, but a considerably lower
accuracy for another group, due to the potential imbalance
distributions between these two protected subgroups [4]. In
order to mitigate such biases in recognition performance,

Figure 1. Comparison of existing fair clustering methods and ours.
Existing methods seek to ensure that the proportion of samples
with different sensitive attributes are approximately equal in each
cluster. As a comparison, deep fair clustering learns fair representations that are amenable for cluster analysis under the constraint
that they are statistically independent of sensitive attributes.

fair and accurate recognition systems are nowadays particularly desirable to serve for many real-world scenarios.
Cluster analysis is a classic and widely used technique
in unsupervised learning to discover the underlying structure of data. In the context of algorithmic fairness, fair
clustering aims to hide sensitive attributes during data partition by balancing the distribution of protected subgroups
in each cluster. Chierichettiss et al. [7] propose a pioneering fairlet by employing a pre-processing technique to
partition original data into chunks, followed by a k-center
based algorithm, which encourages clusters with balanced
demographic groups. In light of the expensive computation involved in fairlet, Backurs et al. [2] provide a scalable
fair clustering algorithm with approximate fairlet decomposition that runs in nearly linear time. Wang and Davidason [31] extend the single sensitive attribute setting to
the one with multi-state protected variable. Additionally,
Suman et al. [3] propose to transform any given clustering solution to a fair one with multiple protected subgroups.
Many other work also exist that are based on the classical
clustering algorithm with fair constraints [39, 27, 18, 22].
Despite the abundant existing literature on fair clustering, most of them cast it as a classical balanced clustering problem [25] with equal proportions of protected subgroups in each cluster as a constraint. Furthermore, existing work mostly focuses on empirical validations with
low-dimensional input data, and their performance on largescale and high-dimensional visual data has not been fully

9070

