Fine-grained Video-Text Retrieval with Hierarchical Graph Reasoning
Shizhe Chen1∗, Yida Zhao1 , Qin Jin1†, Qi Wu2
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide
{cszhe1, zyiday, qjin}@ruc.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval between videos and texts has attracted growing attentions due to the rapid emergence of
videos on the web. The current dominant approach is to
learn a joint embedding space to measure cross-modal similarities. However, simple embeddings are insufficient to
represent complicated visual and textual details, such as
scenes, objects, actions and their compositions. To improve fine-grained video-text retrieval, we propose a Hierarchical Graph Reasoning (HGR) model, which decomposes video-text matching into global-to-local levels. The
model disentangles text into a hierarchical semantic graph
including three levels of events, actions, entities, and generates hierarchical textual embeddings via attention-based
graph reasoning. Different levels of texts can guide the
learning of diverse and hierarchical video representations
for cross-modal matching to capture both global and local
details. Experimental results on three video-text datasets
demonstrate the advantages of our model. Such hierarchical decomposition also enables better generalization across
datasets and improves the ability to distinguish fine-grained
semantic differences. Code will be released at https:
//github.com/cshizhe/hgr_v2t.

1. Introduction
The rapid emergence of videos on the Internet such as
on YouTube and TikTok has brought great challenges to
accurate retrieval of video contents. Traditional retrieval
methods [2, 4, 12] are mainly based on keyword search.
However, since keywords are limited and unstructured, it
is difficult to retrieve various fine-grained contents, such
as a compositional event “a white dog is chasing a cat”.
To address the limitation of keyword-based approach, more
and more researchers are paying attention to video retrieval
using natural language texts that contain richer and more
∗ This work was partially performed while Shizhe Chen was visiting
University of Adelaide.
† Qin Jin is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. We factorize video-text matching into hierarchical levels including events, actions, and entities to form a global to local
structure. On one hand, this enhances global matching with the
help of detailed semantic components, on the other hand, it improves local matching with the help of global event structure.

structured details than keywords, a.k.a, cross-modal videotext retrieval [6, 28, 43].
The current dominant approach for cross-modal retrieval
is to encode different modalities into a joint embedding
space [9] to measure cross-modal similarities, which can
be broadly classified into two categories. The first type of
works [6, 27, 28] embeds videos and texts into global vectors. Despite of high efficiency, such global representation
is hard to capture fine-grained semantic details. For example, understanding the video and text in Figure 1 involves
complicated reasoning about different actions (break, drop,
boil), entities (egg, into the cup etc.) as well as how all components compose to the event (‘egg’ is the patient of action
‘break’ and ‘into the cup’ is the direction). To avoid losing
those details, another type of methods [32, 43] employs a
sequence of frames and words to represent videos and texts
respectively and aligns local components to compute overall
similarities. Although these approaches have achieved improved performance for image-text retrieval [19, 22], learn-

10638

