LiDAR-based Online 3D Video Object Detection with Graph-based Message
Passing and Spatiotemporal Transformer Attention
Junbo Yin1,2 , Jianbing Shen1,4 ∗, Chenye Guan2,3 , Dingfu Zhou2,3 , Ruigang Yang2,3,5
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2

Baidu Research
4

3

National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China
5

Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAE

{yinjunbocn, shenjianbingcg}@gmail.com

University of Kentucky, Kentucky, USA

https://github.com/yinjunbo/3DVID

Abstract
Existing LiDAR-based 3D object detectors usually focus
on the single-frame detection, while ignoring the spatiotemporal information in consecutive point cloud frames. In this
paper, we propose an end-to-end online 3D video object detector that operates on point cloud sequences. The proposed
model comprises a spatial feature encoding component and
a spatiotemporal feature aggregation component. In the
former component, a novel Pillar Message Passing Network (PMPNet) is proposed to encode each discrete point
cloud frame. It adaptively collects information for a pillar node from its neighbors by iterative message passing,
which effectively enlarges the receptive ﬁeld of the pillar
feature. In the latter component, we propose an Attentive
Spatiotemporal Transformer GRU (AST-GRU) to aggregate
the spatiotemporal information, which enhances the conventional ConvGRU with an attentive memory gating mechanism. AST-GRU contains a Spatial Transformer Attention
(STA) module and a Temporal Transformer Attention (TTA)
module, which can emphasize the foreground objects and
align the dynamic objects, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed 3D video object detector achieves state-of-the-art performance on the large-scale
nuScenes benchmark.

1. Introduction
LiDAR-based 3D object detection plays a critical role
in a wide range of applications, such as autonomous driving, robot navigation and virtual/augmented reality [11, 46].
The majority of current 3D object detection approaches [42,
58, 6, 62, 24] follow the single-frame detection paradigm,
while few of them perform detection in the point cloud
video. A point cloud video is deﬁned as a temporal sequence of point cloud frames. For instance, in the nuScenes
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

Figure 1: Occlusion situation in autonomous driving scenarios. Typical single-frame 3D object detector, e.g. [24], often leads
to false-negative (FN) results (top row). In contrast, our online 3D
video object detector can handle this (bottom row). The grey and
red boxes denote the predictions and ground-truths, respectively.

dataset [4], 20 point cloud frames can be captured per second with a modern 32-beam LiDAR sensor. Detection in
single frame may suffer from several limitations due to the
sparse nature of point cloud. In particular, occlusions, longdistance and non-uniform sampling inevitably occur on a
certain frame, where a single-frame object detector is incapable of handling these situations, leading to a deteriorated performance, as shown in Fig 1. However, a point
cloud video contains rich spatiotemporal information of the
foreground objects, which can be explored to improve the
detection performance. The major concern of constructing a 3D video object detector is how to model the spatial and temporal feature representation for the consecutive
point cloud frames. In this work, we propose to integrate
a graph-based spatial feature encoding component with an
attention-aware spatiotemporal feature aggregation component, to capture the video coherence in consecutive point

11495

