Achieving Robustness in the Wild via
Adversarial Mixing with Disentangled Representations
Sven Gowal∗
DeepMind

Chongli Qin∗

Po-Sen Huang

Taylan Cemgil

chongliqin@google.com

posenhuang@google.com

taylancemgil@google.com

sgowal@google.com

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham

Timothy Mann

Pushmeet Kohli

dvij@google.com

timothymann@google.com

pushmeet@google.com

Abstract
Recent research has made the surprising finding that
state-of-the-art deep learning models sometimes fail to generalize to small variations of the input. Adversarial training
has been shown to be an effective approach to overcome this
problem. However, its application has been limited to enforcing invariance to analytically defined transformations like
ℓp -norm bounded perturbations. Such perturbations do not
necessarily cover plausible real-world variations that preserve the semantics of the input (such as a change in lighting
conditions). In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
express and formalize robustness to these kinds of real-world
transformations of the input. The two key ideas underlying
our formulation are (1) leveraging disentangled representations of the input to define different factors of variations, and
(2) generating new input images by adversarially composing
the representations of different images. We use a StyleGAN
model to demonstrate the efficacy of this framework. Specifically, we leverage the disentangled latent representations
computed by a StyleGAN model to generate perturbations
of an image that are similar to real-world variations (like
adding make-up, or changing the skin-tone of a person) and
train models to be invariant to these perturbations. Extensive
experiments show that our method improves generalization
and reduces the effect of spurious correlations (reducing the
error rate of a “smile” detector by 21% for example).

1. Introduction
The principle by which neural networks are trained to
minimize their average error on the training data is known
as Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) [1]. ERM has, for
the most part, enabled breakthroughs in a wide variety of
fields [2–4], and this success has lead to the usage of neural
networks in applications that are safety-critical [5]. ERM,
however, is only guaranteed to produce meaningful models

Figure 1. Variations of the same faces. A model obtained through
classical training classifies the same face as both “smiling” and
“not smiling” (depending on the variations). Our model remains
consistent in terms of classification. Note that these persons “do
not exist” and have been generated using a StyleGAN model.

when the data encountered during training and deployment
is drawn independently from the same distribution. When
a mismatch between training and testing data occurs, models can fail in catastrophic ways; and, unfortunately, such
occurrence is commonplace: training data is often collected
through a biased process that highlights confounding factors
and spurious correlations [6, 7], which can lead to undesirable consequences (e.g., http://gendershades.org).
The effects of such data shifts are largely detailed in the
literature. For example, both Recht et al. [8] and Hendrycks
et al. [9] show that the accuracy of I MAGE N ET models is
severely impacted by changes in the data collection process.
Methods to counteract such effect, which mainly consist
of data augmentation techniques, also struggle. Training
against corrupted data only forces the memorization of such
corruptions and, as a result, these models fail to generalize
to new corruptions [10, 11]. Works such as mixup [12] or
AutoAugment [13] pave the way to further improvements,
11211

