Attentive Normalization for Conditional Image Generation
Yi Wang1∗ Ying-Cong Chen1 Xiangyu Zhang2 Jian Sun2 Jiaya Jia1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 MEGVII Technology
{yiwang, ycchen, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

{zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
Traditional convolution-based generative adversarial
networks synthesize images based on hierarchical local operations, where long-range dependency relation is implicitly modeled with a Markov chain. It is still not sufficient
for categories with complicated structures. In this paper, we
characterize long-range dependence with attentive normalization (AN), which is an extension to traditional instance
normalization. Specifically, the input feature map is softly
divided into several regions based on its internal semantic
similarity, which are respectively normalized. It enhances
consistency between distant regions with semantic correspondence. Compared with self-attention GAN, our attentive normalization does not need to measure the correlation
of all locations, and thus can be directly applied to largesize feature maps without much computational burden. Extensive experiments on class-conditional image generation
and semantic inpainting verify the efficacy of our proposed
module.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks [8] make image generation attract much attention. It aims to generate realistic
images based on a collection of natural images. This allows
various practical applications, e.g. image creation [20, 19],
editing [38, 33], data augmentation in discriminative tasks
[1], etc.
Most image generators rely on a fully convolutional generator [30, 31, 26]. Although these approaches have demonstrated their success in modeling structured data like human faces [19, 20], and unstructured data such as natural
scene [26, 25], they do not work well on complicated structured data such as cats or dogs. The reason is that each
layer in convolutional neural networks (CNN) is locally
*Part of the work is formed when YW took an internship at MEGVII
Technology.
The research of Zhang and Sun is supported by The National Key Research
and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800) and Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Conditional image generation of a GAN framework
using our proposed attentive normalization module. (a) Classconditional image generation. (b) Image inpainting.

bounded, and the relation between distant locations relies
on the Markovian modeling between convolutional layers.
In this regard, although stacking convolution layers
could lead to the large receptive field, fully convolutional
generators still lack the power to model high-order relationship in distant locations. Such long-range relation is vital
because it presents the semantic correspondence that human
perception is familiar with and sensitive about, e.g. symmetry of natural objects and correspondence among limbs.
Self-attention GAN (SA-GAN) [39] takes the first step
to model long-range dependency in class-conditional image generation. It introduces a self-attention module in the
convolution-based generator, which is helpful for capturing
the relation of distant regions. However, the self-attention
module requires computing the correlation between every
two points in the feature map. Therefore, the computational
cost grows rapidly as the feature map becomes large. In
this paper, we propose a different way for long-range dependency modeling, and achieves better results as well as a
lower computational burden.
Our method is built upon instance normalization (IN).
But the previous solution of (IN) normalizes the mean and
variance of a feature map along its spatial dimensions. This
strategy ignores the fact that different locations may correspond to semantics with varying mean and variance. As
illustrated in [28], this mechanism tends to deteriorate the
learned semantics of the intermediate features spatially.
In this paper, we normalize the input feature maps spatially according to the semantic layouts predicted from
them. It improves the distant relationship in the input as
15094

