Seeing Around Street Corners:
Non-Line-of-Sight Detection and Tracking In-the-Wild Using Doppler Radar
Nicolas Scheiner*1
Florian Kraus*1
Fangyin Wei*2
Buu Phan3
3
1
1
Fahim Mannan
Nils Appenrodt
Werner Ritter
Jürgen Dickmann1
Klaus Dietmayer 4
Bernhard Sick 5
Felix Heide 2,3
1

Mercedes-Benz AG

2

Princeton University

3

Algolux

4

Ulm University

Abstract
Conventional sensor systems record information about
directly visible objects, whereas occluded scene components are considered lost in the measurement process. Nonline-of-sight (NLOS) methods try to recover such hidden
objects from their indirect reflections – faint signal components, traditionally treated as measurement noise. Existing NLOS approaches struggle to record these low-signal
components outside the lab, and do not scale to large-scale
outdoor scenes and high-speed motion, typical in automotive scenarios. In particular, optical NLOS capture is fundamentally limited by the quartic intensity falloff of diffuse
indirect reflections. In this work, we depart from visiblewavelength approaches and demonstrate detection, classification, and tracking of hidden objects in large-scale dynamic environments using Doppler radars that can be manufactured at low-cost in series production. To untangle
noisy indirect and direct reflections, we learn from temporal
sequences of Doppler velocity and position measurements,
which we fuse in a joint NLOS detection and tracking network over time. We validate the approach on in-the-wild
automotive scenes, including sequences of parked cars or
house facades as relay surfaces, and demonstrate low-cost,
real-time NLOS in dynamic automotive environments.

1. Introduction
Conventional sensor systems capture objects in their direct line of sight, and, as such, existing computer vision
methods are capable of detecting and tracking only the visible scene parts [13, 15, 38, 37, 12, 23, 53, 30], whereas occluded scene components are deemed lost in the measurement process. Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) methods aim at
recovering information about these occluded objects from
their indirect reflections or shadows on visible scene surfaces, which are again in the line of sight of the detector.
While performing scene understanding of occluded objects
may enable applications across domains, including remote
sensing or medical imaging, especially autonomous driving
applications may benefit from detecting approaching traffic
* Equal contribution.

5

University of Kassel

Visible
Relay
Surface

FMCW
Virtual Aperture Radar

Single
Point Source

Moving
Occluded
Scene

Occluder

Figure 1: We demonstrate that it is possible to recover moving objects outside the direct line of sight in large automotive environments from Doppler radar measurements. Using static building facades or parked vehicles as relay walls,
we jointly classify, reconstruct, and track occluded objects.
participants that are occluded.
Existing NLOS imaging methods struggle outside controlled lab environments, and they struggle with large-scale
outdoor scenes and high-speed motion, such as in typical
automotive scenarios. The most successful NLOS imaging
methods send out ultra-short pulses of light and measure
their time-resolved returns [46, 34, 14, 8, 45, 5, 33, 29]. In
contrast to a conventional camera, such measurements allow existing methods to unmix light paths based on their
travel time [1, 21, 32, 34], effectively trading angular with
temporal resolution. As a result, pulse widths and detection
at a time scale of < 10 ps is required for room-sized scenes,
mandating specialized equipment which suffers from low
photon efficiency, high cost, and slow mechanical scanning. As intensity decreases quartically with the distance
to the visible relay wall, current NLOS methods are limited to meter-sized scenes even when exceeding the eyesafety limits for a Class 1 laser (e.g. Velodyne HDL-64E)
by a factor of 1000 [28]. Moreover, these methods are impractical for dynamic scenes as scanning and reconstruction takes up minutes [29, 5]. Unfortunately, alternative ap-

2068

