PnPNet: End-to-End Perception and Prediction with Tracking in the Loop
Ming Liang1∗ Bin Yang1,2∗
Wenyuan Zeng1,2 Yun Chen1 Rui Hu1 Sergio Casas1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto
{ming.liang, byang10, wenyuan, yun.chen, rui.hu, sergio.casas, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract

(a) Modular perception & prediction
sensor data

We tackle the problem of joint perception and motion
forecasting in the context of self-driving vehicles. Towards
this goal we propose PnPNet, an end-to-end model that
takes as input sequential sensor data, and outputs at each
time step object tracks and their future trajectories. The
key component is a novel tracking module that generates
object tracks online from detections and exploits trajectory
level features for motion forecasting. Specifically, the object
tracks get updated at each time step by solving both the data
association problem and the trajectory estimation problem.
Importantly, the whole model is end-to-end trainable and
benefits from joint optimization of all tasks. We validate
PnPNet on two large-scale driving datasets, and show significant improvements over the state-of-the-art with better
occlusion recovery and more accurate future prediction.

1. Introduction
We focus on the task of joint perception and prediction
(motion forecasting) in the context of self-driving vehicles.
This is a crucial task as in order to plan a safe maneuver,
anticipating the future decisions of surrounding agents is as
important as estimating their current state.
Different paradigms have been proposed to solve the perception and prediction problem, which are compared in Figure 1. Traditional self-driving autonomy stacks [2, 9, 16]
decompose the problem into three subtasks: object detection, object tracking, and motion forecasting, and rely on independent components that perform these subtasks sequentially. However, as each component is developed separately,
this paradigm makes compromises in each module in order
to meet the computing budget. Furthermore, the interface
between these modules is very compact (typically the object’s position, velocity, acceleration, and their uncertainty
estimates), which prevents downstream tasks from correcting the mistakes made by upstream ones.
∗ Equal contribution.

Detector

Tracker
detections

Predictor

Planner

tracks with future
prediction

tracks

(b) End-to-end perception & prediction, tracking out of the loop
sensor data

Detect & Predict

Tracker
detections with
future prediction

Planner

tracks with future
prediction

(c) End-to-end perception & prediction, tracking in the loop
sensor data

Detect → Track → Predict

Planner
tracks with future
prediction

Figure 1. Three paradigms for perception and prediction. Traditional approach (a) adopts the modular design that decomposes
the stack into subtasks and solves them with individual models.
End-to-end method like [28] (b) uses a joint model to solve detection and prediction simultaneously, but performs tracking as
post-processing. As a result, the full temporal history contained
in tracks is not used by detection and prediction. Our approach
(c) brings tracking into the loop so that all tasks benefit from rich
temporal context.

Recently, models that solve the detection and prediction
tasks jointly with a single neural network have been proposed [28], resulting in more efficient computation and improved accuracy. This paradigm is later extended to further solve the driver intention [8] and motion planning [50]
by adding the corresponding modules on top of the shared
backbone network. These approaches, however, suffer from
limited use of temporal history because object tracking is
not included in the loop and thus only leverage up to 1 second of past sensor data due to limited model capacity. This
may cause problems when dealing with occluded actors and
may produce temporal inconsistency in predictions.
In this paper we argue that leveraging the past is key for
sequential decision making process like motion forecasting.
Towards this goal we propose PnPNet, a new paradigm that
combines ideas from multi-object tracking and joint perception and prediction models. While the detection module
processes sequential sensor data and generates object detections at each time step, the tracking module associates
these estimates across time for better understanding of ob-

11553

