On the Distribution of Minima in Intrinsic-Metric Rotation Averaging
Kyle Wilson
Washington College
Department of Math and Computer Science
Chestertown, MD

David Bindel
Cornell University
Department of Computer Science
Ithaca, NY

kwilson24@washcoll.edu

bindel@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Rotation Averaging is a non-convex optimization problem
that determines orientations of a collection of cameras from
their images of a 3D scene. The problem has been studied
using a variety of distances and robustifiers. The intrinsic (or
geodesic) distance on SO(3) is geometrically meaningful;
but while some extrinsic distance-based solvers admit (conditional) guarantees of correctness, no comparable results
have been found under the intrinsic metric.
In this paper, we study the spatial distribution of local
minima. First, we do a novel empirical study to demonstrate sharp transitions in qualitative behavior: as problems
become noisier, they transition from a single (easy-to-find)
dominant minimum to a cost surface filled with minima. In
the second part of this paper we derive a theoretical bound
for when this transition occurs. This is an extension of the
results of [24], which used local convexity as a proxy to
study the difficulty of problem. By recognizing the underlying quotient manifold geometry of the problem we achieve an
n-fold improvement over prior work. Incidentally, our analysis also extends the prior l2 work to general lp costs. Our
results suggest using algebraic connectivity as an indicator
of problem difficulty.

1. Introduction
The rotation averaging problem arises in computer vision
as part of estimating the 3-dimensional poses of a set of
cameras. We are given many images of some scene, produced by cameras at unknown locations and with unknown
orientations. When two images overlap, it is often possible
to estimate the relative orientation of the associated cameras.
By considering many overlapping camera pairs we obtain
many such pairwise measurements.
Essentially, rotation averaging is an optimization problem
on a graph in which vertices represent cameras and edges
represent measurements of relative orientation. The goal is
to pick an absolute orientation for each vertex in a way that

best agrees with the relative orientation measurements. Both
the relative and absolute orientations must be in SO(3), the
group of orientation-preserving rotations of 3D space.
We may choose the cost function used in rotation averaging for convenience of computation, for the existence of theoretical guarantees, or for modeling concerns. From a geometric perspective, costs based on intrinsic metrics—geodesic
distances on SO(3)—are a natural choice. However, no such
method is presently known to have a guarantee of global
convergence. In fact, the l2 geodesic cost is known to yield a
non-convex problem. Formulations based on extrinsic costs—
non-manifold distances within representations—have been
more tractable and sometimes give optimality guarantees.
When solvers fail the junk solutions doom downstream problems, such as translations averaging and bundle adjustment.
This paper considers cost functions based on the intrinsic,
geodesic distance. Two recent surveys [9, 21] propose a familiar pattern: use an extrinsic solver to generate a candidate
solution, then refine with with a solver chosen for its modeling properties—even if the latter solver only guarantees
local optimality. This is a common pattern in geometric computer vision, with a well-known exemplar being the “GoldStandard” algorithm for estimating homographies [15]. The
extrinsic-intrinsic solver pattern leads to some key questions:
“Is this initial guess good enough for us to discover the best
solution?” and “Why do some problems require much better
initial guesses than others?” In this paper, we seek partial
answers to these questions. (Note that we do not propose a
new solver.) We make two main contributions:
1. We empirically investigate the cost surfaces of intrinsic rotation averaging problems. We demonstrate how
properties of the problem instance can lead to challenging distributions of local minima.
2. We derive bounds on this behavior by improving the local convexity analysis in [24]. We show how rotation averaging’s gauge symmetry leads to a quotient-manifold
description of the optimization problem, which leads to
an n-fold improvement in bounds.

6031

