Softmax Splatting for Video Frame Interpolation

SepConv - LF [39]

Simon Niklaus
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

sniklaus@pdx.edu

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

ToFlow [51]

CyclicGen [28]

CtxSyn - LF [37]

DAIN [3]

Ours - LF

Figure 1: A difficult example for video frame interpolation. Our approach produces a high-quality result in spite of the
delicate flamingo leg that is subject to large motion. Please see the arXiv version to be able to view this figure as a video.

Abstract
Differentiable image sampling in the form of backward
warping has seen broad adoption in tasks like depth estimation and optical flow prediction. In contrast, how to perform forward warping has seen less attention, partly due to
additional challenges such as resolving the conflict of mapping multiple pixels to the same target location in a differentiable way. We propose softmax splatting to address
this paradigm shift and show its effectiveness on the application of frame interpolation. Specifically, given two input
frames, we forward-warp the frames and their feature pyramid representations based on an optical flow estimate using
softmax splatting. In doing so, the softmax splatting seamlessly handles cases where multiple source pixels map to
the same target location. We then use a synthesis network
to predict the interpolation result from the warped representations. Our softmax splatting allows us to not only interpolate frames at an arbitrary time but also to fine tune the
feature pyramid and the optical flow. We show that our synthesis approach, empowered by softmax splatting, achieves
new state-of-the-art results for video frame interpolation.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation is a classic problem in computer vision with many practical applications. It can, for

example, be used to convert the frame rate of a video to the
refresh rate of the monitor that is used for playback, which
is beneficial for human perception [24, 25]. Frame interpolation can also help in video editing tasks, such as temporally consistent color modifications, by propagating the
changes that were made in a few keyframes to the remaining frames [33]. Frame interpolation can also support interframe compression for videos [49], serve as an auxiliary
task for optical flow estimation [30, 50], or generate training data to learn how to synthesize motion blur [6]. While
these applications employ frame interpolation in the temporal domain, it can also be used to synthesize novel views in
space by interpolating between given viewpoints [23].
Approaches for video frame interpolation can be categorized as flow-based, kernel-based, and phase-based. We
adopt the flow-based paradigm since it has proven to work
well in quantitative benchmarks [2]. One common approach
for these methods is to estimate the optical flow Ft0 and
Ft1 between two input frames I0 and I1 from the perspective of the frame It that is ought to be synthesized. The
interpolation result can then be obtained by backward warping I0 according to Ft0 and I1 according to Ft1 [20].
While it is intuitive, this approach makes it difficult to use
an off-the-shelf optical flow estimator and prevents synthesizing frames at an arbitrary t in a natural manner. To address these concerns, Jiang et al. [22] and Bao et al. [3]
approximate Ft0 and Ft1 from F01 and F10 .

5437

