MetaFuse: A Pre-trained Fusion Model for Human Pose Estimation
Rongchang Xie1,6 , Chunyu Wang5 , Yizhou Wang2,3,4
1

2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
Adv. Inst. of Info. Tech., Peking University
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University 4 CS Dept., Peking University
5
6
Microsoft Research Asia
Deepwise AI Lab

3

{rongchangxie, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, chnuwa@microsoft.com

Abstract
Cross view feature fusion is the key to address the occlusion problem in human pose estimation. The current fusion
methods need to train a separate model for every pair of
cameras making them difficult to scale. In this work, we introduce MetaFuse, a pre-trained fusion model learned from
a large number of cameras in the Panoptic dataset. The
model can be efficiently adapted or finetuned for a new pair
of cameras using a small number of labeled images. The
strong adaptation power of MetaFuse is due in large part
to the proposed factorization of the original fusion model
into two parts— (1) a generic fusion model shared by all
cameras, and (2) lightweight camera-dependent transformations. Furthermore, the generic model is learned from
many cameras by a meta-learning style algorithm to maximize its adaptation capability to various camera poses.
We observe in experiments that MetaFuse finetuned on the
public datasets outperforms the state-of-the-arts by a large
margin which validates its value in practice.

(a) Large-Scale Pretraining of MetaFuse from many camera views.

(b) Efficient Adaptation of MetaFuse to Unseen Camera placement.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose from multi-view images has
been a longstanding goal in computer vision. Most works
follow the pipeline of first estimating 2D poses in each camera view and then lifting them to 3D space, for example,
by triangulation [15] or by pictorial structure model [25].
However, the latter step generally depends on the quality
of 2D poses which unfortunately may have large errors in
practice especially when occlusion occurs.
Multi-view feature fusion [39, 25] has great potential to
solve the occlusion problem because a joint occluded in one
view could be visible in other views. The most challenging
problem in multi-view fusion is to find the corresponding
locations between different cameras. In a recent work [25]
, this is successfully solved by learning a fusion network
for each pair of cameras (referred to as NaiveFuse in this
paper). However, the learned correspondence is dependent

Figure 1. Concept of MetaFuse. We learn a pre-trained feature
fusion model from a large number of cameras, i.e. the green dots
in (a). Then for a new environment, we finetune the pre-trained
model for each camera pair using only a few training data to get
a customized 2D pose estimator. The feature fusion allows us to
localize the 2D joints even when occlusion occurs as in (b).

on camera poses so they need to retrain the model when
camera poses change which is not flexible.
This work aims to address the flexibility issue in multiview fusion. To that end, we introduce a pre-trained cross
view fusion model MetaFuse, which is learned from a large
number of camera pairs in the CMU Panoptic dataset [17].
The fusion strategies and learning methods allow it to be
rapidly adapted to unknown camera poses with only a few
labeled training data. See Figure 1 for illustration of the
concept. One of the core steps in MetaFuse is to factorize NaiveFuse [25] into two parts: a generic fusion model

13686

