Data-Free Knowledge Amalgamation via Group-Stack Dual-GAN
Jingwen Ye1 , Yixin Ji1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Xin Gao3 , Mingli Song1
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, New Jersey, United States
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{yejingwen, jiyixin, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao.w@gmail.com, zimu.gx@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have provided procedures for learning one network to amalgamate multiple
streams of knowledge from the pre-trained Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) models, thus reduce the annotation
cost. However, almost all existing methods demand massive training data, which may be unavailable due to privacy
or transmission issues. In this paper, we propose a datafree knowledge amalgamate strategy to craft a well-behaved
multi-task student network from multiple single/multi-task
teachers. The main idea is to construct the group-stack generative adversarial networks (GANs) which have two dual
generators. First one generator is trained to collect the
knowledge by reconstructing the images approximating the
original dataset utilized for pre-training the teachers. Then
a dual generator is trained by taking the output from the
former generator as input. Finally we treat the dual part
generator as the target network and regroup it. As demonstrated on several benchmarks of multi-label classification,
the proposed method without any training data achieves the
surprisingly competitive results, even compared with some
full-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely used to achieve state-ofthe-art performances in various artificial intelligent applications, such as tracking [22, 2], classification [16] and segmentation [33, 35]. The success of the widely used CNNs,
however, heavily relies on heavy computation and storage
as well as a massive number of human annotations, sometimes even up to the scales of tens of millions such as those
of ImageNet. However, in many cases of the real-world applications, the training data or annotations are confidential
and therefore, unavailable to the public.
To alleviate the re-training and reproducing effort, various effective approaches have been proposed recently. For

Predicted
Labels

Noise

Generator

Dual-generator
(TargetNet)

Figure 1. The architecture of Dual-GAN where the corresponding
discriminator is not depicted. The generator (left) synthesizes the
images, while the dual-generator (right) produces the label vectors.

example, the usual transfer learning approach [37, 31] utilizes the pre-trained base network and then copies its first
few layers to those of a target network to train toward the
target task. Besides, the seminal work of knowledge distillation (KD) [13] learns a compact student model by the
aid of the soft labels obtained from the teachers. Other than
these works that learn from one single network, knowledge
amalgamation (KA) [36] is proposed to effectively reuse
multiple pre-trained networks, and make the learned multiknowledge settle well in one single network. Besides, the
process of KA doesn’t require any annotations, where only
the intermediate features are treated as knowledge to guide
training.
Training with KA demands for the unlabeled dataset
only, which reduces the annotation cost largely. But it is
also a common situation with no access to any training samples, even the related raw input, due to the extreme privacy
policy or other irresistible factors. For example, building
the face detection system, it is a violation of portraits right
to publish the users’ profile photos. And taking the unrelated dataset as replacement leads to unsatisfying results for
the existence of the domain gap. So, in this paper, we investigate a practical strategy to train a customized network

12516

