Unsupervised Learning of Probably Symmetric Deformable 3D Objects
from Images in the Wild
Shangzhe Wu

Christian Rupprecht

Andrea Vedaldi

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{szwu, chrisr, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Training Phase

Single views only

Testing Phase

Input

3D reconstruction

Textured

Re-lighting

Figure 1: Unsupervised learning of 3D deformable objects from in-the-wild images. Left: Training uses only single views
of the object category with no additional supervision at all (i.e. no ground-truth 3D information, multiple views, or any prior
model of the object). Right: Once trained, our model reconstructs the 3D pose, shape, albedo and illumination of a deformable
object instance from a single image with excellent fidelity. Code and demo at https://github.com/elliottwu/unsup3d.

Abstract

networks appear to understand images as 2D textures [15],
3D modelling can explain away much of the variability of
natural images and potentially improve image understanding
in general. Motivated by these facts, we consider the problem
of learning 3D models for deformable object categories.
We study this problem under two challenging conditions.
The first condition is that no 2D or 3D ground truth information (such as keypoints, segmentation, depth maps, or prior
knowledge of a 3D model) is available. Learning without
external supervisions removes the bottleneck of collecting
image annotations, which is often a major obstacle to deploying deep learning for new applications. The second
condition is that the algorithm must use an unconstrained
collection of single-view images — in particular, it should
not require multiple views of the same instance. Learning
from single-view images is useful because in many applications, and especially for deformable objects, we solely have
a source of still images to work with. Consequently, our
learning algorithm ingests a number of single-view images
of a deformable object category and produces as output a
deep network that can estimate the 3D shape of any instance
given a single image of it (Fig. 1).
We formulate this as an autoencoder that internally decomposes the image into albedo, depth, illumination and
viewpoint, without direct supervision for any of these factors.

We propose a method to learn 3D deformable object categories from raw single-view images, without external supervision. The method is based on an autoencoder that factors
each input image into depth, albedo, viewpoint and illumination. In order to disentangle these components without
supervision, we use the fact that many object categories have,
at least in principle, a symmetric structure. We show that reasoning about illumination allows us to exploit the underlying
object symmetry even if the appearance is not symmetric due
to shading. Furthermore, we model objects that are probably,
but not certainly, symmetric by predicting a symmetry probability map, learned end-to-end with the other components
of the model. Our experiments show that this method can recover very accurately the 3D shape of human faces, cat faces
and cars from single-view images, without any supervision
or a prior shape model. On benchmarks, we demonstrate
superior accuracy compared to another method that uses
supervision at the level of 2D image correspondences.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D structure of images is key in many
computer vision applications. Futhermore, while many deep

1

