Advisable Learning for Self-driving Vehicles
by Internalizing Observation-to-Action Rules
Jinkyu Kim, Suhong Moon, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, and John Canny
EECS, University of California, Berkeley
{jinkyu.kim, suhong.moon, anna.rohrbach, trevordarrell, canny}@berkeley.edu

Semantic Segmentation

Abstract

Vehicle
Controller

Object-centric
Visual Encoder

Autonomous driving control has made dramatic progress
in the last several years. The proposed vehicle controllers
use a variety of approaches; recent efforts [5] suggest that
deep neural networks can be effectively applied to the controllers in an end-to-end manner. These models, however,
are known to be opaque. One way to simplify and expose
the underlying reasoning, is via a situation-specific dependence on visible objects in the scene, i.e. by only attending
to image areas that are causally linked to the driver’s actions [15]. However, the resulting attention maps are not
always compelling or human interpretable. Another option
is to verbalize the autonomous vehicle’s behaviour with natural language [17], Figure 2 (B). The resulting textual explanations are human understandable, but tend to be rather
“shallow”, as they report the more common objects over

Textual Observation:
“The road is wet”

Observation
-to-Action

1. Introduction

Attention Heat Map

Control
Commands

(Offline) Human-to-Vehicle Advice
Observation
Generator

Humans learn to drive through both practice and theory,
e.g. by studying the rules, while most self-driving systems
are limited to the former. Being able to incorporate human knowledge of typical causal driving behaviour should
benefit autonomous systems. We propose a new approach
that learns vehicle control with the help of human advice.
Specifically, our system learns to summarize its visual observations in natural language, predict an appropriate action response (e.g. “I see a pedestrian crossing, so I stop”),
and predict the controls, accordingly. Moreover, to enhance
interpretability of our system, we introduce a fine-grained
attention mechanism which relies on semantic segmentation
and object-centric RoI pooling. We show that our approach
of training the autonomous system with human advice,
grounded in a rich semantic representation, matches or outperforms prior work in terms of control prediction and explanation generation. Our approach also results in more interpretable visual explanations by visualizing object-centric
attention maps. Code is available at https://github.
com/JinkyuKimUCB/advisable-driving.

Instance Mask

“Vehicle should slow
when the road is wet”
Action Command:
“Slow down”

Figure 1: Our model consists of four main parts: (1) an
object-centric visual encoder built upon a semantic segmentation model, (2) an observation generator, which generates
textual observation about the scenes (“The road is wet”),
(3) an observation-to-action module, which maps a visual
scene description to a (high-level) action command (“Slow
down”), and (4) a vehicle controller conditioned on the generated action command.
the less common ones, which may be more important (e.g.
construction cones). Both approaches fall short of demonstrating causal behaviour akin to a typical human driver.
To address this issue, [16] augment an imitation learning
dataset with instantaneous human advice (e.g. “there is a
pedestrian ahead”, or “turn left”), see Figure 2 (A). They
show that providing such inputs helps more closely imitate
a human driver’s behavior. While promising, this method
requires ground-truth human inputs at test time.
Humans learn to drive not only from practice and demonstration, but also from theory, e.g. by studying the rules. We
advocate for a more principled way of integrating human
advice during learning. We assume that at training time,
human advice is available in the form of observation-action
19661

