Minimal Solutions for Relative Pose with a Single Affine Correspondence
Banglei Guan1 , Ji Zhao∗, Zhang Li1 , Fang Sun1 and Friedrich Fraundorfer2,3
1

College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, China
2

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria
3

Remote Sensing Technology Institute, German Aerospace Center, Germany

guanbanglei12@nudt.edu.cn

zhaoji84@gmail.com

sunfang@nudt.edu.cn

zhangli nudt@163.com

fraundorfer@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
In this paper we present four cases of minimal solutions
for two-view relative pose estimation by exploiting the affine
transformation between feature points and we demonstrate
efficient solvers for these cases. It is shown, that under the
planar motion assumption or with knowledge of a vertical
direction, a single affine correspondence is sufficient to recover the relative camera pose. The four cases considered
are two-view planar relative motion for calibrated cameras
as a closed-form and a least-squares solution, a closedform solution for unknown focal length and the case of a
known vertical direction. These algorithms can be used efficiently for outlier detection within a RANSAC loop and for
initial motion estimation. All the methods are evaluated on
both synthetic data and real-world datasets from the KITTI
benchmark. The experimental results demonstrate that our
methods outperform comparable state-of-the-art methods in
accuracy with the benefit of a reduced number of needed
RANSAC iterations.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), visual odometry (VO) and Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
have been active research topics in computer vision for
decades [34, 36]. These technologies have been used successfully in a wide variety of applications and they play an
important role in future technologies like autonomous driving. Relative pose estimation from two views is regarded
as a fundamental algorithm, which is an essential part of
SLAM and SfM pipelines. Thus, improving the accuracy,
efficiency and robustness of relative pose estimation algorithms is still of relevant interest [1, 2, 37, 41].
Most of the SLAM and SfM pipelines follow the scheme
where 2D-2D putative correspondences between subse∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An affine correspondence between two cameras. The
local affine transformation A transforms the patches surrounding
of point correspondence (pi , pj ).

quent views are established by feature matching. Then a
robust motion estimation framework such as the Random
Sample Consensus (RANSAC) [13] is typically adopted to
identify and remove matching outliers. Finally, only inlier
matches between subsequent views are used to estimate the
final relative pose [34]. This outlier removal step is critical for the robustness and reliability of the pose estimation
step. Besides, the efficiency of the outlier removal process
affects the real-time performance of SLAM and SfM directly, in particular, as the computational complexity of the
RANSAC estimator increases exponentially with respect to
the number of data points needed. Thus minimal case solutions for relative pose estimation are still of significant
importance [5, 2, 42, 11].
The idea of minimal solutions for relative pose estimation ranges back to the work of Hartley and Zisserman with
the seven-point method [20]. Other classical works are
the five-point method [30] and the homography estimation
method [20]. By exploiting motion constraints on camera
movements or utilizing an additional sensor like an inertial
measurement unit (IMU), the minimal number of point correspondences needed can be further reduced, which makes
the outlier removal more efficient and numerically more stable. For instance, two points are sufficient to recover camera
motion under the planar motion assumption since the pose
only has two degrees of freedom (DOF) [31, 8, 9]. Another

1929

