GraphTER: Unsupervised Learning of Graph Transformation Equivariant
Representations via Auto-Encoding Node-wise Transformations

1

Xiang Gao1 , Wei Hu1,∗, and Guo-Jun Qi2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing
2
Futurewei Technologies
{gyshgx868, forhuwei}@pku.edu.cn, guojunq@gmail.com

‫܆‬ǡ ‫ۯ‬

Abstract
Recent advances in Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs) have shown their efficiency for nonEuclidean data on graphs, which often require a large
amount of labeled data with high cost. It it thus critical to learn graph feature representations in an unsupervised manner in practice. To this end, we propose a novel
unsupervised learning of Graph Transformation Equivariant Representations (GraphTER), aiming to capture intrinsic patterns of graph structure under both global and local transformations. Specifically, we allow to sample different groups of nodes from a graph and then transform
them node-wise isotropically or anisotropically. Then, we
self-train a representation encoder to capture the graph
structures by reconstructing these node-wise transformations from the feature representations of the original and
transformed graphs. In experiments, we apply the learned
GraphTER to graphs of 3D point cloud data, and results on
point cloud segmentation/classification show that GraphTER significantly outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised
approaches and pushes greatly closer towards the upper
bound set by the fully supervised counterparts. The code
is available at: https://github.com/gyshgx868/graph-ter.

1. Introduction
Graphs are a natural representation of irregular data,
such as 3D geometric points, social networks, citation networks and brain networks. Recent advances in Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNNs) have shown their efficiency in learning representations of such data [4, 54, 53,
46], which generalize the celebrated CNN models. Existing GCNNs are mostly trained in a supervised or semisupervised fashion, requiring a large amount of labeled data
to learn graph representations. This prevents the wide appli∗ Corresponding author:
Wei Hu (forhuwei@pku.edu.cn).
This
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
[61972009] and Beijing Natural Science Foundation [4194080].

Node-wise
Transformation ‫ܜ‬
‫ܜ‬ଵ

‫ܜ‬ଷ

‫ܜ‬ଶ

E

‫܆ ܧ‬ǡ ‫ۯ‬
෩
‫ ܆ ܜ ܧ‬ǡ‫ۯ‬

D

‫ܜ‬Ƹ
Estimated
Transformation

෩
‫ ܆ ܜ‬ǡ‫ۯ‬

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed GraphTER model for
unsupervised feature learning. The encoder learns representations of the original graph data X associated with adjacency matrix A and its transformed counterpart t(X) associated with Ã
respectively. By decoding node-wise transformations t from both
representations, the auto-encoder is able to learn intrinsically morphable structures of graphs.

cability of GCNNs due to the high labeling cost especially
for large-scale graphs in many real scenarios. Hence, it is
demanded to train graph feature representations in an unsupervised fashion, which can adapt to downstream learning
tasks on graphs.
Auto-Encoders (AEs) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are two most representative methods for unsupervised learning. Auto-encoders aim to train an encoder
to learn feature representations by reconstructing input data
via a decoder [42, 36, 16, 18]. Most of auto-encoders stick
to the idea of reconstructing input data at the output end
(e.g., images [16], graphs [19], 3D point clouds [48]), and
thus can be classified into the Auto-Encoding Data (AED)
[51]. In contrast, GANs [14, 10, 11, 50, 26, 7, 3] extract
feature representations in an unsupervised fashion by generating data from input noises via a pair of generator and
discriminator, where the noises are viewed as the data representations, and the generator is trained to generate data
from the “noise” feature representations.
Based on AEs and GANs, many approaches have sought

7163

