Learning a Unified Sample Weighting Network for Object Detection∗
Qi Cai† , Yingwei Pan‡ , Yu Wang‡ , Jingen Liu§ , Ting Yao‡ , and Tao Mei‡
†
‡

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

§

JD AI Research, Mountain View, USA

{cqcaiqi, panyw.ustc, feather1014, jingenliu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com

Score:0.69
IoU: 0.69

Abstract
Region sampling or weighting is significantly important
to the success of modern region-based object detectors.
Unlike some previous works, which only focus on “hard”
samples when optimizing the objective function, we argue
that sample weighting should be data-dependent and taskdependent. The importance of a sample for the objective function optimization is determined by its uncertainties to both object classification and bounding box regression tasks. To this end, we devise a general loss function to cover most region-based object detectors with various sampling strategies, and then based on it we propose
a unified sample weighting network to predict a sample’s
task weights. Our framework is simple yet effective. It
leverages the samples’ uncertainty distributions on classification loss, regression loss, IoU, and probability score,
to predict sample weights. Our approach has several advantages: (i). It jointly learns sample weights for both
classification and regression tasks, which differentiates it
from most previous work. (ii). It is a data-driven process, so it avoids some manual parameter tuning. (iii). It
can be effortlessly plugged into most object detectors and
achieves noticeable performance improvements without affecting their inference time. Our approach has been thoroughly evaluated with recent object detection frameworks
and it can consistently boost the detection accuracy. Code
has been made available at https://github.com/
caiqi/sample-weighting-network.

1. Introduction
Modern region-based object detection is a multi-task
learning problem, which consists of object classification
and localization. It involves region sampling (sliding window or region proposal), region classification and regression, and non-maximum suppression. Leveraging region
sampling, it converts object detection into a classification
∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

Loss: 3.88
Weight: 0.27

Loss: 0.03
Weight: 7.39

Loss: 3.51
Weight: 0.25

Score: 0.19
IoU: 0.87

Score:0.87
IoU: 0.81

Loss: 0.39
Weight: 5.46

Score: 0.21
IoU: 0.89

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Samples from our training process. (a) The samples
having large classification loss but small weight. (b) The samples
having small classification loss but large weight. (c) The samples
exhibiting inconsistency between classification score and IoU.

task, where a vast number of regions are classified and regressed. According to the way of region search, these detectors can be categorized into one-stage detectors [28, 30,
34, 45] and two-stage detectors [2, 15, 16, 17, 27, 36].
In general, the object detectors of the highest accuracy
are based on the two-stage framework such as Faster RCNN [36], which rapidly narrows down regions (most of
them are from the background) during the region proposal
stage. In contrast, the one-stage detectors, such as SSD
[30] and YOLO [34], achieve faster detection speed but
lower accuracy. It is because of the class imbalance problem
(i.e., the imbalance between foreground and background regions), which is a classic challenge for object detection.
The two-stage detectors deal with class imbalance by
a region-proposal mechanism followed by various efficient
sample strategies, such as sampling with a fixed foregroundto-background ratio and hard example mining [13, 37, 40].
Although the similar hard example mining can be applied
to one-stage detectors, it is inefficient due to a large number of easy negative examples [28]. Unlike the Online
Hard Example Mining (OHEM) [37] which explicitly selects samples with high classification losses into the training loop, Focal-Loss [28] proposes a soft weighting strategy, which reshapes the classification loss to automatically
down-weight the contributions of easy samples and thus focuses the training on hard samples. As a result, the manually tuned Focal-Loss can significantly improve the performance of one-stage detectors.

14173

