DeepCap: Monocular Human Performance Capture Using Weak Supervision
Marc Habermann1,2 Weipeng Xu1,2 Michael Zollhoefer3 Gerard Pons-Moll1,2 Christian Theobalt1,2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 2 Saarland Informatics Campus, 3 Stanford University
Abstract

Human performance capture is a highly important computer vision problem with many applications in movie production and virtual/augmented reality. Many previous performance capture approaches either required expensive
multi-view setups or did not recover dense space-time coherent geometry with frame-to-frame correspondences. We
propose a novel deep learning approach for monocular
dense human performance capture. Our method is trained
in a weakly supervised manner based on multi-view supervision completely removing the need for training data with
3D ground truth annotations. The network architecture is
based on two separate networks that disentangle the task
into a pose estimation and a non-rigid surface deformation step. Extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations
show that our approach outperforms the state of the art in
terms of quality and robustness.

1. Introduction
Human performance capture, i.e, the space-time coherent 4D capture of full pose and non-rigid surface deformation of people in general clothing, revolutionized the film
and gaming industry in recent years. Apart from visual effects, it has many use cases in generating personalized dynamic virtual avatars for telepresence, virtual try-on, mixed
reality, and many other areas. In particular for the latter applications, being able to performance capture humans from
monocular video would be a game changer. The majority of established monocular methods only captures articulated motion (including hands or sparse facial expression at
most). However, the monocular tracking of dense full-body
deformations of skin and clothing, in addition to articulated
pose, which play an important role in producing realistic
virtual characters, is still at its infancy.
In literature, multi-view marker-less methods [13, 14,
15, 17, 24, 29, 50, 55, 81, 82, 86, 64, 65] have shown
compelling results. However, these approaches rely on
well-controlled multi-camera studios (typically with green
screen), which prohibits them from being used for location
shootings of films and telepresence in living spaces.
Recent monocular human modeling approaches have
shown compelling reconstructions of humans, including
clothing, hair and facial details [70, 99, 2, 3, 9, 60, 52].

Figure 1. We present the first learning-based approach for dense
monocular human performance capture using weak multi-view supervision that not only predicts the pose but also the space-time
coherent non-rigid deformations of the model surface.

Some directly regress voxels [28, 99] or the continuous occupancy of the surface [70]. Since predictions are pixel
aligned, reconstructions have nice detail, but limbs are often
missing, especially for difficult poses. Moreover, the recovered motion is not factorized into articulation and non-rigid
deformation, which prevents the computer-graphics style
control over the reconstructions that is required in many of
the aforementioned applications. Importantly, surface vertices are not tracked over time, so no space-time coherent
model is captured. Another line of work predicts deformations or displacements to an articulated template, which prevents missing limbs and allows more control [2, 9, 5, 67].
However, these works do not capture motion and the surface
deformations.
The state-of-the-art monocular human performance capture methods [89, 32] densely track the deformation of the
surface. They leverage deep learning-based sparse keypoint detections and perform an expensive template fitting
afterwards. In consequence, they can only non-rigidly fit
to the input view and suffer from instability. By contrast,
we present the first learning-based method that jointly infers the articulated and non-rigid 3D deformation parameters in a single feed-forward pass at much higher performance, accuracy and robustness. The core of our method is
a CNN model which integrates a fully differentiable mesh
template parameterized with pose and an embedded deformation graph. From a single image, our network predicts
the skeletal pose, and the rotation and translation parameters for each node in the deformation graph. In stark contrast to implicit representations [70, 99, 22], our mesh-based
15052

