Feature-metric Registration: A Fast Semi-supervised Approach for Robust Point
Cloud Registration without Correspondences
Xiaoshui Huang
The University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Guofeng Mei, Jian Zhang
University of Technology Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Xiaoshui.Huang@sydney.edu.au

Guofeng.Mei@student.uts.edu.au, Jian.Zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
We present a fast feature-metric point cloud registration framework, which enforces the optimisation of registration by minimising a feature-metric projection error without correspondences. The advantage of the feature-metric
projection error is robust to noise, outliers and density difference in contrast to the geometric projection error. Besides, minimising the feature-metric projection error does
not need to search the correspondences so that the optimisation speed is fast. The principle behind the proposed method
is that the feature difference is smallest if point clouds are
aligned very well. We train the proposed method in a semisupervised or unsupervised approach, which requires limited or no registration label data. Experiments demonstrate our method obtains higher accuracy and robustness
than the state-of-the-art methods. Besides, experimental results show that the proposed method can handle significant
noise and density difference, and solve both same-source
and cross-source point cloud registration.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a process of transforming different scans of the same 3D scene or object into one coordinate system. Most of the state-of-the-art registration
methods [12, 8, 9] minimize a geometric (point coordinatebased) projection error through two processes: correspondences searching and transformation estimation. These two
processes alternatively conduct until the geometric projection error is minimum. We strive to solve the point cloud
registration because the registration is critical for many
tasks such as robotics vision and augment reality.
In the point cloud registration task, looking at Figure 1,
the best alignment of point 1 and point 2 is the third column (manually aligned) since the geometric projection error is minimum. However, such best alignment can hardly
achieve by using the existing two-process methods since

Figure 1. The difference between the coordinate-based registration (top) and feature-metric registration(bottom). The top shows
the best alignment can never be achieved since this alignment has
no point-point correspondences. The bottom feature-metric registration can achieve the best alignment since it optimizes the feature difference without correspondence and the feature difference
is minimum in the best alignment.

there are no point-point correspondences. Even though the
soft correspondence [10] provides an alternative way by using weighted point-point correspondences, the behind theory still relies on the point-point correspondences, and it
is tricky to decide the weights. Besides, the noise, outliers
and density differences existed in the point clouds will make
the registration problem more challenging since the pointpoint correspondences are impaired during the acquisition
process [12].
There are plenty of literature focus on solving point
cloud registration problem [24, 14, 26, 12, 25, 9]. Roughly,
they could generally be divided into two categories: global
and local methods. Global methods [24, 14] usually estimate the up-bound and low-bound of the objective function.
In contrast, the local methods [26, 12, 25, 9] always care
about local alignment. A fundamental block of the existing methods is the iterative computation of correspondences
and transformation. Present implementations of this fundamental block have some inherent limitations. (1) They
solve the registration tasks by minimizing a geometric projection error. This error metric is sensitive to noise and outliers since the registration relies on point-point correspon111366

