Unsupervised Person Re-identification via Multi-label Classification
Dongkai Wang Shiliang Zhang
Peking University
{dongkai.wang, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Multi-label Classification
input

The challenge of unsupervised person re-identification
(ReID) lies in learning discriminative features without true
labels. This paper formulates unsupervised person ReID as
a multi-label classification task to progressively seek true
labels. Our method starts by assigning each person image with a single-class label, then evolves to multi-label
classification by leveraging the updated ReID model for
label prediction. The label prediction comprises similarity computation and cycle consistency to ensure the quality of predicted labels. To boost the ReID model training
efficiency in multi-label classification, we further propose
the memory-based multi-label classification loss (MMCL).
MMCL works with memory-based non-parametric classifier
and integrates multi-label classification and single-label
classification in a unified framework. Our label prediction and MMCL work iteratively and substantially boost
the ReID performance. Experiments on several large-scale
person ReID datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
method in unsupervised person ReID. Our method also allows to use labeled person images in other domains. Under this transfer learning setting, our method also achieves
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of person
re-identification (ReID), which learns discriminative features from labeled person images with deep Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) [43, 14, 9, 27, 16, 26, 28, 29]. Because it is expensive to annotate person images across multiple cameras, recent research efforts start to focus on unsupervised person ReID. Unsupervised person ReID aims
to learn discriminative features from unlabeled person images. Compared with supervised learning, unsupervised
learning relieves the requirement for expensive data annotation, hence shows better potential to push person ReID
towards real applications.
The challenge of unsupervised person ReID lies in learning discriminative features without true labels. To conquer

CNN

memory

scores

MMCL
MPLP
single-class
label

multi-class
label

Figure 1. Illustrations of multi-label classification for unsupervised person ReID. We target to assign each unlabeled person image with a multi-class label reflecting the person identity. This is
achieved by iteratively running MPLP for prediction and MMCL
for multi-label classification loss computation. This procedure
guides CNN to produce discriminative features for ReID.

this challenge, most of recent works [37, 46, 22, 19, 30] define unsupervised person ReID as a transfer learning task,
which leverages labeled data on other domains for model
initialization or label transfer. Among them, some works
assign each image with a single-class label [46]. Some others leverage spatio-temporal cues or additional attribute annotations [22, 19, 30]. Detailed review of existing methods will be presented in Sec. 2. Thanks to the above efforts, the performance of unsupervised person ReID has
been significantly boosted. However, there is still a considerable gap between supervised and unsupervised person ReID. Meanwhile, the setting of transfer learning leads
to limited flexibility. For example, as discussed in many
works [21, 35, 31], the performance of transfer learning is
closely related to the domain gap, e.g., large domain gap
degrades the performance. It is non-trivial to estimate the
domain gap and select suitable source datasets for transfer
learning in unsupervised person ReID.
This paper targets to boost unsupervised person ReID
without leveraging any labeled data. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
we treat each unlabeled person image as a class and train the
ReID model to assign each image with a multi-class label.
In other words, the ReID model is trained to classify each

10981

