Learning Depth-Guided Convolutions for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Mingyu Ding1,2 Yuqi Huo 2,5 Hongwei Yi 3 Zhe Wang4 Jianping Shi4 Zhiwu Lu2,5 Ping Luo1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
4
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
SenseTime Research
5
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing 100872, China
{myding, pluo}@cs.hku.hk {bohony,luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection from a single image without LiDAR
is a challenging task due to the lack of accurate depth information. Conventional 2D convolutions are unsuitable
for this task because they fail to capture local object and
its scale information, which are vital for 3D object detection. To better represent 3D structure, prior arts typically transform depth maps estimated from 2D images into
a pseudo-LiDAR representation, and then apply existing
3D point-cloud based object detectors. However, their results depend heavily on the accuracy of the estimated depth
maps, resulting in suboptimal performance. In this work,
instead of using pseudo-LiDAR representation, we improve
the fundamental 2D fully convolutions by proposing a new
local convolutional network (LCN), termed Depth-guided
Dynamic-Depthwise-Dilated LCN (D4 LCN), where the filters and their receptive fields can be automatically learned
from image-based depth maps, making different pixels of
different images have different filters. D4 LCN overcomes
the limitation of conventional 2D convolutions and narrows
the gap between image representation and 3D point cloud
representation. Extensive experiments show that D4 LCN
outperforms existing works by large margins. For example,
the relative improvement of D4 LCN against the state-of-theart on KITTI is 9.1% in the moderate setting. D4 LCN ranks
1st on KITTI monocular 3D object detection benchmark at
the time of submission (car, December 2019). The code is
available at https://github.com/dingmyu/D4LCN.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental problem and has
many applications such as autonomous driving and robotics.
Previous methods show promising results by utilizing LiDAR device, which produces precise depth information in
terms of 3D point clouds. However, due to the high-cost

(a) Pseudo-LiDAR points from DORN (b) Pseudo-LiDAR from MonoDepth

(c) Our result using MonoDepth

(d) Result of Pesudo-LiDAR

Figure 1. (a) and (b) show pseudo-LiDAR points generated by
the supervised depth estimator, DORN [10] and the unsupervised
Monodepth [13] respectively. The green box represents groundtruth (GT) 3D box. Pseudo-LiDAR points generated by inaccurate depth as shown in (b) have large offsets comapred to the GT
box. (c) and (d) show the detection results of our method and
Pseudo-Lidar [48] by using a coarse depth map. The performance
of [48] depends heavily on the accuracy of the estimated depth
maps, while our method achieves accurate detection results when
accurate depth maps are missing.

and sparse output of LiDAR, it is desirable to seek cheaper
alternatives like monocular cameras. This problem remains
largely unsolved, though it has drawn much attention.
Recent methods towards the above goal can be generally
categorized into two streams as image-based approaches
[36, 26, 41, 19, 17, 4] and pseudo-LiDAR point-based approaches [48, 33, 50]. The image-based approaches [5, 17]
typically leverage geometry constraints including object
shape, ground plane, and key points. These constraints
are formulated as different terms in loss function to improve detection results. The pseudo-LiDAR point-based approaches transform depth maps estimated from 2D images
to point cloud representations to mimic the LiDAR signal.
As shown in Figure 1, both of these methods have drawbacks, resulting in suboptimal performance.
Specifically, the image-based methods typically fail to
capture meaningful local object scale and structure informa111672

