BlendedMVS: A Large-scale Dataset for Generalized Multi-view Stereo
Networks
Yao Yao1

Zixin Luo1
1

Shiwei Li2
Tian Fang2

Jingyang Zhang1
Long Quan1

Yufan Ren3

Lei Zhou1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

{yyaoag, zluoag, jzhangbs, lzhouai, quan}@cse.ust.hk
2

Everest Innovation Technology

3

{sli, fangtian}@altizure.com

renyufan@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
While deep learning has recently achieved great success
on multi-view stereo (MVS), limited training data makes
the trained model hard to be generalized to unseen scenarios. Compared with other computer vision tasks, it is
rather difficult to collect a large-scale MVS dataset as it
requires expensive active scanners and labor-intensive process to obtain ground truth 3D structures. In this paper,
we introduce BlendedMVS, a novel large-scale dataset, to
provide sufficient training ground truth for learning-based
MVS. To create the dataset, we apply a 3D reconstruction
pipeline to recover high-quality textured meshes from images of well-selected scenes. Then, we render these mesh
models to color images and depth maps. To introduce the
ambient lighting information during training, the rendered
color images are further blended with the input images to
generate the training input. Our dataset contains over 17k
high-resolution images covering a variety of scenes, including cities, architectures, sculptures and small objects.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that BlendedMVS endows the trained model with significantly better generalization ability compared with other MVS datasets. The
dataset and pretrained models are available at https:
//github.com/YoYo000/BlendedMVS.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) reconstructs the dense representation of the scene from multi-view images and corresponding camera parameters. While the problem is previously addressed by classical methods, recent studies [30,
31, 10] show that learning-based approaches are also able to
produce results comparable to or even better than classical
state-of-the-arts. Conceptually, learning-based approaches

Zhejiang University

implicitly take into account global semantics such as specularity, reflection and lighting information during the reconstruction, which would be beneficial for reconstructions of
textureless and non-Lambertian areas. It has been reported
on the small object DTU dataset [2] that, the best overall
quality has been largely improved by recent learning-based
approaches [30, 31, 4, 13].
By contrast, leaderboards of Tanks and Temples [14] and
ETH3D [23] benchmarks are still dominated by classical
MVS methods. In fact, current learning-based methods are
all trained on DTU dataset [2], which consists of small objects captured with a fixed camera trajectory. As a result, the
trained model cannot generalize very well on other scenes.
Moreover, previous MVS benchmarks [24, 26, 2, 14, 23]
mainly focus on the point cloud evaluation rather than the
network training. Compared with other computer vision
tasks (e.g., classification and stereo), the training data for
MVS reconstruction is rather limited, and it is desired to establish a new dataset to provide sufficient training ground
truth for learning-based MVS.
In this paper, we introduce BlendedMVS, a large-scale
synthetic dataset for multi-view stereo training. Instead of
using expensive active scanners to obtain ground truth point
clouds, we propose to generate training images and depth
maps by rendering textured 3D models to different viewpoints. The texture mesh of each scene is first reconstructed
from images, which is then rendered into color images and
depth maps. To introduce the ambient lighting information
during training, we further blend rendered images with input color images to generate the training input. The resulting images inherit detailed visual cues from rendered color
images, which makes them consistently align with rendered
depth maps. At the same time, the blended images still
largely preserve the realistic ambient lighting information
from input images, which helps the trained model better

1790

