Adaptive Graph Convolutional Network with Attention Graph Clustering for
Co-saliency Detection

1

Kaihua Zhang1 , Tengpeng Li1 , Shiwen Shen2 , Bo Liu2∗, Jin Chen1 ,Qingshan Liu1
B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
JD Digits, Mountain View, CA, USA
{zhkhua,kfliubo}@gmail.com

Abstract
Co-saliency detection aims to discover the common and
salient foregrounds from a group of relevant images. For
this task, we present a novel adaptive graph convolutional
network with attention graph clustering (GCAGC). Three
major contributions have been made, and are experimentally shown to have substantial practical merits. First,
we propose a graph convolutional network design to extract information cues to characterize the intra- and interimage correspondence. Second, we develop an attention
graph clustering algorithm to discriminate the common objects from all the salient foreground objects in an unsupervised fashion. Third, we present a unified framework
with encoder-decoder structure to jointly train and optimize
the graph convolutional network, attention graph cluster,
and co-saliency detection decoder in an end-to-end manner. We evaluate our proposed GCAGC method on three cosaliency detection benchmark datasets (iCoseg, Cosal2015
and COCO-SEG). Our GCAGC method obtains significant
improvements over the state-of-the-arts on most of them.

1. Introduction
Human is able to exhibit visual fixation to attend to the
attractive and interesting regions and objects for future processing [7]. Co-saliency detection model simulates the human visual system to perceive the scene, and searches for
the common and salient foregrounds in an image group.
Co-saliency has been used in various applications to improve the understanding of image/video content, such as
image/video co-segmentation [55, 13, 14, 59], object colocalization [25, 53], and image retrieval [47, 68].
In co-saliency detection, the semantic categories of the
∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported in part by National Ma-

jor Project of China for New Generation of AI (No. 2018AAA0100400),
in part by the NSFC (61876088, 61825601), in part by the NSF of Jiangsu
Province (BK20170040).

common salient objects are unknown. Thus, the designed
algorithm needs to infer such information from the specific
content of the input image group. Therefore, the co-saliency
detection algorithm design usually focuses on addressing two key challenges: (1) extracting informative image feature
representations to robustly describe the image foregrounds; and (2) designing effective computational frameworks to formulate and detect the co-saliency. Conventional
hand-engineered features, such as Gabor filters, color histograms and SIFT descriptors [43] have been widely used in
many co-saliency detection methods [12, 41, 69]. However, hand-crafted shallow features usually lack the ability to
fully capture the large variations of common object appearances, and complicated background textures [57]. Recently, researchers improve co-saliency detection using deeplearning-based high-level feature representations, and have
shown promising results [75, 73, 76]. Nonetheless, these
approaches separate the representation extraction from cosaliency detection as two distinct steps, and lose the ability
to tailor the image features towards inferring co-salient regions [24]. End-to-end algorithms adopting convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [24, 57, 64] have been developed
to overcome this problem, and demonstrated state-of-the-art
performance. Although CNN is able to extract image representations in a data-driven way, it is the sub-optimal solution to model long-range dependencies [61]. CNN captures
long-range dependencies by deeply stacking convolutional operations to enlarge the receptive fields. However, the
repeated convolutional operations cause optimization difficulties [61, 21], and make multi-hop dependency modeling
[61]. Moreover, it becomes even more challenging for the
CNN to accurately modeling the inter-image non-local dependencies for the co-salient regions in the image group.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we develop a
novel adaptive graph convolutional network with attention
graph clustering (GCAGC) for co-saliency detection. We
first utilize a CNN encoder to extract multi-scale feature
representations from the image group, and generate combined dense feature node graphs. We then process the dense
19050

