Unpaired Portrait Drawing Generation via Asymmetric Cycle Mapping
Ran Yi, Yong-Jin Liu∗
CS Dept, BNRist
Tsinghua University, China

Yu-Kun Lai, Paul L. Rosin
School of Computer Science and Informatics
Cardiff University, UK

{yr16,liuyongjin}@tsinghua.edu.cn

{LaiY4,RosinPL}@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
Portrait drawing is a common form of art with high abstraction and expressiveness. Due to its unique characteristics, existing methods achieve decent results only with
paired training data, which is costly and time-consuming
to obtain. In this paper, we address the problem of automatic transfer from face photos to portrait drawings with
unpaired training data. We observe that due to the significant imbalance of information richness between photos and
drawings, existing unpaired transfer methods such as CycleGAN tend to embed invisible reconstruction information
indiscriminately in the whole drawings, leading to important facial features partially missing in drawings. To address this problem, we propose a novel asymmetric cycle
mapping that enforces the reconstruction information to be
visible (by a truncation loss) and only embedded in selective facial regions (by a relaxed forward cycle-consistency
loss). Along with localized discriminators for the eyes, nose
and lips, our method well preserves all important facial features in the generated portrait drawings. By introducing a
style classifier and taking the style vector into account, our
method can learn to generate portrait drawings in multiple
styles using a single network. Extensive experiments show
that our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Portrait drawing is a unique style of art which is highly
abstract and expressive. However, drawing a delicate portrait drawing is time consuming and needs to be carried out
by skilled artists. Therefore, automatic generation of portrait drawings is very desirable.
Image style transfer has been a longstanding topic in
computer vision. In recent years, inspired by the effectiveness of deep learning, Gatys et al. [4] introduced convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to transfer style from
a style image to a content image, and opened up the field
*Corresponding author

of neural style transfer. Subsequently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have achieved much success in solving image style transfer problems [10, 25]. However, existing methods are mainly applied to cluttered styles (e.g., oil
painting style) where a stylized image is full of fragmented
brush strokes and the requirement for the quality of each
individual element is low.
Artistic portrait line drawings (APDrawings) are completely different from the previously tackled painting styles.
Generating them is very challenging because the style is
highly abstract: it only contains a sparse set of graphical elements, is line-stroke-based, disables shading, and
has high semantic constraints. Therefore, previous texturebased style transfer methods and general image-to-image
translation methods fail to generate good results on the APDrawing style (Fig. 1). To the best of our knowledge, APDrawingGAN [20] is the only method that explicitly deals
with APDrawing by using a hierarchical structure and a distance transform loss. However, this method requires paired
training data that is costly to obtain. Due to the limited
availability of paired data, this method cannot adapt well to
face photos with unconstrained lighting in the wild.
Compared to paired training data, APDrawing generation learned from unpaired data is much more challenging. Previous methods for unpaired image-to-image translation [25, 21] use a cycle structure to regularize training.
Although cycle consistency loss enables learning from unpaired data, we observe that when applying them to face
photo to APDrawing translation, due to significant imbalance of information richness in these two data types, these
methods tend to embed invisible reconstruction information
indiscriminately in the whole APDrawing, causing a deterioration in the quality of the generated APDrawings, such as
important facial features partially missing (Figs. 1(f-g)).
In this paper, we propose an asymmetric cycle structure
to tolerate certain reconstruction quality issues. We argue
that the network does not need to reconstruct an accurate
face photo from a generated APDrawing due to information imbalance. Accordingly, we introduce a relaxed cycle consistency loss between the reconstructed face photo

8217

