Syn2Real Transfer Learning for Image Deraining using Gaussian Processes
Rajeev Yasarla∗

Vishwanath A. Sindagi∗
Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{ryasarl1, vishwanathsindagi, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Images captured under rainy conditions are often of
poor quality. The artifacts introduced by rain streaks adversely affect the performance of subsequent computer vision algorithms such as object detection and recognition
[12, 28, 41, 4]. With such algorithms becoming vital components in several applications such as autonomous navigation and video surveillance [37, 25, 36], it is increasingly
important to develop sophisticated algorithms for rain removal.
The task of rain removal is plagued with several issues
such as (i) large variations in scale, density and orientation of the rain streaks, and (ii) lack of real-world labeled
∗ equal contribution

(b)
 = Labeled data

(c)
 = Unlabeled data

drop

drop
gain

23.5

drop

gain

23.0
22.5

drop
gain

(a)

22.0
gain

PSNR(dB)

Recent CNN-based methods for image deraining have
achieved excellent performance in terms of reconstruction
error as well as visual quality. However, these methods
are limited in the sense that they can be trained only on
fully labeled data. Due to various challenges in obtaining
real world fully-labeled image deraining datasets, existing
methods are trained only on synthetically generated data
and hence, generalize poorly to real-world images. The
use of real-world data in training image deraining networks
is relatively less explored in the literature. We propose a
Gaussian Process-based semi-supervised learning framework which enables the network in learning to derain using
synthetic dataset while generalizing better using unlabeled
real-world images. Through extensive experiments and ablations on several challenging datasets (such as Rain800,
Rain200H and DDN-SIRR), we show that the proposed
method, when trained on limited labeled data, achieves onpar performance with fully-labeled training. Additionally,
we demonstrate that using unlabeled real-world images in
the proposed GP-based framework results in superior performance as compared to existing methods.

21.5
21.0


100

  +    +    +    + 
10

20

40

60

(% of Labeled data)

Figure 1. Top row: (a) Input rainy image. (b) Output from a
network trained using only the synthetic data. (c) Output from
a network trained using the synthetic data and unlabeled realworld data. This shows better generalization. Bottom row: Results
from Semi-supervised learning (SSL) experiments. Reducing the
amount of labeled data used for training results in the performance
drop. Using the proposed SSL framework, we are able to recover
the performance.

training data. Most of the existing work [58, 9, 23, 51, 60,
6, 52, 20] in image deraining have largely focused towards
addressing the first issue. For example, Fu et al. [9] developed an end-to-end method which focuses on high frequency detail during training a deraining network. In another work, Zhang and Patel [58] proposed a density-aware
multi-steam densely connected network for joint rain den12726

