Deep 3D Portrait from a Single Image
Sicheng Xu1 * Jiaolong Yang2 Dong Chen2 Fang Wen2 Yu Deng3 Yunde Jia1 Xin Tong2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Tsinghua University

Abstract
In this paper, we present a learning-based approach for
recovering the 3D geometry of human head from a single
portrait image. Our method is learned in an unsupervised
manner without any ground-truth 3D data. We represent the
head geometry with a parametric 3D face model together
with a depth map for other head regions including hair and
ear. A two-step geometry learning scheme is proposed to
learn 3D head reconstruction from in-the-wild face images,
where we first learn face shape on single images using selfreconstruction and then learn hair and ear geometry using
pairs of images in a stereo-matching fashion. The second
step is based on the output of the first to not only improve
the accuracy but also ensure the consistency of overall head
geometry. We evaluate the accuracy of our method both in
3D and with pose manipulation tasks on 2D images. We
alter pose based on the recovered geometry and apply a refinement network trained with adversarial learning to ameliorate the reprojected images and translate them to the real
image domain. Extensive evaluations and comparison with
previous methods show that our new method can produce
high-fidelity 3D head geometry and head pose manipulation results.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D face geometry from 2D images has
been a longstanding problem in computer vision. Obtaining full head geometry will enable more applications in
games and virtual reality as it provides not only a new way
of 3D content creation but also image-based 3D head rotation (i.e., pose manipulation). Recently, single-image 3D
face reconstruction has seen remarkable progress with the
enormous growth of deep convolutional neutral networks
(CNN) [47, 50, 22, 20, 16]. However, most existing techniques are limited to the facial region reconstruction without addressing other head regions such as hair and ear.
Face image synthesis has also achieved rapid progress
with deep learning. However, few methods can deal with
head pose manipulation from a singe image, which necessi* This work was done when S. Xu was an intern at MSRA.

tates substantial image content regeneration in the head region and beyond. Promising results have been shown for
face rotation [56, 3, 26] with generative adversarial nets
(GAN), but generating the whole head region with new
poses is still far from being solved. One reason could be
implicitly learning the complex 3D geometry of a large variety of hair styles and interpret them onto 2D pixel grid is
still prohibitively challenging for GANs.
In this paper, we investigate explicit 3D geometry recovery of portrait images for head regions including face,
hair and ear. We model a 3D head with two components: a
face mesh by the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [4], and
a depth map for other head parts including hair, ear and
other regions not covered by the 3DMM face mesh. The
3DMM face representation facilitates easy shape manipulation given its parametric nature, and depth map provides a
convenient yet powerful representation to model the complex hair geometry.
Learning single-image 3D head geometry reconstruction
is a challenging task. At least two challenges need to be addressed here. First, portrait images come with ground-truth
3D geometry are too scarce for CNN training, especially for
hair which can be problematic for 3D scanning. To tackle
this issue, we propose an unsupervised learning pipeline for
head geometry estimation. For face part, we simply follow recent 3D face reconstruction methods [47, 20, 21, 59]
to learn to regress 3DMM parameters on a corpus of images via minimizing the rendering-raw input discrepancy.
But for hair and ear, we propose to exploit view change
and train on pairs of portrait images extracted from videos
via minimizing appearance reprojection error. The second
challenge is how to ensure a consistent head structure since
it consists of two independent components. We propose a
two-step shape learning scheme where we use the recovered
face geometry as conditional input of the depth network,
and the designed loss function considers the layer consistency between face and hair geometry. We show that our
two-step unsupervised shape learning scheme leads to compelling 3D head reconstruction results.
Our method can be applied for portrait image head pose
manipulation, the quality of which will be contingent upon
the 3D reconstruction accuracy thus could be used to evalu17710

