Effectively Unbiased FID and Inception Score and where to find them
Min Jin Chong and David Forsyth
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{mchong6, daf}@illinois.edu

Abstract
This paper shows that two commonly used evaluation
metrics for generative models, the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) and the Inception Score (IS), are biased – the
expected value of the score computed for a finite sample set
is not the true value of the score. Worse, the paper shows
that the bias term depends on the particular model being
evaluated, so model A may get a better score than model B
simply because model A’s bias term is smaller. This effect
cannot be fixed by evaluating at a fixed number of samples.
This means all comparisons using FID or IS as currently
computed are unreliable.
We then show how to extrapolate the score to obtain
an effectively bias-free estimate of scores computed with
an infinite number of samples, which we term FID∞ and
IS∞ . In turn, this effectively bias-free estimate requires
good estimates of scores with a finite number of samples.
We show that using Quasi-Monte Carlo integration notably
improves estimates of FID and IS for finite sample sets.
Our extrapolated scores are simple, drop-in replacements
for the finite sample scores. Additionally, we show that using low discrepancy sequence in GAN training offers small
improvements in the resulting generator. The code for calculating FID∞ and IS∞ is at https://github.com/
mchong6/FID_IS_infinity.

tance (KID) [4] has not been widely adopted, likely because of its relatively high variance [32]. Write FIDN and
ISN for FID and IS computed with N generated samples.
Evaluation procedures with FID vary: some authors use
FID50k [7, 19, 18] while others use FID10k [37, 25].
In this paper, we show that both FID and Inception
Scores are biased differently depending on the generator.
Biased estimators are often preferred over unbiased estimators for the reason of efficiency (a strong application example is the photon map in rendering [16]). In this case
however, the bias is intolerable because for both FID and
IS, the bias is a function both of N and the generator being tested. This means that we cannot compare generators
because each has a different bias term (it is not sufficient to
fix N , a procedure described in [4]). To fix this, we propose
an extrapolation procedure on FIDN and ISN to obtain an
effectively unbiased estimate FID∞ and IS∞ (the estimate
when evaluated with an unlimited number of generated images). In addition, both FID∞ and IS∞ are best estimated
with low variance estimates of FIDN and ISN . We show
that Quasi-Monte Carlo Integration offers useful variance
reduction in these estimates. The result is a simple method
for unbiased comparisons between models. Conveniently,
FID∞ is a drop-in replacement for FIDN ; IS∞ for Inception Score. Our main contributions are as follows:
1. We show that FIDN and ISN are biased, and cannot be
used to compare generators.

1. Introduction
Deep Generative Models have been used successfully
to generate hyperrealistic images [18, 19, 7], map images between domains in an unsupervised fashion [42, 23],
and generate images from text [40, 39]. Despite their
widespread adoption, a simple, consistent, and human-like
evaluation of generative models remain elusive, with multiple ad-hoc heuristics having their own faults. The Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) [15] was shown to have a high
bias [4]; Inception Score (IS) [33] does not account for
intra-class diversity and has further been shown to be suboptimal [3]; HYPE [41] requires human evaluation which
makes large scale evaluation difficult; Kernel Inception Dis-

2. We show that extrapolation of FIDN is reliable, and
show how to obtain FID∞ which is an effectively unbiased estimate of FID. Using Quasi-Monte Carlo integration methods yields better estimates of FID∞ .
3. We show the same for Inception Score and obtain IS∞ ,
an effectively unbiased estimate of Inception Score.
4. We show that Quasi-Monte Carlo integration methods
offer small improvements in GAN training.
All figures are best viewed in color and high resolution.

6070

