Learning Visual Motion Segmentation using Event Surfaces
Anton Mitrokhin∗ , Zhiyuan Hua∗, Cornelia Fermüller, Yiannis Aloimonos
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, Maryland
amitrokh@umd.edu, howardh@terpmail.umd.edu, fermulcm@umd.edu, jyaloimo@umd.edu

Abstract
Event-based cameras have been designed for scene motion perception - their high temporal resolution and spatial
data sparsity converts the scene into a volume of boundary
trajectories and allows to track and analyze the evolution
of the scene in time. Analyzing this data is computationally
expensive, and there is substantial lack of theory on densein-time object motion to guide the development of new algorithms; hence, many works resort to a simple solution of
discretizing the event stream and converting it to classical
pixel maps, which allows for application of conventional
image processing methods.
In this work we present a Graph Convolutional neural
network for the task of scene motion segmentation by a moving camera. We convert the event stream into a 3D graph
in (x, y, t) space and keep per-event temporal information.
The difficulty of the task stems from the fact that unlike in
metric space, the shape of an object in (x, y, t) space depends on its motion and is not the same across the dataset.
We discuss properties of of the event data with respect to this
3D recognition problem, and show that our Graph Convolutional architecture is superior to PointNet++. We evaluate
our method on the state of the art event-based motion segmentation dataset - EV-IMO and perform comparisons to
a frame-based method proposed by its authors. Our ablation studies show that increasing the event slice width improves the accuracy, and how subsampling and edge configurations affect the network performance.

1. Introduction
Scene motion analysis been studied for many years [16,
21, 1]. Lately, there has been an increased interest in these
problems due to the applications in autonomous navigation [13]. The basic image representation for motion analysis is optical flow, representing pixelwise motion between
two moments in time. Optical flow is subject to many am∗ The authors contribute equally to this work.

biguities [33, 11]. On the other hand, feature point tracking
allows for long-term estimation of pixel motion trajectories.
That way, by analyzing pixel matches over large time intervals the ambiguity in motion can be resolved. Scene motion
exists in time. Changes in the scene over short time intervals provide some information, but tasks, such as occlusion
detection, segmentation of multiple moving objects, and detecting objects with a motion similar to the camera, require
capturing the changes over longer time intervals to resolve
ambiguities. Classic frame-based vision, however, is not
naturally designed to provide temporal information.
With the growing enthusiasm for technologies such as
VR and gesture recognition, many companies have started
to invest in the development of event-based cameras [19,
28, 7, 32]. These sensors provide dense temporal information about changes in the scene; with every pixel acting as
an independent electrical circuit such sensors are not driven
by a common clock - every pixel reacts to motion independently, allowing for a more efficient, generic and at the same
time accurate perception of the dynamic aspect of the scene.
An additional benefit of these sensors is better tolerance
to varying light conditions and sparse data encoding which
makes event-based cameras useful for mobile devices.
For an event camera, every visible moving edge in the
scene produces a trail of events, - an event cloud, which
lies on a surface (called event-surface or time-surface [18])
in (x, y, t) space. The time-surface contains all the information about structure and motion. Unlike classical 3D
processing (with RGB-D or Lidar sensors), the shape of
the event clouds is constrained by the laws of physics and
epipolar geometry. A certain shape of a cloud, even locally,
might signify that two objects occlude each other, collide
with each other or move closer to the camera.
Examples are shown in Fig. 1. The event clouds for
four object motions are illustrated (the color of points corresponds to the event timestamp, in the range of 0 to 1 sec.):
(a) translation parallel to the camera plane does not change
the shape of the cloud across time, only its spatial coordinates;(b) roll, or rotation around the axis parallel to the
camera plane reveals previously occluded parts of the ob114414

