Robust Partial Matching for Person Search in the Wild
Yingji Zhong1 , Xiaoyu Wang2,3 , Shiliang Zhang1
1
Peking University, 2 Intellifusion, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
1

{zhongyj, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn, 2,3 fanghuaxue@gmail.com

Gallery

Abstract

Global Matching
Query

Various factors like occlusions, backgrounds, etc., would
lead to misaligned detected bounding boxes , e.g., ones covering only portions of human body. This issue is common
but overlooked by previous person search works. To alleviate this issue, this paper proposes an Align-to-Part Network
(APNet) for person detection and re-Identification (reID).
APNet refines detected bounding boxes to cover the estimated holistic body regions, from which discriminative part
features can be extracted and aligned. Aligned part features
naturally formulate reID as a partial feature matching procedure, where valid part features are selected for similarity
computation, while part features on occluded or noisy regions are discarded. This design enhances the robustness of
person search to real-world challenges with marginal computation overhead. This paper also contributes a LargeScale dataset for Person Search in the wild (LSPS), which is
by far the largest and the most challenging dataset for person search. Experiments show that APNet brings considerable performance improvement on LSPS. Meanwhile, it
achieves competitive performance on existing person search
benchmarks like CUHK-SYSU and PRW.

1. Introduction
Thanks to recent research efforts [27, 17, 10, 8, 25, 22,
30, 34, 31], the performance of person re-Identification
(reID) has been significantly improved. However, one potential issue with current reID setting is that, it treats person
detection and reID as two isolated steps. This issue can
be compensated by person search [24, 33, 1, 28, 3, 15] to
jointly accomplish person detection and reID. Being able to
jointly optimize person detection and reID, person search
is attracting more and more attention, and is potential to
present advantages in flexibility, efficiency, and accuracy.
Compared with reID, person search needs to design
pedestrian detectors robust to variances of scales, illuminations, backgrounds, occlusions, etc. Some person search
works refine detectors by jointly training detectors and reID
models [24, 15, 4, 3]. Although strong detectors are gen-

Partial Matching

Complete Body Region

Align

Partial Body Region

Figure 1. Illustration of misaligned person bounding boxes and issues of person matching with global feature. Misalignments commonly occur in person search and can not be eliminated by training
stronger detectors. This paper addresses this issue with bounding
box alignment and partial matching.

erally helpful for reID, they may still produce misaligned
person bounding boxes. As shown in Fig. 1, occlusions and
limited camera viewing field lead to many accurate but misaligned bounding boxes covering portions of pedestrians.
Most of existing person search methods extracts global feature from the detected bounding boxes, no matter the joint
models [24, 15] or the separate models [1, 28, 3]. As shown
in Fig. 1, misalignment degrades the performance of global
features, because it is not reasonable to match partial features against global features. More detailed reviews to person search works can be found in Sec. 2.
This paper targets to design a unified person search
framework robust to the misaligned bounding boxes. As
shown in Fig. 1, the basic idea is to refine detected bounding boxes to cover the estimated holistic body regions to
eliminate misalignment errors. Then, aligned part features
could be extracted from refined bounding boxes with simple
region division. Part features hence allow for robust partial
matching across bounding boxes, where features on the mutual visible regions are matched for similarity computation,
and features on noisy regions are not considered for matching. In other words, our strategy improves both the feature
resolution and robustness to misalignment errors.
The above idea leads to the Align-to-Part Network (APNet) for person search. Built on OIM [24], APNet consists
of the additional Bounding Box Aligner (BBA) and Region

6827

