Learning to Observe: Approximating Human Perceptual Thresholds for
Detection of Suprathreshold Image Transformations
Alan Dolhasz,
Carlo Harvey,
Ian Williams
Digital Media Technology Lab, Birmingham City University
{alan.dolhasz, carlo.harvey, ian.williams}@bcu.ac.uk
https://github.com/dmt-lab/learning-to-observe

Abstract
Many tasks in computer vision are often calibrated and
evaluated relative to human perception. In this paper, we
propose to directly approximate the perceptual function
performed by human observers completing a visual detection task. Specifically, we present a novel methodology for
learning to detect image transformations visible to human
observers through approximating perceptual thresholds. To
do this, we carry out a subjective two-alternative forcedchoice study to estimate perceptual thresholds of human observers detecting local exposure shifts in images. We then
leverage transformation equivariant representation learning to overcome issues of limited perceptual data. This representation is then used to train a dense convolutional classifier capable of detecting local suprathreshold exposure
shifts - a distortion common to image composites. In this
context, our model can approximate perceptual thresholds
with an average error of 0.1148 exposure stops between empirical and predicted thresholds. It can also be trained to
detect a range of different local transformations.

1. Introduction
Human observers are the target audience for image content and thus the ultimate judges of image quality, which
is often measured with reference to opinions of humans
and various local and global distortions and inconsistencies perceptible to them. These distortions can arise as
side-effects of image acquisition, compression, transmission, compositing, and post-processing. Understanding and
modeling how humans detect and process distortions to arrive at subjective quality scores underpin image quality assessment (IQA) research. Many attempts have been made
at modeling the sensitivity of the human visual system
(HVS) to certain types of distortions for applications primarily in IQA [13, 8, 24, 54, 16, 23] and saliency modeling
[51, 55, 29, 19], where detection of relevant and perceptu-

Figure 1. Performance of our model illustrated for three input images and 11 levels of exposure transformation. The left columns
show input images with applied exposure transformations and
the magnitude of this transformation expressed on a log2 scale.
Middle columns show ground truth from our subjective experiments and rightmost columns show output of our model, where
red and green regions indicate detected negative and positive
suprathreshold exposure transformations, while blue regions indicate no suprathreshold transformations.

ally suprathreshold features is key to the approximation of
human performance. However, many of these approaches
are limited in their generalizability, efficiency or transferability. Alternative approaches based on signal fidelity [45],
statistical measures [46] and deep learning models [7, 50]
were also developed as a way to address such limitations.
Human sensitivity to physical stimuli is measured using
14797

