Approximating shapes in images with low-complexity polygons
Muxingzi Li
Florent Lafarge
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Renaud Marlet
Valeo.ai & LIGM, Ecole des Ponts,
Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
renaud.marlet@enpc.fr

Abstract
We present an algorithm for extracting and vectorizing
objects in images with polygons. Departing from a polygonal partition that oversegments an image into convex cells,
the algorithm refines the geometry of the partition while
labeling its cells by a semantic class. The result is a set
of polygons, each capturing an object in the image. The
quality of a configuration is measured by an energy that accounts for both the fidelity to input data and the complexity
of the output polygons. To efficiently explore the configuration space, we perform splitting and merging operations
in tandem on the cells of the polygonal partition. The exploration mechanism is controlled by a priority queue that
sorts the operations most likely to decrease the energy. We
show the potential of our algorithm on different types of
scenes, from organic shapes to man-made objects through
floor maps, and demonstrate its efficiency compared to existing vectorization methods.

1. Introduction
Extracting objects in images is traditionally operated at
the pixel scale, one object being represented as a group of
pixels. Such a resolution-dependent representation is often
not adapted to the end-users. In many application scenarios
as urban mapping or sketching, objects need to be captured
with more compact and editable vector representations. In
particular, polygons with floating coordinates allow both the
approximation of free-form shapes, e.g., organic objects,
and the fine description of piecewise-linear structures, e.g.,
buildings and many other man-made objects.
We consider the task of capturing objects in images by
polygons with three objectives. First, fidelity: the output
polygons should approximate well the object silhouettes in
the input image. Second, complexity: the output polygons
should be composed of a small number of edges to offer a
compact and editable representation. Last, geometric guarantees: the output polygons should be intersection-free,
closed, potentially with holes, and form an image partition.
The simplest way to capture the silhouette of an object

as a polygon is to vectorize a chain of pixels representing
the object contours [9, 12, 38]. While the complexity of
the polygon can be easily controlled, these simplification
processes do not take into account structural information
contained in the input image. Consequently, output polygons are often imprecise, typically with edges that do not fit
accurately the object silhouettes. Recent works on the partitioning of images into polygonal cells [1, 3, 11, 16] suggest that grouping cells from these partitions can produce
more accurate results than traditional vectorization methods. This strategy however suffers from imprecise partitions, typically with some polygonal cells overlapping two
different objects. Existing works in the field focus on merging polygonal cells only and omit the necessity of splitting
operations to deliver more precise results.
In this work, we propose an algorithm to capture objects
by compact floating polygons. Inspired by mesh deformation techniques in Geometry Processing, the main idea consists in refining the geometry of an imprecise polygonal partition while labeling each cells by a semantic class.
Our algorithm relies on two key contributions. First, we
design an energy function to measure the quality of a polygonal partition by taking into account both the fidelity to
input data (image and semantic information) and the complexity of the output polygons. Second, we propose an efficient optimization scheme to minimize that energy. We
explore the solution space by splitting and merging cells
within the polygonal partition. The mechanism is controlled
by a priority queue that sorts the operations that are most
likely to decrease the energy.
We demonstrate the potential of our method on different
types of scenes, from organic shapes to man-made objects
through floor maps and line-drawing sketches, and show its
efficiency with respect to existing vectorization approaches.

2. Related work
We distinguish four families of existing, related methods.
Vectorization pipelines. The most popular strategy consists in extracting the object contours by chains of pixels
that are then simplified into polygons. Contour extraction
18633

