Phase Consistent Ecological Domain Adaptation
Yanchao Yang∗
UCLA Vision Lab

Dong Lao∗
KAUST

Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
KAUST & UTRC

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

Abstract
We introduce two criteria to regularize the optimization
involved in learning a classifier in a domain where no annotated data are available, leveraging annotated data in a
different domain, a problem known as unsupervised domain
adaptation. We focus on the task of semantic segmentation,
where annotated synthetic data are aplenty, but annotating real data is laborious. The first criterion, inspired by
visual psychophysics, is that the map between the two image domains be phase-preserving. This restricts the set of
possible learned maps, while enabling enough flexibility to
transfer semantic information. The second criterion aims
to leverage ecological statistics, or regularities in the scene
which are manifest in any image of it, regardless of the characteristics of the illuminant or the imaging sensor. It is
implemented using a deep neural network that scores the
likelihood of each possible segmentation given a single unannotated image. Incorporating these two priors in a standard domain adaptation framework improves performance
across the board in the most common unsupervised domain
adaptation benchmarks for semantic segmentation.1

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to leverage an annotated “source” dataset in designing learning
schemes for a “target” dataset for which no ground-truth is
available. This problem arises when annotations are easy to
obtain in one domain (e.g., synthetic images) but expensive
in another (e.g., real images), and is exacerbated in tasks
where the annotation is laborious, as in semantic segmentation where each pixel in an image is assigned one of K
labels. If the two datasets are sampled from the same distribution, this is a standard semi-supervised learning problem.
The twist in UDA is that the distributions from which source
and target data are drawn differ enough that a model trained
on the former performs poorly, out-of-the-box, on the latter.
Typical domain adaptation work employing deep neu∗ These two authors contributed equally. Please send correspondence to
yanchao.yang@cs.ucla.edu and dong.lao@kaust.edu.sa.
1 Code available at: https://github.com/donglao/PCEDA

Figure 1. Semantic content is mainly carried by the phase component of the Fourier Transform. Replacing the amplitude component of the image depicting a panda by the amplitude from other
images within a wide range, will not prevent us from recognizing
a panda in the images generated by the inverse Fourier Transform.

ral networks (DNNs) proceeds by either learning a map
that aligns the source and target (marginal) distributions,
or by training a backbone to be insensitive to the domain
change through an auxiliary discrimination loss for the domain variable. Either way, these approaches operate on the
marginal distributions, since the labels are not available in
the target domain. However, the marginals could be perfectly aligned, yet the labels could be scrambled: Trees in
one domain could map to houses in another, and vice-versa.
Since we want to transfer information about the classes, ideally we would want to align the class-conditional distributions, which we do not have. Recent improvements in UDA,
for instance cycle-consistency, only enforce the invertibility
of the map, but not preservation of semantic information
such as the class identity, see Fig. 2. Since the problem is
ill-posed, constraints or prior have to be enforced in UDA.
We introduce two priors or constraints, one on the map
between the domains, the other on the classifier in the target
domain, both unknown at the outset.
For the map between domains, we know from visual psychophysics that semantic information in images tends to be
associated with the phase of its Fourier transform. Changes
in the amplitude of the Fourier transform can significantly
alter the appearance but not the interpretation of the image.

9011

