Generating and Exploiting Probabilistic Monocular Depth Estimates
Zhihao Xia1 , Patrick Sullivan2 , Ayan Chakrabarti1
1
Washington University in St. Louis 2 The Boeing Company
zhihao.xia@wustl.edu, patrick.l.sullivan2@boeing.com, ayan@wustl.edu

Abstract
Beyond depth estimation from a single image, the monocular cue is useful in a broader range of depth inference
applications and settings—such as when one can leverage
other available depth cues for improved accuracy. Currently, different applications, with different inference tasks
and combinations of depth cues, are solved via different
specialized networks—trained separately for each application. Instead, we propose a versatile task-agnostic monocular model that outputs a probability distribution over scene
depth given an input color image, as a sample approximation of outputs from a patch-wise conditional VAE. We show
that this distributional output can be used to enable a variety of inference tasks in different settings, without needing
to retrain for each application. Across a diverse set of applications (depth completion, user guided estimation, etc.),
our common model yields results with high accuracy—
comparable to or surpassing that of state-of-the-art methods dependent on application-specific networks.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation methods—that predict
scene depth from only a single color image—have achieved
surprising success through the use of deep neural networks [2, 7, 9, 22, 46]. This success confirms that even a
single view contains considerable information about scene
geometry. Purely monocular depth map estimates, however,
are far from being precisely accurate given the ill-posed nature of the task. Fortunately, many practical systems are
able to rely on other (yet also imperfect) sources of depth
information—limited measurements from depth sensors, interactive user guidance, consistency across frames or views,
etc. And so, it is desirable to combine these other sources
with the monocular cue to extract depth estimates that are
more accurate than possible from one source alone.
Although the monocular cue is useful for augmenting
other depth cues, the same isn’t true for monocular estimators that simply output a depth map, a form which can not be
directly combined with additional depth cues. Instead, re-

searchers have treated depth estimation using different combinations of cues as different applications in their own right
(e.g., depth up-sampling [4], estimation from sparse [34]
and line [28] measurements, etc.), and solved each by learning separate estimators that take their corresponding set of
cues, in addition to the color image, as input. This requires, for each application, determining the types of inputs
that will be available, constructing a corresponding training
set, choosing an appropriate network architecture, and then
training that application-specific network—a process that is
redundant and often onerous.
In this paper, we introduce a universal and versatile network to leverage the monocular depth cue in multiple application settings without re-training. Our network is trained
in an application-agnostic way on image-depth pairs, but
can be utilized for inference in different applications and
combined with different external depth cues as illustrated
in Fig. 1. Rather than producing a depth map estimate, our
monocular network outputs a probability distribution over
scene depth given an input color image. This distribution
faithfully encodes both the information and ambiguity of
depth values and their spatial dependencies based on the
monocular input, and is produced in a form that can be
combined with other depth cues during inference. Thus,
our approach enables a modular approach to leveraging the
monocular depth cue, with a common task-agnostic model
that can be used in different applications.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel approach to produce a probability
distribution over scene depth conditioned on a given input image. Our distributional output is formed using
patch-wise depth samples generated by a conditional
VAE [18], and is thus able to express arbitrary conditional spatial dependencies over scene depth.
• We demonstrate the practical utility of our probabilistic
outputs by considering their use in a variety of inference
tasks: we describe an estimation framework that efficiently combines our image-conditional densities with
other available information sources (e.g., sensors or user
input), as well as approaches for other application settings (e.g., predicting pairwise depth).

65

