SurfelGAN: Synthesizing Realistic Sensor Data for Autonomous Driving
Zhenpei Yang1∗ , Yuning Chai2 , Dragomir Anguelov2 , Yin Zhou2 , Pei Sun2 ,
Dumitru Erhan3 , Sean Rafferty2 , Henrik Kretzschmar2
1
UT Austin, 2 Waymo, 3 Google Brain

Abstract
Autonomous driving system development is critically dependent on the ability to replay complex and diverse traffic
scenarios in simulation. In such scenarios, the ability to
accurately simulate the vehicle sensors such as cameras,
lidar or radar is hugely helpful. However, current sensor
simulators leverage gaming engines such as Unreal or Unity,
requiring manual creation of environments, objects, and material properties. Such approaches have limited scalability
and fail to produce realistic approximations of camera, lidar,
and radar data without significant additional work.
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective approach
to generate realistic scenario sensor data, based only on
a limited amount of lidar and camera data collected by an
autonomous vehicle. Our approach uses texture-mapped
surfels to efficiently reconstruct the scene from an initial
vehicle pass or set of passes, preserving rich information
about object 3D geometry and appearance, as well as the
scene conditions. We then leverage a SurfelGAN network to
reconstruct realistic camera images for novel positions and
orientations of the self-driving vehicle and moving objects in
the scene. We demonstrate our approach on the Waymo Open
Dataset and show that it can synthesize realistic camera data
for simulated scenarios. We also create a novel dataset that
contains cases in which two self-driving vehicles observe the
same scene at the same time. We use this dataset to provide
additional evaluation and demonstrate the usefulness of our
SurfelGAN model.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have inspired breakthroughs in multiple areas related to autonomous driving
such as perception [16, 27], prediction [5, 7] and planning [13]. These recent trends only underscore the increasingly significant role of data-driven system development.
One aspect is that deep learning networks benefit from large
training datasets. Another is that autonomous driving sys∗ Work done as an intern at Waymo. Correspondence: yzp@utexas.edu

tem evaluation requires the ability to realistically replay a
large set of diverse and complex scenarios in simulation capturing sensor properties, seasons, time of day, and weather.
Developing simulators that support the levels of realism required for autonomous system evaluation is a challenging
task. There are many ways to design simulators, including
simulating mid-level object representations [5, 12]. However, mid-level representations omit subtle perceptual cues
that are important for scene understanding, such as pedestrian gestures and blinking lights on vehicles. Furthermore,
as end-to-end models that combine perception, prediction,
and sometimes even control become an increasingly more
popular direction of research, we are faced with the need to
faithfully simulate the sensor data, which is the input to such
models during scenario replay.
Frameworks for autonomous driving that support realistic
sensor simulation are traditionally built on top of gaming
engines such as Unreal or Unity [12]. The environment
and its object models are created and arranged manually, to
approximate real-world scenes of interest. In order to enable realistic LiDAR and radar modeling, material properties
often need to be manually specified as well. The overall
process is time-consuming and not scalable. Furthermore,
simple ray-casting or ray-tracing techniques are often insufficient to generate realistic camera, LiDAR, or radar data for a
specific self-driving system, and additional work is required
to adapt the simulated sensor statistics to the real sensors.
In this work, we propose a simple yet effective datadriven approach for creating realistic scenario sensor data.
Our approach relies on camera and LiDAR data collected in
a single pass, or several passes, of an autonomous vehicle
through a scene of interest. We use this data to reconstruct
the scene using a texture-mapped surfel representation. This
representation is simple and computationally efficient to create and preserves rich information about the 3D geometry,
semantics, and appearance of all objects in the scene. Given
the surfel reconstruction, we can render the scene for novel
poses of the self-driving vehicle (SDV) and the other scenario agents. The rendered reconstruction for these novel
views may have some missing parts due to occlusion differences between the initial and the new configuration. It can

11118

