Convolution in the Cloud: Learning Deformable Kernels in 3D Graph
Convolution Networks for Point Cloud Analysis

1

Zhi-Hao Lin1 Sheng-Yu Huang1 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{r08942062, r08942095, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Point clouds are among the popular geometry representations for 3D vision applications. However, without regular structures like 2D images, processing and summarizing information over these unordered data points are very
challenging. Although a number of previous works attempt to analyze point clouds and achieve promising performances, their performances would degrade significantly
when data variations like shift and scale changes are presented. In this paper, we propose 3D Graph Convolution
Networks (3D-GCN), which is designed to extract local
3D features from point clouds across scales, while shift
and scale-invariance properties are introduced. The novelty of our 3D-GCN lies in the definition of learnable kernels with a graph max-pooling mechanism. We show that
3D-GCN can be applied to 3D classification and segmentation tasks, with ablation studies and visualizations verifying
the design of 3D-GCN. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/j1a0m0e4sNTU/3dgcn.

1. Introduction
3D vision has been an active research topic, closely related to applications such as augmented reality, drones and
self-driving vehicles [20, 15]. Existing 3D data representations include the use of voxel, mesh or point cloud features.
Voxels [3, 33] describe 3D objects as voxel grids but generally suffer from insufficient resolution and high memory
costs. Meshes are common in animations, while such representations are not directly associated with the 3D sensor
outputs [16, 19]. Finally, 3D point clouds focus on describing shape information of 3D objects and can be easily acquired by 3D sensors, but the resulting unordered set of 3D
points might limit the subsequent analysis tasks.
With the recent remarkable progress of deep learning
techniques, in particular the Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN), promising performances have been observed in a
variety of computer vision tasks [6, 11]. However, image

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Convolution in (a) 2D images and (b) 3D
graphs. Note that standard 2D CNN cannot be easily applied to handle 3D point cloud data, since the kernels in 3D
graph convolution networks need to exhibit additional deformation in shape due to unstructured inputs.

data are generally presented in terms of grid structures (e.g.,
pixels or cells over scales), which makes the convolution
operation feasible. For irregular and unstructured data like
3D point clouds, it is not possible to learn and deploy kernels with fixed sizes or patterns on such data. In order to
process such an unstructured/unordered set of points, PointNet [21] applies multiple fully connected layers to encode
3D point clouds, followed by global max-pooling operation,
and shows impressive results for 3D data recognition and
segmentation. Since global pooling operation is deployed,
locally structured information of 3D point cloud might not
be properly observed. Moreover, it is not designed to be invariant to global transformation like shift or scaling, as we
later discuss and verify.
To better describe local information of 3D data, some
research works utilize mesh data and their corresponding
graph structures (i.e., vertices and associated edges) for extracting desirable information. For example, [27, 4] choose
to propagate and aggregate features of adjacent vertices for
deriving the final representation, while others [16, 2] define kernels with fixed patterns to observe local information.
11800

