State-Aware Tracker for Real-Time Video Object Segmentation
Xi Chen1†, Zuoxin Li2 , Ye Yuan2 , Gang Yu2 , Jianxin Shen1 , Donglian Qi1∗
1
College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University, 2 Megvii Inc.
{xichen zju,J X Shen,qidl}@zju.edu.cn,
{lizuoxin,yuanye,yugang}@megvii.com

Abstract

STM[16]
80

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) requires to segment target objects over video sequences with
only the initial mask given, which is a fundamental task for
computer vision. In VOS task, the initial mask is provided
as visual guidance. Nevertheless, throughout a video sequence, the target object can undergo large pose, scale, and
appearance changes. Moreover, it can even meet abnormal
states like occlusion, fast motion, and truncation. Therefore, it is a challenging task to make a robust representation
over video sequences in a semi-supervised manner.
Luckily, video sequence brings additional context information for VOS task. First, the inter-frame consistency
of video makes it possible to pass information efficiently
between frames. Furthermore, in VOS tasks, information
from preceding frames could be regarded as the temporal
context, which can provide helpful cues for the following
∗ Corresponding Author
† This work was done during an internship at Megvii Inc.

75

Ours

FEELVOS[21]
AGAME[8]
Dyenet[12]
OSVOS-S[15]
RGMP[26]
65

J & F mean on Davis2017

In this work, we address the task of semi-supervised
video object segmentation (VOS) and explore how to make
efficient use of video property to tackle the challenge of
semi-supervision. We propose a novel pipeline called StateAware Tracker (SAT), which can produce accurate segmentation results with real-time speed. For higher efficiency,
SAT takes advantage of the inter-frame consistency and
deals with each target object as a tracklet. For more stable and robust performance over video sequences, SAT gets
awareness for each state and makes self-adaptation via two
feedback loops. One loop assists SAT in generating more
stable tracklets. The other loop helps to construct a more
robust and holistic target representation. SAT achieves a
promising result of 72.3% J &F mean with 39 FPS on
DAVIS2017-Val dataset, which shows a decent trade-off between efficiency and accuracy.

PReMVOS[14]
Ours-Fast

70

60

RANet[25]

STCNN[28]
OSVOS[2]
FAVOS[3]

SiamMask[24]

OSNM[31]

55
50
45

Offline
Online
Ours(offline)

Real Time
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Speed(FPS)

35

40

45

50

55

60

Figure 1. Accuracy versus speed on DAVIS2017-Val dataset.
Some previous methods achieve high accuracy with slow running
speed. Others sacrifice too much accuracy for the faster speed.
Our method achieves a decent speed-accuracy trade-off.

predictions. Hence, making efficient use of the additional
information brought by video is of great importance for
VOS tasks.
However, previous works do not make good use of the
characteristics of videos. [2, 15, 23, 26, 12] completely
ignore the relation between frames and deal with each
frame independently, which causes tremendous information waste. Other methods [22, 17, 31, 27, 31] use feature
concatenation, correlation, or optical flow to propagate predicted mask or feature from the previous frame to the current frame, but they have apparent drawbacks. First, previous works usually propagate information on full images,
while the target object usually occupies a small region. In
this case, operations on full images can cause redundant
computation. Furthermore, the target object can undergo
different states throughout the video, but these methods apply fixed propagation strategies without adaptation, which
makes them unstable over long sequences. Moreover, they
only seek cues from the first or the previous frame for target
modeling, which is not enough for a holistic representation.
As a result, most existing methods can not tackle VOS with
both satisfactory accuracy and fast speed. Therefore, a more
efficient and robust pipeline for semi-supervised video ob-

9384

