High-frequency Component Helps Explain
the Generalization of Convolutional Neural Networks
Haohan Wang, Xindi Wu, Zeyi Huang, Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{haohanw,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu, {xindiw,zeyih}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

Data
How a human understands
the data

We investigate the relationship between the frequency
spectrum of image data and the generalization behavior
of convolutional neural networks (CNN). We first notice
CNN’s ability in capturing the high-frequency components
of images. These high-frequency components are almost imperceptible to a human. Thus the observation leads to multiple hypotheses that are related to the generalization behaviors of CNN, including a potential explanation for adversarial examples, a discussion of CNN’s trade-off between
robustness and accuracy, and some evidence in understanding training heuristics.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved many recent advances in predictive modeling in various tasks, but the community has
nonetheless become alarmed by the unintuitive generalization behaviors of neural networks, such as the capacity in
memorizing label shuffled data [65] and the vulnerability
towards adversarial examples [54, 21]
To explain the generalization behaviors of neural networks, many theoretical breakthroughs have been made
progressively, including studying the properties of stochastic gradient descent [31], different complexity measures
[46], generalization gaps [50], and many more from different model or algorithm perspectives [30, 43, 7, 51].
In this paper, inspired by previous understandings that
convolutional neural networks (CNN) can learn from confounding signals [59] and superficial signals [29, 19, 58],
we investigate the generalization behaviors of CNN from
a data perspective. Together with [27], we suggest that
the unintuitive generalization behaviors of CNN as a direct
outcome of the perceptional disparity between human and
models (as argued by Figure 1): CNN can view the data at
a much higher granularity than the human can.
However, different from [27], we provide an interpreta-

“semantic”

Label
highfrequency
Distribution-specific
correlation
What a model picks up

Figure 1. The central hypothesis of our paper: within a data collection, there are correlations between the high-frequency components and the “semantic” component of the images. As a result, the model will perceive both high-frequency components as
well as the “semantic” ones, leading to generalization behaviors
counter-intuitive to human (e.g., adversarial examples).

tion of this high granularity of the model’s perception: CNN
can exploit the high-frequency image components that are
not perceivable to human.
For example, Figure 2 shows the prediction results of
eight testing samples from CIFAR10 data set, together with
the prediction results of the high and low-frequency component counterparts. For these examples, the prediction outcomes are almost entirely determined by the high-frequency
components of the image, which are barely perceivable to
human. On the other hand, the low-frequency components,
which almost look identical to the original image to human,
are predicted to something distinctly different by the model.
Motivated by the above empirical observations, we further investigate the generalization behaviors of CNN and
attempt to explain such behaviors via differential responses
to the image frequency spectrum of the inputs (Remark 1).
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

8684

