Semantically Multi-modal Image Synthesis
Zhen Zhu1∗, Zhiliang Xu1∗, Ansheng You2 , Xiang Bai1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Peking University
{zzhu, zhiliangxu1, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, youansheng@pku.edu.cn
Pants

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on semantically multi-modal image synthesis (SMIS) task, namely, generating multi-modal
images at the semantic level. Previous work seeks to use
multiple class-specific generators, constraining its usage
in datasets with a small number of classes. We instead
propose a novel Group Decreasing Network (GroupDNet)
that leverages group convolutions in the generator and progressively decreases the group numbers of the convolutions
in the decoder. Consequently, GroupDNet is armed with
much more controllability on translating semantic labels
to natural images and has plausible high-quality yields for
datasets with many classes. Experiments on several challenging datasets demonstrate the superiority of GroupDNet
on performing the SMIS task. We also show that GroupDNet
is capable of performing a wide range of interesting synthesis applications. Codes and models are available at:
https://github.com/Seanseattle/SMIS.

1. Introduction
Semantic image synthesis, namely translating semantic
labels to natural images, has many real-world applications
and draws much attention from the community. It is innately a one-to-many mapping problem. Countless possible
natural images correspond to one single semantic label. Previous works utilized different strategies for the task: adopting the idea of variational auto-encoder [36, 56, 2, 11], introducing noise while training [19], building multiple subnetworks [10] and including instance-level feature embeddings [41], etc. While these methods made exceptional
achievements in improving image quality and extending
more applications, we take a step further to particularly focus on a specific multi-modal image synthesis task that adds
more flexibility to control the generated results.
Just imagine a content creation scenario from a human
parsing map. With the help of semantics-to-image translation models, the parsing map can be converted to a real per∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Upper clothes

Sky

Floor

Building

Figure 1: Demonstration of the semantically multi-modal image synthesis
(SMIS) task. Text of each column above the images indicates the semantic
area that is changing across the whole column. The first row represents the
input labels and the rest rows are generated images by our method.

son image. It looks good in general, but the upper clothes do
not suit your taste. Then comes the problem—either these
models do not support multi-modal synthesis, or when these
models change the upper clothes, other parts vary accordingly. Neither of these fulfills your intention. To conclude,
this user controllable content creation scenario can be interpreted as performing a task that produces multi-modal
results at the semantic level with other semantic parts untouched. We summarize this task as: Semantically Multimodal Image Synthesis (SMIS). As exemplified in Fig. 1,
for each semantics, we have its specific controller. By adjusting the controller of a specific class, only the corresponding areas are changed accordingly.
An intuitive solution for the task is to build different generative networks for different semantics and then produce
the final image by fusing the outputs of different networks.
It is quite similar to the overall scheme of [10], which focused on portrait editing. However, this type of methods
soon face degradation in performance, a linear increase of
training time and computational resource consumption under a growing number of classes.
To make the network more elegant, we unify the gen-

5467

