Attack to Explain Deep Representation
Mohammad A. A. K. Jalwana Naveed Akhtar Mohammed Bennamoun
Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Western Australia.

Ajmal Mian

{mohammad.jalwana@research., naveed.akhtar@, mohammed.bennamoun@, ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Deep visual models are susceptible to extremely low
magnitude perturbations to input images. Though carefully crafted, the perturbation patterns generally appear
noisy, yet they are able to perform controlled manipulation of model predictions. This observation is used to argue that deep representation is misaligned with human perception. This paper counter-argues and proposes the first
attack on deep learning that aims at explaining the learned
representation instead of fooling it. By extending the input
domain of the manipulative signal and employing a model
faithful channelling, we iteratively accumulate adversarial
perturbations for a deep model. The accumulated signal
gradually manifests itself as a collection of visually salient
features of the target label (in model fooling), casting adversarial perturbations as primitive features of the target
label. Our attack provides the first demonstration of systematically computing perturbations for adversarially nonrobust classifiers that comprise salient visual features of objects. We leverage the model explaining character of our
algorithm to perform image generation, inpainting and interactive image manipulation by attacking adversarially robust classifiers. The visually appealing results across these
applications demonstrate the utility of our attack (and perturbations in general) beyond model fooling.

1. Introduction
Deep visual models have provided breakthroughs in numerous computer vision tasks, including image classification [24, 43], object detection [37, 38], semantic segmentation [27, 9] and image captioning [49]. However, despite
their impressive performance, deep models are found vulnerable to adversarial perturbations to inputs [45]. These
perturbations are weak additive signals that manipulate
model predictions while remaining imperceptible to the human visual system. The intriguing susceptibility of deep
models to adversarial perturbations is currently being actively investigated by the research community [2].
Dictated by the original ‘adversarial’ perspective [45],

Figure 1. Top: Using an image distribution, our attack iteratively
generates and refines a perturbation p for a standard deep visual
classifier (VGG-16 here) that extracts geometric patterns deemed
salient visual features of a label by the classifier. Bottom: Applying our attack to adversarially robust classifiers (ResNet-50 here)
enables visually appealing interactive image manipulation (here),
image generation (Fig. 6) and inpainting (Fig. 7).

research in this direction has taken a natural bicephalous
approach. One stream of works aims at generating perturbations with modest visual perceptibility and high transferability to fool known and unknown models [16, 25, 13, 42,
11, 30]. While the other focuses on defending the models against such perturbations [50, 36, 26, 1, 34]. There
are very few exceptions that deviate from the ‘adversarial’
brand of perturbations and cast these signals as a fooling
tool for deep learning. Santurkar et al. [41] presented a notable contribution along this line by using perturbations for
image synthesis with adversarially robust networks.
Investigating adversarial perturbations, Ilyas et al. [19]
claimed that the existing large datasets (e.g. ImageNet [12])
admit to brittle yet highly predictive features that remain
19543

