Optimal least-squares solution to the hand-eye calibration problem
Amit Dekel

Linus Härenstam-Nielsen
Univrses

Sergio Caccamo

{amit.dekel, linus.arenstam, sergio.caccamo}@univrses.com

Abstract
We propose a least-squares formulation to the noisy handeye calibration problem using dual-quaternions, and introduce efficient algorithms to find the exact optimal solution,
based on analytic properties of the problem, avoiding nonlinear optimization. We further present simple analytic approximate solutions which provide remarkably good estimations compared to the exact solution. In addition, we show
how to generalize our solution to account for a given extrinsic prior in the cost function. To the best of our knowledge
our algorithm is the most efficient approach to optimally
solve the hand-eye calibration problem.

1. Introduction
Hand-eye calibration is a common problem in computer
vision where one wishes to find the transformation between
two rigidly attached frames. One popular formulation of the
problem is in terms of the following equation
∆C ◦ X = X ◦ ∆H,

(1)

where ∆C, ∆H, X are SE(3) elements and ◦ is the group
multiplication operation [1]. ∆C and ∆H represent the
sources relative poses (e.g. camera and robot hand) and X is
the rigid transformation between the two frames.
In the literature one can find plenty of strategies to solve
the problem for a given set of poses, as well as different
representations and metrics being used, see [2, 3] for a recent review. Since the SE(3) group is a semi-direct product
of the special orthogonal group and the translational group
(SO(3) ⋉ T (3)), starting with (1), one usually ends up with
two equations which we will refer to as the rotational equation (the quotient by the normal subgroup) and the translational equation (the normal subgroup). In practice, due to
noisy data these equations cannot be satisfied exactly, and
a numerical minimization approach or an approximating
procedures are often used.
Some authors approach the problem by solving the two
equations separately by first minimizing a term related to
the rotational equation and then substituting the solution in

Figure 1: The hand-eye calibration problem for two rigidly attached cameras.

the translational equation and minimizing this term in turn,
where a closed form solution can be found [4, 5, 6]. Others
try to minimize both terms simultaneously.
In the later case, one approach is to perform a (constrained) nonlinear optimization procedure to minimize a
cost function which takes into account the two terms (the
rotational and translational parts) in some representation and
specified metrics. This procedure is more costly in terms
of computations, and requires a proper initial estimation
in order to avoid local minima [6, 7, 8]. A linear simultaneous solution was presented in terms of dual-quaternions
(or equivalently geometric algebra) [9], [10], which aims to
solve (1) rather than a minimization problem, being valid for
the noise free case, or requires filtering of the data.
As mentioned above, one can use different metrics for
the minimization problem, usually related to the chosen
representations or noise model assumptions. For the rotational part, the common (non-equivalent [11]) choices are
the chordal, quaternionic or the geodesic metrics. Similarly,
one can use different minimization terms for the translational
part. Furthermore, rotation and translation terms have different units, and a proper relative weighting should be used. A
natural choice would be the covariance of the measurements,
which is not always available.
In this paper we address the problem of simultaneous
minimization using the dual-quaternions (DQs) representation. The difficulties in solving the minimization problems
analytically are due to nonlinear constraints. Using DQs,
113598

