Vision-Dialog Navigation by Exploring Cross-modal Memory
Yi Zhu1 , Fengda Zhu2 , Zhaohuan Zhan3 , Bingqian Lin3 , Jianbin Jiao1∗, Xiaojun Chang2 , Xiaodan Liang3,4
1
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Monash University
3
4
Sun Yat-sen University
Dark Matter AI Inc.

Cross-modal Memory

Abstract

1. Introduction
Powered by the recent progress in natural language processing and visual scene understanding, vision-language
tasks such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [3, 1, 10]
and Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) [9, 2, 23, 13] have
been extensively explored. Recent works aims at developing a cognitive agent that jointly understands the natu∗ Corresponding Author
1 Source code is publicly available at GitHub: https://github.
com/yeezhu/CMN.pytorch

Q: Where should I begin?
A: Take a right, go back behind the couch.

…

Vision-dialog navigation posed as a new holy-grail task
in vision-language disciplinary targets at learning an agent
endowed with the capability of constant conversation for
help with natural language and navigating according to human responses. Besides the common challenges faced in
visual language navigation, vision-dialog navigation also
requires to handle well with the language intentions of a series of questions about the temporal context from dialogue
history and co-reasoning both dialogs and visual scenes. In
this paper, we propose the Cross-modal Memory Network
(CMN) for remembering and understanding the rich information relevant to historical navigation actions. Our CMN
consists of two memory modules, the language memory
module (L-mem) and the visual memory module (V-mem).
Specifically, L-mem learns latent relationships between the
current language interaction and a dialog history by employing a multi-head attention mechanism. V-mem learns
to associate the current visual views and the cross-modal
memory about the previous navigation actions. The crossmodal memory is generated via a vision-to-language attention and a language-to-vision attention. Benefiting from the
collaborative learning of the L-mem and the V-mem, our
CMN is able to explore the memory about the decision making of historical navigation actions which is for the current
step. Experiments on the CVDN dataset show that our CMN
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art model by a significant margin on both seen and unseen environments. 1

Q: Should I keep going straight or turn left?
A: Turn left and through the door.

{Mi,…, Mj}

Qt At

Qt: Should I go into the kitchen?

At: Sorry go straight.

Figure 1: We propose to explore the Cross-modal Memory
for vision-dialog navigation by performing co-reasoning for
the memory of language interaction and visual perception.
ral language and visual scenes. However, such an agent
is still far from being used in real-world applications (e.g.,
health care, intelligent tutoring) since it does not consider
the continuous interaction with the outer environment over
time. Specifically, the interaction in VQA is that the agent
takes a question as input, and is required to answer a single question about a given image. The agent in VLN moves
to the goal in a 3D environment following a natural language instruction. In contrast to the VQA and VLN, visiondialog navigation [31] is more challenging, where an agent
is placed in a realistic environment and is required to find
a target object by cooperating with the human using natural
language dialogue. To achieve the navigation goal (i.e., find
the target), the agent asks questions (e.g., Left or right from
110730

