Dynamic Traffic Modeling from Overhead Imagery
Scott Workman

Nathan Jacobs

DZYNE Technologies

University of Kentucky

Abstract
Our goal is to use overhead imagery to understand patterns in traffic flow, for instance answering questions such
as how fast could you traverse Times Square at 3am on a
Sunday. A traditional approach for solving this problem
would be to model the speed of each road segment as a function of time. However, this strategy is limited in that a significant amount of data must first be collected before a model
can be used and it fails to generalize to new areas. Instead,
we propose an automatic approach for generating dynamic
maps of traffic speeds using convolutional neural networks.
Our method operates on overhead imagery, is conditioned
on location and time, and outputs a local motion model that
captures likely directions of travel and corresponding travel
speeds. To train our model, we take advantage of historical
traffic data collected from New York City. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can be applied to generate accurate city-scale traffic models.

1. Introduction
Road transportation networks have become extremely
large and complex. According to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics [31], there are approximately 6.6 million kilometers of roads in the United States alone. For most individuals, navigating these complex road networks is a daily
challenge. A recent study found that the average driver in
the U.S. travels approximately 17 500 kilometers per year in
their vehicle, which equates to more than 290 hours behind
the wheel [33].
As such, traffic modeling and analysis has become an increasingly important topic for urban development and planning. The Texas A&M Transportation Institute [26] estimated that in 2017, considering 494 U.S. urban areas, there
were 8.8 billion vehicle-hours of delay and 12.5 billion
liters of wasted fuel, resulting in a congestion cost of 179
billion dollars. Given these far-reaching implications, there
is significant interest in understanding traffic flow and developing new methods to counteract congestion.
Numerous cities are starting to equip themselves with
intelligent transportation systems, such as adaptive traffic

Figure 1: Using our approach to dynamically model traffic
flow in The Bronx, New York City. (left) Predicted traffic speeds for Monday at 4am and (right) Monday at 8am.
Green (red) corresponds to faster (slower).

control, that take advantage of recent advances in computer
vision and machine learning. For example, Pittsburgh recently deployed smart traffic signals at fifty intersections
that use artificial intelligence to estimate traffic volume and
optimize traffic flow in real-time. An initial pilot study [27]
indicated travel times were reduced by 25%, time spent
waiting at signals by 40%, number of stops by 30%, and
emissions by 20%. Ultimately, interest in applying machine learning to problems in traffic management continues
to grow due to its potential for improving safety, decreasing
congestion, and reducing emissions.
Direct access to empirical traffic data is useful for planners to analyze congestion in relation to the underlying
street network, as well as for validating models and guiding infrastructure investments. Unfortunately, historical information relating time, traffic speeds, and street networks
has typically been expensive to acquire and limited to only
primary roads. Only very recently has a large corpus of
traffic speed data been released to the public. In May
of 2019, Uber Technologies, Inc. (an American multinational ridesharing company) announced Uber Movement
Speeds [1], a dataset of street speeds collected from drivers
of their ridesharing platform. However, even this data has
limitations, including: 1) coverage, speed data is only available for 5 large metropolitan cities at the time of release
and 2) granularity, not all roads are traversed at all times (or
112315

