FeatureFlow: Robust Video Interpolation via Structure-to-texture Generation
Shurui Gui∗1,2
Chaoyue Wang∗1
Qihua Chen1,3
Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
agnesgsr@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chaoyue.wang@sydney.edu.au,
cqh@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Overlayed inputs

Structure-guided interpolation

Texture refinement

Ground-truth

Overlayed inputs

Structure-guided interpolation

Texture refinement

Ground-truth

Figure 1: Examples of the proposed structure-to-texture generation for video interpolation. The whole framework
splits the video interpolation task into two stages: structure-guided interpolation and texture refinement. The first row gives
a challenging interpolation example of complicated dynamic scenes. The second row is a typical example to explain.

Abstract
Video interpolation aims to synthesize non-existent
frames between two consecutive frames. Although existing optical flow based methods have achieved promising
results, they still face great challenges in dealing with the
interpolation of complicated dynamic scenes, which include
occlusion, blur or abrupt brightness change. This is mainly
because these cases may break the basic assumptions of the
optical flow estimation (i.e. smoothness, consistency). In
this work, we devised a novel structure-to-texture generation framework which splits the video interpolation task

into two stages: structure-guided interpolation and texture
refinement. In the first stage, deep structure-aware features
are employed to predict feature flows from two consecutive
frames to their intermediate result, and further generate
the structure image of the intermediate frame. In the second stage, based on the generated coarse result, a Frame
Texture Compensator is trained to fill in detailed textures.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that attempts to directly generate the intermediate frame through
blending deep features. Experiments on both the benchmark
datasets and challenging occlusion cases demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed framework over the state-of-theart methods. Codes are available on https://github.
com/CM-BF/FeatureFlow.

1. * indicates equal contribution.
2. This work was completed during the visit of Shurui Gui and Qihua
Chen (summer interns) to UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney.

14004

