Iterative Answer Prediction with Pointer-Augmented
Multimodal Transformers for TextVQA
Ronghang Hu1,2
Amanpreet Singh1
1
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

2

Trevor Darrell2
Marcus Rohrbach1
University of California, Berkeley

{ronghang,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu, {asg,mrf}@fb.com

Abstract

TextVQA

Many visual scenes contain text that carries crucial information, and it is thus essential to understand text in images for downstream reasoning tasks. For example, a deep
water label on a warning sign warns people about the danger in the scene. Recent work has explored the TextVQA
task that requires reading and understanding text in images to answer a question. However, existing approaches
for TextVQA are mostly based on custom pairwise fusion
mechanisms between a pair of two modalities and are restricted to a single prediction step by casting TextVQA as a
classification task. In this work, we propose a novel model
for the TextVQA task based on a multimodal transformer
architecture accompanied by a rich representation for text
in images. Our model naturally fuses different modalities
homogeneously by embedding them into a common semantic space where self-attention is applied to model inter- and
intra- modality context. Furthermore, it enables iterative
answer decoding with a dynamic pointer network, allowing
the model to form an answer through multi-step prediction
instead of one-step classification. Our model outperforms
existing approaches on three benchmark datasets for the
TextVQA task by a large margin.

Question: What is the danger?

1. Introduction
As a prominent task for visual reasoning, the Visual
Question Answering (VQA) task [4] has received wide attention in terms of both datasets (e.g. [4, 17, 22, 21, 20]) and
methods (e.g. [14, 3, 6, 25, 33]). However, these datasets
and methods mostly focus on the visual components in the
scene. On the other hand, they tend to ignore a crucial
modality – text in the images – that carries essential information for scene understanding and reasoning. For example, in Figure 1, deep water on the sign warns people
about the danger in the scene. To address this drawback,
new VQA datasets [44, 8, 37] have been recently proposed
with questions that explicitly require understanding and reasoning about text in the image, which is referred to as the
TextVQA task.

Previous work: water
Our model: deep water

Our model
question words
visual objects
text in image
(rich features)

joint
embedding
+
multimodal
transformer

iterative answer decoding
“deep” “water”
t=0

t=1

answer:
“deep water”

dynamic pointers

Figure 1. Compared to previous work (e.g. [44]) on the TextVQA
task, our model, accompanied by rich features for image text,
handles all modalities with a multimodal transformer over a joint
embedding space instead of pairwise fusion mechanisms between
modalities. Furthermore, answers are predicted through iterative
decoding with pointers instead of one-step classification over a
fixed vocabulary or copying single text token from the image.

The TextVQA task distinctively requires models to see,
read and reason over three modalities: the input question,
the visual contents in the image such as visual objects, and
the text in the image. Several approaches [44, 8, 37, 7] have
been proposed for the TextVQA task, based on OCR results
of the image. In particular, LoRRA [44] extends previous
VQA models [43] with an OCR attention branch and adds
OCR tokens as a dynamic vocabulary to the answer classifier, allowing copying a single OCR token from the image
as the answer. Similarly in [37], OCR tokens are grouped
into blocks and added to the output space of a VQA model.
While these approaches enable reading text in images to
some extent, they typically rely on custom pairwise multimodal fusion mechanisms between two modalities (such
as single-hop attention over image regions and text tokens,
conditioned on the input question), which limit the types
of possible interactions between modalities. Furthermore,
they treat answer prediction as a single-step classification
problem – either selecting an answer from the training set

9992

