MARMVS: Matching Ambiguity Reduced Multiple View Stereo for Efficient
Large Scale Scene Reconstruction
Zhenyu Xu,Yiguang Liu∗ , Xuelei Shi, Ying Wang, Yunan Zheng
College of Computer Science, Sichuan Uiversity, China
sanxu@outlook.com,liuyg@scu.edu.cn,sxlsnow@outlook.com,yingwang@stu.scu.edu.cn,1121955210@qq.com

Abstract
The ambiguity in image matching is one of main factors decreasing the quality of the 3D model reconstructed
by PatchMatch based multiple view stereo. In this paper,
we present a novel method, matching ambiguity reduced
multiple view stereo (MARMVS) to address this issue. The
MARMVS handles the ambiguity in image matching process
with three newly proposed strategies: 1) The matching ambiguity is measured by the differential geometry property of
image surface with epipolar constraint, which is used as a
critical criterion for optimal scale selection of every single pixel with corresponding neighbouring images. 2) The
depth of every pixel is initialized to be more close to the
true depth by utilizing the depths of its surrounding sparse
feature points, which yields faster convergency speed in the
following PatchMatch stereo and alleviates the ambiguity
introduced by self similar structures of the image. 3) In the
last propagation of the PatchMatch stereo, higher priorities
are given to those planes with the related 2D image patch
possesses less ambiguity, this strategy further propagates a
correctly reconstructed surface to raw texture regions. In
addition, the proposed method is very efficient even running
on consumer grade CPUs, due to proper parameterization
and discretization in the depth map computation step. The
MARMVS is validated on public benchmarks, and experimental results demonstrate competing performance against
the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a hot research area in computer vision, which offers a cheap and convenient way
to capture the 3D geometry of scenes and objects, and
serves as a main ingredient for many CV applications, e.g.
[40, 26, 25, 24, 8]. A lot of MVS methods with increasingly high performance have been proposed in last decades,
thanks to the public available benchmarks [31, 34, 1, 14].
Due to the successes of SfM algorithms [28, 38, 33] that

Figure 1. The matching ambiguity can be reduced by proper scale and neighbouring image selection. Finding the optimal corresponding match for the patch p in reference image I0 , if image
I2 is chosen as the neighbour image of p, it will be matched to
several ambiguous patches along the epipolar line L2 , however an
unambiguous patch will be matched if image I1 is chosen. On the
other hand, p is ambiguous on both images in smaller scale.

camera pose can be well estimated, the 3D reconstruction
from multiple images can be viewed as a problem of dense
matching across images. The PatchMatch method [4] is a
powerful tool to solve the dense matching problem with
high accuracy and efficiency. Built on the PatchMatch
schema, several methods rank at the top of recent challenging benchmark [30]. However, the PatchMath method does
not perform well when matching ambiguity occurs, in such
situation many hypotheses can generate high matching scores, and leaving uncertainty for better depth and normal
choosing.
In this paper, we propose a new MVS method to handle
the matching ambiguity issue, and consequently, the accuracy and completeness are increased. Firstly, for a given pixel
the matching ambiguity can be possibly reduced by carefully selection of pixel’s scale and the neighbouring images.
The motivation behind is that the matching ambiguity can
be analysed using the geometry of image surface (the height
is the pixel gray-scale intensity), and it varies with different directions and scales, see Fig. 1. The matching stability
measured by surface normal curvature, is computed in dif-

5981

