Learning Combinatorial Solver for Graph Matching
Tao Wang1,2
1

He Liu1 Yidong Li1

Yi Jin1

Xiaohui Hou2

Haibin Ling3

The Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
2
HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai 201210, China
3
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
{twang,liuhe1996,ydli,yjin}@bjtu.edu.cn, houxh@hiscene.com, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Learning-based approaches to graph matching have
been developed and explored for more than a decade, and
have grown rapidly in scope and popularity recently. However, previous learning-based algorithms, with or without
deep learning strategy, mainly focus on the learning of node
and/or edge affinities generation, and pay less attention to
the learning of the combinatorial solver. In this paper we
propose a fully trainable framework for graph matching, in
which learning of affinities and solving for combinatorial
optimization are not explicitly separated as in many previous arts. We firstly convert the problem of building node
correspondences between two input graphs to the problem
of selecting reliable nodes from a constructed assignment
graph. Subsequently, the graph network block module is
adopted to perform computation on the graph to form structured representations for each node. It finally predicts a label for each node that is used for node classification, and
the training is performed under the regularization of both
permutation differences and the one-to-one matching constraints. The proposed method is evaluated on four public
benchmarks in comparison with state-of-the-art algorithms,
and the experimental results illustrate its excellent performance.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental problem in computer science, graph
matching involves establishing correspondences between
vertex sets of given graphs while keeping the consistency
between their edge sets as well. It closely relates to
many computer vision problems including feature registration [23], shape reconstruction [30], object recognition [31],
visual tracking [28], object labeling [22], etc. Graph matching is a well-known general NP-hard problem, and it is
hard to acquire a global optimum for graphs of reasonable
sizes. Consequently, approximate algorithms that seek acceptable suboptimal solutions by utilizing relaxation to har-

ness the solution searching are popular in this topic. Despite decades of research effort devoted to graph matching [6,8,10,11,13,20,29,34,35,38], it remains a challenging
problem due to not only the non-convex objective but also
the combinatorial constraints.
Aiming to improve the matching accuracy in the assistance of data analysis and machine learning technology,
learning-based algorithms have been investigated in the past
decade. Early methods [4, 16, 17] employ simple and shallow parametric models that control geometric affinities between pairs of vertices, and the promotion to the matching
performance derived from these models are usually limited.
With the growing interest in using deep features for both geometric and semantic visual matching tasks, learning graph
matching using deep network has attracted much research
attention. Researchers [27, 33] presented deep learning
frameworks for graph matching with general applicability
to model deep feature extraction, unary and pairwise affinity generation and combinatorial optimization. However,
these studies mainly focus on the architecture for learning
the affinity functions while less investigation has been devoted to the design of the combinatorial solver. In particular, in these studies the quadratic assignment problem is
usually relaxed to easier ones and is solved by some nonparametric and relatively simple combinatorial solvers that
may hurt the matching accuracy. It therefore demands research attention on how to design fully trainable network to
boost graph matching.
Addressing the above mentioned issues, we propose a
novel deep learning framework for graph matching aiming to improve the matching accuracy. Roughly speaking, our framework is a fully trainable network designed
on top of graph neural network, in which learning of affinities and solving for combinatorial optimization are not explicitly separated. We first construct an assignment graph
for two input graphs to be matched considering each candidate match a node, and convert the problem of building
node correspondences between input graphs to the problem
of selecting reliable nodes from the constructed assignment

7568

