Circle Loss: A Unified Perspective of Pair Similarity Optimization
Yifan Sun1∗, Changmao Cheng1∗, Yuhan Zhang2∗, Chi Zhang1 , Liang Zheng3 , Zhongdao Wang4 , Yichen Wei1†
1
MEGVII Technology 2 Beihang University 3 Australian National University 4 Tsinghua University
{peter, chengchangmao, zhangchi, weiyichen}@megvii.com

Abstract
This paper provides a pair similarity optimization viewpoint on deep feature learning, aiming to maximize the
within-class similarity sp and minimize the between-class
similarity sn . We find a majority of loss functions, including the triplet loss and the softmax cross-entropy loss,
embed sn and sp into similarity pairs and seek to reduce
(sn − sp ). Such an optimization manner is inflexible, because the penalty strength on every single similarity score
is restricted to be equal. Our intuition is that if a similarity
score deviates far from the optimum, it should be emphasized. To this end, we simply re-weight each similarity to
highlight the less-optimized similarity scores. It results in
a Circle loss, which is named due to its circular decision
boundary. The Circle loss has a unified formula for two
elemental deep feature learning paradigms, i.e., learning
with class-level labels and pair-wise labels. Analytically,
we show that the Circle loss offers a more flexible optimization approach towards a more definite convergence target,
compared with the loss functions optimizing (sn − sp ). Experimentally, we demonstrate the superiority of the Circle
loss on a variety of deep feature learning tasks. On face
recognition, person re-identification, as well as several finegrained image retrieval datasets, the achieved performance
is on par with the state of the art.

1. Introduction
This paper holds a similarity optimization view towards
two elemental deep feature learning paradigms, i.e., learning from data with class-level labels and from data with
pair-wise labels. The former employs a classification loss
function (e.g., softmax cross-entropy loss [25, 16, 36]) to
optimize the similarity between samples and weight vectors. The latter leverages a metric loss function (e.g., triplet
loss [9, 22]) to optimize the similarity between samples. In
our interpretation, there is no intrinsic difference between
these two learning approaches. They both seek to minimize
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1

1

B

T

T

C

𝑠"

C

𝑠"

A
0

B

T’

T’

A
𝑠!
(a)

1

0

𝑠!
(b)

1

Figure 1: Comparison between the popular optimization
manner of reducing (sn −sp ) and the proposed optimization
manner of reducing (αn sn − αp sp ). (a) Reducing (sn − sp )
is prone to inflexible optimization (A, B and C all have
equal gradients with respect to sn and sp ), as well as ambiguous convergence status (both T and T ′ on the decision
boundary are acceptable). (b) With (αn sn − αp sp ), the Circle loss dynamically adjusts its gradients on sp and sn , and
thus benefits from a flexible optimization process. For A, it
emphasizes on increasing sp ; for B, it emphasizes on reducing sn . Moreover, it favors a specified point T on the circular decision boundary for convergence, setting up a definite
convergence target.
between-class similarity sn , as well as to maximize withinclass similarity sp .
From this viewpoint, we find that many popular loss
functions (e.g., triplet loss [9, 22], softmax cross-entropy
loss and its variants [25, 16, 36, 29, 32, 2]) share a similar
optimization pattern. They all embed sn and sp into similarity pairs and seek to reduce (sn − sp ). In (sn − sp ),
increasing sp is equivalent to reducing sn . We argue that
this symmetric optimization manner is prone to the following two problems.
• Lack of flexibility for optimization. The penalty
strength on sn and sp is restricted to be equal. Given the
specified loss functions, the gradients with respect to sn
and sp are of same amplitudes (as detailed in Section 2).
In some corner cases, e.g., sp is small and sn already approaches 0 (“A” in Fig. 1 (a)), it keeps on penalizing sn
with a large gradient. It is inefficient and irrational.

6398

