Neuromorphic Camera Guided High Dynamic Range Imaging
Jin Han1 Chu Zhou1 Peiqi Duan2 Yehui Tang1 Chang Xu3 Chao Xu1 Tiejun Huang2 Boxin Shi2∗
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Dept. of Computer Science, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney

Abstract
Reconstruction of high dynamic range image from a single low dynamic range image captured by a frame-based
conventional camera, which suffers from over- or underexposure, is an ill-posed problem. In contrast, recent neuromorphic cameras are able to record high dynamic range
scenes in the form of an intensity map, with much lower
spatial resolution, and without color. In this paper, we propose a neuromorphic camera guided high dynamic range
imaging pipeline, and a network consisting of specially
designed modules according to each step in the pipeline,
which bridges the domain gaps on resolution, dynamic
range, and color representation between two types of sensors and images. A hybrid camera system has been built
to validate that the proposed method is able to reconstruct
quantitatively and qualitatively high-quality high dynamic
range images by successfully fusing the images and intensity maps for various real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging is a widely used
technique that extends the luminance range covered by an
image. A batch of HDR imaging techniques have developed in recent decades by computer vision and graphics
community, as summarized by Sen and Aguerrebere [48].
Traditional methods include taking multiple Low Dynamic
Range (LDR) images under different exposures, then merging them with different weights to reproduce an HDR image [6]. Another approach is hallucinating texture details
from a single LDR image, which is called inverse tone mapping [3]. Inverse tone mapping is obviously an ill-posed
problem, that relies on predicting badly exposed regions
from neighboring areas [54] or priors learned through deep
neural networks [7].
In recent years, some specially designed neuromorphic cameras, such as DAVIS [4], have drawn increas∗ Corresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn.

Conventional
camera

LDR image
𝐼

Intensity map guided
HDR network

Intensity map
𝑋
Neuromorphic
camera

HDR image
𝐻

Figure 1. An intensity map guided HDR network is proposed to
fuse the LDR image from a conventional camera and the intensity
map captured by a neuromorphic camera, to reconstruct an HDR
image.

ing attention of researchers. Neuromorphic cameras have
unique features different from conventional frame-based
cameras, they are particularly good at sensing very fast motion and high dynamic range scenes (1µs and 130 dB for
DAVIS240). The latter characteristic can be utilized to form
an intensity map, which encodes useful information lost in
conventional imaging by a dynamic range capped camera
due to over- and/or under-exposure. Despite the distinctive
advantages in dynamic range, neuromorphic cameras generally bear low spatial resolution (180 × 240 for DAVIS240)
and do not record color information, resulting in intensity
maps less aesthetically pleasing as LDR photos captured by
a modern camera. It is therefore interesting to study the fusion of LDR images and intensity maps with mutual benefits
being combined for high-quality HDR imaging.
In this paper, we propose a neuromorphic camera guided
HDR imaging method. Directly stitching the intensity map
and LDR image from two types of sensors is expected to
produce poor HDR reconstruction, due to the great domain
gap on spatial resolution, dynamic range, color representation and so on. To address these issues, we propose the
intensity map guided HDR network, with specific modules
designed for each type of gap. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the

1730

