Learning Oracle Attention for High-fidelity Face Completion
Tong Zhou1 Changxing Ding1 Shaowen Lin1 Xinchao Wang2 Dacheng Tao3
1
South China University of Technology 2 Stevens Institute of Technology
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
201821011282@mail.scut.edu.cn
eeswlin@mail.scut.edu.cn

chxding@scut.edu.cn

xinchao.w@gmail.com

dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
High-fidelity face completion is a challenging task due
to the rich and subtle facial textures involved. What makes
it more complicated is the correlations between different facial components, for example, the symmetry in texture and
structure between both eyes. While recent works adopted
the attention mechanism to learn the contextual relations
among elements of the face, they have largely overlooked
the disastrous impacts of inaccurate attention scores; in
addition, they fail to pay sufficient attention to key facial
components, the completion results of which largely determine the authenticity of a face image. Accordingly, in
this paper, we design a comprehensive framework for face
completion based on the U-Net structure. Specifically, we
propose a dual spatial attention module to efficiently learn
the correlations between facial textures at multiple scales;
moreover, we provide an oracle supervision signal to the
attention module to ensure that the obtained attention scores are reasonable. Furthermore, we take the location
of the facial components as prior knowledge and impose a
multi-discriminator on these regions, with which the fidelity
of facial components is significantly promoted. Extensive
experiments on two high-resolution face datasets including CelebA-HQ and Flickr-Faces-HQ demonstrate that the
proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by
large margins.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting refers to filling in the missing pixels in
an image with the expectation that the recovered image will
be visually realistic. This process not only requires that the
filled textures themselves be meaningful, but also seeks semantic consistency between the filled area and the context.
Image inpainting is widely applied to photo restoration, image editing, and object removal, among many other tasks.

(a) PEN-Net

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Face completion results for images (256 × 256) with
center mask (128 × 128). In each row from left to right: (a) the
result taken from the paper of PEN-Net [34]. By zooming in, we
can observe the color discrepancy between two eyes, along with
distortions in the nose and mouth regions. (b) The results of our
method. It can be seen that our method indeed produces face images with high fidelity.

Face completion, as a branch of image inpainting, focuses on filling the missing regions of a human face, and turns
out to be a challenging task. The reasons behind lie in two aspects. First, the human face contains rich and subtle
textures that also differ dramatically across persons, mean-

7680

