Dreaming to Distill: Data-free Knowledge Transfer via DeepInversion
Hongxu Yin1,2:∗ , Pavlo Molchanov1˚ , Jose M. Alvarez1 , Zhizhong Li1,3: ,
Arun Mallya1 , Derek Hoiem3 , Niraj K. Jha2 , and Jan Kautz1
1

NVIDIA, 2 Princeton University, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{hongxuy, jha}@princeton.edu, {zli115, dhoiem}@illinois.edu,
{pmolchanov, josea, amallya, jkautz}@nvidia.com
DeepInversion
Teacher
logits

Noise

Image

ReLU

BatchNorm

Conv

Input (updated)

Knowledge Distillation

Cross
entropy

...

Back
Loss
propagation

Pretrained model (fixed), e.g. ResNet50

1-JS

Feature
maps

Synthesized Images

Target class

Feature distribution
regularization

Pretrained model (fixed)

Kullback–Leibler
divergence

Teacher logits
Student model (fixed)

Student
logits

Adaptive DeepInversion

JensenShannon (JS)
divergence

Inverted from a pretrained ImageNet ResNet-50 classifier
(more examples in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6)

Student model
(updated)

Back
propagation Loss

Figure 1: We introduce DeepInversion, a method that optimizes random noise into high-fidelity class-conditional images given just a
pretrained CNN (teacher), in Sec. 3.2. Further, we introduce Adaptive DeepInversion (Sec. 3.3), which utilizes both the teacher and
application-dependent student network to improve image diversity. Using the synthesized images, we enable data-free pruning (Sec. 4.3),
introduce and address data-free knowledge transfer (Sec. 4.4), and improve upon data-free continual learning (Sec. 4.5).

Abstract
We introduce DeepInversion, a new method for synthesizing images from the image distribution used to train a deep
neural network. We “invert” a trained network (teacher) to
synthesize class-conditional input images starting from random noise, without using any additional information on the
training dataset. Keeping the teacher fixed, our method optimizes the input while regularizing the distribution of intermediate feature maps using information stored in the batch normalization layers of the teacher. Further, we improve the diversity of synthesized images using Adaptive DeepInversion,
which maximizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence between
the teacher and student network logits. The resulting synthesized images from networks trained on the CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet datasets demonstrate high fidelity and degree of realism, and help enable a new breed of data-free applications
– ones that do not require any real images or labeled data.
We demonstrate the applicability of our proposed method to
three tasks of immense practical importance – (i) data-free
network pruning, (ii) data-free knowledge transfer, and (iii)
data-free continual learning. Code is available at https:
//github.com/NVlabs/DeepInversion.

∗ Equal contribution. : Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Work supported in part by ONR MURI N00014-16-1-2007.

1. Introduction
The ability to transfer learned knowledge from a trained
neural network to a new one with properties desirable for the
task at hand has many appealing applications. For example,
one might want to use a more resource-efficient architecture
for deployment on edge inference devices [44, 66, 76], or to
adapt the network to the inference hardware [9, 63, 71], or for
continually learning to classify new image classes [29, 34],
etc. Most current solutions for such knowledge transfer
tasks are based on the concept of knowledge distillation [20],
wherein the new network (student) is trained to match its
outputs to that of a previously trained network (teacher).
However, all such methods have a significant constraint –
they assume that either the previously used training dataset is
available [8, 29, 45, 57], or some real images representative
of the prior training dataset distribution are available [25, 26,
34, 56]. Even methods not based on distillation [27, 50, 74]
assume that some additional statistics about prior training is
made available by the pretrained model provider.
The requirement for prior training information can be
very restrictive in practice. For example, suppose a very deep
network such as ResNet-152 [18] was trained on datasets
with millions [10] or even billions of images [36], and we
wish to distill its knowledge to a lower-latency model such
as ResNet-18. In this case, we would need access to these
datasets, which are not only large but difficult to store, trans-

8715

