PPDM: Parallel Point Detection and Matching for Real-time Human-Object
Interaction Detection
Yue Liao1,2 Si Liu1∗ Fei Wang2 Yanjie Chen2 Chen Qian2 Jiashi Feng3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
SenseTime Research 3 National University of Singapore

22

Abstract

PPDM-Hourglass (Ours)

We propose a single-stage Human-Object Interaction
(HOI) detection method that has outperformed all existing
methods on HICO-DET dataset at 37 fps on a single Titan XP GPU. It is the first real-time HOI detection method.
Conventional HOI detection methods are composed of two
stages, i.e., human-object proposals generation, and proposals classification. Their effectiveness and efficiency are
limited by the sequential and separate architecture. In this
paper, we propose a Parallel Point Detection and Matching
(PPDM) HOI detection framework. In PPDM, an HOI is
defined as a point triplet < human point, interaction point,
object point>. Human and object points are the center of
the detection boxes, and the interaction point is the midpoint of the human and object points. PPDM contains
two parallel branches, namely point detection branch and
point matching branch. The point detection branch predicts
three points. Simultaneously, the point matching branch
predicts two displacements from the interaction point to its
corresponding human and object points. The human point
and the object point originated from the same interaction
point are considered as matched pairs. In our novel parallel architecture, the interaction points implicitly provide
context and regularization for human and object detection.
The isolated detection boxes unlikely to form meaningful
HOI triplets are suppressed, which increases the precision
of HOI detection. Moreover, the matching between human and object detection boxes is only applied around limited numbers of filtered candidate interaction points, which
saves much computational cost. Additionally, we build a
new application-oriented database named as HOI-A, which
serves as a good supplement to the existing datasets1 .

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection [30, 11, 10,
9, 12, 16, 22] has received increasing attention recently.
∗ Corresponding author (liusi@buaa.edu.cn)
1 https://github.com/YueLiao/PPDM

Mean Average Precious (mAP)

20

PPDM-DLA (Ours)
PMFNet

18

No-Frills TIN

16
iCAN
14

GPNN

Real-time
12
InteractNet
10

8
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Seconds Per Image

Figure 1. mAP versus inference time on the HICO-Det test set.
Our PPDM-DLA outperforms the state-of-the-art methods with
the inference speed of 37 fps (0.027s). It is the first real-time HOI
detection method. Our PPDM-Hourglass achieves 4.27% mAP
improvement over the state-of-the-arts with a faster speed.

Given an image, HOI detection aims to detect the triplet
< human, interaction, object >. Different from the general
visual relationship detection [19, 29, 20, 13, 32], the subject of the triplet is fixed as human while the interaction is
action. HOI detection is an important step toward the highlevel semantic understanding of human-centric scenes. It
has a lot of applications, such as activity analysis, humanmachine interaction and intelligent monitoring.
The conventional HOI detection methods [2, 22, 12, 16,
26] mostly consist of two stages. The first stage is the
human-object proposal generation. A pre-trained detector [8, 23] is used to localize both the humans and objects.
Then M ×N human-object proposals are generated by pairwisely combining the filtered M human boxes and N object boxes. The second stage is the proposal classification
which predicts the interactions for each human-object proposal. The limitations of the two-stage methods’ effectiveness and efficiency are mainly because their two stages are
sequential and separated. The proposal generation stage is
completely based on object detection confidences. Each human/object proposal is independently generated. The possibility of combining two proposals to form a meaningful

482

