Learning Texture Transformer Network for Image Super-Resolution
Fuzhi Yang1∗ , Huan Yang2 , Jianlong Fu2 , Hongtao Lu1 , Baining Guo2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China,
{yfzcopy0702, htlu}@sjtu.edu.cn, {huayan, jianf, bainguo}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study on image super-resolution (SR), which aims to
recover realistic textures from a low-resolution (LR) image.
Recent progress has been made by taking high-resolution
images as references (Ref), so that relevant textures can
be transferred to LR images. However, existing SR approaches neglect to use attention mechanisms to transfer
high-resolution (HR) textures from Ref images, which limits these approaches in challenging cases. In this paper,
we propose a novel Texture Transformer Network for Image Super-Resolution (TTSR), in which the LR and Ref images are formulated as queries and keys in a transformer,
respectively. TTSR consists of four closely-related modules
optimized for image generation tasks, including a learnable
texture extractor by DNN, a relevance embedding module,
a hard-attention module for texture transfer, and a softattention module for texture synthesis. Such a design encourages joint feature learning across LR and Ref images,
in which deep feature correspondences can be discovered by
attention, and thus accurate texture features can be transferred. The proposed texture transformer can be further
stacked in a cross-scale way, which enables texture recovery from different levels (e.g., from 1× to 4× magnification). Extensive experiments show that TTSR achieves significant improvements over state-of-the-art approaches on
both quantitative and qualitative evaluations.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution aims to recover natural and realistic textures for a high-resolution image from its degraded
low-resolution counterpart [12]. The recent success of image SR can greatly enhance the quality of media content
for a better user experiences. For example, the digital zoom
∗ This work was performed when the first author was visiting Microsoft
Research as a research intern.

GT

GT Patch

Reference

SOTA Result

Reference

Our Result

Figure 1. A comparison of 4× SR results between the proposed
TTSR and a state-of-the-art RefSR approach [43]. TTSR (ours)
learns to search on relevant textures from the Ref image (indicated by green) for a target LR region (indicated by yellow), which
avoids incorrect texture transfer (indicated by red).

algorithm for mobile cameras and image enhancement technology for digital televisions. Besides, this fundamental
technology can benefit a broad range of computer vision
tasks, like medical imaging [21] and satellite imaging [35].
The research on image SR is usually conducted on two
paradigms, including single image super-resolution (SISR),
and reference-based image super-resolution (RefSR). Traditional SISR often results in blurry effects, because the highresolution (HR) textures have been excessively destructed
in the degrading process which are unrecoverable. Although generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7] based
image SR approaches are proposed to relieve the above
problems, the resultant hallucinations and artifacts caused
by GANs further pose grand challenges to image SR tasks.

5791

