Semantic Image Manipulation Using Scene Graphs
Helisa Dhamo 1, ∗

Azade Farshad1, ∗

Gregory D. Hager3
1

Technische Universität München

Iro Laina1,2

Federico Tombari1,4
2

University of Oxford

Nassir Navab1,3
Christian Rupprecht2

3

Johns Hopkins University

4

Google

Figure 1: Semantic Image Manipulation. Given an image, we predict a semantic scene graph. The user interacts with the
graph by making changes on the nodes and edges. Then, we generate a modified version of the source image, which respects
the constellations in the modified graph.

Abstract
Image manipulation can be considered a special case
of image generation where the image to be produced is a
modification of an existing image. Image generation and
manipulation have been, for the most part, tasks that operate
on raw pixels. However, the remarkable progress in learning
rich image and object representations has opened the way
for tasks such as text-to-image or layout-to-image generation
that are mainly driven by semantics. In our work, we address
the novel problem of image manipulation from scene graphs,
in which a user can edit images by merely applying changes
in the nodes or edges of a semantic graph that is generated
from the image. Our goal is to encode image information
in a given constellation and from there on generate new
constellations, such as replacing objects or even changing
relationships between objects, while respecting the semantics
and style from the original image. We introduce a spatiosemantic scene graph network that does not require direct
supervision for constellation changes or image edits. This
makes it possible to train the system from existing real-world
datasets with no additional annotation effort.

∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work

Project page: https://he-dhamo.github.io/SIMSG/

1. Introduction
The goal of image understanding is to extract rich and
meaningful information from an image. Recent techniques
based on deep representations are continuously pushing
the boundaries of performance in recognizing objects [37]
and their relationships [27] or producing image descriptions
[18]. Understanding is also necessary for image synthesis,
e.g. to generate natural looking images from an abstract
semantic canvas [4, 44, 57] or even from language descriptions [11, 24, 36, 53, 55]. High-level image manipulation,
however, has received less attention. Image manipulation
is still typically done at pixel level via photo editing software and low-level tools such as in-painting. Instances of
higher-level manipulation are usually object-centric, such as
facial modifications or reenactment. A more abstract way of
manipulating an image from its semantics, which includes
objects, their relationships and attributes, could make image
editing easier with less manual effort from the user.
In this work, we present a method to perform semantic
editing of an image by modifying a scene graph, which is
a representation of the objects, attributes and interactions
in the image (Figure 1). As we show later, this formulation
allows the user to choose among different editing functions.
For example, instead of manually segmenting, deleting and
in-painting unwanted tourists in a holiday photo, the user

5213

