Squeeze-and-Attention Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Zilong Zhong1,4 , Zhong Qiu Lin2 , Rene Bidart2 , Xiaodan Hu2 , Ibrahim Ben Daya2 , Zhifeng Li5 ,
Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,4 , Jonathan Li2 , Alexander Wong2
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen Univeristy, China
2
3

4

University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
5

Mstar Technologies, Hangzhou, China

{zlzhong, wszheng}@ieee.org, {zq2lin, x226hu, ibendaya, junli, a28wong}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
The recent integration of attention mechanisms into segmentation networks improves their representational capabilities through a great emphasis on more informative features. However, these attention mechanisms ignore an
implicit sub-task of semantic segmentation and are constrained by the grid structure of convolution kernels. In this
paper, we propose a novel squeeze-and-attention network
(SANet) architecture that leverages an effective squeezeand-attention (SA) module to account for two distinctive
characteristics of segmentation: i) pixel-group attention,
and ii) pixel-wise prediction. Specifically, the proposed
SA modules impose pixel-group attention on conventional
convolution by introducing an ‘attention’ convolutional
channel, thus taking into account spatial-channel interdependencies in an efficient manner. The final segmentation
results are produced by merging outputs from four hierarchical stages of a SANet to integrate multi-scale contexts
for obtaining an enhanced pixel-wise prediction. Empirical
experiments on two challenging public datasets validate the
effectiveness of the proposed SANets, which achieves 83.2%
mIoU (without COCO pre-training) on PASCAL VOC and
a state-of-the-art mIoU of 54.4% on PASCAL Context.

1. Introduction
Segmentation networks become the key recognition elements for autonomous driving, medical image analysis,
robotic navigation and virtual reality. The advances of segmentation methods are mainly driven by improving pixelwise representation for accurate labeling. However, semantic segmentation is not fully equivalent to pixel-wise
prediction. In this paper, we argue that semantic segmentation can be disentangled into two independent dimen-

Figure 1: Semantic segmentation can be disentangled into
two sub-tasks: explicit pixel-wise prediction and implicit
pixel grouping. These two tasks separate semantic segmentation from image classification. Motivated by designing a
module that accounts for pixel grouping, we design a novel
squeeze-and-attention (SA) module along with a SANet to
improve the performance of dense prediction and account
for the largely ignored pixel grouping.
sions: pixel-wise prediction and pixel grouping. Specifically, pixel-wise prediction addresses the prediction of each
pixel, while pixel grouping emphasizes the connection between pixels. Previous segmentation works mainly focus
on improving segmentation performance from the pixellevel but largely ignore the implicit task of pixel grouping
[26, 5, 41, 40, 4, 3].
The largely ignored task of pixel grouping can be discovered by disentangling semantic segmentation into two
sub-tasks. As shown in Figure 1, the first sub-task requires
precise pixel-wise annotation and introduces spatial constraints to image classification. Recent segmentation models achieved significant advances by aggregating contextual
features using pyramid pooling and dilated convolution layers for pixel-wise labeling [41, 5]. However, the grid struc-

13065

