Can We Learn Heuristics For Graphical Model Inference Using Reinforcement
Learning?
Safa Messaoud, Maghav Kumar, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{messaou2, mkumar10, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization is frequently used in computer vision. For instance, in applications like semantic
segmentation, human pose estimation and action recognition, programs are formulated for solving inference in Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) to produce a structured output
that is consistent with visual features of the image. However,
solving inference in CRFs is in general intractable, and approximation methods are computationally demanding and
limited to unary, pairwise and hand-crafted forms of higher
order potentials. In this paper, we show that we can learn
program heuristics, i.e., policies, for solving inference in
higher order CRFs for the task of semantic segmentation,
using reinforcement learning. Our method solves inference
tasks efficiently without imposing any constraints on the form
of the potentials. We show compelling results on the Pascal
VOC and MOTS datasets.

1. Introduction
Graphical model inference is an important combinatorial
optimization task for robotics and autonomous systems. Despite significant progress in recent years due to increasingly
accurate deep net models, challenges such as inconsistent
bounding box detection, segmentation or image classification remain. Those inconsistencies can be addressed with
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), albeit requiring to solve
an inference task which is of combinatorial complexity.
Classical algorithms to address combinatorial problems
come in three paradigms: exact, approximate and heuristic.
Exact algorithms are often based on solving an Integer Linear
Program (ILP) using a combination of a Linear Programming (LP) relaxation and a branch-and-bound framework.
Particularly for large problems, repeated solving of linear
programs is computationally expensive and therefore prohibitive. Approximation algorithms address this concern,
however, often at the expense of weak optimality guarantees.
Moreover, approximation algorithms often involve manual
construction for each problem. Seemingly easier to develop
are heuristics which are generally computationally fast but

guarantees are hardly provided. In addition, tuning of hyperparameters for a particular problem instance may be required.
A fourth paradigm has been considered since the early 2000s
and gained popularity again recently [93, 6, 85, 5, 27, 18]:
learned algorithms. This fourth paradigm is based on the
intuition that data governs the properties of the combinatorial algorithm. For instance, semantic image segmentation
always deals with similarly sized problem structures or semantic patterns. It is therefore conceivable that learning
to solve the problem on a given dataset uncovers strategies
which are close to optimal but hard to find manually, since
it is much more effective for a learning algorithm to sift
through large amounts of sample problems. To achieve this,
in a series of work, reinforcement learning techniques were
developed [93, 6, 85, 5, 27, 18] and shown to perform well
on a variety of combinatorial tasks from the traveling salesman problem and the knapsack formulation to maximum cut
and minimum vertex cover.
While the aforementioned learning based techniques have
been shown to perform extremely well on classical benchmarks, we are not aware of results for inference algorithms in
CRFs for semantic segmentation. We hence wonder whether
we can learn heuristics to address graphical model inference
in semantic segmentation problems? To study this we develop a new framework for higher order CRF inference for
the task of semantic segmentation using a Markov Decision
Process (MDP). To solve the MDP, we assess two reinforcement learning algorithms: a Deep Q-Net (DQN) [58] and a
deep net guided Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [82].
The proposed approach has two main advantages: (1)
Unlike traditional approaches, it does not impose any constraints on the form of the CRF terms to facilitate effective
inference. We demonstrate our claim by designing detection
based higher order potentials that result in computationally
intractable classical inference approaches. (2) Our method
is more efficient than traditional approaches as inference
complexity is linear in arbitrary potential orders while classical methods have exponential dependence on the largest
clique size in general. This is due to the fact that semantic
segmentation is reduced to sequentially inferring the labels
17589

