SAPIEN: A SimulAted Part-based Interactive ENvironment
Fanbo Xiang1 Yuzhe Qin1 Kaichun Mo2 Yikuan Xia1 Hao Zhu1
Fangchen Liu1 Minghua Liu1 Hanxiao Jiang3 Yifu Yuan5 He Wang2 Li Yi4
Angel X. Chang3 Leonidas Guibas2 Hao Su1
1
UC San Diego 2 Stanford University 3 Simon Fraser University 4 Google Research 5 UC Los Angeles
https://sapien.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Building home assistant robots has long been a goal for
vision and robotics researchers. To achieve this task, a
simulated environment with physically realistic simulation,
sufficient articulated objects, and transferability to the real
robot is indispensable. Existing environments achieve these
requirements for robotics simulation with different levels
of simplification and focus. We take one step further in
constructing an environment that supports household tasks
for training robot learning algorithm. Our work, SAPIEN,
is a realistic and physics-rich simulated environment that
hosts a large-scale set of articulated objects. SAPIEN
enables various robotic vision and interaction tasks that
require detailed part-level understanding.We evaluate stateof-the-art vision algorithms for part detection and motion
attribute recognition as well as demonstrate robotic interaction tasks using heuristic approaches and reinforcement
learning algorithms. We hope that SAPIEN will open
research directions yet to be explored, including learning
cognition through interaction, part motion discovery, and
construction of robotics-ready simulated game environment.

1. Introduction
To achieve human-level perception and interaction with
the 3D world, home-assistant robots must have the capability to use perception to interact with 3D objects [11, 61, 40].
For a robot to help put away groceries, it must be able to
open the refrigerator by locating the door handle, pulling
the door and fetching the target objects.
One direct way to address the problem is to train
robots by interacting with the real environment [30, 4, 27].
However, training robots in the real world could be very
time consuming, costly, unstable, and potentially unsafe.
Moreover, a slight perturbation in hardware or environment
setup can result in different outcomes in the real world, thus
inhibiting reproducible research. Researchers, therefore,

Figure 1: Robot-object Interaction in SAPIEN. We show
the ray-traced scene (top) and robot camera views (bottom):
RGB image, surface normals, depth and semantic segmentation of motion parts, while a robot is learning to operate a
dishwasher.
have long used simulated environments for tasks such as
navigation [43, 58, 44, 1, 3, 56, 14, 58] and control [24, 42,
50, 10].
Constructing simulated environments for robot learning
with transferability to the real world is a non-trivial task.
It faces challenges from four main aspects: 1) The environment needs to reproduce the real-world physics to some
level. As it is still infeasible to simulate real-world physics
exactly, any physical simulator needs to decide the levelof-details and accuracy it operates on. Some approximate
physics by simulating rigid bodies and joints[36, 50, 10];
some handle soft deformable objects [50, 10]; and others simulate fluid [50, 45]. 2) The environment should
incorporate the simulation of real robots, including the
behaviors of real robotics manipulators, sensors and controllers [35]. Only this can enable seamless transfer to
the real-world after training. 3) The environment needs

11097

