DoveNet: Deep Image Harmonization via Domain Verification
Wenyan Cong1 , Jianfu Zhang1 , Li Niu1 ∗, Liu Liu1 , Zhixin Ling1 , Weiyuan Li2 , Liqing Zhang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 East China Normal University
1

{plcwyam17320,c.sis,ustcnewly,Shirlley,1069066484}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

10162100162@stu.ecnu.edu.cn 1 zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image composition is an important operation in image
processing, but the inconsistency between foreground and
background significantly degrades the quality of composite image. Image harmonization, aiming to make the foreground compatible with the background, is a promising
yet challenging task. However, the lack of high-quality
publicly available dataset for image harmonization greatly
hinders the development of image harmonization techniques. In this work, we contribute an image harmonization
dataset iHarmony4 by generating synthesized composite
images based on COCO (resp., Adobe5k, Flickr, day2night)
dataset, leading to our HCOCO (resp., HAdobe5k, HFlickr,
Hday2night) sub-dataset. Moreover, we propose a new
deep image harmonization method DoveNet using a novel
domain verification discriminator, with the insight that
the foreground needs to be translated to the same domain as background. Extensive experiments on our constructed dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Our dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/bcmi/Image Harmonization Datasets.

1. Introduction
Image composition targets at generating a composite image by extracting the foreground of one image and pasting
it on the background of another image. However, since
the foreground is usually not compatible with the background, the quality of composite image would be significantly downgraded. To address this issue, image harmonization aims to adjust the foreground to make it compatible with the background in the composite image. Both
traditional methods [20, 47, 54] and deep learning based
method [43, 45] have been explored for image harmonization, in which deep learning based method [43, 45] could
achieve promising results.
As a data-hungry approach, deep learning calls for a
∗ Corresponding author.

large number of training pairs of composite image and harmonized image as input image and its ground-truth output.
However, given a composite image, manually creating its
harmonized image, i.e., adjusting the foreground to be compatible with background, is in high demand for extensive
efforts of skilled expertise. So this strategy of constructing datasets is very time-consuming and expensive, making
it infeasible to generate large-scale training data. Alternatively, as proposed in [43], we can treat a real image as
harmonized image, segment a foreground region, and adjust this foreground region to be inconsistent with the background, yielding a synthesized composite image. Then,
pairs of synthesized composite image and real image can
be used to supersede pairs of composite image and harmonized image. Because foreground adjustment can be done
automatically (e.g., color transfer methods) without timeconsuming expertise editing, it becomes feasible to collect
large-scale training data. Despite this inspiring strategy
proposed in [43], Tsai et al. [43] did not make the constructed datasets publicly available. Besides, the proposed
dataset has several shortcomings, such as inadequate diversity/realism of synthesized composite images and lack of
real composite images.
Considering the unavailability and shortcomings of the
dataset built in [43], we tend to build our own stronger
dataset. Overall, we adopt the strategy in [43] to generate pairs of synthesized composite image and real image.
Similar to [43], we generate synthesized composite images based on Microsoft COCO dataset [24], MIT-Adobe5k
dataset [2], and our self-collected Flickr dataset. For Flickr
dataset, we crawl images from Flickr image website by using the category names in ImageNet dataset [5] as queries
in order to increase the diversity of crawled images. Nevertheless, not all crawled images are suitable for the image
harmonization task. So we manually filter out the images
with pure-color or blurry background, the cluttered images
with no obvious foreground objects, and the images which
appear apparently unrealistic due to artistic editing.
Besides COCO, Adobe5k, and Flickr suggested in [43],
we additionally consider datasets which contain multiple

8394

