Cross-View Tracking for Multi-Human 3D Pose Estimation at over 100 FPS
Long Chen1
1

Haizhou Ai1

Rui Chen1

Zijie Zhuang1

Shuang Liu2

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Estimating 3D poses of multiple humans in real-time is
a classic but still challenging task in computer vision. Its
major difficulty lies in the ambiguity in cross-view association of 2D poses and the huge state space when there are
multiple people in multiple views. In this paper, we present
a novel solution for multi-human 3D pose estimation from
multiple calibrated camera views. It takes 2D poses in different camera coordinates as inputs and aims for the accurate 3D poses in the global coordinate. Unlike previous
methods that associate 2D poses among all pairs of views
from scratch at every frame, we exploit the temporal consistency in videos to match the 2D inputs with 3D poses directly in 3-space. More specifically, we propose to retain the
3D pose for each person and update them iteratively via the
cross-view multi-human tracking. This novel formulation
improves both accuracy and efficiency, as we demonstrated
on widely-used public datasets. To further verify the scalability of our method, we propose a new large-scale multihuman dataset with 12 to 28 camera views. Without bells
and whistles, our solution achieves 154 FPS on 12 cameras
and 34 FPS on 28 cameras, indicating its ability to handle
large-scale real-world applications. The proposed dataset
will be released at https://github.com/longcw/
crossview_3d_pose_tracking.

1. Introduction
Multi-human 3D pose estimation from videos has a wide
range of applications, including action recognition, sports
analysis, and human-computer interaction. With the rapid
development of deep neural network, most of the recent efforts in this area have been devoted to monocular 3D pose
estimation [25, 26] . However, despite much progress, the
single-camera setting is still far from being resolved due to
the large variations of human poses and partial occlusion in
the monocular views. A natural solution for these problems
is to recover the 3D poses from multiple camera views.
Recent multi-view approaches generally employ the de-

2

AiFi Inc.

tected 2D body joints from multiple views as inputs with
the advance of 2D human pose estimation [9, 11, 35], and
address the 3D pose estimation in a two-step formulation
[2, 13]. Specifically, the 2D joints of the same person are
first matched and associated across views, the 3D location
of each joint is subsequently determined by a multi-view
reconstruction method. In this formulation, the challenge
comes from three parts: 1) the detected 2D joints are noisy
and inaccurate since the pose estimation is imperfect; 2) the
cross-view association is ambiguous when multiple people
interacting with each other in crowded scenes; 3) the computational complexity explodes as the number of people and
number of cameras increase.
To tackle the problem of cross-view association, 3D pictorial structure model (3DPS) is widely used in some previous methods [2, 8], where the 3D poses are recovered from
2D joints in a discretized 3-space. In this formulation, the
likelihood of a joint belonging to a spatial bin is given by the
geometric consistency [16], along with a pre-defined body
structure model. A severe problem of 3DPS is the expensive
computational cost due to the huge state space with multiple people in multiple views. As an improvement, Dong et
al. [13] propose solving the cross-view association problem at the body level in advance before applying 3DPS.
They associate 2D poses of the same person from different views as clusters and estimate 3D poses from the clusters via 3DPS. Nevertheless, matching 2D poses between
all pairs of views still makes the computational complexity
explode as the number of cameras increases.
In contrast to previous methods that process inputs from
multiple cameras simultaneously, we propose a new solution with an iterative processing strategy. Specifically, we
propose exploiting the temporal consistency in videos to
match 2D poses of each view with 3D poses directly in 3space, where the 3D poses are retained and updated iteratively by the cross-view multi-human tracking. There are
two advantages in our formulation. Firstly, for the accuracy, matching in 3-space is expected to be robust to partial occlusion and inaccurate 2D localization, as the 3D
poses consist of multi-view information. Secondly, for the
efficiency, processing camera views iteratively makes the

3279

