Uncertainty-Aware Mesh Decoder for High Fidelity 3D Face Reconstruction
Gun-Hee Lee1 , Seong-Whan Lee2
1
Department of Computer and Radio Communications Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
{gunhlee, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Figure 1: We propose an uncertainty-aware mesh decoder which reconstructs high quality 3D face. Our approach successfully
employs Graph CNN and GAN for mesh decoder along with an uncertainty-aware image encoder to reconstruct shape and
texture in high fidelity. Our 3D face reconstruction results are best viewed in color.

Abstract
3D Morphable Model (3DMM) is a statistical model of
facial shape and texture using a set of linear basis functions.
Most of the recent 3D face reconstruction methods aim to
embed the 3D morphable basis functions into Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN). However, balancing
the requirements of strong regularization for global shape
and weak regularization for high level details is still illposed. To address this problem, we properly control generality and specificity in terms of regularization by harnessing
the power of uncertainty. Additionally, we focus on the concept of nonlinearity and find out that Graph Convolutional
Neural Network (Graph CNN) and Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) are effective in reconstructing high quality 3D shapes and textures respectively. In this paper, we
propose to employ (i) an uncertainty-aware encoder that
presents face features as distributions and (ii) a fully nonlinear decoder model combining Graph CNN with GAN. We
demonstrate how our method builds excellent high quality
results and outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods
on 3D face reconstruction tasks for both constrained and
in-the-wild images.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing a high quality personalized 3D face can
be used for many applications, including face recognition [11, 21, 16, 14, 36], facial motion capture [9] or virtual and augmented reality [34, 33]. However, estimating
3D geometry and texture from a single photograph is still a
challenging problem due to the limited 3D scan data and the
complex relationship of multiple physical dimensions such
as illumination, reflectance, and geometry. To address the
above difficulties, Blanz and Vetter [37] introduced 3DMM
which relies on additional prior assumption such as constraining faces to lie in a low dimensional subspace. Since
then, a lot of 3DMM based methods have been presented
and showed impressive results [10, 18, 31, 13, 19, 32].
However, these methods do not generalize well beyond the
restricted low dimensional subspace of the underlying linear statistical model.
Recently, many studies have been conducted to bring the
concept of DCNN to 3DMMs. This learns model directly
from 2D images to better capture in-the-wild variations and
increases the representation power. However, these models
are still not capable of modeling high fidelity shapes and
textures for in-the-wild images. The main reason is that the

6100

