TPNet: Trajectory Proposal Network for Motion Prediction
Liangji Fang†⋆ Qinhong Jiang†⋆ Jianping Shi† Bolei Zhou‡
†
‡
SenseTime Group Limited
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{fangliangji, jiangqinhong, shijianping}@sensetime.com, bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Making accurate motion prediction of the surrounding
traffic agents such as pedestrians, vehicles, and cyclists is
crucial for autonomous driving. Recent data-driven motion prediction methods have attempted to learn to directly
regress the exact future position or its distribution from massive amount of trajectory data. However, it remains difficult for these methods to provide multimodal predictions as
well as integrate physical constraints such as traffic rules
and movable areas. In this work we propose a novel twostage motion prediction framework, Trajectory Proposal
Network (TPNet). TPNet first generates a candidate set of
future trajectories as hypothesis proposals, then makes the
final predictions by classifying and refining the proposals
which meets the physical constraints. By steering the proposal generation process, safe and multimodal predictions
are realized. Thus this framework effectively mitigates the
complexity of motion prediction problem while ensuring the
multimodal output. Experiments on four large-scale trajectory prediction datasets, i.e. the ETH, UCY, Apollo and
Argoverse datasets, show that TPNet achieves the state-ofthe-art results both quantitatively and qualitatively.1

1. Introduction
Predicting the motion of the surrounding traffic agents,
such as vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists, is crucial for the
autonomous driving system to make informative and safe
decisions. Traffic agent behaviors tend to be inherently multimodal where there could be multiple plausible intentions
for determining their future paths. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
Vehicle 1 in green could turn right or go straight under this
scenario when only a limited number of observations are
received. Moreover the movements of the traffic agents are
not only determined by their intentions but also regularized
by the nearby traffic rules such as the possible movable areas. For example, vehicles should drive on the road and
⋆ indicates equal contribution.
1 More information is available at this link.

Vehicle 1

Pedestrian 2
Pedestrian 1

Past Position
Future Position
Vehicle 2

Ego Car

Prediction
First stage proposal
Regressed end point

Figure 1. The movements of traffic agents are often regularized
by the movable areas (white areas for vehicles and gray areas for
pedestrians), while there might be multiple plausible future paths
for the agents. Thus it requires the motion prediction systems to
be able to incorporate the traffic constraints and output multimodal
predictions. Our framework generates the predictions with different intentions under physical constraints for both vehicles and
pedestrians.

pedestrians should walk on sidewalks or crosswalks. Thus
reliable motion prediction should involve the modeling of
the agent’s previous trajectory as well as the traffic constraints for the target. Ensuring safe and multimodal predictions is critical for autonomous driving systems.
Early work on motion prediction considers the timeseries prediction task by utilizing Kalman Filter based dynamic models [5, 6] or Gaussian mixture models [9], etc.
However, these models are sensitive to the observation
16797

