Multi-Path Region Mining For Weakly Supervised 3D Semantic Segmentation on
Point Clouds
Jiacheng Wei1
Guosheng Lin1∗
Kim-Hui Yap1
Tzu-Yi Hung2
Lihua Xie1
1
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Delta Research Center, Singapore
{jiacheng002, gslin, ekhyap, elhxie}@ntu.edu.sg, tzuyi.hung@deltaww.com

Abstract
Point clouds provide intrinsic geometric information and
surface context for scene understanding. Existing methods
for point cloud segmentation require a large amount of fully
labeled data. Using advanced depth sensors, collection of
large scale 3D dataset is no longer a cumbersome process.
However, manually producing point-level label on the large
scale dataset is time and labor-intensive. In this paper, we
propose a weakly supervised approach to predict point-level
results using weak labels on 3D point clouds. We introduce
our multi-path region mining module to generate pseudo
point-level label from a classification network trained with
weak labels. It mines the localization cues for each class
from various aspects of the network feature using different
attention modules. Then, we use the point-level pseudo labels to train a point cloud segmentation network in a fully
supervised manner. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first method that uses cloud-level weak labels on raw
3D space to train a point cloud semantic segmentation network. In our setting, the 3D weak labels only indicate the
classes that appeared in our input sample. We discuss both
scene- and subcloud-level weakly labels on raw 3D point
cloud data and perform in-depth experiments on them. On
ScanNet[8] dataset, our result trained with subcloud-level
labels is compatible with some fully supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Compared to 2D images, as projections of the real world,
3D data brings geometry and the surrounding context of objects and scenes along with their RGB information. The
extra hints have drawn much attention recently. With the
great success of deep learning in 2D image vision tasks, researchers proposed many deep learning based methods for
recognition tasks on point clouds. However, deep learning
based methods are usually data-hungry.
Recently, the advances in reconstruction algorithms and
more affordable consumer-level depth sensors provide con∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

Wall
Floor
Sofa

Table
Curtain
Otherfurniture

(A) Scene-level Label

(B) Point-level Label

Floor
Sofa
Table
Otherfurniture

(C)Subcloud-level Label

Figure 1. An illustration of different kinds of labels for point
clouds. (A) Scene-level label indicates all the classes appeared
in the scene, (B)Point-level label indicates the class that each pixel
belongs to, (C)Subcloud-level label denotes the classes appeared
in the subcloud.

venient and inexpensive access to 3D data collection. However, annotations on these data are still expensive in labor
and time. Especially for 3D data, directly labeling of reconstructed 3D meshes or grouped points is to be carried
out.
For example, ScanNet[8], a popular large-scale RGBD dataset of real-world indoor environments, that provides
1513 3D scans from 70 unique indoor scenes, consists of
over 2.5M RGB-D images. Then, 3D meshes and point
clouds were reconstructed from the RGB-D scans. Using
Structure sensor[31], which can be attached to mobile devices like smartphones and iPads, only 20 people participated in the collection of 1513 3D scans. Despite the convenience in data collection, the annotation process turned
out to be much exhausting and arduous. According to the
statistics, more than 500 works participated in the semantic
annotation process. To ensure the annotation accuracy, each
scene was annotated by 2 to 3 participants. In aggregate, the
median and mean time for annotation per scan is 16.8 min

4384

