Multi-Scale Fusion Subspace Clustering Using Similarity Constraint
Zhiyuan Dang1 , Cheng Deng1∗, Xu Yang1 , Heng Huang2,3
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
{zydang,xyang 01}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Classical subspace clustering methods often assume that
the raw form data lie in a union of the low-dimension linear subspace. This assumption is too strict in practice,
which largely limits the generalization of subspace clustering. To tackle this issue, deep subspace clustering (DSC)
networks based on deep autoencoder (DAE) have been proposed, which non-linearly map the raw form data into a
latent space well-adapted to subspace clustering. However,
existing DSC models ignore the important multi-scale information embedded in DAE, thus abandon the much more
useful deep features, leading their suboptimal clustering
results. In this paper, we propose the Multi-Scale Fusion Subspace Clustering Using Similarity Constraint (SCMSFSC) network, which learns a more discriminative selfexpression coefficient matrix by a novel multi-scale fusion
module. More importantly, it introduces a similarity constraint module to guide the fused self-expression coefficient
matrix in training. Specifically, the multi-scale fusion module is framed to generate the self-expression coefficient matrix of each convolutional layer in DAE and then fuses them
with the convolutional kernel. In addition, the similarity
constraint module is to supervise the fused self-expression
coefficient matrix by the designed similarity matrix. Extensive experimental results on four benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our new model against stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, subspace clustering [33] has aroused
widespread research interests in unsupervised learning and
is successfully exploited to various applications, such as image segmentation [22, 36], motion segmentation [14, 4], image clustering [40, 5, 37, 38, 11], genes expression microarray clustering [24] and so on. Subspace clustering aims to
∗ Corresponding author.

segment data drawn from a union of low-dimension subspaces in an unsupervised way, and actually, many data
equip this property. For example, the face images of a subject taken under fixed pose, varying lighting conditions and
Lambertian reflectance, occupy a low-dimension subspace
whose dimension close to nine [2, 13], and the handwritten digit images of a single digit also form a low-dimension
subspace [10]. Therefore, we can apply subspace clustering to segment the data into multiple groups according to
whether they belong to the same subspace or not.
Majority of the subspace clustering methods [35, 3, 4,
19, 21] rely on the assumption that the raw form data locate
in a union of low-dimension linear subspace. In fact, this assumption is too strict for some practical environments. For
example, in face image clustering, the reflectance is normally non-Lambertian and the pose of the subject is not always fixed [13]. Under such situations, the images corresponding to the same face no longer lie in linear subspaces.
Subsequently, kernel-based methods [30, 29, 39] are developed to implicitly map raw data into high-dimension spaces,
expecting to address the problem of non-linear subspace
embedding. However, it is difficult to choose proper kernel
function and its corresponding hyper-parameter, and more
importantly, there is no clear theoretical guarantee such kernel existing [43].
By virtue of the powerful deep learning [17], DAEs have
been widely used to non-linearly transform data into latent
space for unsupervised learning. DSC based on DAE is the
latest work [13] in the subspace clustering field, which successfully makes the generated latent space well-adapted to
subspace clustering and obtains promising results. Beyond
that, according to the self-expression property of data that
indicates a data point can be expressed as a linear combination of other data points in the same subspace, DSC [13]
first introduces this property into the deep network and substitutes the self-expression coefficient matrix with the novel
self-expression layer, whose weights are viewed as the coefficient matrix. In subsequent works of DSC [43, 45, 42],
DAE is still used to extract features from input data. As

6658

