Attention Mechanism Exploits Temporal Contexts:
Real-time 3D Human Pose Reconstruction
Ruixu Liu1 , Ju Shen1 , He Wang1 , Chen Chen2 , Sen-ching Cheung3 , Vijayan Asari1
1

University of Dayton, 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 3 University of Kentucky

{liur05, jshen1, hwang6, vasari1}@udayton.edu, chen.chen@uncc.edu, sccheung@ieee.org

Abstract
We propose a novel attention-based framework for 3D
human pose estimation from a monocular video. Despite
the general success of end-to-end deep learning paradigms,
our approach is based on two key observations: (1) temporal incoherence and jitter are often yielded from a single frame prediction; (2) error rate can be remarkably reduced by increasing the receptive field in a video. Therefore,
we design an attentional mechanism to adaptively identify
significant frames and tensor outputs from each deep neural net layer, leading to a more optimal estimation. To
achieve large temporal receptive fields, multi-scale dilated
convolutions are employed to model long-range dependencies among frames. The architecture is straightforward to
implement and can be flexibly adopted for real-time applications. Any off-the-shelf 2D pose estimation system,
e.g. Mocap libraries, can be easily integrated in an adhoc fashion. We both quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate our method on various standard benchmark datasets
(e.g. Human3.6M, HumanEva). Our method considerably outperforms all the state-of-the-art algorithms up to
8% error reduction (average mean per joint position error: 34.7) as compared to the best-reported results. Code
is available at: (https://github.com/lrxjason/
Attention3DHumanPose)

1. Introduction
Articulated 3D human pose estimation is a classic vision
task enabling numerous applications from activity recognition to human-robot interaction. Traditional approaches
often use specialized devices under highly controlled environments, such as multi-view capture [1], marker systems
[26] and multi-modal sensing [32], which requires a laborious setup process that limits their practical uses. This work
focuses on 3D pose estimation from an arbitrary monocu-

(a) Result from [35]

(b) Ground truth

(c) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison results: Top: side-by-side views of
motion retargeting results on a 3D avatar; the source is from
frame 857 of walking S9 and frame 475 of posing S9 in
Human3.6M. Bottom: the average joint error comparison
across all the frames of the video walking S9 [19, 35].
lar video, which is challenging due to the high-dimensional
variability and nonlinearity of human dynamics. Recent
efforts of using deep architectures have significantly advanced the state-of-the-art in 3D pose reasoning [41, 29].
The end-to-end learning process alleviates the need of using
tailor-made features or spatial constraints, thereby minimizing the characteristic errors such as double-counting image
evidence [15].
In this work, we aim to utilize an attention model to further improve the accuracy among existing deep networks
while preserving natural temporal coherence in videos. The

5064

