Learning to Transfer Texture from Clothing Images to 3D Humans
Aymen Mir1
1

Thiemo Alldieck1, 2

Gerard Pons-Moll1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
2

Computer Graphics Lab, TU Braunschweig, Germany

{amir,gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de alldieck@cg.cs.tu-bs.de

Figure 1: Our model Pix2Surf allows to digitally map the texture of online retail store clothing images to the 3D surface of
virtual garment items enabling 3D virtual try-on in real-time.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a simple yet effective method to
automatically transfer textures of clothing images (front and
back) to 3D garments worn on top SMPL [42], in real time.
We first automatically compute training pairs of images with
aligned 3D garments using a custom non-rigid 3D to 2D
registration method, which is accurate but slow. Using these
pairs, we learn a mapping from pixels to the 3D garment
surface. Our idea is to learn dense correspondences from
garment image silhouettes to a 2D-UV map of a 3D garment
surface using shape information alone, completely ignoring texture, which allows us to generalize to the wide range
of web images. Several experiments demonstrate that our
model is more accurate than widely used baselines such as
thin-plate-spline warping and image-to-image translation
networks while being orders of magnitude faster. Our model
opens the door for applications such as virtual try-on, and
allows for generation of 3D humans with varied textures
which is necessary for learning. Code will be available at
https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/pix2surf/.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to learn a model capable of transferring texture from two photographs (front and back) of a garment
to the 3D geometry of a garment template, automatically
and in real time. Such a model can be extremely useful
for photo-realistic rendering of humans, varied generation
of synthetic data for learning, virtual try-on, art and design.
Despite the many applications, automatic transfer of clothing texture to 3D garments has received very little attention.
The vast majority of recent methods work in image space
directly. Most works focus on either image based person
re-posing [82, 43, 44, 56, 63, 21, 10, 64], or virtual try-on
[57, 78, 28, 69, 77, 22, 83]. Re-posing methods learn to
synthesize image pixels to produce novel poses of a person,
whereas virtual try-on methods learn to morph an image of
a clothing item to drape it on a target person. The advantage of these methods is that they can be trained on largescale datasets. The critical disadvantage is that they operate
in pixel-space instead of 3D, they can not synthesize difficult poses, and struggle to produce temporally consistent
results. Another line of work extracts texture by fitting 3D

7023

