DeepStrip: High Resolution Boundary Refinement
Peng Zhou1
Brian Price2
Scott Cohen2
1
University of Maryland, College Park

Gregg Wilensky2
Larry S. Davis1
2
Adobe Research, San Jose

Abstract
In this paper, we target refining the boundaries in high
resolution images given low resolution masks. For memory
and computation efficiency, we propose to convert the regions of interest into strip images and compute a boundary
prediction in the strip domain. To detect the target boundary, we present a framework with two prediction layers.
First, all potential boundaries are predicted as an initial
prediction and then a selection layer is used to pick the target boundary and smooth the result. To encourage accurate
prediction, a loss which measures the boundary distance in
the strip domain is introduced. In addition, we enforce a
matching consistency and C0 continuity regularization to
the network to reduce false alarms. Extensive experiments
on both public and a newly created high resolution dataset
strongly validate our approach.

1. Introduction
Boundary detection is a well-studied problem and fundamental for human recognition [29, 9]. Recent decades
have witnessed considerable effort to improve the boundary
quality of an object that has been detected [42, 36, 33, 19,
38, 49, 16, 23, 43] or segmented [11, 35, 25, 7, 18]. Consequently, it is not difficult to separate object of interests from
backgrounds with precise boundaries utilizing these methods. While current learning based boundary detection algorithms are usually computed on low resolution (LR) images
(0.04-0.25 million pixels), most photos taken these days are
much larger, ranging from cell phone size (8-16 million
pixels) to professional camera size (16-400 million pixels).
Most methods are not designed for images of this size and
the excessive computation they require, and most machine
learning based methods cannot process them due to memory constraints. Given a precise low resolution prediction, a
workaround would be to directly apply upsampling to reach
high resolution (HR). Nevertheless, this usually yields poor
quality results because the semantic contents in the HR image are not considered. (See Figure 1.)
Most research in boundary detection focuses on improving the boundary quality in LR through introducing

HR image

Bilinear upsampling

Ours

HR ground truth

Boundary
upsampling

LR
mask

Figure 1. Concept overview. The example is from the newly created PixaHR dataset. Given low resolution mask and high resolution image on the left, a bilinear upsampling with scale factor 16×
would results in boundary misalignment in high resolution image,
as is shown in the enlarged boundary region on the right. Also, the
new details in high resolution would be missed.

more semantic information [2, 46, 27] or human interaction [23, 26, 44, 25, 7]. While there has been some
work on HR semantic segmentation [12, 48] and upsampling [41, 47], there is less focus on accurately capturing
the boundary detail in HR. Instead of treating this problem
as an upsampling problem, we treat it as boundary detection
and harness the contents in HR images for prediction.
To this end, we propose a novel approach to handle
boundary refinement in HR images. (See Figure 2.) Our key
idea is to allow the power of deep learning methods to be
applied to HR images in a time and memory efficient manner by operating on narrow images made up of pixels near
the boundary. Given an accurate LR mask, the boundary in
HR is likely in proximity to the upsampled LR boundary.
(See Figure 1.) Therefore, to save memory and computation, we propose to search for the target boundary in a strip
region near the boundary of the upsampled mask. The strip
image is formed by sampling pixels along and normal to
the upsampled mask boundary. Since the normals may not
be smooth due to inaccurate boundaries in the upsampled
mask, we represent the LR boundary with a spline approximation and directly treat the orthogonal derivatives of the
upsampled spline as the normal directions. Feeding as input the generated strip images, we train a network to firstly
predict all potential boundaries. Based on the initial prediction, an additional selection layer is included to predict
the target boundary more accurately. To encourage closer
prediction and reduce false positives, we propose loss functions to minimize the boundary distance between the pre110558

