Cascaded Deep Video Deblurring Using Temporal Sharpness Prior
Jinshan Pan, Haoran Bai, and Jinhui Tang∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

(a) Input frame

(b) Kim and Lee [12]

(c) STFAN [32]

(d) EDVR [27]

(e) Ours

(f) Sharpness prior of (a)

Figure 1. Deblurred result on a real challenging video. Our algorithm is motivated by the success of variational model-based methods. It
explores sharpness pixels from adjacent frames by a temporal sharpness prior (see (f)) and restores sharp videos by a cascaded inference
process. As our analysis shows, enforcing the temporal sharpness prior in a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) and learning the
deep CNN by a cascaded inference manner can make the deep CNN more compact and thus generate better-deblurred results than both the
CNN-based methods [27, 32] and variational model-based method [12].

Abstract
We present a simple and effective deep convolutional
neural network (CNN) model for video deblurring. The proposed algorithm mainly consists of optical flow estimation
from intermediate latent frames and latent frame restoration
steps. It first develops a deep CNN model to estimate optical
flow from intermediate latent frames and then restores the
latent frames based on the estimated optical flow. To better
explore the temporal information from videos, we develop a
temporal sharpness prior to constrain the deep CNN model
to help the latent frame restoration. We develop an effective
cascaded training approach and jointly train the proposed
CNN model in an end-to-end manner. We show that exploring the domain knowledge of video deblurring is able to
make the deep CNN model more compact and efficient. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods
on the benchmark datasets as well as real-world videos.

1. Introduction
Video deblurring, as a fundamental problem in the vision
and graphics communities, aims to estimate latent frames
from a blurred sequence. As more videos are taken using hand-held and onboard video capturing devices, this
problem has received active research efforts within the last
decade. The blur in videos is usually caused by camera
shake, object motion, and depth variation. Recovering la∗ Corresponding author.

tent frames is highly ill-posed as only the blurred videos are
given.
To recover the latent frames from a blurred sequence,
conventional methods usually make assumptions on motion blur and latent frames [12, 2, 4, 11, 5, 29]. Among
these methods, the motion blur is usually modeled as optical flow [12, 2, 5, 29]. The key success of these methods is to jointly estimate the optical flow and latent frames
under the constraints by some hand-crafted priors. These
algorithms are physically inspired and generate promising
results. However, the assumptions on motion blur and latent frames usually lead to complex energy functions which
are difficult to solve.
The deep convolutional neural network (CNN), as one
of the most promising approach, has been developed to
solve video deblurring. Motivated by the success of deep
CNNs in single image deblurring, Su et al. [24] concatenate
consecutive frames and develop a deep CNN based on an
encoder-decoder architecture to directly estimate the latent
frames. Kim et al. [13] develop a deep recurrent network to
recurrently restore latent frames by the concatenating multiframe features. To better capture the temporal information,
Zhang et al. [31] develop spatial-temporal 3D convolutions to help latent frame restoration. These methods perform
well when the motion blur is not significant and displacement among input frames is small. However, they are less
effective for the frames containing significant blur and large
displacement as they do not consider the alignment among
input frames [6].
13043

