Single-Side Domain Generalization for Face Anti-Spoofing
Yunpei Jia1,2 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
yunpei.jia@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {zhangjie, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Existing domain generalization methods for face antispoofing endeavor to extract common differentiation features to improve the generalization. However, due to large
distribution discrepancies among fake faces of different domains, it is difficult to seek a compact and generalized feature space for the fake faces. In this work, we propose
an end-to-end single-side domain generalization framework
(SSDG) to improve the generalization ability of face antispoofing. The main idea is to learn a generalized feature
space, where the feature distribution of the real faces is
compact while that of the fake ones is dispersed among
domains but compact within each domain. Specifically, a
feature generator is trained to make only the real faces
from different domains undistinguishable, but not for the
fake ones, thus forming a single-side adversarial learning.
Moreover, an asymmetric triplet loss is designed to constrain the fake faces of different domains separated while
the real ones aggregated. The above two points are integrated into a unified framework in an end-to-end training
manner, resulting in a more generalized class boundary, especially good for samples from novel domains. Feature and
weight normalization is incorporated to further improve the
generalization ability. Extensive experiments show that our
proposed approach is effective and outperforms the stateof-the-art methods on four public databases. The code is
released online1 .

1. Introduction
In recent years, face recognition techniques have been
widely exploited in our daily life, especially in the fields
of smartphones login, access control, etc. However, many
presentation attacks have emerged (e.g., print attack, video
attack, and 3D mask attack), which has led to a huge secu-

Conventional DG

Ours DG

Fake

Real
Source 1
Target

Fake
Source 2

Real
Source 3

Classifier

Figure 1. Left: Conventional domain generalization methods align
source domains to learn a shared feature space, which fail to get a
discriminative class boundary on the unseen domain. Right: Our
single-side domain generalization method aggregates all the real
examples while separates the fake ones from different domains to
learn a class boundary, generalizing better to the novel domain.

rity risk on face recognition systems and become an increasingly critical concern in the face recognition field. To tackle
this issue, various face anti-spoofing methods have been
proposed, which can be coarsely categorized into texturebased methods and temporal-based methods. The texturebased methods utilize hand-craft descriptors or data-driven
deep learning to extract texture cues discriminative between
the real faces and the fake ones, such as the color [5], distortion cues [11, 39], etc. In contrast, the temporal-based
methods leverage various temporal cues in consecutive face
frames, such as rPPG [20, 21] and optical flow [2, 4].
Although existing state-of-the-art methods have obtained
promising results under intra-database testing scenarios,
they cannot generalize well in case of cross-database testing, where training (source domain2 ) and testing (target do-

1 https://github.com/taylover-pei/SSDG-CVPR2020

2 The term domain in this paper represents a database.

8484

