KeyPose: Multi-View 3D Labeling and Keypoint Estimation
for Transparent Objects
Xingyu Liu1∗

Rico Jonschkowski2
Stanford University

1

Anelia Angelova2
2
Robotics at Google

Kurt Konolige2

Abstract
Estimating the 3D pose of desktop objects is crucial for
applications such as robotic manipulation. Many existing
approaches to this problem require a depth map of the object for both training and prediction, which restricts them
to opaque, lambertian objects that produce good returns in
an RGBD sensor. In this paper we forgo using a depth sensor in favor of raw stereo input. We address two problems:
first, we establish an easy method for capturing and labeling 3D keypoints on desktop objects with an RGB camera;
and second, we develop a deep neural network, called KeyPose, that learns to accurately predict object poses using
3D keypoints, from stereo input, and works even for transparent objects. To evaluate the performance of our method,
we create a dataset of 15 clear objects in five classes, with
48K 3D-keypoint labeled images. We train both instance
and category models, and show generalization to new textures, poses, and objects. KeyPose surpasses state-of-theart performance in 3D pose estimation on this dataset by
factors of 1.5 to 3.5, even in cases where the competing
method is provided with ground-truth depth. Stereo input
is essential for this performance as it improves results compared to using monocular input by a factor of 2. We will
release a public version of the data capture and labeling
pipeline, the transparent object database, and the KeyPose
models and evaluation code. Project website: https:
//sites.google.com/corp/view/keypose.

1. Introduction
Estimating the position and orientation of 3D objects is
one of the core problems in computer vision applications
that involve object-level perception such as augmented reality (AR) and robotic manipulation. Rigid objects with
a known model can be described by 4D pose (e.g., vehicles [13, 10]), 6D pose [31, 5], and 9D pose where scale is
predicted [29]. A more flexible method uses 3D keypoints
[16, 26], which can handle articulated and deformable ob∗ Work done as an intern at Google Research/Robotics at Google.

1.00

1.00

0.95

0.95

0.90

0.90

0.85

0.85

0.80

0.80

0.75

0.75

0.70

0.70

Figure 1: RGB image (top), depth map (middle), and point
cloud (bottom) of an opaque bottle (left) and its transparent
twin (right). The opaque bottle returns reasonable depth
while the transparent one returns invalid depth values using
a Microsoft Azure Kinect sensor.

jects such as the human hand or body [25, 12]. While some
of these methods predict 3D keypoints from a single RGB
image, others use RGBD data collected by a depth sensor
[28, 16, 3] to achieve better accuracy. Unfortunately, existing commercial depth sensors, such as projected light
or time-of-flight (ToF) sensors, assume that objects have
opaque, lambertian surfaces that can support diffuse reflection from the sensor. Depth sensing fails when these conditions do not hold, e.g., for transparent or shiny metallic
objects. Figure 1 shows such an example.
In this paper, we present the first method of keypointbased pose estimation for (transparent) 3D objects from
stereo RGB images. There are several challenges: first,
there is no available large-scale dataset for transparent 3D

11602

