Conditional Channel Gated Networks for Task-Aware Continual Learning
Davide Abati1∗
1

Jakub Tomczak2
Rita Cucchiara1

Tijmen Blankevoort2
Simone Calderara1
2
Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

Qualcomm AI Research†
Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.

{name.surname}@unimore.it

{jtomczak,tijmen,behtesha}@qti.qualcomm.com

2

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks experience catastrophic
forgetting when optimized on a sequence of learning problems: as they meet the objective of the current training examples, their performance on previous tasks drops drastically. In this work, we introduce a novel framework to tackle
this problem with conditional computation. We equip each
convolutional layer with task-specific gating modules, selecting which filters to apply on the given input. This way,
we achieve two appealing properties. Firstly, the execution
patterns of the gates allow to identify and protect important
filters, ensuring no loss in the performance of the model for
previously learned tasks. Secondly, by using a sparsity objective, we can promote the selection of a limited set of kernels, allowing to retain sufficient model capacity to digest
new tasks. Existing solutions require, at test time, awareness of the task to which each example belongs to. This
knowledge, however, may not be available in many practical scenarios. Therefore, we additionally introduce a task
classifier that predicts the task label of each example, to
deal with settings in which a task oracle is not available. We
validate our proposal on four continual learning datasets.
Results show that our model consistently outperforms existing methods both in the presence and the absence of a task
oracle. Notably, on Split SVHN and Imagenet-50 datasets,
our model yields up to 23.98% and 17.42% improvement in
accuracy w.r.t. competing methods.

1. Introduction
Machine learning and deep learning models are typically
trained offline, by sampling examples independently from
the distribution they are expected to deal with at test time.
However, when trained online in real-world settings, models may encounter multiple tasks as a sequential stream of
∗ Research conducted during an internship at Qualcomm Technologies
Netherlands B.V.
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,
Inc.

activities, without having any knowledge about their relationship or duration in time. Such challenges typically
arise in robotics [2], reinforcement learning [29], vision systems [26] and many more (cf. Chapter 4 in [7]). In such scenarios, deep learning models suffer from catastrophic forgetting [23, 9], meaning they discard previously acquired
knowledge to fit the current observations. The underlying
reason is that, while learning the new task, models overwrite the parameters that were critical for previous tasks.
Continual learning research (also called lifelong or incremental learning) tackles the above mentioned issues [7].
The typical setting considered in the literature is that of a
model learning disjoint classification problems one-by-one.
Depending on the application requirements, the task for
which the current input should be analyzed may or may not
be known. The majority of the methods in the literature assume that the label of the task is provided during inference.
Such a continual learning setting is generally referred to as
task-incremental. In many real-world applications, such as
classification and anomaly detection systems, a model can
seamlessly instantiate a new task whenever novel classes
emerge from the training stream. However, once deployed
in the wild, it has to process inputs without knowing in
which training task similar observations were encountered.
Such a setting, in which task labels are available only during training, is known as class-incremental [35]. Existing
methods employ different strategies to mitigate catastrophic
forgetting, such as memory buffers [27, 18], knowledge distillation [17], synaptic consolidation [14] and parameters
masking [21, 32]. However, recent evidence has shown that
existing solutions fail, even for simple datasets, whenever
task labels are not available at test time [35].
This paper introduces a solution based on conditionalcomputing to tackle both task-incremental and classincremental learning problems. Specifically, our framework
relies on separate task-specific classification heads (multihead architecture), and it employs channel-gating [6, 3] in
every layer of the (shared) feature extractor. To this aim, we
introduce task-dedicated gating modules that dynamically
select which filters to apply conditioned on the input feature

3931

