3D Sketch-aware Semantic Scene Completion
via Semi-supervised Structure Prior
Xiaokang Chen1∗
Kwan-Yee Lin2
Chen Qian2
Gang Zeng1†
Hongsheng Li3
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
3
SenseTime Research
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

RGB
Ceil

Depth (NYUCAD)
Floor

Wall

Window

Ground Truth
Chair

Bed

SSCNet
Sofa

Table

Ours
TVs

Furn.

Objects

Figure 1. Visualization of Semantic Scene Completion task. From left to right: (1) RGB input, (2) depth map, (3) ground truth of
semantic scene completion, (4) result of SSCNet [27], (5) result of the proposed method. Our method generates a more reasonable result
and obtains a better intra-class consistency and inter-class distinction compared with SSCNet [27], a classic method that models context
on implicitly embedded depth feature that learnt from general 3D CNNs.

Abstract
The goal of the Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) task is
to simultaneously predict a completed 3D voxel representation of volumetric occupancy and semantic labels of objects
in the scene from a single-view observation. Since the computational cost generally increases explosively along with
the growth of voxel resolution, most current state-of-thearts have to tailor their framework into a low-resolution
representation with the sacrifice of detail prediction. Thus,
voxel resolution becomes one of the crucial difficulties that
lead to the performance bottleneck.
In this paper, we propose to devise a new geometry-based
strategy to embed depth information with low-resolution
voxel representation, which could still be able to encode
sufficient geometric information, e.g., room layout, object’s
sizes and shapes, to infer the invisible areas of the scene
with well structure-preserving details. To this end, we first
propose a novel 3D sketch-aware feature embedding to explicitly encode geometric information effectively and efficiently. With the 3D sketch in hand, we further devise a simple yet effective semantic scene completion framework that
incorporates a light-weight 3D Sketch Hallucination mod* This work was done during an internship at SenseTime Research.
† Gang Zeng is the corresponding author.

ule to guide the inference of occupancy and the semantic
labels via a semi-supervised structure prior learning strategy. We demonstrate that our proposed geometric embedding works better than the depth feature learning from habitual SSC frameworks. Our final model surpasses stateof-the-arts consistently on three public benchmarks, which
only requires 3D volumes of 60 × 36 × 60 resolution for
both input and output.

1. Introduction
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC), which provides an
alternative to understand the 3D world with both 3D geometry and semantics of the scene from a partial observation,
is an emerging topic in computer vision for its wide applicability on many applications, e.g., augmented reality, surveillance and robotics. Due to the high memory and computational cost requirements on inherent voxel representation,
most existing methods [27, 9, 41, 7, 14, 16, 40, 4] achieve
semantic scene completion through sophisticated 3D context modeling on implicitly embedded depth feature that
learnt from general 3D CNNs. These methods are either
error-prone on classifying fine details of objects or have the
difficulties in completing the scene when there exists a large
portion of geometry missing, as shown in Figure 1.
Several recent studies [7, 14, 16] present promising re-

4193

