Uncertainty-Aware CNNs for Depth Completion:
Uncertainty from Beginning to End
Abdelrahman Eldesokey

Michael Felsberg

Karl Holmquist

Michael Persson

1. Introduction
The recent surge of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
led to remarkable breakthroughs on several computer vision
tasks, e.g. object classification and detection [31, 25, 22, 2],
semantic segmentation [37, 30], and object tracking [6, 34].
However, this was achieved at the cost of increased model
complexity, inducing new concerns such as: how do these
black-box models infer their predictions? and how certain
are they about these predictions? Failing to address these
concerns impairs the reliability of DNNs. For instance,

𝒄0

NCNN

RGB

GT

ෝ
𝒚

𝒄𝐿

(a)

ℎ(𝑥)

𝒄0

NCNN

𝑬

ෝ
𝒚

𝒄𝐿

(b)

Low

𝒄0

Estimated Input
Confidence

Binary Input
Confidence

Disturbed Input

The focus in deep learning research has been mostly to
push the limits of prediction accuracy. However, this was
often achieved at the cost of increased complexity, raising concerns about the interpretability and the reliability of
deep networks. Recently, an increasing attention has been
given to untangling the complexity of deep networks and
quantifying their uncertainty for different computer vision
tasks. Differently, the task of depth completion has not received enough attention despite the inherent noisy nature of
depth sensors. In this work, we thus focus on modeling the
uncertainty of depth data in depth completion starting from
the sparse noisy input all the way to the final prediction.
We propose a novel approach to identify disturbed measurements in the input by learning an input confidence estimator in a self-supervised manner based on the normalized convolutional neural networks (NCNNs). Further, we
propose a probabilistic version of NCNNs that produces a
statistically meaningful uncertainty measure for the final
prediction. When we evaluate our approach on the KITTI
dataset for depth completion, we outperform all the existing Bayesian Deep Learning approaches in terms of prediction accuracy, quality of the uncertainty measure, and
the computational efficiency. Moreover, our small network
with 670k parameters performs on-par with conventional
approaches with millions of parameters. These results give
strong evidence that separating the network into parallel
uncertainty and prediction streams leads to state-of-the-art
performance with accurate uncertainty estimates.

ℎ(𝑥)

Threshold

Estimated Input
Confidence

Abstract

High

Computer Vision Laboratory, Linköping University, Sweden

NCNN

𝑬

ෝ
𝒚

(c)

𝒄𝐿

𝑬

Figure 1. The confidence c0 for the input data is usually unknown.
NCNNs [8] assume binary input confidence, which leads to severe
artifacts (a). We propose to learn the input confidence in a selfsupervised manner, which leads to improved prediction (b). However, the output confidence cL is not strongly correlated with the
error E. Therefore, we propose a probabilistic version of NCNN
that produces a proper output uncertainty measure (c).

Huang et al. [13] showed that it is possible to fool stateof-the-art object detectors to produce false and highly certain predictions using physical and digital manipulations.
Therefore, there is a compelling need for investigating interpretability and uncertainty of DNNs to be able to trust
them in safety-critical environments.
Recently, a growing attention was given towards untangling the complexity of DNNs to enhance their reliability by
analyzing how they make predictions and quantifying the
uncertainty of these predictions. Probabilistic approaches
such as Bayesian deep learning (BDL) have contributed to
this endeavor by modifying DNNs to output the parameters of a probabilistic distribution, e.g. mean and variance,
which yields uncertainty information about the predictions
[18]. The availability of a reliable uncertainty measure facilitates the understanding of DNNs and applying safety
procedures in case of model failure or high uncertainty.
Several BDL approaches were proposed for different computer vision tasks such as object classification and segmen-

12014

