Self2Self With Dropout: Learning Self-Supervised Denoising From Single Image
Yuhui Quan1 , Mingqin Chen1 , Tongyao Pang2 and Hui Ji2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore

csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, csmingqinchen@mail.scut.edu.cn, matpt@nus.edu.sg and matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In last few years, supervised deep learning has emerged
as one powerful tool for image denoising, which trains a
denoising network over an external dataset of noisy/clean
image pairs. However, the requirement on a high-quality
training dataset limits the broad applicability of the denoising networks. Recently, there have been a few works that
allow training a denoising network on the set of external
noisy images only. Taking one step further, this paper proposes a self-supervised learning method which only uses
the input noisy image itself for training. In the proposed
method, the network is trained with dropout on the pairs
of Bernoulli-sampled instances of the input image, and the
result is estimated by averaging the predictions generated
from multiple instances of the trained model with dropout.
The experiments show that the proposed method not only
significantly outperforms existing single-image learning or
non-learning methods, but also is competitive to the denoising networks trained on external datasets.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is the process to remove measurement
noises from noisy images. It not only has great practical
value, but also serves as a core module in many image recovery tasks. A noisy image y is usually modeled as
y = x + n,

(1)

where x denotes the clean image (ground truth), and n denotes the measurement noise often assumed to be random.
In recent years, deep learning has become a prominent
approach for image denoising, which uses a set of training
samples to train a deep neural network (NN), denoted by
Fθ (·) with the parameter vector θ, that maps a noisy image to its clean counterpart. Most existing deep-learningbased denoising methods (e.g. [26, 31, 32]) use many pairs
of clean/noisy images, denoted by {x(i) , y (i) }i , as the train-

ing samples, and the training is done by solving
X
L(Fθ (x(i) ), y (i) ),
min
θ

(2)

i

where L(·, ·) measures the distance between two images.
The availability of a large number of training samples is one
key factor contributing to the performance of these methods. Sometimes, it can be expensive and difficult to collect
a large dataset of useful clean/noisy image pairs.
Recently, there are some studies on training denoising
NNs with only external noisy images. The Noise2Noise
(N2N) method [19] showed that a denoising NN model can
be trained using many pairs of two noisy images of the same
scene. Using a self-prediction loss, together with a so-called
blind-spot strategy to avoid learning an identity mapping,
the Noise2Void (N2V) method [15] and the Noise2Self
(N2S) method [3] showed the possibility to learn a denoising NN with good performance on a set of unorganized external noisy images. Yet, to achieve good performance, the
external images used for training should be highly related to
the noisy image being processed, in terms of image content
and noise statistics. The collection of such external images
can be costly or challenging in practice.
It is of great value to develop a powerful denoising NN
that has no prerequisite on training samples. That is, the
denoising NN is learned only on the input image itself. So
far, there has been very little work along this line. Based on
the deep image prior (DIP), Ulyanov et al. [25] proposed a
single-image deep learning model for image recovery. The
aforementioned dataset-based N2V and N2S methods can
also be trained using only a noisy image. However, the performance of these methods is not competitive to existing
non-local methods, e.g. BM3D [10]. To summarize, there
is no satisfactory solution on how to train a denoising NN
with good performance, given only the input noisy image.

1.1. Aim and Basic Idea
Motivated by its practical value and the lack of good
solutions, this paper aims at developing an NN-based denoiser, which has good performance and yet can be trained

1890

