SwapText: Image Based Texts Transfer in Scenes
Qiangpeng Yang, Jun Huang, Wei Lin
Alibaba Group
yqp0424@gmail.com, huangjun.hj@alibaba-inc.com, weilin.lw@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. Arbitrary text style transfer in scene text images. (Left) Our model learns to perform diverse translation between multilanguage.
(Right) Style-guide transfer

Abstract
Swapping text in scene images while preserving original
fonts, colors, sizes and background textures is a challenging
task due to the complex interplay between different factors.
In this work, we present SwapText, a three-stage framework
to transfer texts across scene images. First, a novel text
swapping network is proposed to replace text labels only
in the foreground image. Second, a background completion
network is learned to reconstruct background images. Finally, the generated foreground image and background image are used to generate the word image by the fusion network. Using the proposing framework, we can manipulate
the texts of the input images even with severe geometric distortion. Qualitative and quantitative results are presented
on several scene text datasets, including regular and irregular text datasets. We conducted extensive experiments to
prove the usefulness of our method such as image based text
translation, text image synthesis, etc.

1. Introduction
Imagine being able to swap text in scene images while
keeping the original fonts, colors, sizes and background tex-

tures within seconds, and without hours of image editing. In
this work, we aim to realize this goal with an algorithm that
automatically replaces the text in scene images. The core
challenge of text swapping lies in generating visually realistic text and keeping coherent style with the original text.
Text swapping or text replacement is relevant in many
scenarios including text detection, text recognition, text
transfer in posters and other creative applications. For text
detection and recognition tasks, text swapping is a very useful data augmentation approach. Witness the great success
of deep neural networks (DNN) in various computer vision
tasks, obtaining large amounts of annotated training images
has become the bottleneck for training DNN models. The
easiest and most widely used methods augment training images by geometric transformation, such as translation, rotation and flipping, etc. Recently, image synthesis based
approaches [11, 7, 39] have been proposed for training text
detection and recognition models. These approaches create
new images from text-free images by modeling the physical behaviors of light and energy in combination of different rendering techniques. However, the synthetic images do
not fully cohere with the images in scenes, which is critically important while applying the synthesized images to
train DNN models.

14700

