DIST: Rendering Deep Implicit Signed Distance Function
with Differentiable Sphere Tracing
Shaohui Liu1,3 † Yinda Zhang2 Songyou Peng1,6 Boxin Shi4,7
Marc Pollefeys1,5,6 Zhaopeng Cui1∗
1
ETH Zurich 2 Google 3 Tsinghua University 4 Peking University 5 Microsoft
6
Max Planck ETH Center for Learing Systems 7 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
We propose a differentiable sphere tracing algorithm to
bridge the gap between inverse graphics methods and the
recently proposed deep learning based implicit signed distance function. Due to the nature of the implicit function,
the rendering process requires tremendous function queries,
which is particularly problematic when the function is represented as a neural network. We optimize both the forward
and backward passes of our rendering layer to make it run
efficiently with affordable memory consumption on a commodity graphics card. Our rendering method is fully differentiable such that losses can be directly computed on the
rendered 2D observations, and the gradients can be propagated backwards to optimize the 3D geometry. We show that
our rendering method can effectively reconstruct accurate
3D shapes from various inputs, such as sparse depth and
multi-view images, through inverse optimization. With the
geometry based reasoning, our 3D shape prediction methods show excellent generalization capability and robustness
against various noises.

1. Introduction
Solving vision problem as an inverse graphics process is
one of the most fundamental approaches, where the solution
is the visual structure that best explains the given observations. In the realm of 3D geometry understanding, this approach has been used since the very early age [1, 35, 54]. As
a critical component to the inverse graphics based 3D geometric reasoning process, an efficient renderer is required
to accurately simulate the observations, e.g., depth maps,
from an optimizable 3D structure, and also be differentiable
to back-propagate the error from the partial observation.
As a natural fit to the deep learning framework, differentiable rendering techniques have drawn great interests re† Work done while Shaohui Liu was an academic guest at ETH Zurich.
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed differentiable renderer for
continuous signed distance function. Our method enables geometric reasoning with strong generalization capability. With a random shape code z0 initialized in the learned shape space, we can
acquire high-quality 3D shape prediction by performing iterative
optimization with various 2D supervisions.

cently. Various solutions for different 3D representations,
e.g., voxels, point clouds, meshes, have been proposed.
However, these 3D representations are all discretized up to
a certain resolution, leading to the loss of geometric details
and breaking the differentiable properties [23]. Recently,
the continuous implicit function has been used to represent
the signed distance field [34], which has premium capacity to encode accurate geometry when combined with the
deep learning techniques. Given a latent code as the shape
representation, the function can produce a signed distance
value for any arbitrary point, and thus enable unlimited resolution and better preserved geometric details for rendering purpose. However, a differentiable rendering solution
for learning-based continuous signed distance function does
not exist yet.
In this paper, we propose a differentiable renderer for
continuous implicit signed distance functions (SDF) to facilitate the 3D shape understanding via geometric reasoning in a deep learning framework (Fig. 1). Our method
can render an implicit SDF represented by a neural network
from a latent code into various 2D observations, e.g., depth
images, surface normals, silhouettes, and other properties
encoded, from arbitrary camera viewpoints. The rendering process is fully differentiable, such that loss functions

2019

