What Machines See Is Not What They Get: Fooling Scene Text Recognition
Models with Adversarial Text Images
Xing Xu, Jiefu Chen, Jinhui Xiao, Lianli Gao, Fumin Shen, Heng Tao Shen∗
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
The research on scene text recognition (STR) has made
remarkable progress in recent years with the development
of deep neural networks (DNNs). Recent studies on adversarial attack have verified that a DNN model designed for
non-sequential tasks (e.g., classification, segmentation and
retrieval) can be easily fooled by adversarial examples. Actually, STR is an application highly related to security issues. However, there are few studies considering the safety
and reliability of STR models that make sequential prediction. In this paper, we make the first attempt in attacking
the state-of-the-art DNN-based STR models. Specifically,
we propose a novel and efficient optimization-based method
that can be naturally integrated to different sequential prediction schemes, i.e., connectionist temporal classification
(CTC) and attention mechanism. We apply our proposed
method to five state-of-the-art STR models with both targeted and untargeted attack modes, the comprehensive results on 7 real-world datasets and 2 synthetic datasets consistently show the vulnerability of these STR models with
a significant performance drop. Finally, we also test our
attack method on a real-world STR engine of Baidu OCR,
which demonstrates the practical potentials of our method.

1. Introduction
The scene text recognition (STR) [15, 26, 37, 42] aims
at reading sequential characters of varied-length from a text
image in natural scene. STR has been an active research
field in computer vision because it is a critical element of
a lot of real-world applications, such as human computer
interaction [59], road sign recognition in the autonomous
vehicles [58], assistive reading for the blind and low-vision
people [29], etc. Developing accurate and robust STR models has been a research challenge for years, due to the huge
diversity in the visual appearance of texts, the illumination
artifacts, the complex image background, etc.
∗ Corresponding author.

The advantages of deep neural networks (DNNs) and
their successes in various computer vision tasks have also
boosted the development of STR in recent years [4, 20, 41,
55, 2, 56]. Most of these DNN-based works convert the
STR tasks into sequence recognition (labeling) [50] problems. Specifically, they firstly encode the input image into
a feature sequence through a certain encoding technique,
such as convolution neural network (CNN) or recurrent neural network (RNN), and then apply decoders, such as connectionist temporal classification (CTC) [14, 42, 18] or attention mechanism [43, 8], to predict the linguistic strings
in the image. Despite their current success, recent studies
[46, 12, 5] have shown that DNNs are extremely vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e., by adding small perturbations on the input images. Intuitively, the STR also has this
problem since DNN models are prevalent in such a securitycritical scenario. For an online STR system, incorrectly recognizing even a single word may possibly change the overall meaning of the text image.
Current studies on adversarial examples mainly focus
on non-sequential vision tasks, such as image classification
[46, 48, 10], video classification [28, 21], object detection
[24, 57], semantic segmentation [49, 33], face recognition
[13, 38], etc. Differently, attacking STR models has rarely
been explored in the literature since STR is considered as a
sequence recognition task and STR models are more difficult to deal with than above non-sequential tasks. Attacking STR models is significantly more challenging due to
three major issues: 1) The output of the modern STR models (DNN-based) is a label sequence of varied-length, rather
than a single label in the non-sequential attacks (e.g., object
classification model). As discussed in [54], the common
attack strategies in the non-sequential attacks only involve
the substitution operation (e.g., modifying the ground-truth
class label), while the sequential attacks in STR is expected to consider operations on both character level and
word level: insertion, substitution and deletion (e.g., insertion: “horse” 7→ “hoarse”; substitution: “horse” 7→ “house”,
“horse” 7→ “zebra”; deletion: “horse” 7→ “hose”). 2) The
adversarial examples for attacking STR models should be
112304

