Inducing Hierarchical Compositional Model by Sparsifying Generator Network
Xianglei Xing1 , Tianfu Wu2 , Song-Chun Zhu3 , Ying Nian Wu3
1
College of Automation, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NC State University, North Carolina 27695
3
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095
xingxl@hrbeu.edu.cn, tianfu wu@ncsu.edu,{sczhu,ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes to learn hierarchical compositional AND-OR model for interpretable image synthesis by sparsifying the generator network. The proposed method
adopts the scene-objects-parts-subparts-primitives hierarchy in image representation. A scene has different types
(i.e., OR) each of which consists of a number of objects (i.e., AND). This can be recursively formulated across
the scene-objects-parts-subparts hierarchy and is terminated at the primitive level (e.g., wavelets-like basis). To realize this AND-OR hierarchy in image synthesis, we learn a
generator network that consists of the following two components: (i) Each layer of the hierarchy is represented by
an over-complete set of convolutional basis functions. Offthe-shelf convolutional neural architectures are exploited to
implement the hierarchy. (ii) Sparsity-inducing constraints
are introduced in end-to-end training, which induces a sparsely activated and sparsely connected AND-OR model
from the initially densely connected generator network. A
straightforward sparsity-inducing constraint is utilized, that
is to only allow the top-k basis functions to be activated at
each layer (where k is a hyper-parameter). The learned
basis functions are also capable of image reconstruction
to explain the input images. In experiments, the proposed
method is tested on four benchmark datasets. The results
show that meaningful and interpretable hierarchical representations are learned with better qualities of image synthesis and reconstruction obtained than baselines.

1. Introduction
Remarkable recent progress on image synthesis [11, 4,
18, 35, 2, 36] has been made using deep neural networks
(DNNs) [22, 21]. Most efforts focus on developing sophisticated architectures and training paradigms for sharp and
photo-realistic image synthesis [27, 5, 18]. Although highfidelity images can be generated, the internal synthesizing
process via DNNs is still largely viewed as a black-box, thus

potentially hindering the long-term applicability in eXplainable AI (XAI) [7]. More recently, the generative adversarial
network (GAN) dissection method [3] has been proposed to
identify internal neurons in pre-trained GANs that show interpretable meanings using a separate annotated dataset in a
post-hoc fashion.
In this paper, we focus on learning interpretable models
for unconditional image synthesis from scratch with explicit
hierarchical representations. Interpretable image synthesis
means that the internal image generation process can be explicitly unfolded through meaningful basis functions at different layers which are learned via end-to-end training and
which conceptually reflect the hierarchy of scene-objectsparts-subparts-primitives. A scene has different types (i.e.,
OR) each of which consists of a number of objects (i.e.,
AND). This can be recursively formulated across the sceneobjects-parts-subparts hierarchy and is terminated at the
primitive level (e.g., wavelets-like basis functions). Figure 1
shows an example of the AND-OR tree learned from scratch
for explaining the generation of a face image.
The hierarchy of scene-objects-parts-subparts-primitives
is at the stem of image grammar models [10, 41]. The ANDOR compositionality has been applied in image and vision
tasks [41]. With the recent resurgence of DNNs [22, 21] and
the more recent DNN-based image synthesis frameworks
such as the widely used Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [11] and Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) methods [19, 14], the hierarchy is usually assumed to be modeled
implicitly in DNNs. Due to dense connections between consecutive layers in traditional DNNs, they often learn dense
compositional patterns of how entities in a layer are formed
from “smaller” ones in the layer right below it.
The sparsity principle has played a fundamental role in
high-dimensional statistics, machine learning, signal processing and AI. In particular, the sparse coding scheme [32]
is an important principle for understanding the visual cortex. By imposing sparsity constraints on the coefficients of
a linear generative model, [33] learned Gabor-like wavelets
that resemble the neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1).
114296

