Photometric Stereo via Discrete Hypothesis-and-Test Search
Kenji Enomoto1

Michael Waechter1 Kiriakos N. Kutulakos2 Yasuyuki Matsushita1
1
Osaka University 2 University of Toronto

Abstract

Photometric stereo recovers fine surface details in the
form of surface normals from images taken by a static camera under varying lightings. While traditional photometric
stereo methods [25] assume Lambertian reflectance or simplified parametric reflectance models, it is understood that
their deviation from real-world reflectances introduces errors in surface normal estimates. In the past, other studies
used more sophisticated reflectance models [1, 15, 21, 13, 4]
for more accurate surface normal recovery; however, they
generally encounter an issue of non-convex optimization in
determining the surface normals. The problem is rooted in
the fact that these methods frame the estimation problem as
a continuous optimization problem.
In this paper, we cast surface normal estimation as a discrete hypothesis-and-test search problem. Instead of treating surface normals to be estimated as a continuous quantity, our method finely discretizes the space of surface normals and finds the best surface normal by a hypothesis-andtest search. Since a surface normal vector has only two degrees of freedom (a unit 3D vector) represented by its azimuth and elevation angles in a hemisphere, discretization

…

1. Introduction

…

In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating
surface normals of a scene with spatially varying, general
BRDFs observed by a static camera under varying, known,
distant illumination. Unlike previous approaches that are
mostly based on continuous local optimization, we cast the
problem as a discrete hypothesis-and-test search problem
over the discretized space of surface normals. While a naı̈ve
search requires a significant amount of time, we show that
the expensive computation block can be precomputed in a
scene-independent manner, resulting in accelerated inference for new scenes. It allows us to perform a full search
over the finely discretized space of surface normals to determine the globally optimal surface normal for each scene
point. We show that our method can accurately estimate
surface normals of scenes with spatially varying different
reflectances in a reasonable amount of time.

BRDFs & known lights

Surface normal
candidates

Hypothesize - and -

Test

Target scene

Figure 1: An overview of our approach. We hypothesize
a surface normal and test whether it can explain the target
measurements. By conducting the hypothesis-and-test for
all possible surface normals, our method is able to find a
globally optimal surface normal.
results in a relatively small number of surface normal candidates. For example, even if we discretize the angles in
one-degree intervals, it results in 32, 400 = 360×90 normal
candidates. Our method uses each surface normal candidate
as hypothesis and tests its suitability to the image formation
model; thus, we call it a hypothesis-and-test search strategy. In this manner, our method searches for the globally
optimal surface normal from all (discretized) possible ones.
To alleviate the issue of computing cost in our discrete
search, we developed a precomputation method that performs expensive computations in a scene-independent manner prior to the inference for a new scene. To deal with
a diverse set of reflectances, we use a non-parametric, discrete table of bidirectional reflectance distribution functions
(BRDFs), whose axes are the space of surface normals, light
directions, and materials, for a fixed viewing direction. The
table of BRDFs, which we call a BRDF tensor, can contain
an arbitrary number of materials, and importantly, the number of reference materials considered in the BRDF tensor
does not influence the computation time during inference.
Our method is motivated by the success of examplebased [9] and virtual exemplar-based [11] approaches.
However, unlike example-based methods, we do not require
12311

