TomoFluid: Reconstructing Dynamic Fluid from Sparse View Videos
Guangming Zang1 Ramzi Idoughi1 Congli Wang1 Anthony Bennett1 Jianguo Du1
Scott Skeen2 William L. Roberts1 Peter Wonka1 Wolfgang Heidrich1
1
KAUST 2 Sandia National Laboratories

Abstract
Visible light tomography is a promising and increasingly
popular technique for fluid imaging. However, the use of a
sparse number of viewpoints in the capturing setups makes
the reconstruction of fluid flows very challenging. In this
paper, we present a state-of-the-art 4D tomographic reconstruction framework that integrates several regularizers into
a multi-scale matrix free optimization algorithm. In addition
to existing regularizers, we propose two new regularizers for
improved results: a regularizer based on view interpolation
of projected images and a regularizer to encourage reprojection consistency. We demonstrate our method with extensive
experiments on both simulated and real data.

SART

[18]

[36]

[53]

Ours

GT

SART

[18]

[36]

[53]

Ours

GT

1. Introduction
t=2

Capturing fluid flows is a challenging reconstruction problem that is of great interest in computer vision and many scientific fields, e.g. for retrieving the fluid properties (e.g. temperature, species concentration, density and velocity) [43],
validating simulation results [14, 40] or allowing flow editing
and re-simulation [20].
A number of fluid imaging methods have been developed
to tackle the different usage scenarios (we provide a brief literature review in the next section). Among those techniques,
visible light tomography is the most used in computer vision and also finds frequent use in scientific imaging applications. In visible light tomography, simultaneous video
sequences of the fluid are acquired from different angles,
using either monochromatic or color cameras. From those
videos tomographic reconstruction algorithms can be applied to reconstruct a sequence of 3D volumes, representing
the densities of the fluid at different times. Some proposed
approaches reconstruct the volumes at each time frame independently of each other, while others jointly optimize all
frames in a single time-dependent reconstruction [20, 13, 14].
This second approach allows the introduction of temporal
priors that improve the reconstruction quality. However, reconstructing complex three-dimensional fluid flows using
visible-light tomography remains a difficult task for several
reasons: First, many phenomena like absorption, scattering,

t = 30

t = 60

t = 90

Figure 1: With sparse view videos as input (yellow box), TomoFluid generates three types of results: Novel view images for
each time frame (green box) in the first row, physical-based temporally coherent density volumes and velocity fields (illustrated
with streamlines) in the last row. Comparison between ground truth
(GT) and different approaches is shown in the middle.

refraction, occlusion impact the captured data. Second, the
involved setups are often sophisticated and require a difficult
calibration step. Finally, the data acquired is typically very
sparse with few cameras capturing the fluid flow. Indeed,
usually the cameras are placed relatively close to the fluid,
which limits the number of cameras that can be used. Also,
many real-world fluid experiments in scientific imaging take
place inside special containers, and it is difficult or impossible to add many optical access windows to these containers
without affecting the fluid flow. Finally, many fluid phenomena of interest are quite fast, which necessitates the use of
high-speed or ultra high-speed cameras that add a significant
expense to the setup (e.g. $80k or more per camera). For
these reasons, it is often only feasible to use 2 or 3 cameras
for an experiment. This leads to an under-constrained reconstruction problem that heavily relies on the use of good
regularizers to produce satisfactory results.
11870

