Frequency Domain Compact 3D Convolutional Neural Networks
Hanting Chen1,2 , Yunhe Wang2 , Han Shu2 , Yehui Tang1,2 , Chunjing Xu2∗,
Boxin Shi3,4 , Chao Xu1 , Qi Tian2 , Chang Xu5
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 NELVT, Dept. of CS, Peking University. 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
5
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney.
{htchen, yhtang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
{yunhe.wang, han.shu, xuchunjing, tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
This paper studies the compression and acceleration of
3-dimensional convolutional neural networks (3D CNNs).
To reduce the memory cost and computational complexity of
deep neural networks, a number of algorithms have been explored by discovering redundant parameters in pre-trained
networks. However, most of existing methods are designed
for processing neural networks consisting of 2-dimensional
convolution filters (i.e. image classification and detection)
and cannot be straightforwardly applied for 3-dimensional
filters (i.e. time series data). In this paper, we develop a
novel approach for eliminating redundancy in the time dimensionality of 3D convolution filters by converting them
into the frequency domain through a series of learned optimal transforms with extremely fewer parameters. Moreover,
these transforms are forced to be orthogonal, and the calculation of feature maps can be accomplished in the frequency
domain to achieve considerable speed-up rates. Experimental results on benchmark 3D CNN models and datasets
demonstrate that the proposed Frequency Domain Compact
3D CNNs (FDC3D) can achieve the state-of-the-art performance, e.g. a 2× speed-up ratio on the 3D-ResNet-18 without obviously affecting its accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been well demonstrated in a
large variety of computer vision tasks. Plenty of manually designed convolutional neural networks, such as
AlexNet [17], VGGNet [29], and ResNet [13] were proposed to achieve impressive classification accuracy on the
challenging ILSVRC 2012 dataset [28]. Similar successes
have been repeated in other tasks, including object detec∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed FDC3D. The matrix of
feature maps and filters are converted into the frequency domain
utilizing the learned optimal transform. Then, the computation
cost can be directly reduced by structural pruning.

tion (e.g. Faster RCNN [26] and SSD [20]) and segmentation (e.g. FCN [21] and Mask r-cnn [12]). In these aforementioned computer vision tasks, each individual image is
often processed separately and consumes hundreds of MB
memory. 3D convolution has been developed to tackle
video-based processing task, such as human action recognition [16]. Compared to 2D convolution, more resources
would be cost if video frames are investigated at the same
for the sake of temporal information. For example, 3DResNet-50 [11] requires 354MB memory and over 22G
times of floating number multiplications, which is much
higher than the conventional 2D-ResNet-50 with 103MB
memory and 4G FLOPs.
Over the years, considerable methods were proposed for

1641

