Learning Individual Speaking Styles for Accurate Lip to Speech Synthesis
K R Prajwal∗
IIIT, Hyderabad

Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay∗
IIIT, Hyderabad

Vinay P. Namboodiri
IIT, Kanpur

C V Jawahar
IIIT, Hyderabad

{prajwal.k,radrabha.m}@research.iiit.ac.in, vinaypn@iitk.ac.in, jawahar@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
Humans involuntarily tend to infer parts of the conversation from lip movements when the speech is absent or
corrupted by external noise. In this work, we explore the
task of lip to speech synthesis, i.e., learning to generate
natural speech given only the lip movements of a speaker.
Acknowledging the importance of contextual and speakerspecific cues for accurate lip-reading, we take a different
path from existing works. We focus on learning accurate
lip sequences to speech mappings for individual speakers
in unconstrained, large vocabulary settings. To this end,
we collect and release a large-scale benchmark dataset, the
first of its kind, specifically to train and evaluate the singlespeaker lip to speech task in natural settings. We propose a
novel approach with key design choices to achieve accurate,
natural lip to speech synthesis in such unconstrained scenarios for the first time. Extensive evaluation using quantitative, qualitative metrics and human evaluation shows that
our method is four times more intelligible than previous
works in this space.

1. Introduction
Babies actively observe the lip movements of people
when they start learning to speak [24]. As adults, we
pay high attention to lip movements to “visually hear” the
speech in highly noisy environments. Facial actions, specifically the lip movements, thus reveal a useful amount of
speech information. This fact is also exploited by individuals hard of hearing, who often learn to lip read their close
acquaintances over time [15] to engage in more fluid conversations. Naturally, the question arises as to whether a
model can learn to voice the lip movements of a speaker by
“observing” him/her speak for an extended period. Learning such a model would only require videos of people talking with no further manual annotation. It also has a variety
of practical applications such as (i) video conferencing in
silent environments, (ii) high-quality speech recovery from
∗ Both authors have contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. We propose “Lip2Wav”: a sequence-to-sequence architecture for accurate speech generation from silent lip videos in unconstrained settings for the first time. The text in the bubble is
manually transcribed and is shown for presentation purposes.

background noise [1], (iii) long-range listening for surveillance and (iv) generating a voice for people who cannot produce voiced sounds (aphonia). Another interesting application would be “voice inpainting” [41], where the speech
generated from lip movements can be used in place of a corrupted speech segment.
Inferring the speech solely from the lip movements,
however, is a notoriously difficult task. A major challenge [5, 10] is the presence of homophenes: multiple
sounds (phonemes) that are auditorily distinct being perceptually very similar with almost identical lip shapes
(viseme). For instance, the lip shape when uttering the
phoneme /p/ (park) can be easily confused with /b/ (bark),
and /m/ (mark). As a matter of fact, only 25% to 30%
of the English language is discernible through lip-reading
alone [8, 15, 25, 26]. This implies that professional lip readers do not only lip-read but also piece together multiple
streams of information: the familiarity with their subjects,
the topic being spoken about, the facial expressions and
head gestures of the subject and also their linguistic knowledge. In contrast to this fact, contemporary works in lip to
speech and lip to text take a drastically different approach.
Recent attempts in lip to text [2, 5] learn from unconstrained, large vocabulary datasets with thousands of speakers. However, these datasets only contain about 2 minutes
113796

