On Positive-Unlabeled Classification in GAN
Tianyu Guo1,2 , Chang Xu2 , Jiajun Huang2 , Yunhe Wang3 , Boxin Shi4,5 , Chao Xu1 , Dacheng Tao2
1

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 4 NELVT, Dept. of CS, Peking University. 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
2

{tianyuguo, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, yunhe.wang@huawei.com
{c.xu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au, jhua7177@uni.sydney.edu.au

Abstract
This paper defines a positive and unlabeled classification
problem for standard GANs, which then leads to a novel
technique to stabilize the training of the discriminator in
GANs. Traditionally, real data are taken as positive while
generated data are negative. This positive-negative classification criterion was kept fixed all through the learning
process of the discriminator without considering the gradually improved quality of generated data, even if they could
be more realistic than real data at times. In contrast, it is
more reasonable to treat the generated data as unlabeled,
which could be positive or negative according to their quality. The discriminator is thus a classifier for this positive
and unlabeled classification problem, and we derive a new
Positive-Unlabeled GAN (PUGAN). We theoretically discuss
the global optimality the proposed model will achieve and
the equivalent optimization goal. Empirically, we find that
PUGAN can achieve comparable or even better performance
than those sophisticated discriminator stabilization methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep generative models have received remarkable achievements in image generation tasks [14, 22, 25, 5].
As a representative generative model, GANs [5] approximated a target distribution via playing a min-max game. In
the standard framework of GAN [5, 23], a generator takes
noise vectors from a prior distribution (e.g. Gaussian distribution and normal distribution) as the input and tends to
produce data that follows the distribution of the reference
natural images, while the discriminator aims to distinguish
the generated data from the real data. Various GAN methods
have been developed in many interesting applications. For
example, in the image-to-image translation task, generators
in GANs map the input image to output image. Representative methods include Pix2pix [10] over paired training

images and cycleGAN [30] in an unsupervised way.
In vanilla GANs, the training progress usually lacks stability, and the quality of generated images is not always satisfactory (e.g. model collapse). For instance, DCGAN [23] carefully designed the neural architectures for the generator and
the discriminator to alleviate these problems. Progressive
GAN [12] generated high-resolution images by progressively
deepening the network. BigGAN [3] produced high-quality
images by improving training methods, e.g. enlarging batch
size, and truncating the latent space. WGAN [1] and WGANGP [6] tried to fit and optimize the Wasserstein distance to
stabilize the generation process. SNGAN [21] proved the
necessity and benefits of introducing Lipschitz continuity to
the discriminator.
These aforementioned methods to stabilize GAN could
be roughly divided into two categories: designing stable
network structures and training strategies and developing
new effective optimization goals. However, neither of them
has stepped away from the positive-negative classification
problem initially established in standard GAN. Although
WGAN and WGAN-GP no longer take the discriminator as
a classifier for real data and generated data, the aim of the is
still to separate the real and generated data as far as possible.
To the best of our knowledge, existing GAN models attempt
to strictly distinguish between generated data and real data
and ignore the fact that the quality of the generated samples
is not the same. It is unfair to treat high-quality samples
equally with low-quality samples, especially when highquality samples are sufficiently realistic. Although there
are many theoretical results proposed to justify the final
equilibrium, such as vanilla GAN [5] proving the existing of
the equilibrium and WGAN [1] replacing the JS divergence
with the Wasserstein distance, these analysis mainly focus
on the final achievement rather than the intermediate status
in the training process.
In this paper, we suggest that instead of an ordinary positive and negative classification (i.e. real v.s. fake) problem,
GAN is actually in the face of a positive-unlabeled classi-

8385

