Focus on defocus: bridging the synthetic to real domain gap for depth estimation
Maxim Maximov
Technical University Munich

Kevin Galim
Technical University Munich

Abstract

Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University Munich

Input

AiFNet

Data-driven depth estimation methods struggle with the
generalization outside their training scenes due to the immense variability of the real-world scenes. This problem
can be partially addressed by utilising synthetically generated images, but closing the synthetic-real domain gap
is far from trivial. In this paper, we tackle this issue by
using domain invariant defocus blur as direct supervision.
We leverage defocus cues by using a permutation invariant convolutional neural network that encourages the network to learn from the differences between images with a
different point of focus. Our proposed network uses the defocus map as an intermediate supervisory signal. We are
able to train our model completely on synthetic data and
directly apply it to a wide range of real-world images. We
evaluate our model on synthetic and real datasets, showing
compelling generalization results and state-of-the-art depth
prediction. The dataset and code are available at https:
//github.com/dvl-tum/defocus-net.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen an increase in the number of smartphone photography users, bringing the need for
image editing tools to a wider audience. Most of these
tools are still limited to color adjustments and simple image transformations. More advanced post-capture changes
such as focus and depth-of-field adjustments are not commonly available due to the need for depth maps of the captured scene. While there exist specialized hardware solutions to compute depth, e.g., light-field cameras [14], nowadays, data-driven machine learning makes it possible to
tackle the problem from the software side, predicting depth
maps [9, 7, 36] from a single image. However, monocular depth estimation methods do not generalize well to unseen data/scenes, e.g., different viewing angles, geometry
and objects types. They heavily rely on perspective, size,
texture and shading cues to measure distance. Those cues
are dependent on the type of scene and objects, texture and
illumination, which easily leads to overfitting to those memorized settings [20]. Other works on depth estimation show

All-in-Focus

DefocusNet
DepthNet

Focal stack

Defocus maps

Depth

Skip-connection

Figure 1. The pipeline of our approach. Our proposed end-toend learned model combines depth and all-in-focus estimation
from a focal stack using intermediate defocus map estimation and
permutation-invariant networks, leading to a better generalization
from a synthetic training to real photos.

better generalization by relying on comparison-based depth
cues, such as depth from motion [34, 19] or stereo [37, 29].
An under-explored cue for depth estimation is defocus,
given that an object’s depth dictates how sharp it will appear in the image. Depth-from-focus (or defocus) is defined as the task of obtaining the depth of a scene from a
focal stack, i.e., a set of images taken by the same camera but focused on different focal planes. Analytical approaches [21, 33] compute depth based on the sharpness
of each pixel. Such approaches are time-consuming, and
perform especially poorly for texture-less objects. Recent
deep learning approaches address these challenges in a datadriven way by learning to directly regress depth from a focal stack [12]. Their main drawback is that they do not
consider the underlying image formation process, therefore,
such methods are also prone to overfitting to the specific
training conditions.
Another challenge towards achieving generalization is
the lack of high-quality and diverse training sets. Collecting focal stack images with registered depth maps is an extremely time-consuming task, not to mention the imperfect
depth ground truth data obtained from hardware solutions
like time-of-flight sensors [12]. One can rely on synthetic
data as used in inverse-graphics tasks [31, 17, 18, 9], but not
without addressing the problem of bridging the domain gap

1071

