Towards Global Explanations of Convolutional Neural Networks with Concept
Attribution
Weibin Wu1 , Yuxin Su1∗, Xixian Chen2 , Shenglin Zhao2 , Irwin King1 , Michael R. Lyu1 , Yu-Wing Tai2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Tencent
{wbwu, yxsu, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {xixianchen, henryslzhao, yuwingtai}@tencent.com

Abstract
With the growing prevalence of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), there is an urgent demand to explain their
behaviors. Global explanations contribute to understanding model predictions on a whole category of samples, and
thus have attracted increasing interest recently. However,
existing methods overwhelmingly conduct separate input attribution or rely on local approximations of models, making
them fail to offer faithful global explanations of CNNs. To
overcome such drawbacks, we propose a novel two-stage
framework, Attacking for Interpretability (AfI), which explains model decisions in terms of the importance of userdefined concepts. AfI first conducts a feature occlusion
analysis, which resembles a process of attacking models to
derive the category-wide importance of different features.
We then map the feature importance to concept importance
through ad-hoc semantic tasks. Experimental results confirm the effectiveness of AfI and its superiority in providing
more accurate estimations of concept importance than existing proposals.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have emerged as
a cutting-edge solution to a broad spectrum of real-world
applications, such as object recognition [21], audio processing [17], and natural language analysis [49]. Despite the
startling advance of these powerful computational architectures, their inner workings remain a mystery. Interpreting
and understanding the behaviors of CNNs have become an
increasingly crucial topic of research. It can not only justify
decisions of CNNs to promote model trustworthiness, but
also spot their latent defects to inspire the development of
better models [12, 16, 9, 45].
Among diverse explanation techniques, attribution endeavors to succinctly summarize how CNNs arrive at their
final decisions [28, 10]. Under the context of image clas∗ Corresponding author.

sification, the convention is to measure the importance of
human-understandable units to model predictions, such as
pixels (i.e., input attribution) and concepts (i.e., concept attribution) [19]. Concept attribution can overcome the ambiguity of input attribution and thus have attracted growing
attention recently [19, 10, 52].
There are two explanation interfaces of concept attribution studied in the literature: local explanations [52] and
global ones [19], and we focus on the latter in this work,
which is imperative but under-explored. Local explanations
investigate the rationale of model predictions on individual
data points, which are helpful when we only care about a
specific instance. In contrast, global explanations center on
mining generic decision modes that apply to an entire class
of examples. For instance, global explanations can answer
to what extent the banded texture is related to a zebra class
in model cognition. Therefore, such global explanations are
conducive to summarize the model knowledge succinctly
and understand the model as a whole [19].
In general, existing concept attribution methods implicitly follow a two-stage procedure [19, 10, 52]. First, since
the model decisions are built upon a cornucopia of feature
detectors, they conduct feature attribution to quantify the
importance of individual feature detectors to model predictions1 . In this step, current attempts simply employ backpropagated gradients as the estimation of feature importance. Second, they achieve concept attribution by translating feature importance into concept importance. Most
turn to first settle the embedding of a concept in the model
feature space (i.e., the concept vector), and then measure
the alignment between this concept vector and the vector of
feature importance. As for works that focus on global explanations, they just analyze individual predictions in isolation with the above procedure and then return summary
statistics [19, 10].
It is doubtful whether such a strategy to obtain global explanations indeed sees “globally”. The deficiency primar1 To avoid confusion, we consistently use the term “feature” to refer to
the visual patterns detected by feature filters of CNNs (e.g., the banded
texture), rather than the input pixels.

8652

