SaccadeNet: A Fast and Accurate Object Detector
Shiyi Lan1∗ Zhou Ren2 Yi Wu2 Larry S. Davis1 Gang Hua2
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Wormpex AI Research
sylan@cs.umd.edu, lsd@umiacs.umd.edu, {renzhou200622, ywu.china, ganghua}@gmail.com

Abstract

42

Object detection is an essential step towards holistic
scene understanding. Most existing object detection algorithms attend to certain object areas once and then predict the object locations. However, neuroscientists have revealed that humans do not look at the scene in fixed steadiness. Instead, human eyes move around, locating informative parts to understand the object location. This active perceiving movement process is called saccade.
Inspired by such mechanism, we propose a fast and accurate object detector called SaccadeNet. It contains four
main modules, the Center Attentive Module, the Corner Attentive Module, the Attention Transitive Module, and the
Aggregation Attentive Module, which allows it to attend to
different informative object keypoints, and predict object
locations from coarse to fine. The Corner Attentive Module is used only during training to extract more informative
corner features which brings free-lunch performance boost.
On the MS COCO dataset, we achieve the performance of
40.4% mAP at 28 FPS and 30.5% mAP at 118 FPS. Among
all the real-time object detectors, our SaccadeNet achieves
the best detection performance, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed detection mechanism.

39

1. Introduction
The human visual system is accurate and fast. As the
first gate to perceive the physical world, our visual system glances at a scene and immediately understands what
objects are there and where they are. This efficient and
effective vision system enables human to perceive the visual world with little conscious thought. In machine intelligence, similarly a fast and accurate object detector is
essential, which can allow machines to perceive the physical world efficiently and effectively, and unlock subsequent
processes such as understanding the holistic scene and interacting within it.
∗ This work was done when Shiyi Lan was a research intern at Wormpex
AI Research.

MS COCO AP

36
33
30
27
24
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Inference Time(ms)

SaccadeNet

CenterNet

HSD

YOLOv3

RetinaNet

Figure 1. Performance comparison on COCO test-dev. SaccadeNet outperforms all previous fast detectors [31, 16, 1, 22]. Best
viewed in color.

Many recent algorithms have been proposed to advance
object detection. On the one hand, anchor-based methods
[24, 23, 16, 18, 7] proposed to pre-define a large amount
of anchor locations, and then either directly regress object
bounding box locations, or generate region proposals based
on anchors and decide whether each region contains a certain object category. These methods usually achieve competitive performance since they aggregate detailed image
features within each region. However, the time-consuming
region proposal stage is an bottleneck of inference speed.
On the other hand, researchers proposed anchor-free detectors [13, 32, 5, 31]. This type of methods proposed to
directly regress object locations by utilizing features at certain pre-defined object keypoints, either in the object center
or on the bounding box edges. Most edge keypoints based
methods are not fast because of the time-consuming grouping process that combines multiple detected keypoints to
form a single object bounding box. The recent proposed
center keypoint based detectors [31] avoid the complex

10397

