Efficient Dynamic Scene Deblurring Using Spatially Variant Deconvolution
Network with Optical Flow Guided Training
Yuan Yuan,
Wei Su,
Dandan Ma∗
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{y.yuan1.ieee, npusuwei, madandanhello}@gmail.com

Abstract
In order to remove the non-uniform blur of images captured from dynamic scenes, many deep learning based
methods design deep networks for large receptive fields and
strong fitting capabilities, or use multi-scale strategy to deblur image on different scales gradually. Restricted by the
fixed structures and parameters, these methods are always
huge in model size to handle complex blurs. In this paper, we start from the deblurring deconvolution operation,
then design an effective and real-time deblurring network.
The main contributions are three folded, 1) we construct
a spatially variant deconvolution network using modulated
deformable convolutions, which can adjust receptive fields
adaptively according to the blur features. 2) our analysis
shows the sampling points of deformable convolution can
be used to approximate the blur kernel, which can be simplified to bi-directional optical flows. So the position learning of sampling points can be supervised by bi-directional
optical flows. 3) we build a light-weighted backbone for
image restoration problem, which can balance the calculations and effectiveness well. Experimental results show
that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art deblurring performance, but with less parameters and shorter running time.

1. Introduction
Due to relative motion during exposure time, motion blur
always occurs when taking pictures. Many factors such as
camera shake, object motion and depth variation could result in blur artifacts. Blur artifacts downgrade the image
quality, which is harmful to the computer vision tasks such
as object detection, text recognition and object tracking because of the blurry structures of objects. Dynamic scene deblurring is to recover clear image from the observed blurry
image. The blurring in dynamic scenes can be modeled as
∗ Corresponding Author.

Position
Loss

Content
Loss

Figure 1. The overview of the proposed method. The sampling
points of deformable convolution are used to approximate the local blur kernel, and supervised by the bi-directional optical flows,
which can be easily obtained from the deblurring datasets. The
position loss is used to train the sampling points getting closer to
the optical flows.

non-uniform blur, which is usually formulate as:
b = Ks + n,

(1)

where b, s and n represent the vectorized blurry image, clear
latent image, and additional noise respectively. K is the
non-uniform blur matrix, each row of which represents a local blur kernel attached to sharp image to generate a blurry
pixel. The solution space of non-uniform blur is very large,
which causes it hard to solve the s and K with b.
To constraint the solution space of non-uniform blur,
some hand-crafted priors such as dark channel prior [22],
heavy-tailed gradient prior [24], hyper-Laplacian prior [16],
extreme channel prior [33], and etc., are introduced. However, the traditional deblurring process involves expensive
non-convex optimization, which is time and memory consuming. Once the priors are not suitable, artifacts such

3555

