Distilling Cross-Task Knowledge via Relationship Matching
Han-Jia Ye
Nanjing University

Su Lu
Nanjing University

De-Chuan Zhan
Nanjing University

yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn

lus@lamda.nju.edu.cn

zhandc@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The discriminative knowledge from a high-capacity deep
neural network (a.k.a. the “teacher”) could be distilled
to facilitate the learning efficacy of a shallow counterpart
(a.k.a. the “student”). This paper deals with a general scenario reusing the knowledge from a cross-task teacher —
two models are targeting non-overlapping label spaces. We
emphasize that the comparison ability between instances
acts as an essential factor threading knowledge across domains, and propose the RElationship FacIlitated Local
cLassifiEr Distillation (R E F ILLED) approach, which decomposes the knowledge distillation flow into branches for
embedding and the top-layer classifier. In particular, different from reconciling the instance-label confidence between
models, R E F ILLED requires the teacher to reweight the
hard triplets push forwarded by the student so that the similarity comparison levels between instances are matched.
A local embedding-induced classifier from the teacher further supervises the student’s classification confidence. R E F ILLED demonstrates its effectiveness when reusing crosstask models, and also achieves state-of-the-art performance
on the standard knowledge distillation benchmarks. The
code of the paper can be accessed at https://github.
com/njulus/ReFilled.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation [6, 20, 64] facilitates the learning efficiency of a deep neural network by reusing the “dark
knowledge” from another model. In detail, a strong classifier, e.g., a neural network trained with deeper architectures [43], high-quality images [65], or precise optimization strategies [13, 60], acts as a “teacher”, and guides the
training of a weaker “student” model. Such model-based
knowledge reuse improves the discriminative ability of the
target student model, and relieves the burden of model training and storage as well [20, 43, 64, 13]. Its success has
been witnessed in a wide range of applications such as
model/dataset compression [56, 2, 35, 36, 8], multi-task
learning [68, 27], incremental image classification [69, 24].

Learn Student Model

Learn Teacher Model

+SHKJJOTM
(GIQHUTK

1TU]RKJMK
*OYZORRGZOUT

+SHKJJOTM
(GIQHUTK

:UV2G_KX
)RGYYOLOKX
Teacher Model

:UV2G_KX
)RGYYOLOKX
Student Model

A Pre-Trained model from NonOverlapping Classes

Learn current task (student) model
with the help of the teacher.

Figure 1. An illustration of reusing the knowledge from a CrossTask teacher model. In a classification task, a teacher is learned
from images with non-overlapping classes, while its learning experience is distilled to facilitate the training of the student model.

The main idea of knowledge distillation is to specify a
kind of dark knowledge, based on which the student is asked
to align with the teacher. For example, the teacher specifies
the proportion of how much similar an instance with candidate categories rather than the extreme “black or white”
supervision. Although the predictions matching enables the
transition of knowledge flow across different neural architectures [20, 35], its dependence on the instance-label relationship restricts both teacher and student to the same label
space. In this paper, we enable the student to utilize the
learning experience from a cross-task teacher, i.e., a neural
network with non-overlapping label spaces, which generalizes the knowledge reuse approaches to more applications.
The label difference between teacher and student impedes the direct learning experience transition [22]. The
comparison ability of the embeddings — measuring how
similar two instances are — captures a kind of invariant
nature of the model [1] and is free from the label constraint [47, 33, 22]. For a teacher and a student discerning
‘Husky vs. Birman” and “Poodle vs. Persian” respectively,
the teacher’s discriminative embedding encoding the “dogcat” related characteristics is capable of estimating the similarity relationship of instances in the student’s task. Thus,
we emphasize the instance-instance relationship to bridge
the knowledge transfer across different tasks, and thread the
knowledge reuse for both embedding and top-layer classifier by taking advantage of the teacher’s comparison ability.
Figure 1 illustrates the notion of cross-task distillation.
To this end, we propose a 2-stage approach RElationship

12396

