Context Prior for Scene Segmentation
Changqian Yu1,2 Jingbo Wang3 Changxin Gao1∗ Gang Yu4 Chunhua Shen2 Nong Sang1
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Tencent
{changqian yu,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works have widely explored the contextual dependencies to achieve more accurate segmentation results.
However, most approaches rarely distinguish different types
of contextual dependencies, which may pollute the scene understanding. In this work, we directly supervise the feature aggregation to distinguish the intra-class and interclass context clearly. Specifically, we develop a Context
Prior with the supervision of the Affinity Loss. Given an
input image and corresponding ground truth, Affinity Loss
constructs an ideal affinity map to supervise the learning
of Context Prior. The learned Context Prior extracts the
pixels belonging to the same category, while the reversed
prior focuses on the pixels of different classes. Embedded
into a conventional deep CNN, the proposed Context Prior
Layer can selectively capture the intra-class and inter-class
contextual dependencies, leading to robust feature representation. To validate the effectiveness, we design an effective Context Prior Network (CPNet). Extensive quantitative
and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed
model performs favorably against state-of-the-art semantic segmentation approaches. More specifically, our algorithm achieves 46.3% mIoU on ADE20K, 53.9% mIoU on
PASCAL-Context, and 81.3% mIoU on Cityscapes. Code is
available at https://git.io/ContextPrior.

(a) Input Image

(b) Pyramid Method

(c) CPNet

(d) Input Image

(e) Attention Method

(f) CPNet

Figure 1. Hard examples in scene segmentation. In the first row,
the central part of the sand in the red box is misclassified as the
sea, because the shadow part has a similar appearance with the
sea. With the pyramid-based aggregation method [3], aggregation of the confused spatial information may lead to undesirable
prediction as visualized in (b). In the second row, the table in
the green box has a similar appearance to the bottom part of the
bed. The attention-based method [50] fails to effectively distinguish the confused spatial information without prior knowledge,
leading to less correct prediction as shown in (e). In the proposed
CPNet, we aggregate the contextual dependencies with clear distinguishment. Notably, the Context Prior models the intra-class
and inter-class relationships as a context prior knowledge to capture the intra-class and inter-class contextual dependencies.

1. Introduction
Scene segmentation is a long-standing and challenging
problem in computer vision with many downstream applications e.g., augmented reality, autonomous driving [8, 12],
human-machine interaction, and video content analysis.
The goal is to assign each pixel with a category label, which
provides comprehensive scene understanding.
Benefiting from the effective feature representation of
∗ Corresponding author. Part of the work was done when C. Yu was
visiting The University of Adelaide.

the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), a few approaches
have obtained promising performance. However, limited
by the structure of convolutional layers, the FCN provides
insufficient contextual information, leaving room for improvement. Therefore, various methods [1, 3, 5, 32, 49, 43,
45, 35, 19] explore the contextual dependencies to obtain
more accurate segmentation results. There are mainly two
paths to aggregate the contextual information: 1) Pyramidbased aggregation method. Several methods [49, 1, 3, 5]
adopt pyramid-based modules or global pooling to aggre-

12416

