AD-Cluster: Augmented Discriminative Clustering for Domain Adaptive
Person Re-identification
Yunpeng Zhai1,2 , Shijian Lu3 , Qixiang Ye4,6 , Xuebo Shan1,2 , Jie Chen1,6 ,
Rongrong Ji5,6 , Yonghong Tian1,2,6∗
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
2
NELVT, School of EE&CS, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
5
Xiamen University, China, 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{ypzhai, shanxb, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg, qxye@ucas.ac.cn,
chenj@pcl.ac.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive person re-identification (re-ID) is a
challenging task, especially when person identities in target domains are unknown. Existing methods attempt to address this challenge by transferring image styles or aligning feature distributions across domains, whereas the rich
unlabeled samples in target domains are not sufficiently exploited. This paper presents a novel augmented discriminative clustering (AD-Cluster) technique that estimates and
augments person clusters in target domains and enforces
the discrimination ability of re-ID models with the augmented clusters. AD-Cluster is trained by iterative densitybased clustering, adaptive sample augmentation, and discriminative feature learning. It learns an image generator and a feature encoder which aim to maximize the intracluster diversity in the sample space and minimize the intracluster distance in the feature space in an adversarial minmax manner. Finally, AD-Cluster increases the diversity
of sample clusters and improves the discrimination capability of re-ID models greatly. Extensive experiments over
Market-1501 and DukeMTMC-reID show that AD-Cluster
outperforms the state-of-the-art with large margins.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to match persons
in an image gallery collected from non-overlapping camera
networks. Despite of the impressive progress of supervised
methods in person re-ID [5] [50], models trained in one domain often fail to generalize well to others due to the change
of camera configurations, lighting conditions, person views,
∗ Corresponding author.

Clustering

Extraction

Optimization

Update
Image generator

Update
Feature encoder
Alternatively training

Max Step
Original samples

Min Step
Augmented samples

Cluster regions

Figure 1. AD-Cluster alternatively trains an image generator and
a feature encoder, which respectively Maximizes intra-cluster distance (i.e., increase the diversity of sample space) and Minimizes
intra-cluster distance in feature space (i.e., decrease the distance in
new feature space). It enforces the discrimination ability of re-ID
models in an adversarial min-max manner. (Best viewed in color)

etc. Domain adaptive re-ID methods that can work across
domains remain a very open research challenge.
To implement domain adaptive re-ID, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods have been widely explored
[44], [26], [27], [10], [45], [61], [32], [14], [52],

9021

