Training a Steerable CNN for Guidewire Detection
Donghang Li, Adrian Barbu
Florida State University
600 W College Ave, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA
dl14h@my.fsu.edu, abarbu@stat.fsu.edu

Abstract
Guidewires are thin wires used in coronary angioplasty
to guide different tools to access and repair the obstructed
artery. The whole procedure is monitored using fluoroscopic (real-time X-ray) images. Due to the guidewire being thin in the low quality fluoroscopic images, it is usually
poorly visible. The poor quality of the X-ray images makes
the guidewire detection a challenging problem in imageguided interventions. Localizing the guidewire could help
in enhancing its visibility and for other automatic procedures. Guidewire localization methods usually contain a
first step of computing a pixelwise guidewire response map
on the entire image. In this paper, we present a steerable Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which is a Fully
Convolutional Neural Network (FCNN) that can detect objects rotated by an arbitrary 2D angle, without being rotation invariant. In fact, the steerable CNN has an angle
parameter that can be changed to make it sensitive to objects rotated by that angle. We present an application of
this idea to detecting the guidewire pixels, and compare
it with an FCNN trained to be invariant to the guidewire
orientation. Results reveal that the proposed method is a
good choice, outperforming some popular filter-based and
learning-based approaches such as Frangi Filter, Spherical
Quadrature Filter, FCNN and a state of the art trained classifier based on hand-crafted feature.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) are widely used
and have an impressive performance in detecting and classifying objects. However, the CNNs performance is sensitive
to variations in rotation, position or scaling of the objects
to be detected. In [14], capsules were proposed as accurate generative models to handle such variations and obtain more accurate representations, with promising results.
However, each capsule is trained to handle only a small
range of such variations, hence the need for multiple capsules to handle the same object.

In this paper we propose a steerable CNN that can detect
an object rotated by an arbitrary angle without being rotation invariant. The proposed model is discriminative like a
regular CNN, but it has a latent parameter representing the
object’s 2D orientation. For any value of this parameter,
the steerable CNN will be sensitive to detect only objects
having that orientation.
We apply the steerable CNN to detect the guidewire in
fluoroscopy (real-time X-ray) images. The guidewire is a
thin wire used in coronary angioplasty interventions, which
are visualized using fluoroscopic images. The fluoroscopic
images are usually low-dose in order to limit the amount of
radiation received by the patient. Under these conditions,
the guidewire is a thin and poorly visible wire-like structure with different orientations, as shown in Figure 1. In
this application, knowing the orientation of the guidewire is
important for its detection, but the scaling is not important
since all guidewires are one or two pixels wide.
In order to find the entire guidewire, a low level measurement that shows how the guidewire passes through any pixel
of the image should be obtained first. More details about
this procedure will be explained in Section 2. There are
two main approaches to obtain the pixelwise detection map,
filter-based approaches and learning-based approaches. For
the filter-based approach, one applies a predefined filter
(Frangi Filter, Steerable Filters, Spherical Quadrature Filters) to obtain a filtered response map. The learning-based
approach is to find a per-pixel probability map by training a
classifier with some Haar or hand-crafted features.
The best performing methods are trained on rotationaligned samples and search for the maximum response rotation angle at detection time. This is done by rotating the
image by a number of angles and applying the classifier to
the rotated images.
Recently, a CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) was
trained for this purpose, which learned its own features using the training data and obtained an invariant model that
can detect guidewires at any orientation.
In this paper, we are interested in seeing what is to gain
by training a CNN that is tuned to the guidewire orientation.
113955

