StereoGAN: Bridging Synthetic-to-Real Domain Gap
by Joint Optimization of Domain Translation and Stereo Matching

1

Rui Liu1 Chengxi Yang2 Wenxiu Sun2 Xiaogang Wang1 Hongsheng Li1
2
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, Chinese University of Hong Kong
SenseTime Research
ruiliu@link.cuhk.edu.hk {yangchengxi, sunwenxiu}@sensetime.com
{xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Left Image

1. Introduction
With the fast development of deep neural networks [23, 12] and large-scale benchmarks [31, 13, 7], deep
learning-based stereo matching methods have made great
progress in the past decade [29, 19]. These methods, however, relying on a large quantity of high-quality left-rightdisparity training data. Although the input images to the
stereo matching networks ( i.e., left and right images) are
relatively easy to collect using stereo rigs in the real world,
their corresponding ground-truth disparities are very diffi-

CycleGAN
Proposed

Large-scale synthetic datasets are beneficial to stereo
matching but usually introduce known domain bias. Although unsupervised image-to-image translation networks
represented by CycleGAN show great potential in dealing
with domain gap, it is non-trivial to generalize this method
to stereo matching due to the problem of pixel distortion and
stereo mismatch after translation. In this paper, we propose
an end-to-end training framework with domain translation
and stereo matching networks to tackle this challenge. First,
joint optimization between domain translation and stereo
matching networks in our end-to-end framework makes the
former facilitate the latter one to the maximum extent. Second, this framework introduces two novel losses, i.e., bidirectional multi-scale feature re-projection loss and correlation consistency loss, to help translate all synthetic stereo
images into realistic ones as well as maintain epipolar constraints. The effective combination of above two contributions leads to impressive stereo-consistent translation and
disparity estimation accuracy. In addition, a mode seeking
regularization term is added to endow the synthetic-to-real
translation results with higher fine-grained diversity. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework on bridging the synthetic-to-real domain
gap on stereo matching.

Right Image

Synthetic

Abstract

Figure 1. Domain translation results. Top row: stereo images from
synthetic domain. Middle row: synthetic-to-real translated results
by CycleGAN. Bottom row: synthetic-to-real translated results by
our proposed model.

cult to collect. Instead, researchers tend to create synthetic
training datasets [29, 31, 13] with perfect disparities. In
this way, the demand of large quantity of training data is
alleviated. However, the non-negligible domain gaps between synthetic and real must be considered when generalizing to real domains. In order to mitigate the domain gaps,
some of the previous works [1, 40] train their models in two
stages. Firstly the model is trained on synthetic dataset and
then fine-tuned on a particular real dataset in either supervised [30, 1, 11] or unsupervised manner [38, 39]. In this
paper, we focus on the latter one, a more challenging task
with no ground-truth for the real target-domain data.
Existing unsupervised online adaptation methods advanced the research progress, however, still have difficulties on handling the domain gaps between source and target
domains [38, 39]. Moreover, these methods introduce extra
112757

