Dataless Model Selection with the Deep Frame Potential
Calvin Murdock1
Simon Lucey1,2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Argo AI
{cmurdock,slucey}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Choosing a deep neural network architecture is a fundamental problem in applications that require balancing performance and parameter efficiency. Standard approaches
rely on ad-hoc engineering or computationally expensive
validation on a specific dataset. We instead attempt to
quantify networks by their intrinsic capacity for unique and
robust representations, enabling efficient architecture comparisons without requiring any data. Building upon theoretical connections between deep learning and sparse approximation, we propose the deep frame potential: a measure
of coherence that is approximately related to representation
stability but has minimizers that depend only on network
structure. This provides a framework for jointly quantifying
the contributions of architectural hyper-parameters such as
depth, width, and skip connections. We validate its use as
a criterion for model selection and demonstrate correlation
with generalization error on a variety of common residual
and densely connected network architectures.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have dominated nearly every
benchmark within the field of computer vision. While this
modern influx of deep learning originally began with the
task of large-scale image recognition [18], new datasets,
loss functions, and network configurations have quickly expanded its scope to include a much wider range of applications. Despite this, the underlying architectures used to
learn effective image representations are generally consistent across all of them. This can be seen through the community’s quick adoption of the newest state-of-the-art deep
networks from AlexNet [18] to VGGNet [28], ResNets [13],
DenseNets [15], and so on. But this begs the question: why
do some deep network architectures work better than others? Despite years of groundbreaking empirical results, an
answer to this question still remains elusive.
Fundamentally, the difficulty in comparing network architectures arises from the lack of a theoretical foundation for characterizing their generalization capacities. Shal-

(a) Chain Network

≈

(b) Residual Network

≈

(c) Densely Connected
Convolutional Network

≈

(d) Induced Dictionary Structures for Sparse Approximation

Figure 1: Why are some deep neural network architectures better
than others? In comparison to (a) standard chain connections, skip
connections like those in (b) ResNets [13] and (c) DenseNets [15]
have demonstrated significant improvements in training effectiveness, parameter efficiency, and generalization performance. We
provide one possible explanation for this phenomenon by approximating network activations as (d) solutions to sparse approximation problems with different induced dictionary structures.

low machine learning techniques like support vector machines [6] were aided by theoretical tools like the VCdimension [31] for determining when their predictions
could be trusted to avoid overfitting. Deep neural networks,
on the other hand, have eschewed similar analyses due to
their complexity. Theoretical explorations of deep network
generalization [24] are often disconnected from practical
applications and rarely provide actionable insight into how
architectural hyper-parameters contribute to performance.
Building upon recent connections between deep learning and sparse approximation [26, 23], we instead interpret
feed-forward deep networks as algorithms for approximate
inference in related sparse coding problems. These problems aim to optimally reconstruct zero-padded input images
as sparse, nonnegative linear combinations of atoms from
architecture-dependent dictionaries, as shown in Fig. 1. We
propose to indirectly analyze practical deep network architectures with complicated skip connections, like residual
networks (ResNets) [13] and densely connected convolu-

11257

