Learning to See Through Obstructions
Yu-Lun Liu1,4 Wei-Sheng Lai2 Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3 Yung-Yu Chuang1
1
National Taiwan University 2 Google 3 UC Merced 4 MediaTek Inc.

Jia-Bin Huang5
5
Virginia Tech

https://www.cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw/˜yulunliu/ObstructionRemoval

(a) Reflection removal

(b) Fence removal

(c) Raindrop removal

Figure 1: Seeing through obstructions. We present a learning-based method for recovering clean images from a given short
sequence of images taken by a moving camera through obstructing elements such as (a) windows, (b) fence, or (c) raindrop.

Abstract
We present a learning-based approach for removing unwanted obstructions, such as window reflections, fence occlusions or raindrops, from a short sequence of images captured by a moving camera. Our method leverages the motion differences between the background and the obstructing elements to recover both layers. Specifically, we alternate between estimating dense optical flow fields of the
two layers and reconstructing each layer from the flowwarped images via a deep convolutional neural network.
The learning-based layer reconstruction allows us to accommodate potential errors in the flow estimation and brittle assumptions such as brightness consistency. We show
that training on synthetically generated data transfers well
to real images. Our results on numerous challenging scenarios of reflection and fence removal demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Taking clean photographs through reflective surfaces
(such as windows) or occluding elements (such as fences) is
challenging as the captured images inevitably contain both
the scenes of interests and the obstructions caused by reflections or occlusions. An effective solution to recover the
underlying clean image is thus of great interest for improving the quality of the images captured under such conditions
or allowing computers to form a correct physical interpretation of the scene, e.g., enabling a robot to navigate in a
scene with windows safely.

Recent efforts have been focused on automatically removing unwanted reflections or occlusions from a single
image [2, 8, 16, 17, 27, 38, 43, 45]. These methods either
leverage the ghosting cues [30] or adopt learning-based approaches to capture the prior of natural images [8, 16, 38,
43, 45]. While impressive results have been shown, separating the clean background from reflection/occlusions is fundamentally ill-posed and often requires a high-level semantic understanding of the scene to perform well. In particular, the performance of learning-based methods degrades
significantly for out-of-distribution images.
To tackle these challenges, multi-frame approaches have
been proposed for reflection/occlusion removal. The core
idea is to exploit the fact that the background scene and
the occluding elements are located at different depths with
respect to the camera (e.g., virtual depth of window reflections). Consequently, taking multiple images from a slightly
moving camera reveals the motion differences between the
two layers [3, 9, 12, 21, 24, 34]. A number of approaches
exploit such cues for reflection or fence removal from a
video [1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 21, 24, 26, 31, 34]. Xue et al. [42]
propose a unified computational framework for obstruction
removal and show impressive results on several natural sequences. The formulation, however, requires a computationally expensive optimization process and relies on strict
assumptions of brightness constancy or accurate motion estimation. To alleviate these issues, recent work [1] explores
model-free methods by using a generic 3D convolutional
neural network (CNN). Yet, the CNN-based methods do not
produce results with comparable quality as optimizationbased algorithms on real input sequences.
114215

