Neural Pose Transfer by Spatially Adaptive Instance Normalization
Jiashun Wang1∗‡

Chao Wen1∗§

Yanwei Fu1†‡
1

Haitao Lin1

Fudan University

Tianyun Zou1
2

Xiangyang Xue1

Yinda Zhang2†

Google LLC

Figure 1: Four groups of pose transfer examples. Each visualization group consists of 3 meshes, input pose mesh, input
identity mesh, and our result. For the first two groups, we show the pose mesh from SMPL [16], the identity mesh from
FAUST [4] and our result, the identity mesh of the third group is from MG-dataset[3], the last group shows our pose transfer
result from the animal dataset [24], please refer to supplementary materials for more details.

Abstract
Pose transfer has been studied for decades, in which
the pose of a source mesh is applied to a target mesh.
Particularly in this paper, we are interested in transferring the pose of source human mesh to deform the target human mesh, while the source and target meshes may
have different identity information. Traditional studies assume that the paired source and target meshes are existed with the point-wise correspondences of user annotated
landmarks/mesh points, which requires heavy labelling efforts. On the other hand, the generalization ability of
deep models is limited, when the source and target meshes
have different identities. To break this limitation, we proposes the first neural pose transfer model that solves the
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.
‡ Yanwei Fu and Jiashun Wang are with School of Data Science, and
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent
Information Processing Fudan University.
§ Chao Wen is with Academy of Engineering and Technology, and Institute of AI and Robotics, Fudan University

pose transfer via the latest technique for image style transfer, leveraging the newly proposed component – spatially
adaptive instance normalization. Our model does not require any correspondences between the source and target
meshes. Extensive experiments show that the proposed
model can effectively transfer deformation from source to
target meshes, and has good generalization ability to deal
with unseen identities or poses of meshes. Code is available
at https://github.com/jiashunwang/Neural-Pose-Transfer.

1. Introduction
Deformation transfer has been drawing consistent attention over decades and is enabling many applications. For
example, one can easily transfer the pose from the mesh of
one person to another in the games and movies. However, It
is very challenging when there is a huge ”shape gap” given
very different identities of source and target meshes, as illustrated in Fig. 1. To make this feasible, previous works demand re-enforcing the correspondence between source and
target meshes, additional information, such as point-wise

5831

