Normalized and Geometry-Aware Self-Attention Network
for Image Captioning

Longteng Guo
1

1,2

Jing Liu

1

Xinxin Zhu

1

Peng Yao

3

Shichen Lu

4

Hanqing Lu

1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Science and Technology Beijing 4 Wuhan University

{longteng.guo,jliu,xinxin.zhu,luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,S20180598@xs.ustb.edu.cn,sclu@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-attention (SA) network has shown profound value
in image captioning. In this paper, we improve SA from two aspects to promote the performance of image captioning. First, we propose Normalized Self-Attention (NSA),
a reparameterization of SA that brings the benefits of normalization inside SA. While normalization is previously only applied outside SA, we introduce a novel normalization
method and demonstrate that it is both possible and beneficial to perform it on the hidden activations inside SA. Second, to compensate for the major limit of Transformer that
it fails to model the geometry structure of the input objects,
we propose a class of Geometry-aware Self-Attention (GSA)
that extends SA to explicitly and efficiently consider the relative geometry relations between the objects in the image.
To construct our image captioning model, we combine the
two modules and apply it to the vanilla self-attention network. We extensively evaluate our proposals on MS-COCO
image captioning dataset and superior results are achieved
when comparing to state-of-the-art approaches. Further experiments on three challenging tasks, i.e. video captioning,
machine translation, and visual question answering, show
the generality of our methods.

translation, most image captioning approaches adopt an
encoder-decoder paradigm, which uses a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to encode the input image as a vectorial representation, and a recurrent neural network (RNN)
based caption decoder to generate the output caption. Recently, self-attention (SA) networks, denoted as SANs, have
been introduced by [46, 43] to replace conventional RNNs
in image captioning. Since its first introduction in Transformer [32], SA and its variants have shown promising empirical results in a wide range of CV [45, 16, 37, 10, 24, 9]
and NLP [30, 8, 41] tasks. Although SAN-based framework
has achieved state-of-the-art performance in image captioning, it remains two problems to be solved.

1. Introduction

Firstly, SA is susceptible to the internal covariate shift
[18] problem. Typically, SA is regarded as a mapping of a
set of query and key/value pairs. We observe, from another perspective, that computation of the attention weights in
SA could be considered as feeding the queries into a fullyconnected layer, whose parameters are dynamically computed according to the inputs. Problem could happen when
the distribution of the queries shifts due to the change in
network parameters during training. That is, the subsequent
layers have to continuously adapt to the new input distribution, and consequently, SA may not be learned effectively.
This problem is called “Internal Covariate Shift” in [18] —
the tendency that the distribution of activations drifts during
training in a feed-forward network.

Automatically generating captions for images, namely
image captioning [20, 40], has emerged as a prominent research problem at the intersection of computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP). This task is challenging as it requires to first recognize the objects in the
image, the relationships between them, and finally properly
organize and describe them in natural language.
Inspired by the sequence-to-sequence model for machine

To eliminate the internal covariate shift problem inside
SA, in this paper, we introduce an effective reparameterization of SA, named Normalized Self-Attention (NSA). NSA
performs a novel normalization method on the hidden activations of SA to fix their distributions. By doing so, we can
effectively decouple the fully-connected layer’s parameters
from those of other layers, leading to a better-conditioned
optimization of SA. While Layer Normalization (LN) [4]

10327

