Panoptic-DeepLab:
A Simple, Strong, and Fast Baseline for Bottom-Up Panoptic Segmentation
Bowen Cheng1,2 , Maxwell D. Collins2 , Yukun Zhu2 , Ting Liu2 ,
Thomas S. Huang1 , Hartwig Adam2 , Liang-Chieh Chen2
1

UIUC

2

Google Research

Abstract
In this work, we introduce Panoptic-DeepLab, a simple,
strong, and fast system for panoptic segmentation, aiming
to establish a solid baseline for bottom-up methods that
can achieve comparable performance of two-stage methods
while yielding fast inference speed. In particular, PanopticDeepLab adopts the dual-ASPP and dual-decoder structures specific to semantic, and instance segmentation, respectively. The semantic segmentation branch is the same
as the typical design of any semantic segmentation model
(e.g., DeepLab), while the instance segmentation branch is
class-agnostic, involving a simple instance center regression. As a result, our single Panoptic-DeepLab simultaneously ranks first at all three Cityscapes benchmarks, setting
the new state-of-art of 84.2% mIoU, 39.0% AP, and 65.5%
PQ on test set. Additionally, equipped with MobileNetV3,
Panoptic-DeepLab runs nearly in real-time with a single
1025 × 2049 image (15.8 frames per second), while achieving a competitive performance on Cityscapes (54.1 PQ%
on test set). On Mapillary Vistas test set, our ensemble of
six models attains 42.7% PQ, outperforming the challenge
winner in 2018 by a healthy margin of 1.5%. Finally, our
Panoptic-DeepLab also performs on par with several topdown approaches on the challenging COCO dataset. For
the first time, we demonstrate a bottom-up approach could
deliver state-of-the-art results on panoptic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation, unifying semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation, has received a lot of attention
thanks to the recently proposed panoptic quality metric [34]
and associated recognition challenges [46, 16, 53]. The goal
of panoptic segmentation is to assign a unique value, encoding both semantic label and instance id, to every pixel in an
image. It requires identifying the class and extent of each
individual ‘thing’ in the image, and labelling all pixels that

Figure 1. Our Panoptic-DeepLab predicts three outputs: semantic segmentation, instance center prediction and instance center
regression. Class-agnostic instance segmentation, obtained by
grouping predicted foreground pixels to their closest predicted
instance centers, is then fused with semantic segmentation by
majority-vote rule to generate final panoptic segmentation.

belong to each ‘stuff’ class.
The task of panoptic segmentation introduces challenges
that preceding methods are unsuited to solve. Models typically used in the separate instance and semantic segmentation literature have diverged, and fundamentally different
approaches dominate in each setting. For panoptic segmentation, the top-down methods [74, 33, 40, 43, 60], attaching another semantic segmentation branch to Mask R-CNN
[25], generate overlapping instance masks as well as duplicate pixel-wise semantic predictions. To settle the conflict, the commonly employed heuristic resolves overlapping instance masks by their predicted confidence scores
[34], or even by the pairwise relationship between categories [43] (e.g., ties should be always in front of person). Additionally, the discrepancy between semantic and
instance segmentation results are sorted out by favoring the
instance predictions. Though effective, it may be hard to
implement the hand-crafted heuristics in a fast and parallel fashion. Another effective way is to develop advanced
modules to fuse semantic and instance segmentation results
[43, 40, 74]. However, these top-down methods are usually

12475

