Hardware-in-the-loop End-to-end Optimization of
Camera Image Processing Pipelines
Ali Mosleh1
Fahim Mannan1

Avinash Sharma1
Nicolas Robidoux1
1

Algolux

Abstract
Commodity imaging systems rely on hardware image
signal processing (ISP) pipelines. These low-level pipelines
consist of a sequence of processing blocks that, depending
on their hyperparameters, reconstruct a color image from
RAW sensor measurements. Hardware ISP hyperparameters have a complex interaction with the output image, and
therefore with the downstream application ingesting these
images. Traditionally, ISPs are manually tuned in isolation
by imaging experts without an end-to-end objective. Very
recently, ISPs have been optimized with 1st-order methods that require differentiable approximations of the hardware ISP. Departing from such approximations, we present
a hardware-in-the-loop method that directly optimizes hardware image processing pipelines for end-to-end domainspecific losses by solving a nonlinear multi-objective optimization problem with a novel 0th-order stochastic solver
directly interfaced with the hardware ISP. We validate the
proposed method with recent hardware ISPs and 2D object detection, segmentation, and human viewing as end-toend downstream tasks. For automotive 2D object detection,
the proposed method outperforms manual expert tuning by
30% mean average precision (mAP) and recent methods using ISP approximations by 18% mAP.

1. Introduction
Hardware ISPs are ubiquitous low-level image processing pipelines present in nearly all commodity cameras and
a wide variety of applications like digital still photography, camera phones, video surveillance, robotics, driverassistance systems, and self-driving vehicles. ISPs transform RAW sensor data into images suitable for human
viewing or downstream analytic tasks. This transformation typically includes several processing blocks that operate power-efficiently at real-time rates, which is critical for
applications in robotics or self-driving vehicles. Growing
sensor resolutions mandate efficient processing pipelines in
hardware. For example, the 8MPix Sony IMX324 sensor

2

Emmanuel Onzon1
Felix Heide1,2

Princeton University

demands processing of about 1.5GB of RAW high dynamic
range data per second.
Existing hardware ISPs typically consist of proprietary
black box blocks with little information exposed to users
except for a set of registers with their operational ranges.
The behavior of an ISP is configurable with a set of useradjustable hyperparameters. Hyperparameter values not
only affect the output image but also the domain-specific
application. Traditionally, imaging experts manually tune
the hyperparameters of the ISP on a small dataset, using
a combination of visual inspection and image quality metrics [9]. The resulting handcrafted hyperparameter settings are consequently biased towards human perception,
and do not necessarily benefit analytic higher-level vision
tasks [36, 38], see Fig. 1.
Optimizing a hardware ISP for an end-to-end loss is
challenging because the parameter space is formed by tens
to hundreds of categorical and continuous parameters that
can affect the downstream task in a complex and nonlinear
manner via the intermediate ISP image output. For example, a single binary parameter may switch between completely different algorithmic branches. A full grid search is
not an alternative due to the large combinatorial space of
hyperparameters. Several recent works aim at automating
this process by solving ISP hyperparameter optimization
problems. However, to tackle this challenging optimization problem, they rely on software approximations of the
hardware ISP to allow either block coordinate descent [30],
which requires detailed knowledge of ISP block internals,
or end-to-end gradient-based methods, which requires the
approximation to be differentiable [35]. We demonstrate
that such approximations and first-order methods are prone
to local minima for a number of recent hardware ISPs.
In this work, we depart from optimizing software approximations and demonstrate that it is possible to directly
optimize low-level hardware ISP pipelines for an end-toend domain-specific loss. The proposed hardware-in-theloop optimization method revisits Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) [16]. We optimize ISP

7529

