Transfer Learning from Synthetic to Real-Noise Denoising with Adaptive
Instance Normalization
Yoonsik Kim

Jae Woong Soh

Gu Yong Park

Nam Ik Cho

Departmet of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul Korea
{terryoo, soh90815, benkay}@ispl.snu.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Real-noise denoising is a challenging task because the
statistics of real-noise do not follow the normal distribution,
and they are also spatially and temporally changing. In order to cope with various and complex real-noise, we propose a well-generalized denoising architecture and a transfer learning scheme. Specifically, we adopt an adaptive instance normalization to build a denoiser, which can regularize the feature map and prevent the network from overfitting
to the training set. We also introduce a transfer learning
scheme that transfers knowledge learned from syntheticnoise data to the real-noise denoiser. From the proposed
transfer learning, the synthetic-noise denoiser can learn
general features from various synthetic-noise data, and the
real-noise denoiser can learn the real-noise characteristics
from real data. From the experiments, we find that the proposed denoising method has great generalization ability,
such that our network trained with synthetic-noise achieves
the best performance for Darmstadt Noise Dataset (DND)
among the methods from published papers. We can also see
that the proposed transfer learning scheme robustly works
for real-noise images through the learning with a very small
number of labeled data.

1. Introduction
Image restoration tasks [18, 29, 31, 30, 57, 48, 27, 36]
have achieved noticeable improvement with the development of convolutional neural network (CNN). Although
most of image restoration methods work well on synthetically degraded images [24, 58, 9, 25], they show insufficient
performance on the real degradations.
Regarding the denoising methods, the networks trained
with synthetic-noise (SN) do not work well for the realworld images because of the discrepancy in the distribution
of SN and real-noise (RN). Specifically, CNNs [54, 55, 56]
trained with Gaussian noise do not work well for the real-

world images, because the CNNs are overfitted to the Gaussian distribution. The problem of overfitting can also be
seen from a toy regression example in Fig. 1. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), the severely overfitted regression method (‘w/o
Regularizer’) shows worse performance than a regularized
method (‘w/ Regularizer’) on the synthetic test data. Moreover, it can be seen in Fig. 1(b) that the generalization ability is much worse when the training and test domains are
different.
To better address the problem due to the different data
distribution between training and test sets, two kinds of
approaches have been developed: (1) obtaining the pairs
of RN image and corresponding near-noise-free image
[38, 42, 5, 2, 49], and (2) finding more realistic noise model
[20, 7].
The RN datasets enable the quantitative comparison of
denoising performance on real-world images and also provide the training sets for learning-based methods. The
CNNs trained with RN datasets robustly work on the realworld images, because domains of training and test set almost coincide. However, acquiring the pairs of RN images needs specialized knowledge, and the amount of provided datasets would not be enough for training a deeper
CNN [52, 50]. Furthermore, learning-based methods can be
easily overfitted to a specific camera device (dataset), which
cannot cover all the devices that have different characteristics such as gamma correction, color correction, and other
in-camera pipelines.
For a finding more realistic noise model, CBDNet [20]
synthesized near-RN images by considering realistic noise
models and simulating the in-camera pipeline. It generates enough dataset that simulates more than 200 camera
response functions. The CBDNet shows excellent performance on RN images even though the CNN is trained with
the SN. Furthermore, they showed that additional training
with RN dataset improves performance. Although realistic
noise modeling indeed reduces the domain discrepancy between SN and RN, there still remains a domain discrepancy
to be handled. Moreover, CNN can be overfitted to a certain

3482

