High-Order Information Matters: Learning Relation and Topology
for Occluded Person Re-Identification
∗

∗

Guan’an Wang1 , Shuo Yang3 , Huanyu Liu2 , Zhicheng Wang2 , Yang Yang1 , Shuliang Wang3 , Gang
Yu2 , Erjin Zhou2 and Jian Sun2
1

Institute of Automation, CAS
1

2

3

MEGVII Technology

Beijing Institute of Technology

wangguanan2015@ia.ac.cn 2 {liuhuanyu,wangzhicheng,yugang,zej,sunjian}@megvii.com
3
{shuoyang,slwang2011}@bit.edu.cn 1 {yang.yang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

(b) Vanilla
Method

Abstract
Occluded person re-identification (ReID) aims to match
occluded person images to holistic ones across dis-joint
cameras. In this paper, we propose a novel framework by
learning high-order relation and topology information for
discriminative features and robust alignment. At first, we
use a CNN backbone and a key-points estimation model to
extract semantic local features. Even so, occluded images
still suffer from occlusion and outliers. Then, we view the
local features of an image as nodes of a graph and propose an adaptive direction graph convolutional (ADGC)
layer to pass relation information between nodes. The proposed ADGC layer can automatically suppress the message
passing of meaningless features by dynamically learning direction and degree of linkage. When aligning two groups
of local features from two images, we view it as a graph
matching problem and propose a cross-graph embeddedalignment (CGEA) layer to jointly learn and embed topology information to local features, and straightly predict
similarity score. The proposed CGEA layer not only take
full use of alignment learned by graph matching but also replace sensitive one-to-one matching with a robust soft one.
Finally, extensive experiments on occluded, partial, and
holistic ReID tasks show the effectiveness of our proposed
method. Specifically, our framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-art by 6.5% mAP scores on OccludedDuke dataset. Code is available at https://github.
com/wangguanan/HOReID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) [6, 43] aims to match images of a person across dis-joint cameras, which is widely
∗ Equal contribution, works done as interns in Megvii Research.

2
2

1

extract local features of
key-point regions

1

suppose key-points accurate
and features well aligned

hard match between
features from same key-points

use graph learn relation
information from edges

GM learn topology info via
edge-to-edge learning

soft match by merging features
from related key-points

Feature Learning

Alignment Learning

Matching

(c) Our
Method
2
2
3
3

(a) Ocluded
Images

Figure 1. Illustration of high-order relation and topology information. (a) In occluded ReID, key-points suffer from occlusions
( 1 2 ) and outliers ( 3 ). (b) Vanilla method relies on one-order
key-points information in all three stages, which is not robust. (c)
Our method learn features via an graph to model relation information , and view alignment as a graph matching problem to model
topology information by learning both node-to-node and edge-toedge correspondence.

used in video surveillance, security and smart city. Recently, various of methods [25, 39, 18, 44, 16, 19, 43, 11,
35] have been proposed for person ReID. However, most of
them focus on holistic images, while neglecting occluded
ones, which may be more practical and challenging. As
shown in Figure 1(a), persons can be easily occluded by
some obstacles (e.g. baggage, counters, crowded public,
cars, trees) or walk out of the camera fields, leading to occluded images. Thus, it is necessary to match persons with
occluded observation, which is known as occluded person
Re-ID problem [48, 26].
Compared with matching persons with holistic images,
16449

