Efficient Adversarial Training with Transferable Adversarial Examples
Haizhong Zheng

Ziqi Zhang Juncheng Gu Honglak Lee
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Atul Prakash

{hzzheng, ziqizh, jcgu, honglak, aprakash}@umich.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training is an effective defense method to
protect classification models against adversarial attacks.
However, one limitation of this approach is that it can require orders of magnitude additional training time due to
high cost of generating strong adversarial examples during training. In this paper, we first show that there is high
transferability between models from neighboring epochs in
the same training process, i.e., adversarial examples from
one epoch continue to be adversarial in subsequent epochs.
Leveraging this property, we propose a novel method, Adversarial Training with Transferable Adversarial Examples
(ATTA), that can enhance the robustness of trained models
and greatly improve the training efficiency by accumulating adversarial perturbations through epochs. Compared
to state-of-the-art adversarial training methods, ATTA enhances adversarial accuracy by up to 7.2% on CIFAR10
and requires 12 ∼ 14× less training time on MNIST and
CIFAR10 datasets with comparable model robustness.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art deep learning models for computer vision tasks have been found to be vulnerable to adversarial
examples [27]. Even a small perturbation on the image can
fool a well-trained model. Recent works [7, 25, 26] also
show that adversarial examples can be physically realized,
which can lead to serious safety issues. Design of robust
models, which correctly classifies adversarial examples, is
an active research area [5, 9, 14, 21, 30], with adversarial
training [18] being one of the most effective methods. It
formulates training as a game between adversarial attacks
and the model: the stronger the adversarial examples generated to train the model are, the more robust the model is.
To generate strong adversarial examples, iterative attacks [13], which use multiple attack iterations to generate
adversarial examples, are widely adopted in various adversarial training methods [4,18,28,34]. Since adversarial perturbations are usually bounded by a constrained space S and
attack perturbations outside S need to be projected back to

S, k-step projected gradient descent method [13,18] (PGDk) has been widely adopted to generate adversarial examples. Typically, using more attack iterations (higher value
of k) produces stronger adversarial examples [18]. However, each attack iteration needs to compute the gradient on
the input, which causes a large computational overhead. As
shown in Table 1, the training time of adversarial training
can be close to 100 times larger than natural training.
Recent works [17, 19, 20] show that adversarial examples can be transferred between models: adversarial examples generated for one model can still stay adversarial to another model. The key insight in our work, which we experimentally verified, is that, because of high transferability between models (i.e., checkpoints) from neighboring training
epochs, attack strength can be accumulated across epochs
by repeatedly reusing the adversarial perturbation from the
previous epoch.
We take advantage of this insight in coming up with a
novel adversarial training method called ATTA (Adversarial
Training with Transferable Adversarial examples) that can
be significantly faster than state-of-the-art methods while
achieving similar model robustness. In traditional adversarial training, when a new epoch begins, the attack algorithm
generates adversarial examples from the original input images, which ignores the fact that these perturbations can be
reused effectively. In contrast, we show that it can be advantageous to reuse these adversarial perturbations through
epochs. Even using only one attack iteration to generate
adversarial examples, ATTA-1 can still achieve comparable
robustness with respect to traditional PGD-40.
We apply our technique on Madry’s Adversarial Training method (MAT) [18] and TRADES [34] and evaluate the
performance on both MNIST and CIFAR10 dataset. Compared with traditional PGD attack, our method improves
training efficiency by up to 12.2× (14.1×) on MNIST (CIFAR10) with comparable model robustness. Trained with
ATTA, the adversarial accuracy of MAT can be improved
by up to 7.2%. Noticeably, for MNIST, with one attack
iteration, our method can achieve 96.31% adversarial accuracy within 5 minutes (compared to 65 minutes with MAT
). For CIFAR10, compared to MAT whose training time is
11181

