DLWL: Improving Detection for Lowshot classes with Weakly Labelled data
Vignesh Ramanathan
Facebook

Rui Wang
Facebook

Dhruv Mahajan
Facebook

vigneshr@fb.com

ruiw@fb.com

dhruvm@fb.com

Large scale detection dataset

Abstract

dog

highshot

Large detection datasets have a long tail of lowshot
classes with very few bounding box annotations. We wish to
improve detection for lowshot classes with weakly labelled
web-scale datasets only having image-level labels. This
requires a detection framework that can be jointly trained
with limited number of bounding box annotated images and
large number of weakly labelled images. Towards this end,
we propose a modification to the FRCNN [39] model to
automatically infer label assignment for objects proposals
from weakly labelled images during training. We pose this
label assignment as a Linear Program with constraints on
the number and overlap of object instances in an image.
We show that this can be solved efficiently during training
for weakly labelled images. Compared to just training with
few annotated examples, augmenting with weakly labelled
examples in our framework provides significant gains. We
demonstrate this on the LVIS dataset (3.5% gain in AP)
as well as different lowshot variants of the COCO dataset.
We provide a thorough analysis of the effect of amount of
weakly labelled and fully labelled data required to train the
detection model. Our DLWL framework can also outperform self-supervised baselines like omni-supervision [37]
for lowshot classes.

1. Introduction
Object detection models have made drastic progress on
standard datasets like COCO [31] and PASCAL VOC [11]
with thousands of object instances per class. However,
as we move towards larger datasets like LVIS [18], we
encounter lowshot classes with fewer than ten bounding
boxes. On the other hand, there are huge web-scale datasets
[50] with image-level labels for large number of classes, but
without any bounding boxes. It is lucrative to leverage this
information to improve detection for lowshot classes.
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) [3, 62, 53]
is a line of work that uses only image-level class labels to
train detection models. However, the performance of these
models are significantly lower than their fully supervised

dachshund
dachshund

tricycle

lowshot

tricycle

tricycle

dachshund

constrained
LP

tricycle

FRCNN

Weakly labelled
web-data

Figure 1: Large-scale detection datasets have a long-tail distribution with many
lowshot classes. We adopt FRCNN [39] to leverage additional weakly labelled images to improve detection for these classes.

counterparts. In our work, we investigate a more practical
middle-ground. We use the few bounding box annotations
for lowshot classes in detection datasets in conjunction with
a large number of weakly labelled images (Fig. 1). Intuitively, the bounding boxes from the fully supervised examples can lead to better localization compared to WSOD
models. Similarly, the class supervision from weakly supervised examples could help in decreasing the classification
error in object detection.
We propose a framework to improve Detection for Lowshot classes with Weakly Labelled (DLWL) data. To
achieve this, we would like to enable a standard detection model like FRCNN [39] to use both fully labelled and
weakly labelled data. FRCNN has two stages: object proposal generation followed by the classification of proposals. For fully supervised images, FRCNN uses the overlap between annotated bounding boxes and the proposals
at every iteration to identify proposal class labels used in
the classification stage. The main challenge with weakly
labelled examples is that the class labels for proposals are
unknown during training. We tackle this problem by generalizing this label assignment method to work with imagelevel labels as well. This is in contrast to WSOD approaches
[26, 53, 15, 1] that have specialized architectures and loss
functions to learn exclusively from weakly labelled images.
We formulate proposal label assignment as an optimization problem. In the spirit of classification expectation
maximization (C-EM [5]) the maximum predicted score for
19342

