Object Relational Graph with Teacher-Recommended Learning
for Video Captioning
Ziqi Zhang1,3 ∗, Yaya Shi2 ∗, Chunfeng Yuan1 †, Bing Li1,6,7 , Peijin Wang3,5 , Weiming Hu1,3,4 , Zhengjun Zha2
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
2
University of Science and Technology of China 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
5
Aerospace Information Research Institute, CAS 6 PeopleAI, Inc.
7
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, People’s Daily Online
{zhangziqi2017}@ia.ac.cn,{shiyaya,zhazj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

1. Introduction
Video captioning aims to generate natural language descriptions automatically according to the visual information of given videos. There are many wonderful visions
of video captioning such as blind assistance and autopilot
assistance. Video captioning needs to consider both spatial appearance and temporal dynamics of video contents,
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

:RUGVIUHTXHQF\EHIRUH75/



:RUGVIUHTXHQF\DIWHU75/

+HDG

LHQ
WLV
W
WHQ
QL
GD V
QF
H

RQ

VF

GR

J

7DLO
PR

Taking full advantage of the information from both vision
and language is critical for the video captioning task. Existing models lack adequate visual representation due to the
neglect of interaction between object, and sufﬁcient training for content-related words due to long-tailed problems.
In this paper, we propose a complete video captioning system including both a novel model and an effective training strategy. Speciﬁcally, we propose an object relational
graph (ORG) based encoder, which captures more detailed
interaction features to enrich visual representation. Meanwhile, we design a teacher-recommended learning (TRL)
method to make full use of the successful external language
model (ELM) to integrate the abundant linguistic knowledge into the caption model. The ELM generates more semantically similar word proposals which extend the groundtruth words used for training to deal with the long-tailed
problem. Experimental evaluations on three benchmarks:
MSVD, MSR-VTT and VATEX show the proposed ORGTRL system achieves state-of-the-art performance. Extensive ablation studies and visualizations illustrate the effectiveness of our system.



D
WKH
LQ
PD
Q
WDO
N

Abstract

Figure 1. Long-tailed problem of the caption corpus. The top-50
words frequency of MSR-VTT are shown. Under the guidance
of TRL, more potential content-speciﬁc words are exposed to the
caption model. Compared with the words frequency before, the
words in tail region get an overall boosting.

which is a promising and challenging task [20, 37, 39, 52].
The key problems in this task are twofold: how to extract
discriminative features to represent the contents of videos,
and how to leverage the existing visual features to match
the corresponding captioning corpus. The ultimate aim is to
cross the gap between vision and language.
For vision representation, previous works [48, 50, 25, 24,
38] always leverage appearance features of keyframes and
motion features of segments to represent video contents.
These features extract global information and hard to capture the detailed temporal dynamics of objects in the video.
The most recent works [53, 13] apply a pretrained object
detector to obtain some object proposals in each keyframe
and use spatial/temporal attention mechanisms to fuse object features. However, they neglect the relationship between objects in the temporal and spatial domains. Some
researches in the ﬁeld of Visual Question Answering, Image Captioning even Action Recognition demonstrate that
the relationship between objects is vital, which also plays
an important role in generating a more detailed and diverse
description for a video.
For sentence generation, according to statistics of word

13278

