Reference-Based Sketch Image Colorization using
Augmented-Self Reference and Dense Semantic Correspondence
Junsoo Lee*,1 ,

Eungyeup Kim*,1 , Yunsung Lee2 , Dongjun Kim1 , Jaehyuk Chang3 ,
1
KAIST, 2 Korea University, 3 NAVER WEBTOON Corp.

Jaegul Choo1

{junsoolee93,eykim94,rassilon,jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr,

Sketch

Reference

Sketch

Reference

swack9751@korea.ac.kr, jaehyuk.chang@webtoonscorp.com

Figure 1: Qualitative results of our method on the CelebA [24] and ImageNet [31] dataset respectively. Each row has the
same content while each column has the same reference.

Abstract
This paper tackles the automatic colorization task of
a sketch image given an already-colored reference image.
Colorizing a sketch image is in high demand in comics, animation, and other content creation applications, but it suffers from information scarcity of a sketch image. To address
this, a reference image can render the colorization process
in a reliable and user-driven manner. However, it is difficult to prepare for a training data set that has a sufficient
amount of semantically meaningful pairs of images as well
as the ground truth for a colored image reflecting a given
reference (e.g., coloring a sketch of an originally blue car
given a reference green car). To tackle this challenge, we
propose to utilize the identical image with geometric distor* indicates equal contribution

tion as a virtual reference, which makes it possible to secure
the ground truth for a colored output image. Furthermore,
it naturally provides the ground truth for dense semantic
correspondence, which we utilize in our internal attention
mechanism for color transfer from reference to sketch input. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
various types of sketch image colorization via quantitative
as well as qualitative evaluation against existing methods.

1. Introduction
Early colorization tasks [42, 18, 19] have focused on colorizing a grayscale image, which have shown great progress
so far. More recently, the task of colorizing a given sketch
or outline image has attracted a great deal of attention in
both computer vision and graphics communities, due to its
significant needs in practice. Compared to a grayscale im-

5801

