Self-supervised Monocular Trained Depth Estimation using
Self-attention and Discrete Disparity Volume
Adrian Johnston Gustavo Carneiro
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide
{adrian.johnston, gustavo.carneiro}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation has become one of the most
studied applications in computer vision, where the most accurate approaches are based on fully supervised learning
models. However, the acquisition of accurate and large
ground truth data sets to model these fully supervised methods is a major challenge for the further development of
the area. Self-supervised methods trained with monocular
videos constitute one the most promising approaches to mitigate the challenge mentioned above due to the wide-spread
availability of training data. Consequently, they have been
intensively studied, where the main ideas explored consist
of different types of model architectures, loss functions, and
occlusion masks to address non-rigid motion. In this paper, we propose two new ideas to improve self-supervised
monocular trained depth estimation: 1) self-attention, and
2) discrete disparity prediction. Compared with the usual
localised convolution operation, self-attention can explore
a more general contextual information that allows the inference of similar disparity values at non-contiguous regions of the image. Discrete disparity prediction has been
shown by fully supervised methods to provide a more robust and sharper depth estimation than the more common
continuous disparity prediction, besides enabling the estimation of depth uncertainty. We show that the extension of
the state-of-the-art self-supervised monocular trained depth
estimator Monodepth2 with these two ideas allows us to design a model that produces the best results in the field in
KITTI 2015 and Make3D, closing the gap with respect selfsupervised stereo training and fully supervised approaches.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Self-supervised Monocular Trained Depth Estimation using Self-attention and Discrete Disparity Volume. Our
self-supervised monocular trained model uses self-attention to improve contextual reasoning and discrete disparity estimation to
produce accurate and sharp depth predictions and depth uncertainties. Top: input image; Middle Top: estimated disparity; Middle Bottom: samples of the attention maps produced by our system (blue indicates common attention regions); Bottom: pixel-wise
depth uncertainty (blue: low uncertainty; green/red: high/highest
uncertainty).

Perception of the 3D world is one of the main tasks in
computer/robotic vision. Accurate perception, localisation,
mapping and planning capabilities are predicated on having
access to correct depth information. Range finding sensors
such as LiDAR or stereo/multi-camera rigs are often deployed to estimate depth for use in robotics and autonomous
systems, due to their accuracy and robustness. However, in

many cases it might be unfeasible to have, or rely solely on
such expensive or complex sensors. This has led to the development of learning-based methods [49, 50, 20], where
the most successful approaches rely on fully supervised
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [9, 8, 10, 15, 35].
14756

