Sketchformer: Transformer-based Representation for Sketched Structure
Leo Sampaio Ferraz Ribeiro*1 , Tu Bui*2 , John Collomosse2, 3 , and Moacir Ponti1
1

ICMC, Universidade de São Paulo – São Carlos/SP, Brazil
leo.sampaio.ferraz.ribeiro@gmail.com, ponti@usp.br
2
CVSSP, University of Surrey – Guildford, Surrey, UK
{t.bui,j.collomosse}@surrey.ac.uk
3
Adobe Research, Creative Intelligence Lab – San Jose, CA, USA

Abstract
Sketchformer is a novel transformer-based representation for encoding free-hand sketches input in a vector form,
i.e. as a sequence of strokes. Sketchformer effectively addresses multiple tasks: sketch classification, sketch based
image retrieval (SBIR), and the reconstruction and interpolation of sketches. We report several variants exploring continuous and tokenized input representations, and contrast
their performance. Our learned embedding, driven by a
dictionary learning tokenization scheme, yields state of the
art performance in classification and image retrieval tasks,
when compared against baseline representations driven by
LSTM sequence to sequence architectures: SketchRNN and
derivatives. We show that sketch reconstruction and interpolation are improved significantly by the Sketchformer embedding for complex sketches with longer stroke sequences.

1. Introduction
Sketch representation and interpretation remains an open
challenge, particularly for complex and casually constructed drawings. Yet, the ability to classify, search, and
manipulate sketched content remains attractive as gesture
and touch interfaces reach ubiquity. Advances in recurrent network architectures within language processing have
recently inspired sequence modeling approaches to sketch
(e.g. SketchRNN [1]) that encode sketch as a variable length
sequence of strokes, rather than in a rasterized or ‘pixel’
form. In particular, long-short term memory (LSTM) networks have shown significant promise in learning search
embeddings [2, 3] due to their ability to model higher-level
structure and temporal order versus convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) on rasterized sketches [4, 5, 6, 7]. Yet,
the limited temporal extent of LSTM restricts the structural
complexity of sketches that may be accommodated in sequence embeddings. In language modeling domain, this
* These authors contributed equally to this work

shortcoming has been addressed through the emergence of
Transformer networks [8, 9, 10] in which slot masking enhances the ability to learn complex structures that are represented by longer sequences.
This paper proposes Sketchformer, the first Transformer
based network for learning a deep representation for freehand sketches. We build on the language modeling Transformer architecture of Vaaswani et al. [10] to develop several variants of Sketchformer that process sketch sequences
in continuous and tokenized forms. We evaluate the efficacy
of each learned sketch embedding for common sketch interpretation tasks. We make three core technical contributions:
1) Sketch Classification. We show that Sketchformer
driven by a dictionary learning tokenization scheme outperforms state of the art sequence embeddings for sketched object recognition over QuickDraw! [11]; the largest and most
diverse public corpus of sketched objects.
2) Generative Sketch Model. We show that for more
complex, detailed sketches comprising lengthy stroke sequences, Sketchformer improves generative modeling of
sketch – demonstrated by higher fidelity reconstruction of
sketches from the learned embedding. We also show that
for sketches of all complexities, interpolation in the Sketchformer embedding is stable, generating more plausible intermediate sketches for both inter- and intra-class blends.
3) Sketch based Image Retrieval (SBIR) We show that
Sketchformer can be unified with raster embedding to produce a search embedding for SBIR (after [3] for LSTM)
to deliver improved prevision over a large photo corpus
(Stock10M).
These enhancements to sketched object understanding,
generative modeling and matching demonstrated for a diverse and complex sketch dataset suggest Transformer as a
promising direction for stroke sequence modeling.

2. Related Work
Representation learning for sketch has received extensive attention within the domain of visual search. Classical
14153

