CookGAN: Causality based Text-to-Image Synthesis
Bin Zhu
City University of Hong Kong

Chong-Wah Ngo
City University of Hong Kong

binzhu4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of text-to-image synthesis from a new perspective, i.e., the cause-and-effect
chain in image generation. Causality is a common phenomenon in cooking. The dish appearance changes depending on the cooking actions and ingredients. The challenge
of synthesis is that a generated image should depict the visual result of action-on-object. This paper presents a new
network architecture, CookGAN, that mimics visual effect in
causality chain, preserves fine-grained details and progressively upsamples image. Particularly, a cooking simulator
sub-network is proposed to incrementally make changes to
food images based on the interaction between ingredients
and cooking methods over a series of steps. Experiments on
Recipe1M verify that CookGAN manages to generate food
images with reasonably impressive inception score. Furthermore, the images are semantically interpretable and
manipulable.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis aims to generate images from
natural language description. A generated image is expected to be photo and semantics realistic. Speciﬁcally, an image should have sufﬁcient visual details that semantically
align with the text description. Since the proposal of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [1], there have been numerous progresses that address the issues in photo-realistic
quality [11, 18, 19, 20], and semantic consistency [17].
While both aspects emphasize image quality, an aspect being overlooked in the literature is the cause-and-effect visual scenario in image generation. For example, an image
corresponding to the text “cut chicken into dice and stir with
roasted peanuts” is hard to be generated with the current text-to-image synthesis paradigm. The reason is that the
sentence is action-oriented. The expected image details are
entities like “diced chicken” and “roasted peanuts”, and the
visual consequence of stirring both entities. The current state-of-the-art techniques that rely on mapping between
textual and visual entities cannot deal with this cause-and-

effect realistic image generation.
This paper studies recipe-to-image synthesis, speciﬁcally, to generate food image from cooking recipe. Different
from visual narrative sentences that describe the visual content expected in an image, recipes provide ingredients as
entities and cooking steps to textually instruct preparation
of a dish. The expected image is to present the ﬁnal prepared dish as a visual consequence over a series of cooking
steps. Note that a cooking step is not necessarily to be visually relevant. It implies a new state of ingredient entities
after the step is taken.
We propose a new network architecture, named CookGAN, to address the causality effect in image generation.
Different from other GANs [18, 19, 20, 16, 23, 17], CookGAN is a tailor-made GAN for food image generation. The
input to CookGAN consists of a list of words (i.e., ingredients) and a sequence of procedural descriptions (i.e., cooking steps). CookGAN addresses four issues in generating
causality realistic food image. First, the network allows
explicit interaction between cooking steps and ingredients.
Second, the evolution of dish over different steps is learnt
incrementally, such that on-the-ﬂy modiﬁcation of ingredients and instructions is possible to visualize novel effect of
a dish. Third, the bundled effect of ingredient-action can be
modeled. For example, the shape of egg changes depending
on whether an action is boil, fry or steam. Fourth, the visibility and impact of ingredients to dish are learnt. For example, “sugar” is likely non-visible, while “tomato sauce”
can signiﬁcantly change the appearance of a dish.
Other than these issues, photo and semantics realistic image generation are also considered. Similar in spirit as other GANs [19, 20, 16], CookGAN progressively upsamples
image from low to high resolution. The relative importance
of each ingredient to the sub-regions of a generated image
is computed for presentation of ﬁne-grained ingredient details. The ingredients of a generated food image can also
be semantically interpreted using an existing ingredient encoder [13].
The main contribution of this paper is addressing causality effect in image generation. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no prior work for this problem. We contribute a nov-

5519

