GNN3DMOT: Graph Neural Network for 3D Multi-Object Tracking
with 2D-3D Multi-Feature Learning
Xinshuo Weng, Yongxin Wang, Yunze Man, Kris Kitani
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{xinshuow, yongxinw, yman, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Previous Work
2D (or 3D)

3D Multi-object tracking (MOT) is crucial to autonomous systems. Recent work uses a standard trackingby-detection pipeline, where feature extraction is first performed independently for each object in order to compute
an affinity matrix. Then the affinity matrix is passed to the
Hungarian algorithm for data association. A key process of
this standard pipeline is to learn discriminative features for
different objects in order to reduce confusion during data
association. In this work, we propose two techniques to improve the discriminative feature learning for MOT: (1) instead of obtaining features for each object independently,
we propose a novel feature interaction mechanism by introducing the Graph Neural Network. As a result, the feature
of one object is informed of the features of other objects so
that the object feature can lean towards the object with similar feature (i.e., object probably with a same ID) and deviate from objects with dissimilar features (i.e., object probably with different IDs), leading to a more discriminative
feature for each object; (2) instead of obtaining the feature
from either 2D or 3D space in prior work, we propose a
novel joint feature extractor to learn appearance and motion features from 2D and 3D space simultaneously. As features from different modalities often have complementary
information, the joint feature can be more discriminate than
feature from each individual modality. To ensure that the
joint feature extractor does not heavily rely on one modality,
we also propose an ensemble training paradigm. Through
extensive evaluation, our proposed method achieves stateof-the-art performance on KITTI and nuScenes 3D MOT
benchmarks. Our code will be made available at https:
//github.com/xinshuoweng/GNN3DMOT

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is an indispensable component of many applications such as autonomous driving

Objects feature extractor
in frame t

Affinity matrix
Hungarian
algorithm

2D (or 3D)
Objects feature extractor
in frame t+1

frame t

frame t+1

Ours
2D + 3D
Objects feature extractor
in frame t

Affinity matrix
Hungarian
algorithm

Feature
interaction
2D + 3D
Objects feature extractor
in frame t+1

frame t

frame t+1

Figure 1. (Top): Prior work often employs a 2D or 3D feature
extractor and obtain the feature independently from each object.
(Bottom): Our work proposes a joint 2D and 3D feature extractor
and a feature interaction mechanism to improve the discriminative
feature learning for data association in MOT.

[21, 41, 49, 47]. Recent work approaches MOT in an online
manner with a tracking-by-detection [4, 45] pipeline, where
an object detector [32, 46, 28, 48] is applied to all frames
and feature is extracted independently from each detected
object. Then the pairwise feature similarity is computed between objects and used to solve the MOT with a Hungarian
algorithm [40]. The key process of this pipeline is to learn
discriminative features for objects with different identities.
Our observation is that the feature extraction in prior
work is always independent for each object as shown in
Figure 1 (Top) and there is no interaction. For example, an
object’s 2D appearance feature is computed only from its
own image patch, not involving with features of other objects. We found that this independent feature extraction is
sub-optimal for discriminative feature learning. This is reasonable as the feature similarity of different objects should
be dependent in MOT, given the fact that an object in current frame can be matched to at most one object in previous

6499

