Structure-Preserving Super Resolution with Gradient Guidance
Cheng Ma1,2,3 , Yongming Rao1,2,3 , Yean Cheng1 , Ce Chen1 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
macheng17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com
{cya17, chence17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Structures matter in single image super resolution
(SISR). Recent studies benefiting from generative adversarial network (GAN) have promoted the development of SISR
by recovering photo-realistic images. However, there are
always undesired structural distortions in the recovered images. In this paper, we propose a structure-preserving super resolution method to alleviate the above issue while
maintaining the merits of GAN-based methods to generate
perceptual-pleasant details. Specifically, we exploit gradient maps of images to guide the recovery in two aspects.
On the one hand, we restore high-resolution gradient maps
by a gradient branch to provide additional structure priors for the SR process. On the other hand, we propose a
gradient loss which imposes a second-order restriction on
the super-resolved images. Along with the previous imagespace loss functions, the gradient-space objectives help
generative networks concentrate more on geometric structures. Moreover, our method is model-agnostic, which can
be potentially used for off-the-shelf SR networks. Experimental results show that we achieve the best PI and LPIPS
performance and meanwhile comparable PSNR and SSIM
compared with state-of-the-art perceptual-driven SR methods. Visual results demonstrate our superiority in restoring
structures while generating natural SR images. 1

1. Introduction
Single image super resolution (SISR) aims to recover
high-resolution (HR) images from their low-resolution (LR)
counterparts. SISR is a fundamental problem in the community of computer vision and can be applied in many image
analysis tasks including surveillance and satellite image. It
∗ Corresponding author
1 Code: https://github.com/Maclory/SPSR

(a) HR

(b) RCAN [51]

(c) SRGAN [27]

(d) ESRGAN [42]

(e) NatSR [37]

(f) SPSR (Ours)

Figure 1. SR results of different methods. RCAN represents
PSNR-oriented methods, typically generating straight but blurry
edges for the bricks. Perceptual-driven methods including SRGAN, ESRGAN and NatSR commonly recover sharper but
geometric-inconsistent textures. Our SPSR result is sharper than
that of RCAN, and preserve finer geometric structures compared
with perceptual-driven methods. Best viewed on screen.

is a widely known ill-posed problem since each LR input
may have multiple HR solutions. With the development of
deep learning, a number of SR methods [8, 35] have been
proposed. Most of them are optimized by the mean squared
error (MSE) which measures the pixel-wise distances between SR images and the HR ones. However, such opti-

7769

