Deep Iterative Surface Normal Estimation
Jan Eric Lenssen1,2,∗

Christian Osendorfer1

Jonathan Masci1

janeric.lenssen@udo.edu

christian@nnaisense.com

jonathan@nnaisense.com

1

2

NNAISENSE
TU Dortmund University

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end differentiable algorithm for robust and detail-preserving surface normal estimation on unstructured point-clouds. We utilize graph
neural networks to iteratively parameterize an adaptive
anisotropic kernel that produces point weights for weighted
least-squares plane fitting in local neighborhoods. The approach retains the interpretability and efficiency of traditional sequential plane fitting while benefiting from adaptation to data set statistics through deep learning. This results
in a state-of-the-art surface normal estimator that is robust to noise, outliers and point density variation, preserves
sharp features through anisotropic kernels and equivariance through a local quaternion-based spatial transformer.
Contrary to previous deep learning methods, the proposed
approach does not require any hand-crafted features or preprocessing. It improves on the state-of-the-art results while
being more than two orders of magnitude faster and more
parameter efficient.

1. Introduction
Normal vectors are local surface descriptors that are used
as an input for several computer vision tasks ranging from
surface reconstruction [27] to registration [39] and segmentation [17]. For this reason, the task of surface normal estimation has been an important and well studied research topic for a long time, with several methods dating
back up to 30 years [23]. Progress in the field, however,
has been plateauing only until recently when a number of
works has shown that improvements can be achieved with
the use of data-driven deep learning techniques [5, 7, 19],
as also shown in related fields like point cloud denoising
[42] or finding correspondences on meshes and point clouds
[10, 14, 32, 35]. Deep learning methods are known to often
achieve better results compared to data-independent methods. However, they have downsides in terms of robustness
∗ Work performed during an internship at NNAISENSE.

a) Least squares plane fitting

Pair-wise residual features prf(i, j)

b) Graph neural network
w

θ1 R 1

c) Deep re-weighting

θ2 R2

ψ(·, θ2 )

ψ(·, θ1 )

R2
R1

θ3 R3

ψ(·, θ3 )

R3

Figure 1: Simplified overview of the proposed method for
deep iterative surface normal estimation. The figure shows
the process for a subset of three points. (a) Surfaces are fitted by optimizing weighted least squares. (b) A graph neural network infers kernel parameters and local orientation
from intermediate pair-wise point descriptors. (c) A trainable, adaptive kernel refines the weights for the next step of
the least squares optimization.
to small input changes, adversarial attacks, interpretability,
and sometimes also computational efficiency. Also, they do
not make use of often well-known instrinsic problem structure, which leads to the necessity of having a large amount
of training data and model parameters to learn that structure
on their own.
It is well-known that surface normal estimation can be
formulated as a least-squares optimization problem. A way
to utilize this problem-specific knowledge with deep learning is to take an iteratively reweighting least squares (IRLS)
scheme [22] for robust model fitting and modify it using
deep data-dependent weighting, as it has been done recently
(with or without iterations) for other tasks [25, 43, 44, 46].

11247

