Discovering Human Interactions with Novel Objects via Zero-Shot Learning
Suchen Wang1
Kim-Hui Yap1
1
Nanyang Technological University

Junsong Yuan2
Yap-Peng Tan1
2
State University of New York at Buffalo

{wang.sc, ekhyap, eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, {jsyuan}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
We aim to detect human interactions with novel objects
through zero-shot learning. Different from previous works,
we allow unseen object categories by using its semantic
word embedding. To do so, we design a human-object region proposal network specifically for the human-object interaction detection task. The core idea is to leverage human visual clues to localize objects which are interacting
with humans. We show that our proposed model can outperform existing methods on detecting interacting objects,
and generalize well to novel objects. To recognize objects
from unseen categories, we devise a zero-shot classification
module upon the classifier of seen categories. It utilizes the
classifier logits for seen categories to estimate a vector in
the semantic space, and then performs nearest search to
find the closest unseen category. We validate our method
on V-COCO and HICO-DET datasets, and obtain superior
results on detecting human interactions with both seen and
unseen objects.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection [12, 5, 11, 27]
is important for human-centric visual understanding. The
goal is to detect interactions between humans and objects, and use verbs to describe their relationships (e.g.,
sit on bench, carry suitcase, etc.). Although recent studies [4, 21, 44, 48, 43, 40, 39] have achieved good progress,
current HOI methods are limited to interactions with 80 object categories as defined in MS-COCO dataset [23].
Previous attempts [17, 37, 1, 30] to scale HOIs only focus on detecting human interactions with known objects. It
aims to generalize the knowledge obtained from seen interactions (e.g., sit on chair, carry suitcase) to unseen interactions (e.g., sit on suitcase). In comparison, as shown in
Figure 1, we aim to detect human interactions with unseen
object categories (i.e., categories without any annotated visual samples in the training set).
Most existing HOI methods [4, 21, 44, 48, 43, 40, 39]
applied an off-the-shelf object detector to first generate hu-

Figure 1: We aim to scale the object space in HOI detection via
zero-shot learning. This figure depicts the output of our model.
Apart from the 80 object categories (green boxes) as defined in
MS-COCO, our model can detect human interactions with unseen
object categories, e.g., rose (red box) in this image.

man and object candidates, and then applied an interaction
model to predict their relationships. However, the commonly used object detectors [35, 22, 7] are designed for
detecting all objects in the given image. As a result, many
non-interacting human-object pairs are produced. Besides,
those object detectors treat humans as an independent category like other object categories. In this way, the detection
of objects cannot exploit the information of human appearance.
To alleviate the above limitations, we propose a detector (as shown in Figure 2) specifically for the HOI detection
task. Our main idea is to leverage human visual clues to
find interacting objects. The proposed detector follows the
pipeline of Faster RCNN [35], while we replace the original region proposal network (RPN) with a novel humanobject region proposal network (HO-RPN). It scores region
proposals based on its interactiveness with the detected humans, and generalizes well to novel objects if they are interacting with humans (e.g., the red box in Figure 1). This
enables us to detect human interactions with unseen object
categories.

11652

