Global-Local Bidirectional Reasoning for Unsupervised Representation
Learning of 3D Point Clouds
Yongming Rao1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
1

raoyongming95@gmail.com; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Local and global patterns of an object are closely related.
Although each part of an object is incomplete, the underlying
attributes about the object are shared among all parts, which
makes reasoning the whole object from a single part possible.
We hypothesize that a powerful representation of a 3D object
should model the attributes that are shared between parts
and the whole object, and distinguishable from other objects.
Based on this hypothesis, we propose to learn point cloud
representation by bidirectional reasoning between the local
structures at different abstraction hierarchies and the global
shape without human supervision. Experimental results on
various benchmark datasets demonstrate the unsupervisedly
learned representation is even better than supervised representation in discriminative power, generalization ability,
and robustness. We show that unsupervisedly trained point
cloud models can outperform their supervised counterparts
on downstream classification tasks. Most notably, by simply increasing the channel width of an SSG PointNet++1 ,
our unsupervised model surpasses the state-of-the-art supervised methods on both synthetic and real-world 3D object
classification datasets. We expect our observations to offer
a new perspective on learning better representation from
data structures instead of human annotations for point cloud
understanding.2

1. Introduction
Facilitating machines to understand the 3D world is crucial to many important real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, augmented reality and robotics. One core
problem on 3D geometric data such as point clouds is learn∗ Corresponding author
1 Single-Scale Grouping PoinetNet++ [38].
2 Code: https://github.com/raoyongming/PointGLR

Local-to-Global
Reasoning
part

tail

Global-to-Local
Reasoning

airliner “001”

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. We propose to learn
representation unsupervisedly from data structures by training the
networks to solve two problems: reasoning the whole object from
a single part and reasoning detailed structures from the global
representation.

ing powerful representations that are discriminative, generic
and robust. To tackle this problem, current state-of-the-arts
on point cloud analysis [2, 26, 28, 33, 38, 43, 49, 51, 54] are established with the help of extensive human-annotated supervised information. However, manually labeled data require
the high cost of human labor and may limit the generalization ability of the learned models. Therefore, unsupervised
learning is an attractive direction to obtain generic and robust
representations for 3D object understanding.
Learning useful representations from unlabeled data is a
fundamental and challenging problem for point cloud analysis. While several efforts have been devoted to learn representation of a point cloud without human supervision [1,8,14,
18,26,31,47,55,56] , these methods are mainly based on selfsupervision signals provided by generation or reconstruction
tasks, including self-reconstruction [1, 8, 14, 26, 47, 55, 56],
local-to-global reconstruction [18, 31] and distribution estimation [1, 26]. These methods have proven to be effective

5376

