AutoTrack: Towards High-Performance Visual Tracking for UAV with
Automatic Spatio-Temporal Regularization
Yiming Li† , Changhong Fu†,∗ , Fangqiang Ding† , Ziyuan Huang‡ , and Geng Lu§
†
Tongji University ‡ National University of Singapore § Tsinghua University
yimingli9702@gmail.com, changhongfu@tongji.edu.cn, lug@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing trackers based on discriminative correlation filters (DCF) try to introduce predefined regularization
term to improve the learning of target objects, e.g., by suppressing background learning or by restricting change rate
of correlation filters. However, predefined parameters introduce much effort in tuning them and they still fail to adapt
to new situations that the designer did not think of. In this
work, a novel approach is proposed to online automatically
and adaptively learn spatio-temporal regularization term.
Spatially local response map variation is introduced as spatial regularization to make DCF focus on the learning of
trust-worthy parts of the object, and global response map
variation determines the updating rate of the filter. Extensive experiments on four UAV benchmarks have proven the
superiority of our method compared to the state-of-the-art
CPU- and GPU-based trackers, with a speed of ∼60 frames
per second running on a single CPU.
Our tracker is additionally proposed to be applied in
UAV localization. Considerable tests in the indoor practical scenarios have proven the effectiveness and versatility of
our localization method. The code is available at https:
//github.com/vision4robotics/AutoTrack.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental tasks
in the computer vision community, aiming to localize the
object sequentially only with the information given in the
ﬁrst frame. Endowing unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with
visual tracking capability brings many applications, e.g.,
aerial cinematography [1], person following [2], aircraft
tracking [3], and trafﬁc patrolling [4].
There are currently two main research interests in this
area: discriminative correlation ﬁlter (DCF)-based methods [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] as well as deep learningbased approaches [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. In considera∗ Corresponding author

Local response variation

#005

#025

#095

#107

#207

Global response variation

Threshold

Severe illumination variation

Occlusion

Out-of-view

Figure 1. Central idea of our tracker. Spatially local and global
response variations are exploited. Local variations indicate local
credibility in the object bounding box. Severe illumination change
in frame 25 and 95 as well as partial occlusion in frame 107 and
207 can lower the credibility of the appearance. AutoTrack is punished for learning these appearances so that local distractions can
be avoided. In terms of global variations, large value can indicate
wrong tracking result, where we stop the learning of correlation
ﬁlters, while relatively large value should accelerate the learning
of correlation ﬁlters so that adaptivity can be raised.

tion of the limitation of power capacity and computational
resources onboard UAVs, DCF framework is selected because of its high efﬁciency originating from calculation in
the Fourier domain.
To improve DCF-based trackers, there are currently three
directions: a) building more robust appearance model [18,
17, 20, 21], b) mitigating boundary effect or imposing restrictions in learning [8, 22, 17, 14, 23], and c) mitigating
ﬁlter degradation [24, 12, 14, 25]. Robust appearance can
indeed boost performance, yet it leads to burdensome calculations. Filter degradation, on the other hand, is not improving it fundamentally. Most trackers try to improve performance using option b) by introducing regularization terms.
Recently, some attentions have been brought to using
response maps generated in the detection phase to form
the restrictions in learning [26]. The intuition behind it is

11923

