Adversarial Camouflage: Hiding Physical-World Attacks with Natural Styles

1

Ranjie Duan1 Xingjun Ma2† Yisen Wang3 James Bailey2 A. K. Qin1 Yun Yang1
Swinburne University of Technology 2 The University of Melbourne 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. Existing works have mostly
focused on either digital adversarial examples created via
small and imperceptible perturbations, or physical-world
adversarial examples created with large and less realistic
distortions that are easily identified by human observers. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach, called Adversarial
Camouflage (AdvCam), to craft and camouflage physicalworld adversarial examples into natural styles that appear
legitimate to human observers. Specifically, AdvCam transfers large adversarial perturbations into customized styles,
which are then “hidden” on-target object or off-target background. Experimental evaluation shows that, in both digital
and physical-world scenarios, adversarial examples crafted
by AdvCam are well camouflaged and highly stealthy, while
remaining effective in fooling state-of-the-art DNN image
classifiers. Hence, AdvCam is a flexible approach that
can help craft stealthy attacks to evaluate the robustness of
DNNs. AdvCam can also be used to protect private information from being detected by deep learning systems. code

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are a family of powerful
models that have been widely used in various AI systems,
and they have achieved a great success across many applications, such as image classification [13], speech recognition
[26], natural language processing [33], and autonomous
driving [6]. However, DNNs are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples (or attacks) that are crafted by
adding carefully designed perturbations on normal examples [25, 12, 20, 2, 27, 28]. This raises serious concerns for
security-critical applications [23, 8, 10, 15, 21]. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the addition of a carefully crafted
perturbation that resembles stain, snow and discoloration on
the surface of a stop sign. A self-driving car equipped with
state-of-the-art classifier detects the modified stop sign as
other objects with very high confidence (we will examine
how this perturbation was created later).
† Correspondence to: Xingjun Ma (xingjun.ma@unimelb.edu.au)

Figure 1: Camouflaged adversarial examples crafted by
proposed AdvCam attack. Given a target image in (a), an
adversary can choose different camouflage styles from (b)
to craft adversarial examples in (c) that appear naturally occurring, yet can fool a DNN classifier to make incorrect predictions with high confidence.

Adversarial attacks can be applied in two different settings: 1) digital setting, where the attacker can feed input digital images directly into the DNN classifier; and 2)
physical-world setting, where the DNN classifier only accepts inputs from a camera and the attacker can only present
adversarial images to the camera. There are three properties
which may be used to characterize adversarial attack: 1)
adversarial strength, which represents the ability to fool
DNNs; 2) adversarial stealthiness, which is about whether
the adversarial perturbations can be detected by human observers; and 3) camouflage flexibility, which is the degree
to which the attacker can control the appearance of adversarial image.
Most attacking methods have been developed for the digital setting, such as Projected Gradient Decent (PGD) [22],
Carlini and Wagner (CW) attack [4] and adversarial examples crafted using generative adversarial networks (AdvGAN) [30]. For digital attacks, small perturbations are
often sufficient. However, physical-world attacks require
large or even unrestricted perturbations [17, 1], since small
perturbations are too subtle to be captured by cameras in
complex physical-world environments. There already exist

1000

