SPARE3D: A Dataset for SPAtial REasoning on Three-View Line Drawings
Wenyu Han∗

Siyuan Xiang∗

Chenhui Liu

Ruoyu Wang

Chen Feng†

New York University Tandon School of Engineering
https://ai4ce.github.io/SPARE3D
Abstract
Spatial reasoning is an important component of human
intelligence. We can imagine the shapes of 3D objects and
reason about their spatial relations by merely looking at
their three-view line drawings in 2D, with different levels of
competence. Can deep networks be trained to perform spatial reasoning tasks? How can we measure their “spatial
intelligence”? To answer these questions, we present the
SPARE3D dataset. Based on cognitive science and psychometrics, SPARE3D contains three types of 2D-3D reasoning
tasks on view consistency, camera pose, and shape generation, with increasing difficulty. We then design a method to
automatically generate a large number of challenging questions with ground truth answers for each task. They are
used to provide supervision for training our baseline models using state-of-the-art architectures like ResNet. Our experiments show that although convolutional networks have
achieved superhuman performance in many visual learning
tasks, their spatial reasoning performance in SPARE3D is
almost equal to random guesses. We hope SPARE3D can
stimulate new problem formulations and network designs
for spatial reasoning to empower intelligent robots to operate effectively in the 3D world via 2D sensors.

1. Introduction
Spatial reasoning is “the ability to generate, retain, retrieve, and transform well-structured visual images” [29]. It
allows an intelligent agent to understand and reason about
the relations among objects in three or two dimensions. As a
part of general intelligence, spatial reasoning allows people
to interpret their surrounding 3D world [30] and affect their
spatial task performances in large-scale environments [20].
Moreover, statistics from many psychological and educational studies [26, 31, 45] have empirically proved that good
spatial reasoning ability can benefit performance in STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and math) areas.
Therefore, when we are actively developing intelligent
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.
† Chen Feng is the corresponding author. cfeng@nyu.edu

Front (F)
View Consistency:
Given F, R, T,
Select I

Top (T)

Right (R)

Camera Pose:
Given F, R, T, I,
Select Pose of I

Isometric (I)
Shape Generation:
Given F, R, T,
Generate 3D Model

Figure 1. SPARE3D task overview. The input to each task is
either the whole or a subset of four different orthographic views
of a 3D object as line drawings, i.e., front (F), top (T), right (R),
and isometric (I) views. Based on the input, an intelligent agent
needs to answer three types of questions: 1) select a consistent
view describing the same object, 2) reason about the camera pose
of a view, and 3) generate the object shape as an isometric view or
a 3D model. The green box (left) and circle (middle) indicate the
correct answers in this example. Best viewed in color.

systems such as self-driving cars and smart service robots,
it is natural to ask how good their spatial reasoning abilities are, especially if they are not equipped with expensive 3D sensors. Because deep convolutional networks empower most state-of-the-art visual learning achievements
(such as object detection and scene segmentation) in those
systems, and they are typically trained and evaluated on a
large amount of data, it is then important to design a set of
non-trivial tasks and develop a large-scale dataset to facilitate the study of spatial reasoning for intelligent agents.
As an important topic in psychometrics, there exist several spatial reasoning test datasets, including the Mental Rotation Tests [43], Purdue Spatial Visualization Test
(PSVT) [4], and Revised Purdue Spatial Visualization
Test [50]. However, those human-oriented tests are not directly suitable for our purpose of developing and testing the
spatial reasoning capability of an intelligent system, or a
deep network. First, the amount of data in these datasets,
typically less than a hundred of questions, is not enough for
most deep learning methods. Second, the manual way to design and generate questions in these tests are not easily scal-

14690

