Block-wisely Supervised Neural Architecture Search with Knowledge Distillation
Changlin Li2∗,

Jiefeng Peng1∗,
1

Liuchun Yuan1,3 , Guangrun Wang1,3†,
Liang Lin1,3 , Xiaojun Chang2

DarkMatter AI Research

2

Monash University

3

Xiaodan Liang1,3 ,

Sun Yat-sen University

{changlin.li,xiaojun.chang}@monash.edu, {jiefengpeng,ylc0003,xdliang328}@gmail.cn,
wanggrun@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), aiming at automatically designing network architectures by machines, is expected to bring about a new revolution in machine learning. Despite these high expectation, the effectiveness and
efficiency of existing NAS solutions are unclear, with some
recent works going so far as to suggest that many existing
NAS solutions are no better than random architecture selection. The ineffectiveness of NAS solutions may be attributed
to inaccurate architecture evaluation. Specifically, to speed
up NAS, recent works have proposed under-training different candidate architectures in a large search space concurrently by using shared network parameters; however, this
has resulted in incorrect architecture ratings and furthered
the ineffectiveness of NAS.
In this work, we propose to modularize the large search
space of NAS into blocks to ensure that the potential candidate architectures are fully trained; this reduces the representation shift caused by the shared parameters and leads
to the correct rating of the candidates. Thanks to the blockwise search, we can also evaluate all of the candidate architectures within each block. Moreover, we find that the
knowledge of a network model lies not only in the network
parameters but also in the network architecture. Therefore,
we propose to distill the neural architecture (DNA) knowledge from a teacher model to supervise our block-wise architecture search, which significantly improves the effectiveness of NAS. Remarkably, the performance of our searched
architectures has exceeded the teacher model, demonstrating the practicability of our method. Finally, our method
achieves a state-of-the-art 78.4% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet in a mobile setting. All of our searched models
along with the evaluation code are available at https:
//github.com/changlin31/DNA.
∗ Changlin Li and Jiefeng Peng contribute equally and share firstauthorship. This work was done when Changlin Li worked as an intern
at DarkMatter AI.
† Corresponding Author is Guangrun Wang.

v2 v4
v1

Teacher Architecture
IT

Block 4
Block 3
Block 1

Block 2

Student Architecture Candidates

Figure 1. We consider a network architecture has several blocks,
conceptualized as analogous to the ventral visual blocks V1, V2,
V4, and IT [27]. Then, we search for the candidate architectures
(denoted by different nodes and paths) block-wisely guided by the
architecture knowledge distilled from a teacher model.

1. Introduction
Due to the importance of automatically designing machine learning algorithms using machines, interest in the
prospect of Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) has
been a growing recently. Neural architecture search (NAS),
as an essential task of AutoML, is expected to reduce the
effort required to be expended by human experts in network
architecture design. Research into NAS has been accelerated in the past two years by the industry, and a number
of solutions have been proposed. However, the effectiveness and efficiency of existing NAS solutions are unclear.
Typically, [26] and [35] even suggest that many existing solutions to NAS are no better than or struggle to outperform
random architecture selection. Hence, the question of how
to efficiently solve a NAS problem remains an active and
unsolved research topic.
The most mathematically accurate solution to NAS is to
train each of the candidate architectures within the search
space from scratch to convergence and compare their performance; however, this is impractical due to the astonishingly high cost. A suboptimal solution is to train only the
architectures in a search sub-space using advanced search
strategies like Reinforcement Learning (RL) or Evolutionary Algorithms (EA); although this is still time-consuming,

1989

