Lightweight Multi-View 3D Pose Estimation
through Camera-Disentangled Representation
Edoardo Remelli1

Shangchen Han2
Sina Honari1
Pascal Fua1
1
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Facebook Reality Labs, Redmond, USA

Robert Wang2

Abstract
Encoder

We present a lightweight solution to recover 3D pose
from multi-view images captured with spatially calibrated
cameras. Building upon recent advances in interpretable
representation learning, we exploit 3D geometry to fuse
input images into a unified latent representation of pose,
which is disentangled from camera view-points. This allows us to reason effectively about 3D pose across different views without using compute-intensive volumetric grids.
Our architecture then conditions the learned representation
on camera projection operators to produce accurate perview 2d detections, that can be simply lifted to 3D via a
differentiable Direct Linear Transform (DLT) layer. In order to do it efficiently, we propose a novel implementation
of DLT that is orders of magnitude faster on GPU architectures than standard SVD-based triangulation methods.
We evaluate our approach on two large-scale human pose
datasets (H36M and Total Capture): our method outperforms or performs comparably to the state-of-the-art volumetric methods, while, unlike them, yielding real-time performance.

1. Introduction
Most recent works on human 3D pose capture has focused on monocular reconstruction, even though multi-view
reconstruction is much easier, since multi-camera setups are
perceived as being too cumbersome. The appearance of Virtual/Augmented Reality headsets with multiple integrated
cameras challenges this perception and has the potential to
bring back multi-camera techniques to the fore, but only if
multi-view approaches can be made sufficiently lightweight
to fit within the limits of low-compute headsets.
Unfortunately, the state-of-the-art multi-camera 3D pose
estimation algorithms tend to be computationally expensive
because they rely on deep networks that operate on volumetric grids [14], or volumetric Pictorial Structures [22,
21], to combine features coming from different views in accordance with epipolar geometry. Fig. 1(a) illustrates these

3D-CNN

#$%$

Decoder

or

Encoder

PSM

#)%$

Decoder

a) Volumetric Approaches
Disentangled
Representation

Encoder

! |#$%$

&'(

! |#$

Decoder
DLT

Encoder

! |#)%$

! |#) Decoder

b) Canonical Fusion (ours)
Figure 1. Overview of 3D pose estimation from multi-view images. The state-of-the-art approaches project 2D detections to 3D
grids and reason jointly across views through computationally intensive volumetric convolutional neural networks [14] or Pictorial
Structures (PSM) [22, 21]. This yields accurate predictions but is
computationally expensive. We design a lightweight architecture
that predicts 2D joint locations from a learned camera-independent
representation of 3D pose and then lifts them to 3D via an efficient
formulation of differentiable triangulation (DLT). Our method
achieves performance comparable to volumetric methods, while,
unlike them, working in real-time.

approaches.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the expense of using a
3D grid is not required. Fig. 1(b) depicts our approach. We
encode each input image into latent representations, which
are then efficiently transformed from image coordinates into
world coordinates by conditioning on the appropriate camera transformation using feature transform layers [31]. This
yields feature maps that live in a canonical frame of reference and are disentangled from the camera poses. The
feature maps are fused using 1D convolutions into a unified latent representation, denoted as p3D in Fig. 1(b), which
makes it possible to reason jointly about the extracted 2D
poses across camera views. We then condition this latent
code on the known camera transformation to decode it back
16040

