Domain Balancing: Face Recognition on Long-Tailed Domains
Dong Cao1,2∗ Xiangyu Zhu1,2∗ Xingyu Huang3 Jianzhu Guo1,2 Zhen Lei1,2†
1 CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3 Tianjin University
{dong.cao,xiangyu.zhu,jianzhu.guo,zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xingyu.huang@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-tailed problem has been an important topic in face
recognition task. However, existing methods only concentrate on the long-tailed distribution of classes. Differently,
we devote to the long-tailed domain distribution problem,
which refers to the fact that a small number of domains frequently appear while other domains far less existing. The
key challenge of the problem is that domain labels are too
complicated (related to race, age, pose, illumination, etc.)
and inaccessible in real applications. In this paper, we propose a novel Domain Balancing (DB) mechanism to handle this problem. Specifically, we first propose a Domain
Frequency Indicator (DFI) to judge whether a sample is
from head domains or tail domains. Secondly, we formulate a light-weighted Residual Balancing Mapping (RBM)
block to balance the domain distribution by adjusting the
network according to DFI. Finally, we propose a Domain
Balancing Margin (DBM) in the loss function to further optimize the feature space of the tail domains to improve generalization. Extensive analysis and experiments on several
face recognition benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed
method effectively enhances the generalization capacities
and achieves superior performance.

1. Introduction
Feature descriptor is of crucial importance to the performance of face recognition, where the training and testing
images are drawn from different identities and the distance
metric is directly acted on the features to determine whether
they belong to the same identity or not. Recent years have
witnessed remarkable progresses in face recognition, with a
variety of approaches proposed in the literatures and applied
in real applications [18, 32, 4, 7, 6, 42]. Although yielding
excellent success, face recognition often suffers from poor
∗ Equally-contributed
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The long-tailed domain distribution demarcated by the
mixed attributions (e.g., race and age) in the MS-Celeb-1M [8]
and CASIA-Webface [36]. Number of classes per domain falls
drastically, and only few domains have abundant classes. (Baidu
API [1] is used to estimate the race and age)

generalization, i.e., the learned features only work well on
the domain the same as the training set and perform poorly
on the unseen domains. This is one of the most critical issues for face recognition in the wild, partially due to the
non-negligible domain shift from the training set to the deployment environment.
Real-world visual data inherently follows a long-tailed
distribution, where only a limited number of classes appear
frequently, and most of the others remain relatively rare. In
this paper, we aim to investigate the long-tailed domain distribution and balance it to improve the generalization capacity of deep models. However, different from the long-tailed
problem in classes, domain labels are inaccessible in most
of applications. Specifically, domain is an abstract attribute
related to many aspects, e.g., age (baby, child, young man,
aged, etc), race (caucasian, indian, asian, african, etc.), expression (happy, angry, surprise, etc.), pose (front, profile,
etc.), etc. As a result, the domain information is hard to
label or even describe. Without the domain label, it is difficult to judge whether a sample belongs to the head domains
or the tail domains, making existing methods inapplicable.
Figure 1 illustrates a possible partition by the mixed attributions (e.g., race and age).
We formally study this long-tailed domain distribution

5671

