Predicting Goal-directed Human Attention Using
Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Zhibo Yang1 , Lihan Huang1 , Yupei Chen1 , Zijun Wei2 , Seoyoung Ahn1 ,
Gregory Zelinsky1 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Minh Hoai1
1
Stony Brook University, 2 Adobe Inc.

Abstract
Human gaze behavior prediction is important for behavioral vision and for computer vision applications. Most
models mainly focus on predicting free-viewing behavior
using saliency maps, but do not generalize to goal-directed
behavior, such as when a person searches for a visual target
object. We propose the first inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) model to learn the internal reward function and policy used by humans during visual search. We modeled the
viewer’s internal belief states as dynamic contextual belief
maps of object locations. These maps were learned and then
used to predict behavioral scanpaths for multiple target categories. To train and evaluate our IRL model we created
COCO-Search18, which is now the largest dataset of highquality search fixations in existence. COCO-Search18 has
10 participants searching for each of 18 target-object categories in 6202 images, making about 300,000 goal-directed
fixations. When trained and evaluated on COCO-Search18,
the IRL model outperformed baseline models in predicting
search fixation scanpaths, both in terms of similarity to human search behavior and search efficiency. Finally, reward
maps recovered by the IRL model reveal distinctive targetdependent patterns of object prioritization, which we interpret as a learned object context.

1. Introduction
Human visual attention comes in two forms. One is
bottom-up, where prioritization is based solely on processing of the visual input. The other is top-down, where prioritization is based on many top-down information sources
(object context of a scene, semantic relationships between
objects, etc. [14, 38, 54]). When your food arrives at a
restaurant, among your very first attention movements will
likely be to the fork and knife (Fig. 1), because they are
important to your goal of having dinner.
Code and dataset are available at https://github.com/
cvlab-stonybrook/Scanpath_Prediction.

Figure 1: Predicting fixations in a visual search task.
Left: behavioral scanpath shown in yellow. Right: predicted scanpath in green. The search target is the fork,
shown in the yellow bounding box.
Goal-directed attention control underlies all the tasks
that we try to do, thus making its prediction a more challenging and important problem than predicting the bottomup control of attention by a visual input. One of the
strongest forms of top-down attention control is in the definition of a target goal. Arguably the simplest goal-directed
task is visual search—there is a target object and the task
is to find it. Humans are very efficient and flexible in the
image locations that they choose to fixate while searching
for a target-object goal, making the prediction of human
search behavior important for both behavioral and computer
vision, e.g. robotic visual systems [16, 39]. In this paper,
we introduce Inverse Reinforcement Learning as a computational model of human attention in visual search.
Gaze prediction in visual search. We aim to predict the
fixation patterns made during the visual search of an image.
These patterns can be either spatial (fixation density maps)
or spatial+temporal (scanpaths). Most fixation-prediction
models are of free-viewing behavior. A critical difference
between search and free-viewing tasks is that search fixations are guided towards a target-object goal, whereas in
free viewing there are no explicit goals. Prioritization of
fixation locations during free viewing is thought to be controlled by bottom-up saliency, and since Itti’s [25] seminal
work the prediction of free-viewing fixations using saliency
maps has grown into a large literature [6, 8, 9, 12, 23, 26,
27, 32–34, 36]. However, saliency model predictions do not
generalize to fixations made in goal-directed attention tasks,
such as target object search [20, 31].

193

