MLCVNet: Multi-Level Context VoteNet for 3D Object Detection
Qian Xie1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Jing Wu2 , Zhoutao Wang1 , Yiming Zhang1 , Kai Xu3 , and Jun Wang ∗1
1

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
Cardiff University
3
National University of Defense Technology

What漨

Abstract
In this paper, we address the 3D object detection task by
capturing multi-level contextual information with the selfattention mechanism and multi-scale feature fusion. Most
existing 3D object detection methods recognize objects individually, without giving any consideration on contextual
information between these objects. Comparatively, we propose Multi-Level Context VoteNet (MLCVNet) to recognize
3D objects correlatively, building on the state-of-the-art
VoteNet. We introduce three context modules into the voting
and classifying stages of VoteNet to encode contextual information at different levels. Specifically, a Patch-to-Patch
Context (PPC) module is employed to capture contextual
information between the point patches, before voting for
their corresponding object centroid points. Subsequently,
an Object-to-Object Context (OOC) module is incorporated
before the proposal and classification stage, to capture the
contextual information between object candidates. Finally,
a Global Scene Context (GSC) module is designed to learn
the global scene context. We demonstrate these by capturing contextual information at patch, object and scene levels. Our method is an effective way to promote detection
accuracy, achieving new state-of-the-art detection performance on challenging 3D object detection datasets, i.e.,
SUN RGBD and ScanNet. We also release our code at
https://github.com/NUAAXQ/MLCVNet.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is becoming an active research topic
in both computer vision and computer graphics. Compared to 2D object detection in RGB images, predicting
3D bounding boxes in real world environments captured by
point clouds is more essential for many tasks [1] such as indoor robot navigation [2], robot grasping [3], etc. However,
∗ Corresponding author: wjun@nuaa.edu.cn

Chair: 60%

dining room
(a) Single object

(b) Global scene context

Chair: 85%

Chair: 90%

chair

chair

table

chair

table

chair

dining room
(c) Object context

(d) Multi-level context

Figure 1. Illustration of the importance of multi-level contextual
information for 3D object detection from point cloud data. (a) It is
hard to recognize the object when the point cloud is shown independently. (b)-(d) When the surrounding environment information
is given, we can then recognize the chair easily. In fact, unlike general object detection in open scenes, indoor scenes usually contain
strong context constraints, which can be utilized in indoor scene
understanding tasks such as 3D object detection.

the unstructured data in point clouds makes the detection
more challenging than in 2D. In particular, the popular convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which are highly successful in 2D object detection, are difﬁcult to be applied to
point clouds directly.
Growing interests have been attracted to tackle this challenge. With the emergence of deep 3D points processing
networks, such as [4, 5], several deep learning based 3D
object detection works have been proposed recently to detect objects directly from 3D point clouds [6, 7]. The most
recent work VoteNet [7] proposed an end-to-end 3D object
detection network on the basis of Hough voting. VoteNet
transfers the traditional Hough voting procedure into a re-

10447

