FroDO: From Detections to 3D Objects
Martin Rünz1,2,* , Kejie Li1,3,* , Meng Tang1 , Lingni Ma1 , Chen Kong1 , Tanner Schmidt1 , Ian Reid3 ,
Lourdes Agapito2 , Julian Straub1 , Steven Lovegrove1 , and Richard Newcombe1
1

2

Input

Facebook Reality Labs
Department of Computer Science, University College London
3
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide

3D Bounding-Box Prediction

Point-Cloud Optimization

Dense Optimization

Ground Truth for Reference

Figure 1: Given a localized input RGB sequence, FroDO dectects objects and infers their pose and a progressively fine
grained and expressive object shape representation. Results on a real-world sequence from ScanNet [7].

Abstract
Object-oriented maps are important for scene understanding since they jointly capture geometry and semantics, allow individual instantiation and meaningful reasoning about objects. We introduce FroDO, a method for accurate 3D reconstruction of object instances from RGB video
that infers object location, pose and shape in a coarse-tofine manner. Key to FroDO is to embed object shapes in a
novel learnt space that allows seamless switching between
sparse point cloud and dense DeepSDF decoding. Given
an input sequence of localized RGB frames, FroDO first aggregates 2D detections to instantiate a category-aware 3D
bounding box per object. A shape code is regressed using
an encoder network before optimizing shape and pose further under the learnt shape priors using sparse and dense
shape representations. The optimization uses multi-view
geometric, photometric and silhouette losses. We evaluate
on real-world datasets, including Pix3D, Redwood-OS, and
ScanNet, for single-view, multi-view, and multi-object reconstruction.
* The first two authors contributed equally.

1. Introduction
Localizing and reconstructing 3D objects from RGB
video is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Traditional geometry-based multi-view reconstruction [40, 41]
can deal with large scenes given rich textures and large
baselines but it is prone to failure in texture-less regions or
when the photo-consistency assumption does not hold. Besides, these methods only provide geometry information but
no semantics. An even more challenging question is how to
fill in unobserved regions of the scene. Recently, learning
based 3D reconstruction methods [2, 6, 9, 12, 28, 50] have
emerged and achieved promising results. However, datadriven approaches rely heavily on synthetic renderings and
do not generalize well to natural images. On the other hand,
we have seen impressive progress in 2D recognition tasks
such as detection and segmentation [15, 21, 26].
In this paper, we propose a system for object-centric reconstruction that leverages the best properties of 2D recognition, learning-based object reconstruction and multi-view
optimization with deep shape priors. As illustrated in
Fig. 2 FroDO takes a sequence of localized RGB images
as input, and progressively outputs 2D and 3D bound114720

