ActBERT: Learning Global-Local Video-Text Representations
Linchao Zhu1,2 and Yi Yang2∗
1
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
{linchao.zhu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce ActBERT for self-supervised
learning of joint video-text representations from unlabeled
data. First, we leverage global action information to catalyze mutual interactions between linguistic texts and local
regional objects. It uncovers global and local visual clues
from paired video sequences and text descriptions for detailed visual and text relation modeling. Second, we introduce a TaNgled Transformer block (TNT) to encode three
sources of information, i.e., global actions, local regional
objects, and linguistic descriptions. Global-local correspondences are discovered via judicious clues extraction
from contextual information. It enforces the joint video-text
representation to be aware of fine-grained objects as well
as global human intention. We validate the generalization
capability of ActBERT on downstream video-and-language
tasks, i.e., text-video clip retrieval, video captioning, video
question answering, action segmentation, and action step
localization. ActBERT significantly outperforms the stateof-the-art, demonstrating its superiority in video-text representation learning.

1. Introduction
While supervised learning has been successful in a variety of computer vision tasks [17, 9, 38, 29], self-supervised
representation learning from unlabeled data has attracted increasing attention in recent years [4, 27]. In self-supervised
learning, a model is first pre-trained on a large amount
of unlabeled data with a surrogate loss. The fine-tuning
process further helps the pre-trained model to be specialized in downstream tasks. Recently, there has been
rapid progress in self-supervised representation learning for
texts [7, 45], where the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model [7] generalizes remarkably to many natural language tasks, e.g., question answering [2].
* This work was done when Linchao Zhu visited Baidu Research. Yi
Yang is the corresponding author.

Motivated by BERT’s success in self-supervised training, we aim to learn an analogous model for video and
text joint modeling. We exploit video-text relations based
on narrated instructional videos, where the aligned texts
are detected by off-the-shelf automatic speech recognition
(ASR) models. These instructional videos serve as natural
sources for video-text relationship studies. First, they are
vastly available and freely accessible on YouTube and other
platforms [26, 33]. Second, the visual frames are aligned
with the instructional narrations. The text narrations not
only cover the objects in the scene explicitly but identify
the salient action in the video clip.
To generalize BERT to video-and-language tasks, Sun et
al. [33] extended the BERT model by learning from quantized video frame features. The original BERT takes discrete elements as inputs and predicts the corresponding tokens as the output. In contrast, visual features are distributed representations with real value, while the real-value
features cannot be directly categorized into discrete labels
for “visual token” prediction. Sun et al. [33] discretized visual features into visual words via clustering. These visual
tokens can be directly passed to the original BERT model.
However, detailed local information, e.g., interacting objects, human actions would be possibly lost during clustering. It prevents the model from uncovering fine-grained relations between video and text. In this paper, we propose
ActBERT to learn a joint video-text representation that uncovers global and local visual clues from paired video sequences and text descriptions. Both the global and the local
visual signals interact with the semantic stream mutually.
ActBERT leverages profound contextual information and
exploits fine-grained relations for video-text joint modeling.
First, ActBERT incorporates global actions, local regional objects and text descriptions in a joint framework.
Actions, e.g., “cut”, “rotate”, “slice”, are essential to various video-related downstream tasks. The recognition of
human actions can demonstrate the model’s capacity in motion understanding and complex human intention reasoning. It could be beneficial to explicitly model human actions
during model pre-training. Long-term action sequences
furthermore offer temporal dependencies about an instruc-

8746

