Fusion-Aware Point Convolution for Online Semantic 3D Scene Segmentation
Jiazhao Zhang1,∗
Chenyang Zhu1, *
Lintao Zheng1
Kai Xu1,2†
1
National University of Defense Technology 2 SpeedBot Robotics Ltd.

Abstract
Online semantic 3D segmentation in company with realtime RGB-D reconstruction poses special challenges such
as how to perform 3D convolution directly over the progressively fused 3D geometric data, and how to smartly fuse information from frame to frame. We propose a novel fusionaware 3D point convolution which operates directly on the
geometric surface being reconstructed and exploits effectively the inter-frame correlation for high quality 3D feature learning. This is enabled by a dedicated dynamic data
structure which organizes the online acquired point cloud
with global-local trees. Globally, we compile the online reconstructed 3D points into an incrementally growing coordinate interval tree, enabling fast point insertion and neighborhood query. Locally, we maintain the neighborhood information for each point using an octree whose construction
benefits from the fast query of the global tree. Both levels
of trees update dynamically and help the 3D convolution effectively exploits the temporal coherence for effective information fusion across RGB-D frames. Through evaluation
on public benchmark datasets, we show that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy of semantic segmentation with online RGB-D fusion in 10 FPS.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of 3D scenes is an fundamental task
in 3D vision. The recent state-of-the-art methods mostly
apply deep learning on either 3D geometric data solely [25]
or the fusion of 2D and 3D data [20]. These approaches,
however, are usually offline, working with an already reconstructed 3D scene geometry [5, 14]. Online scene understanding associated with real-time RGB-D reconstruction [13, 22], on the other hand, is deemed to be more
appealing due to the potential applications in robot and
AR. Technically, online analysis can also fully exploit the
spatial-temporal information during RGB-D fusion.
For the task of semantic scene segmentation in company
with RGB-D fusion, deep-learning-based approaches commonly adopt the frame feature fusion paradigm. Such meth* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

Frame 180

Frame 260

Frame 350

Figure 1: We present fusion-aware 3D point convolution
which operates directly over the progressively acquired and
online reconstructed scene surface. We show the point-wise
labeling is being gradually improved (the chairs are recognized) as more and more frames (first row) are fused in.
ods first perform 2D convolution in the individual RGB-D
frames and then fuse the extracted 2D features across consecutive frames. Previous works conduct such feature fusion through either max-pooling operation [14] or Bayesian
probability updating [20]. We advocate the adoption of direct convolution over 3D surfaces for frame feature fusion.
3D convolution on surfaces learns features of the intrinsic
structure of the geometric surfaces [2] that cannot be wellcaptured by view-based convolution and fusion. During online RGB-D fusion, however, the scene geometry changes
progressively with the incremental scanning and reconstruction. It is difficult to perform 3D convolution directly over
the time-varying geometry. Besides, to attain a powerful
3D feature learning, special designs are needed to exploit
the temporal correlation between adjacent frames.
In this work, we argue that a fast and powerful 3D convolution for online segmentation necessitates an efficient and
versatile in-memory organization of dynamic 3D geometric data. To this end, we propose a tree-based global-local
dynamic data structure to enable efficient data maintenance
and 3D convolution of time-varying geometry. Globally, we
organize the online fused 3D points with an incrementally
growing coordinate interval tree, which enables fast point
14534

