Leveraging 2D Data to Learn Textured 3D Mesh Generation
Paul Henderson
IST Austria

Vagia Tsiminaki
IBM Research Zürich

Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria

paul@pmh47.net

tsi@zurich.ibm.com

chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Numerous methods have been proposed for probabilistic
generative modelling of 3D objects. However, none of these
is able to produce textured objects, which renders them of
limited use for practical tasks. In this work, we present the
first generative model of textured 3D meshes. Training such
a model would traditionally require a large dataset of textured meshes, but unfortunately, existing datasets of meshes
lack detailed textures. We instead propose a new training
methodology that allows learning from collections of 2D
images without any 3D information. To do so, we train our
model to explain a distribution of images by modelling each
image as a 3D foreground object placed in front of a 2D
background. Thus, it learns to generate meshes that when
rendered, produce images similar to those in its training set.
A well-known problem when generating meshes with
deep networks is the emergence of self-intersections, which
are problematic for many use-cases. As a second contribution we therefore introduce a new generation process for 3D
meshes that guarantees no self-intersections arise, based on
the physical intuition that faces should push one another out
of the way as they move.
We conduct extensive experiments on our approach, reporting quantitative and qualitative results on both synthetic data and natural images. These show our method
successfully learns to generate plausible and diverse textured 3D samples for five challenging object classes.

1. Introduction
Learning the structure of a 3D object class is a fundamental task in computer vision. It is typically cast as learning a probabilistic generative model, from which instances
of the class may be sampled. The last five years have seen
dramatic progress on this task [53, 52, 36, 32, 27, 41, 8,
45, 54, 9, 2, 15, 28], enabled by new, large-scale training sets [6, 53]. However, existing methods generate only
shapes, without any associated textures to capture the surface appearance. This is a major shortcoming since the surface appearance of an object strongly influences how we

Figure 1. We propose a method to learn a generative model of
textured 3D shapes (right), from collections of images (left)

perceive and interact with it—consider for example the difference between a red and a green tomato, a police car and a
taxi, a book and a brick, or a zebra and a horse. As such, textures are vital for many practical uses of generated shapes,
such as visual effects and games.
We hypothesise that the lack of research on methods that
learn to generate textured shapes is in part due to a lack of
textured 3D data for training them. Of the two large-scale
datasets of 3D shapes, ShapeNet [6] lacks detailed textures
for most instances, while ModelNet [53] lacks color information entirely.
We propose an alternative paradigm: rather than learning such a model from 3D data, we learn it from a large
collection of 2D images (Fig. 1). This lets us leverage existing weakly-annotated image datasets, at the price of solving a very challenging learning problem. It is challenging
for three reasons: (i) infinitely many 3D shapes may project
to give the same 2D image; (ii) we cannot rely on having
multiple views of each object instance; (iii) objects appear
in front of cluttered backgrounds, and segmentation masks
may not be available. We must therefore learn to isolate
foreground objects from background clutter, at the same
time as learning their space of valid shapes and textures.
Our first contribution is a new generative model over
textured 3D shapes (Sec. 3). Our second and most significant contribution is a method to train this model to match
a distribution of images (Sec. 5), overcoming the difficulties mentioned. Specifically, our model learns to reconstruct its training images in terms of the physical process
by which they were formed. This is achieved by augmenting the generative model with an image-formation model—
we place the generated 3D object in front of a camera, and

7498

