Adversarial Robustness: From Self-Supervised Pre-Training to Fine-Tuning
Tianlong Chen1 , Sijia Liu2 , Shiyu Chang2 , Yu Cheng3 , Lisa Amini2 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
Texas A&M University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research 3 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{wiwjp619,atlaswang}@tamu.edu, {sijia.liu,shiyu.chang,lisa.amini}@ibm.com, yu.cheng@microsoft.com

Abstract

Ensemble Finetune
54

1. Introduction
Supervised training of deep neural networks requires massive, labeled datasets, which may be unavailable and costly
to assemble [15, 2, 28, 36]. Self-supervised and unsupervised training techniques attempt to address this challenge
by eliminating the need for manually labeled data. Representations pretrained through self-supervised techniques enable
fast fine-tuning to multiple downstream tasks, and lead to
better generalization and calibration [20, 23]. Examples of
tasks proven to attain high accuracy through self-supervised
pretraining include position predicting tasks (Selfie [35], Jigsaw [25, 3]), rotation predicting tasks (Rotation [9]), and a
variety of other perception tasks [6, 41, 8].
The labeling and sample efficiency challenges of deep
learning are further exacerbated by vulnerability to adversarial attacks. For example, Convolutional Neural Networks

Ensemble Pretrain

Robust Accuracy

Pretrained models from self-supervision are prevalently
used in fine-tuning downstream tasks faster or for better
accuracy. However, gaining robustness from pretraining is
left unexplored. We introduce adversarial training into selfsupervision, to provide general-purpose robust pretrained
models for the first time. We find these robust pretrained
models can benefit the subsequent fine-tuning in two ways:
i) boosting final model robustness; ii) saving the computation cost, if proceeding towards adversarial fine-tuning.
We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that the
proposed framework achieves large performance margins
(e.g., 3.83% on robust accuracy and 1.3% on standard accuracy, on the CIFAR-10 dataset), compared with the conventional end-to-end adversarial training baseline. Moreover, we find that different self-supervised pretrained models
have diverse adversarial vulnerability. It inspires us to ensemble several pretraining tasks, which boosts robustness
more. Our ensemble strategy contributes to a further improvement of 3.59% on robust accuracy, while maintaining
a slightly higher standard accuracy on CIFAR-10. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/TAMU-VITA/
Adv-SS-Pretraining.

52

Selfie

Adversarial Training (Baseline)

48

46

Rotation

Jigsaw

50

83.0

83.5

84.0

84.5

Standard Accuracy

85.0

85.5

86.0

Figure 1: Summary of our achieved performance (CIFAR-10).
The upper right corner indicates the best performance in
terms of both standard and robust accuracy. The size of markers represents the number of training epochs to achieve the best
robust accuracy. Black circle (•) is the baseline method: end-to-end
adversarial training. Blue circles (•) are fine-tuned models that inherit robust models from different self-supervised pretraining tasks.
Orange circle (•) is the ensemble of three self-supervised pretraining tasks. Red Star (★) is the ensemble of three fine-tuned models.
The correspondence between the marker size and # epochs is given
by, Ensemble Fine-tune (★, 144 epochs) > Baseline (•, 99 epochs)
> Ensemble Pretrain (•, 56 epochs) > Selfie (•, 50 epochs) >
Jigsaw (•, 48 epochs) > Rotation (•, 46 epochs)

(CNNs), are widely leveraged for perception tasks, due to
high predictive accuracy. However, even a well-trained CNN
suffers from high misclassification rates when imperceivable
perturbations are applied the input [18, 24]. As suggested by
[30], the sample complexity of learning an adversarially robust model with current methods is significantly higher than
that of standard learning. Adversarial training (AT) [21], the
state-of-the-art model defense approach, is also known to be
computationally more expensive than standard training (ST).
The above facts make it especially meaningful to explore:
Can appropriately pretrained models play a similar
role for adversarial training as they have for ST?
That is, can they lead to more efficient fine-tuning
and better, adversarially-robust generalization?
Self-supervision has only recently been linked to the study
of robustness. An approach is offered in [14], by incorporat-

699

