Progressive Mirror Detection
Jiaying Lin
Guodong Wang
Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The mirror detection problem is important as mirrors
can affect the performances of many vision tasks. It is a difﬁcult problem since it requires an understanding of global
scene semantics. Recently, a method was proposed to detect mirrors by learning multi-level contextual contrasts between inside and outside of mirrors, which helps locate mirror edges implicitly. We observe that the content of a mirror
reflects the content of its surrounding, separated by the edge
of the mirror. Hence, we propose a model in this paper to
progressively learn the content similarity between the inside
and outside of the mirror while explicitly detecting the mirror edges. Our work has two main contributions. First,
we propose a new relational contextual contrasted local
(RCCL) module to extract and compare the mirror features
with its corresponding context features, and an edge detection and fusion (EDF) module to learn the features of mirror edges in complex scenes via explicit supervision. Second, we construct a challenging benchmark dataset of 6,461
mirror images. Unlike the existing MSD dataset, which has
limited diversity, our dataset covers a variety of scenes and
is much larger in scale. Experimental results show that our
model outperforms relevant state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Mirrors are ubiquitous in our daily lives. As they can affect the performances of a lot of vision tasks, such as depth
prediction and object detection, they are beginning to receive some discussions [5, 2]. For example, Anderson et al.
[2] note that mirrors are potential obstacles in vision-andlanguage navigation (VLN) tasks and existing methods for
VLN tend to ignore mirrors. Braun et al. [5] ﬁnd that the
error caused by the reﬂections from mirror-like surfaces is
one of the six major types of error in the person detection
problem. Zendel et al. [30] conduct a safety analysis of existing datasets for computer vision tasks, and ﬁnd that the
existence of mirrors is a hazardous factor to these tasks.
Recently, Yang et al. [29] make the ﬁrst attempt to automatically detect mirrors. They propose a model, called Mir0† Rynson W.H. Lau is the corresponding author. He leads this project.

(a) Input

(b) GT

(c) PSPNet

(d) MirrorNet

(e) Ours

Figure 1: Two popular scenarios where existing methods [32, 29] fail. While PSPNet [32] is a segmentation
model, MirrorNet [29] is designed for mirror detection.
As MirrorNet is based on extracting contrasted features, it
wrongly segments the mirror region in the top image, and
wrongly detects the window and ﬁreplace in the bottom image as mirrors. In contrast, our model extracts correspoding
context features between inside and outside of the mirror to
accurately identify mirror regions.
rorNet, to segment mirrors from a single image based on extracting multi-level contextual contrasted features. Through
extracting the contextual contrast information, their method
implicitly learns to detect mirror edges for segmenting the
mirrors. However, this method may fail when the contextual contrasts between the inside and outside of a mirror are
not obvious. The ﬁrst row of Figure 1 shows a very common scenario, where a person is looking at a mirror in (a).
Since he and his mirrored image have almost identical appearances and overlap with each other (i.e., the arm of the
person and his cloth in the reﬂection), the visual contrast
between them is small. If we detect the mirror using MirrorNet, it gets confused by the mixture and fails to separate
the two correctly, as shown in (c). In addition, since MirrorNet only considers contextual contrast, it is more prone
to overpredict the mirror regions. In the second row of Figure 1, the mirror, window and ﬁreplace all exhibit contextual contrasts with their surroundings. Hence, MirrorNet
fails to distinguish them, and detects all of them as mirrors.
To tackle the above problem, we propose in this paper a
novel approach to detect mirrors. We note that the content
of a mirror reﬂects its surrounding context. This means that
there is often a corresponding relationship between objects
inside a mirror and those outside of the mirror. In this work,
we explore this corresponding relationship in a progressive
manner. Figure 2 explains our idea. We can see from (b)
4321
3697

