Deep Geometric Functional Maps: Robust
Feature Learning for Shape Correspondence
Nicolas Donati
LIX, École Polytechnique

Abhishek Sharma
LIX, École Polytechnique

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique

nicolas.donati@polytechnique.edu

kein.iitian@gmail.com

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
We present a novel learning-based approach for computing correspondences between non-rigid 3D shapes. Unlike
previous methods that either require extensive training data
or operate on handcrafted input descriptors and thus generalize poorly across diverse datasets, our approach is both
accurate and robust to changes in shape structure. Key to
our method is a feature-extraction network that learns directly from raw shape geometry, combined with a novel regularized map extraction layer and loss, based on the functional map representation. We demonstrate through extensive experiments in challenging shape matching scenarios
that our method can learn from less training data than existing supervised approaches and generalizes significantly
better than current descriptor-based learning methods. Our
source code is available at: https://github.com/
LIX-shape-analysis/GeomFmaps.

1. Introduction
Shape correspondence is a key problem in computer vision, computer graphics and related fields with a broad
range of applications, including texture or deformation
transfer and statistical shape analysis [7], among many others. While classical correspondence methods have been
based on handcrafted features or deformation models [49],
more recent approaches have focused on learning an optimal model from the data either in supervised [11, 53, 25, 16]
or even unsupervised settings [19, 43, 17].
Despite significant progress in recent years, however,
learning-based approaches for shape correspondence typically require large amounts of training data in order to
learn a model that generalizes well to diverse shape classes
[53, 16]. Several existing methods address this challenge by learning a derived representation, through a nonlinear transformation of pre-computed feature descriptors
[11, 25, 19, 43], rather than on the geometry of the shapes
themselves. Unfortunately, as we demonstrate below, this

Point Cloud
Descriptors

Point-to-Point
Map

Figure 1. Given a pair of shapes, our approach builds consistent descriptors directly from the underlying point clouds (left), and automatically computes an accurate pointwise correspondence (right).

reliance on a priori hand-crafted descriptors makes the resulting learned models both less robust and less accurate
leading to a significant drop in generalization power to new
shape classes or instances.
In this work, we propose an approach that combines the
power of learning directly from the 3D shapes with strong
regularization based on a novel spectral correspondence extraction layer. Our method is inspired by recent learning techniques employing the functional map representation [25, 43]; however, we extend them to learn the features
from 3D geometry rather than from some pre-computed de18592

