Searching Central Difference Convolutional Networks for Face Anti-Spoofing
Zitong Yu1 , Chenxu Zhao2 , Zezheng Wang3 , Yunxiao Qin4 ,
∗
Zhuo Su1 , Xiaobai Li1 , Feng Zhou3 , Guoying Zhao1
1

CMVS, University of Oulu
3
Aibee

2

Mininglamp Academy of Sciences, Mininglamp Technology
Northwestern Polytechnical University

4

{zitong.yu, zhuo.su, xiaobai.li, guoying.zhao}@oulu.fi,

{zhaochenxu}@mininglamp.com,{zezhengwang, fzhoug}@aibee.com, {qyxqyx}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) plays a vital role in face recognition systems. Most state-of-the-art FAS methods 1) rely on
stacked convolutions and expert-designed network, which
is weak in describing detailed fine-grained information and
easily being ineffective when the environment varies (e.g.,
different illumination), and 2) prefer to use long sequence as
input to extract dynamic features, making them difficult to
deploy into scenarios which need quick response. Here we
propose a novel frame level FAS method based on Central
Difference Convolution (CDC), which is able to capture intrinsic detailed patterns via aggregating both intensity and
gradient information. A network built with CDC, called the
Central Difference Convolutional Network (CDCN), is able
to provide more robust modeling capacity than its counterpart built with vanilla convolution. Furthermore, over
a specifically designed CDC search space, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is utilized to discover a more powerful network structure (CDCN++), which can be assembled with Multiscale Attention Fusion Module (MAFM) for
further boosting performance. Comprehensive experiments
are performed on six benchmark datasets to show that 1) the
proposed method not only achieves superior performance
on intra-dataset testing (especially 0.2% ACER in Protocol1 of OULU-NPU dataset), 2) it also generalizes well on
cross-dataset testing (particularly 6.5% HTER from CASIAMFSD to Replay-Attack datasets). The codes are available
at https://github.com/ZitongYu/CDCN.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has been widely used in many interactive artificial intelligence systems for its convenience. However, vulnerability to presentation attacks (PA) curtail its
reliable deployment. Merely presenting printed images or
videos to the biometric sensor could fool face recognition
∗ denotes corresponding author

Print Attack 1

Print Attack 2

Vanilla
Convolution

Central Difference
Convolution

Inconsistent

consistent

Figure 1. Feature response of vanilla convolution (VanillaConv)
and central difference convolution (CDC) for spoofing faces in
shifted domains (illumination & input camera). VanillaConv fails
to capture the consistent spoofing pattern while CDC is able to extract the invariant detailed spoofing features, e.g., lattice artifacts.

systems. Typical examples of presentation attacks are print,
video replay, and 3D masks. For the reliable use of face
recognition systems, face anti-spoofing (FAS) methods are
important to detect such presentation attacks.
In recent years, several hand-crafted features based [7,
8, 15, 29, 45, 44] and deep learning based [49, 64, 36, 26,
62, 4, 19, 20] methods have been proposed for presentation
attack detection (PAD). On one hand, the classical handcrafted descriptors (e.g., local binary pattern (LBP) [7])
leverage local relationship among the neighbours as the discriminative features, which is robust for describing the detailed invariant information (e.g., color texture, moiré pattern and noise artifacts) between the living and spoofing
faces. On the other hand, due to the stacked convolution operations with nonlinear activation, the convolutional neural
networks (CNN) hold strong representation abilities to distinguish the bona fide and PA. However, CNN based methods focus on the deeper semantic features, which are weak
in describing detailed fine-grained information between liv-

5295

