Adaptive Dilated Network with Self-Correction Supervision for Counting
Shuai Bai1 , Zhiqun He2 , Yu Qiao3 , Hanzhe Hu4 , Wei Wu2 , Junjie Yan2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 SenseTime Group Limited
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Peking University
1

baishuai@bupt.edu.cn {hezhiqun, wuwei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn huhz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The counting problem aims to estimate the number of objects in images. Due to large scale variation and labeling
deviations, it remains a challenging task. The static density map supervised learning framework is widely used in
existing methods, which uses the Gaussian kernel to generate a density map as the learning target and utilizes the
Euclidean distance to optimize the model. However, the
framework is intolerable to the labeling deviations and can
not reflect the scale variation. In this paper, we propose an
adaptive dilated convolution and a novel supervised learning framework named self-correction (SC) supervision. In
the supervision level, the SC supervision utilizes the outputs of the model to iteratively correct the annotations and
employs the SC loss to simultaneously optimize the model
from both the whole and the individuals. In the feature
level, the proposed adaptive dilated convolution predicts a
continuous value as the specific dilation rate for each location, which adapts the scale variation better than a discrete
and static dilation rate. Extensive experiments illustrate
that our approach has achieved a consistent improvement
on four challenging benchmarks. Especially, our approach
achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art methods on all benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The counting task is an important topic in computer
vision. There are many practical applications, such as
traffic management and congestion estimation under video
surveillance. In recent years, the methods using convolutional neural network (CNN) have achieved remarkable
progress. However, this task remains challenging, which is
mainly faced with two challenges: how to effectively supervise the learning process and address the large scale variation problem?
Firstly, compared to the bounding-box annotation, the
dotted annotation is less labour-intensive, which is widely

Crowd dataset

Vehicle dataset

(a)

Perspective

Congested

(b)

Figure 1. Two challenges for the counting problem. a) The location
of the dotted annotation (yellow points) is inconsistent, whether it
is a vehicle or a person. b) There is large scale variation in the
same scene and different scenes.

used in most of the counting datasets[11, 50, 15, 14, 43].
However, as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the dotted annotations
are not consistent on different targets because of subjective deviation. Most of the existing state-of-the-art methods
[48, 20, 23, 37, 26, 30] use Gaussian distribution to generate
a density map as the learning target. The model is optimized
by comparing the Euclidean (L2 ) distance between the target density map and the model estimation. However, there
are three limitations in this supervised method: 1) The labeling deviation makes the target density map not accurate.
2) The variance of the Gaussian density map does not match
the scale of the target. 3) L2 loss is sensitive to the deviation of position and the change of variance. As a result,
the model cannot learn consistent mapping relationships between density maps and features, which greatly limits the
upper bound of the performance. Recently, some works
[51, 36, 39, 22] have been proposed to alleviate the inconsistency, including introducing additional loss function (e.g.,
adversarial loss [34] and structural similarity (SSIM) loss
[2]) and fusing the density maps of different variances [42].
These methods mainly focus on the loss function while ignoring the deviation of the target density map.
Secondly, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), there is large scale variation in different scenes. Even in the same scene, the scale
still changes dramatically due to perspective phenomenon.

4594

