PhraseCut: Language-based Image Segmentation in the Wild
Chenyun Wu1 Zhe Lin2 Scott Cohen2 Trung Bui2 Subhransu Maji1
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Adobe Research
{chenyun,smaji}@cs.umass.edu,

{zlin,scohen,bui}@adobe.com

“large cake on plate”

1. Introduction
Modeling the interplay of language and vision is important for tasks such as visual question answering, automatic image editing, human-robot interaction, and more
broadly towards the goal of general Artificial Intelligence.
Existing efforts on grounding language descriptions to images have achieved promising results on datasets such
as Flickr30Entities [30] and Google Referring Expressions [26]. These datasets, however, lack the scale and diversity of concepts that appear in real-world applications.
To bridge this gap we present the VGP HRASE C UT
dataset and an associated task of grounding natural language phrases to image regions called PhraseCut (Figure 1
and 2). Our dataset leverages the annotations in the Visual
Genome (VG) dataset [18] to generate a large set of referring
phrases for each image. For each phrase, we annotate the regions and instance-level bounding boxes that correspond to
the phrase. Our dataset contains 77,262 images and 345,486
phrase-region pairs, with some examples shown in Figure 2.
VGP HRASE C UT contains a significantly longer tail of concepts and has a unified treatment of stuff and object cat-

Modular Heatmaps

We consider the problem of segmenting image regions
given a natural language phrase, and study it on a novel
dataset of 77,262 images and 345,486 phrase-region pairs.
Our dataset is collected on top of the Visual Genome dataset
and uses the existing annotations to generate a challenging
set of referring phrases for which the corresponding regions
are manually annotated. Phrases in our dataset correspond
to multiple regions and describe a large number of object
and stuff categories as well as their attributes such as color,
shape, parts, and relationships with other entities in the image. Our experiments show that the scale and diversity
of concepts in our dataset poses significant challenges to
the existing state-of-the-art. We systematically handle the
long-tail nature of these concepts and present a modular
approach to combine category, attribute, and relationship
cues that outperforms existing approaches.

OUTPUT

INPUT

Abstract

large

cake

on plate

Attribute Module

Category Module

Relationship Module

Figure 1. Our task and approach. PhraseCut is the task of segmenting image regions given a natural language phrase. Each
phrase is templated into words corresponding to categories, attributes, and relationships. Our approach combines these cues in
a modular manner to estimate the final output.

egories, unlike prior datasets. The phrases are structured
into words that describe categories, attributes, and relationships, providing a systematic way of understanding the performance on individual cues as well as their combinations.
The PhraseCut task is to segment regions of an image
given a templated phrase. As seen in Figure 1, this requires
connecting natural language concepts to image regions. Our
experiments shows that the task is challenging for stateof-the-art referring approaches such as MattNet [40] and
RMI [21]. We find that the overall performance is limited by the performance on rare categories and attributes.
To address these challenges we present (i) a modular approach for combining visual cues related to categories, attributes, and relationships, and (ii) a systematic approach to
improving the performance on rare categories and attributes
by leveraging predictions on more frequent ones. Our category and attribute modules are based on detection models,
whose instance-level scores are projected back to the image and further processed using an attention-based model
driven by the query phrase. Finally, these are combined with

10216

