Variational-EM-based Deep Learning for Noise-blind Image Deblurring
Yuesong Nan1 , Yuhui Quan2 , and Hui Ji1
1

2

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
nanyuesong@u.nus.edu, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, and matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Non-blind deblurring is an important problem encountered in many image restoration tasks. The focus of nonblind deblurring is on how to suppress noise magnification
during deblurring. In practice, it often happens that the
noise level of input image is unknown and varies among
different images. This paper aims at developing a deep
learning framework for deblurring images with unknown
noise level. Based on the framework of variational expectation maximization (EM), an iterative noise-blind deblurring scheme is proposed which integrates the estimation
of noise level and the quantification of image prior uncertainty. Then, the proposed scheme is unrolled to a neural
network (NN) where image prior is modeled by NN with uncertainty quantification. Extensive experiments showed that
the proposed method not only outperformed existing noiseblind deblurring methods by a large margin, but also outperformed those state-of-the-art image deblurring methods
designed/trained with known noise level.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring, recovering a clear image with sharp
details from a blurred one, is an important problem with
many applications. A blurring process is often modeled as
y = k ⊗ x + n,

(1)

where y denotes the blurred image, x denotes the latent image, k denotes the blur kernel, and n denotes the measurement noise. The operator ⊗ represents the discrete convolution. When the kernel k is unknown, estimating x from
y is called blind deblurring. Otherwise, it is called nonblind deblurring. In other words, blind deblurring needs to
estimate both the kernel and latent image, while non-blind
deblurring only needs to estimate the latent image.
With blur kernel in hand, how to deblur a noisy blurry
image is a challenging ill-conditioned linear inverse prob-

lem. The blurring process will significantly attenuate or
erase high-frequency information of an image, i.e. image
details of small scale. Recovering such attenuated/missing
high-frequency information is very sensitive to measurement noise. Thus, the study of non-blind image deblurring
focuses on suppressing noise magnification while recovering all image details.

1.1. Motivation
The treatment on noise in image deblurring is usually
done by imposing certain prior on the clear image x during
recovery. The noise level plays an important role, as one
needs to balance the strength of the regularization on latent
image and the approximation error to the blurred image, i.e.,
the so called bias-variance trade-off in regression. For the
images with different noise levels, most non-learning-based
regularization methods adjust regularization parameters accordingly to fit the noise level. Thus, when using such a regularization method, one needs to call some separate noise
level estimators in advance.
In recent years, learning-based image deblurring approaches, especially those deep-learning-based ones, are
more preferred solutions with impressive performance.
However, as the regularization/prior is trained using many
pairs of latent images and their degraded counterparts, one
has to train the model for a specific noise level to achieve
optimal performance. In other words, one needs to train
many NNs with respect to different noise levels, and store
multiple such trained NNs for usage. When calling such a
deep learning method to deblur a noisy blurred image, one
needs to first determine its noise level and then call the corresponding NN. Such an proccedure is certainly not appealing in practice.
There is practical demand on developing deep-learningbased deblurring methods that are blind to noise level. In
other words, the trained model should be a universal one
that can deblur images with varying unknown noise level.
So far, the works along this line are scant in existing liter-

3626

