IntrA: 3D Intracranial Aneurysm Dataset for Deep Learning
Xi Yang1
Ding Xia1,2
1
The University of Tokyo

Taichi Kin1
Takeo Igarashi1
2
South China University of Technology

Figure 1: 3D models of intracranial aneurysm segments with segmentation annotation in our dataset. Hot pink shows the
healthy blood vessel part, and aqua shows the aneurysm part for each model.

Abstract
Medicine is an important application area for deep
learning models. Research in this field is a combination of medical expertise and data science knowledge. In
this paper, instead of 2D medical images, we introduce
an open-access 3D intracranial aneurysm dataset, IntrA,
that makes the application of points-based and mesh-based
classification and segmentation models available. Our
dataset can be used to diagnose intracranial aneurysms and
to extract the neck for a clipping operation in medicine
and other areas of deep learning, such as normal estimation and surface reconstruction. We provide a large-scale
benchmark of classification and part segmentation by testing state-of-the-art networks. We also discuss the performance of each method and demonstrate the challenges of
our dataset. The published dataset can be accessed here:
https://github.com/intra3d2019/IntrA.

1. Introduction
Intracranial aneurysm is a life-threatening disease, and
its surgical treatments are complicated. Timely diagnosis

and preoperative examination are necessary to formulate
the treatment strategies and surgical approaches. Currently,
the primary treatment method is clipping the neck of an
aneurysm to prevent it from rupturing, as shown in Figure 2.
The decisions of the position and posture of the clip are still
highly dependent on “clinical judgment” based on the experience of physicians. In the surgery support system of intracranial aneurysms simulating real-life neurosurgery and
teach neurosurgical residents [5], the accuracy of aneurysm
segmentation is the most crucial part because it is used to
extract the neck of an aneurysm, that is, the boundary line
of the aneurysm.
Based on 3D surface models, the diagnosis of an
aneurysm can be much more accurate than 2D images. The
edge of the aneurysm is much clearer for doctors, and the
complicated and time-consuming annotation of a mess of
2D images is avoided. There are many reports of automatic
diagnosis and segmentation of aneurysms based on medical
images, including intracranial aneurysm (IA) and abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) [24, 30, 37]; however, few reports have been published based on 3D models. This is not
only because data collection is inefficient, subjective, and

2656

