Vec2Face: Unveil Human Faces from their Blackbox Features in
Face Recognition
Chi Nhan Duong1 , Thanh-Dat Truong2 , Khoa Luu2 , Kha Gia Quach1 , Hung Bui3 , Kaushik Roy4
1
Concordia University, Canada 2 University of Arkansas, USA 3 VinAI Research
4
North Carolina A&T State University, USA
1

{dcnhan, kquach}@ieee.org, 2 {tt032, khoaluu}@uark.edu, 3 v.hungbh1@vinai.io, 4 kroy@ncat.edu

Abstract
Unveiling face images of a subject given his/her highlevel representations extracted from a blackbox Face
Recognition engine is extremely challenging. It is because
the limitations of accessible information from that engine
including its structure and uninterpretable extracted features. This paper presents a novel generative structure with
Bijective Metric Learning, namely Bijective Generative Adversarial Networks in a Distillation framework (DiBiGAN),
for synthesizing faces of an identity given that person’s features. In order to effectively address this problem, this
work firstly introduces a bijective metric so that the distance measurement and metric learning process can be directly adopted in image domain for an image reconstruction task. Secondly, a distillation process is introduced to
maximize the information exploited from the blackbox face
recognition engine. Then a Feature-Conditional Generator Structure with Exponential Weighting Strategy is presented for a more robust generator that can synthesize realistic faces with ID preservation. Results on several benchmarking datasets including CelebA, LFW, AgeDB, CFP-FP
against matching engines have demonstrated the effectiveness of DiBiGAN on both image realism and ID preservation properties.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has recently matured and achieved high
accuracy against millions of identities [47, 48]. A face
recognition system is often designed in two main stages,
i.e. feature extraction and feature comparison. The role
of feature extraction is more important since it directly determines the robustness of the engine. This operator defines an embedding process mapping input facial images
into a higher-level latent space where embedded features
extracted from photos of the same subject distribute within
a small margin [32]. Moreover, since most face recognition engines are set into a blackbox mode to protect the

Figure 1. Metric Learning for Image Reconstruction. By maintaining the one-to-one mapping via a bijection, the distance between images can be directly and intuitively measured and enhances the metric learning process for image reconstruction task.

technologies [25], there is no apparent technique to inverse
that embedding process to reconstruct the faces of a subject
given his/her extracted features from those engines.
Some Blackbox Adversarial Attack approaches [20, 21,
44] have partially addressed this task by analyzing the gradients of the classifier’s outputs to generate adversarial examples that mislead the behaviour of that classifier. However, they only focus on a closed-set problem where the
output classes are predefined. Moreover, their goal is to
generate imperceptible pertubations added to the given input signal. Other methods [1, 4, 7, 43, 53] are also introduced in literature but still require the access to the classifier structure, i.e. whitebox setting. Meanwhile, our goal
focuses on a more challenging reconstruction task with a
blackbox face recognition. Firstly, this process reconstructs
faces from scratch without any hint from input images. Secondly, in a blackbox setting, there is no information about
the engine’s structure, and, therefore, it is unable to directly
exploit knowledge from the inverse mapping process (i.e.
back-propagation). Thirdly, the embedded features from a
face recognition engine are for open-set problem where no
label information is available. More importantly, the subjects to be reconstructed may have never been seen during
training process of the face recognition engine. In the scope
of this work, we assume that the face recognition engines
are primarily developed by Convolutional Neural Networks
16132

