HigherHRNet: Scale-Aware Representation Learning for
Bottom-Up Human Pose Estimation
Bowen Cheng1 , Bin Xiao2 , Jingdong Wang2 , Honghui Shi1,3 , Thomas S. Huang1 , Lei Zhang2
1

UIUC, 2 Microsoft, 3 University of Oregon

Abstract
Bottom-up human pose estimation methods have difficulties in predicting the correct pose for small persons
due to challenges in scale variation. In this paper, we
present HigherHRNet: a novel bottom-up human pose
estimation method for learning scale-aware representations using high-resolution feature pyramids. Equipped
with multi-resolution supervision for training and multiresolution aggregation for inference, the proposed approach is able to solve the scale variation challenge
in bottom-up multi-person pose estimation and localize keypoints more precisely, especially for small person.
The feature pyramid in HigherHRNet consists of feature
map outputs from HRNet and upsampled higher-resolution
outputs through a transposed convolution. HigherHRNet outperforms the previous best bottom-up method by
2.5% AP for medium person on COCO test-dev, showing its effectiveness in handling scale variation. Furthermore, HigherHRNet achieves new state-of-the-art result on
COCO test-dev (70.5% AP) without using refinement or
other post-processing techniques, surpassing all existing
bottom-up methods. HigherHRNet even surpasses all topdown methods on CrowdPose test (67.6% AP), suggesting its robustness in crowded scene. The code and models are available at https://github.com/HRNet/
Higher-HRNet-Human-Pose-Estimation.

1. Introduction
2D human pose estimation aims at localizing human
anatomical keypoints (e.g., elbow, wrist, etc.) or parts. As
a fundamental technique to human behavior understanding,
it has received increasing attention in recent years.
Current human pose estimation methods can be categorized into top-down methods and bottom-up methods. Topdown methods [34, 9, 16, 42, 38, 40, 39, 16] take a dependency on person detector to detect person instances each
with a bounding box and then reduce the problem to a sim-

CNN
Heatmap
Aggregation

CNN
CNN

(a) Image pyramid.
CNN

(b) Upsampling input.
HRNet

Heatmap
Aggregation

(c) Our approach.

Figure 1. (a) Using image pyramid for heatmap prediction [33,
30]. (a) Generating higher resolution and spatially more accurate
heatmaps by upsampling image. Recent work PersonLab [33] relies on enlarging input image size to generate high quality feature
maps. (c) Our HigherHRNet uses high resolution feature pyramid.

pler task of single person pose estimation. As top-down
methods can normalize all the persons to approximately the
same scale by cropping and resizing the detected person
bounding boxes, they are generally less sensitive to the scale
variance of persons. Thus, state-of-the-art performances on
various multi-person human pose estimation benchmarks
are mostly achieved by top-down methods. However, as
such methods rely on a separate person detector and need to
estimate pose for every person individually, they are normally computationally intensive and not truly end-to-end
systems. By contrast, bottom-up methods [3, 30, 33, 22]
start by localizing identity-free keypoints for all the persons
in an input image through predicting heatmaps of different anatomical keypoints, followed by grouping them into
person instances. This strategy effectively makes bottomup methods faster and more capable of achieving real-time
pose estimation. However, because bottom-up methods
need to deal with scale variation, there still exists a large
gap between the performances of bottom-up and top-down

5386

