OctSqueeze: Octree-Structured Entropy Model for LiDAR Compression
Lila Huang1,2 Shenlong Wang1,3 Kelvin Wong1,3 Jerry Liu1 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Waterloo 3 University of Toronto
{lila.huang,shenlong.wang,kelvin.wong,jerryl,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
We present a novel deep compression algorithm to reduce the memory footprint of LiDAR point clouds. Our
method exploits the sparsity and structural redundancy between points to reduce the bitrate. Towards this goal, we
first encode the LiDAR points into an octree, a data-efficient
structure suitable for sparse point clouds. We then design a tree-structured conditional entropy model that models the probabilities of the octree symbols to encode the octree into a compact bitstream. We validate the effectiveness
of our method over two large-scale datasets. The results
demonstrate that our approach reduces the bitrate by 1020% at the same reconstruction quality, compared to the
previous state-of-the-art. Importantly, we also show that
for the same bitrate, our approach outperforms other compression algorithms when performing downstream 3D segmentation and detection tasks using compressed representations. Our algorithm can be used to reduce the onboard
and offboard storage of LiDAR points for applications such
as self-driving cars, where a single vehicle captures 84 billion points per day.

1. Introduction
In the past few decades, we have witnessed artificial intelligence revolutionizing robotic perception. Robots powered by these AI algorithms often utilize a plethora of different sensors to perceive and interact with the world. In particular, 3D sensors such as LiDAR and structured light cameras have proven to be crucial for many types of robots, such
as self-driving cars, indoor rovers, robot arms, and drones,
thanks to their ability to accurately capture the 3D geometry
of a scene. These sensors produce a significant amount of
data: a single Velodyne HDL-64 LiDAR sensor generates
over 100,000 points per sweep, resulting in over 84 billion
points per day. This enormous quantity of raw sensor data
brings challenges to onboard and offboard storage as well as
real-time communication. Hence, it is necessary to develop
an efficient compression method for 3D point clouds.
Raw 3D point clouds are represented as unstructured
n × 3 matrices at float precision. This uncompressed data

representation does not exploit the fact that the geometry of
the scene is usually well structured. Prior works have approached point cloud compression by using data structures
such as KD-trees [4] and octrees [19] to encode a point
cloud’s structure. Quantization is exploited to further reduce storage. However, there remains a massive quantity of
redundant information hidden in these representations, such
as repetitive local structures, planar surfaces, or object categories with a strong shape prior, such as cars and humans. In
theory, this redundant information can be exploited during
compression to reduce the bitrate even further. However,
this has not yet been exploited to its full potential in point
cloud compression.
The recent success of deep neural networks in image and
video compression brings a new paradigm towards structured data compression for point clouds. These approaches
typically contain three steps: 1) encode the data into a hidden representation through a convolutional neural network;
2) quantize the hidden features; and 3) learn an entropy
model to reduce the bitstream further through entropy coding. The key to the learned entropy model is encoding
context information to improve the predictability of a symbol’s occurrence, which directly increases its compressibility. However, it is non-trivial to apply these deep compression algorithms directly on a LiDAR point cloud, as it is
sparse and non-grid structured. Hence, there are two major
challenges that we need to address: 1) What is a memoryefficient data structure to represent LiDAR while exploiting
its sparsity? 2) How can we train a deep entropy model to
encode the representation to bitstreams efficiently?
In this work, we propose a novel deep learning model
for LiDAR point cloud compression. Our approach first exploits the efficient and self-adaptive octree structure to get
an initial encoding of the raw point cloud. We then learn
a tree-structured deep conditional entropy model over each
intermediate node of the tree, incorporating both the prior
and the context of the scene simultaneously to help predict the node symbols. The predicted probabilities from our
learned entropy model are then passed to an entropy coder
to encode the serialized symbols into the final bitstream.
We evaluate the performance of our approach over two

1313

