Embodied Language Grounding with 3D Visual Feature Representations
Mihir Prabhudesai∗, Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung∗, Syed Ashar Javed∗,
Maximilian Sieb†, Adam W. Harley, Katerina Fragkiadaki
{mprabhud,htung,sajaved,msieb,aharley,katef}@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We propose associating language utterances to 3D visual abstractions of the scene they describe. The 3D visual abstractions are encoded as 3-dimensional visual feature maps. We infer these 3D visual scene feature maps
from RGB images of the scene via view prediction: when
the generated 3D scene feature map is neurally projected
from a camera viewpoint, it should match the corresponding
RGB image. We present generative models that condition on
the dependency tree of an utterance and generate a corresponding visual 3D feature map as well as reason about its
plausibility, and detector models that condition on both the
dependency tree of an utterance and a related image and
localize the object referents in the 3D feature map inferred
from the image. Our model outperforms models of language
and vision that associate language with 2D CNN activations or 2D images by a large margin in a variety of tasks,
such as, classifying plausibility of utterances, detecting referential expressions, and supplying rewards for trajectory
optimization of object placement policies from language instructions. We perform numerous ablations and show the
improved performance of our detectors is due to its better
generalization across camera viewpoints and lack of object
interferences in the inferred 3D feature space, and the improved performance of our generators is due to their ability
to spatially reason about objects and their configurations in
3D when mapping from language to scenes.

1. Introduction
Consider the utterance “the tomato is to the left of the
pot”. Humans can answer numerous questions about the
situation described such as, “is the pot larger than the
tomato?”, “can we move to a viewpoint from which the
tomato is completely hidden behind the pot?”, “can we
∗ Equal contribution
† Work done while in Carnegie Mellon University.

have an object that is both to the left of the tomato and to the
right of the pot?”, and so on. How can we learn computational models that would permit a machine to carry out similar types of reasoning? One possibility is to treat the task as
text comprehension (37; 12; 15; 8) and train machine learning models using supervision from utterances accompanied
with question answer pairs. However, information needed
for answering the questions is not contained in the utterance
itself; training a model to carry out predictions in absence
of the relevant information would lead to overfitting. Associating utterances with RGB images that depict the scene
described in the utterance, and using both images and utterances for answering questions, provides more world context and has been shown to be helpful. Consider though that
information about object size, object extent, occlusion relationships, free space and so on, are only indirectly present
in an RGB image, while they are readily available given a
3D representation of the scene the image depicts. Though
it would take many training examples to learn whether a
spoon can be placed in between the tomato and the pot on
the table, in 3D this experiment can be imagined easily, simply by considering whether the 3D model of the spoon can
fit in the free space between the tomato and the pot. Humans are experts in inverting camera projection and inferring an approximate 3D scene given an RGB image (21).
This paper builds upon inverse graphics neural architectures
for providing the 3D visual representations to associate language, with the hope to inject spatial reasoning capabilities
into architectures for language understanding.
We propose associating language utterances to spaceaware 3D visual feature representations of the scene
they describe. We infer such 3D scene representations
from RGB images of the scene. Though inferring 3D scene
representations from RGB images, a.k.a. inverse graphics, is known to be a difficult problem (17; 28; 33), we
build upon recent advances in computer vision (34) that
consider inferring from images a learnable 3D scene feature representation in place of explicit 3D representations
such as meshes, pointclouds or binary voxel occupancies
12220

