Differential Treatment for Stuff and Things:
A Simple Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Method for Semantic Segmentation
Zhonghao Wang1 , Mo Yu2 , Yunchao Wei3 , Rogerio Feris2 ,
Jinjun Xiong2 , Wen-mei Hwu1 , Thomas S. Huang1 , Honghui Shi4,1
1

C3SR, UIUC, 2 IBM Research, 3 ReLER, UTS, 4 University of Oregon

Abstract
We consider the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation by easing the domain shift
between the source domain (synthetic data) and the target
domain (real data) in this work. State-of-the-art approaches
prove that performing semantic-level alignment is helpful
in tackling the domain shift issue. Based on the observation that stuff categories usually share similar appearances
across images of different domains while things (i.e. object
instances) have much larger differences, we propose to improve the semantic-level alignment with different strategies
for stuff regions and for things: 1) for the stuff categories,
we generate feature representation for each class and conduct the alignment operation from the target domain to the
source domain; 2) for the thing categories, we generate feature representation for each individual instance and encourage the instance in the target domain to align with the most
similar one in the source domain. In this way, the individual differences within thing categories will also be considered to alleviate over-alignment. In addition to our proposed method, we further reveal the reason why the current
adversarial loss is often unstable in minimizing the distribution discrepancy and show that our method can help ease
this issue by minimizing the most similar stuff and instance
features between the source and the target domains. We
conduct extensive experiments in two unsupervised domain
adaptation tasks, i.e. GTA5 → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA →
Cityscapes, and achieve the new state-of-the-art segmentation accuracy.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [28] enables image scene understanding at the pixel level, which is crucial to many realworld applications such as autonomous driving. The recent
surge of deep learning [25] methods that generate features
from large training datasets has significantly accelerated the
progress in semantic segmentation [3, 4, 45, 5, 18, 19, 7, 39,

Stuff: “tree”

Instance: “car”

Stuff: “tree”

Instance: “car”

features of synthetic data

features of real data

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Stuff Instance Matching
(SIM) structure. By matching the most similar stuff regions and
things (i.e., instances) with differential treatment, we can adapt
the features more accurately from the source domain to the target
domain.

8, 21, 31]. However, collecting data with pixel-level annotation is costly in terms of both time and money. Specifically, to annotate an image in the widely used benchmark
Cityscapes [10] takes 1.5 hours on average; that sums up
to 7,500 hours in total for annotating all the 5,000 images.
Such annotation cost is quite burdensome, given that training deep neural networks on the collected data usually takes
less than dozens of hours.
To address the problem of high-cost annotation, unsupervised domain adaptation methods are proposed for semantic segmentation [32, 33]. In these works, a model trained
on a source domain dataset with segmentation annotations
is adapted for an unlabeled target domain. The source domain datasets can be synthetic, e.g., from video games, so
that little human effort is required. However, such methods suffer from the domain shift problem. Existing methods deal with the problem by minimizing the distribution
discrepancy of the features extracted by a feature extractor
[36, 14] between the source domain and the target domain.
To this end, the GAN [13] architectures, usually composed

12635

