Inter-Region Affinity Distillation for Road Marking Segmentation
Yuenan Hou1 , Zheng Ma2 , Chunxiao Liu2 , Tak-Wai Hui1 , and Chen Change Loy3†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Group Limited 3 Nanyang Technological University
1
{hy117, twhui}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, 2 {mazheng, liuchunxiao}@sensetime.com, 3 ccloy@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
We study the problem of distilling knowledge from a
large deep teacher network to a much smaller student network for the task of road marking segmentation. In this
work, we explore a novel knowledge distillation (KD) approach that can transfer ‘knowledge’ on scene structure
more effectively from a teacher to a student model. Our
method is known as Inter-Region Affinity KD (IntRA-KD).
It decomposes a given road scene image into different regions and represents each region as a node in a graph. An
inter-region affinity graph is then formed by establishing
pairwise relationships between nodes based on their similarity in feature distribution. To learn structural knowledge from the teacher network, the student is required to
match the graph generated by the teacher. The proposed
method shows promising results on three large-scale road
marking segmentation benchmarks, i.e., ApolloScape, CULane and LLAMAS, by taking various lightweight models as students and ResNet-101 as the teacher. IntRAKD consistently brings higher performance gains on all
lightweight models, compared to previous distillation methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/
cardwing/Codes-for-IntRA-KD.

1. Introduction
Road marking segmentation serves various purposes in
autonomous driving, e.g., providing cues for vehicle navigation or extracting basic road elements and lanes for constructing high-definition maps [7]. Training a deep network
for road marking segmentation is known to be challenging
due to various reasons [8], including tiny road elements,
poor lighting conditions and occlusions caused by vehicles.
The training difficulty is further compounded by the nature
of segmentation labels available for training, which are usually sparse (e.g., very thin and long lane marking against a
large background), hence affecting the capability of a net†: Corresponding author.

work in learning the spatial structure of a road scene [8, 14].
The aforementioned challenges become especially crippling when one is required to train a small model for road
marking segmentation. This requirement is not uncommon
considering that small models are usually deployed on vehicles with limited computational resources. Knowledge distillation (KD) [6] offers an appealing way to facilitate the
training of a small student model by transferring knowledge
from a trained teacher model of larger capacity. Various KD
methods have been proposed in the past, e.g., with knowledge transferred through softened class scores [6], feature
maps matching [9, 13] or spatial attention maps matching [27].
While existing KD methods are shown effective in many
classification tasks, we found that they still fall short in
transferring knowledge of scene structure for the task of
road marking segmentation. Specifically, a road scene typically exhibits consistent configuration, i.e., road elements
are orderly distributed in a scene. The structural relationship is crucial to providing the necessary constraint or regularization, especially for small networks, to combat against
the sparsity of supervision. However, such structural relationship is rarely exploited in previous distillation methods.
The lack of structural awareness makes small models struggle in differentiating visually similar but functionally different road markings.
In this paper, we wish to enhance the structural awareness of a student model by exploring a more effective way
to transfer the scene structure prior encoded in a teacher to
a student. Our investigation is based on the premise that
a teacher model should have a better capability in learning
discriminative features and capturing contextual information due to its larger capacity in comparison to the student
model. Feature distribution relationships encoded by the
teacher on different parts of a deep feature map could reveal rich structural connections between different scene regions, e.g., the lane region should look different from the
zebra crossing. Such priors can offer a strong constraint to
regularize the learning of the student network.
Our method is known as Inter-Region Affinity Knowledge Distillation (IntRA-KD). As the name implies, knowl112486

