Residual Feature Aggregation Network for Image Super-Resolution
Jie Liu Wenjie Zhang Yuting Tang Jie Tang∗ Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{jieliu,zwj,MF1833070}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {tangjie,gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, very deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have shown great power in single image superresolution (SISR) and achieved significant improvements
against traditional methods. Among these CNN-based
methods, the residual connections play a critical role in
boosting the network performance. As the network depth
grows, the residual features gradually focused on different
aspects of the input image, which is very useful for reconstructing the spatial details. However, existing methods neglect to fully utilize the hierarchical features on the residual branches. To address this issue, we propose a novel
residual feature aggregation (RFA) framework for more efficient feature extraction. The RFA framework groups several
residual modules together and directly forwards the features on each local residual branch by adding skip connections. Therefore, the RFA framework is capable of aggregating these informative residual features to produce more
representative features. To maximize the power of the RFA
framework, we further propose an enhanced spatial attention (ESA) block to make the residual features to be more
focused on critical spatial contents. The ESA block is designed to be lightweight and efficient. Our final RFANet is
constructed by applying the proposed RFA framework with
the ESA blocks. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
the necessity of our RFA framework and the superiority of
our RFANet over state-of-the-art SISR methods.

1. Introduction
The task of single image super-resolution (SISR) is to
map a degraded low-resolution (LR) image to a visually
high-resolution (HR) image, which is a highly ill-posed procedure since multiple HR solutions can map to one LR
input. Many image SR methods have been proposed to
tackle this inverse problem, including early interpolationbased [37], reconstruction-based [34], and recent learning
based methods [27, 28, 22, 4, 12, 13, 36, 3].
∗ Corresponding author.

RB

RB

RB

RB

(a) A Chain of Residual Modules

RB

RB

RB
RB

Conv

(b) Residual Feature Aggregation (RFA)

Figure 1. (a) A chain of residual modules. A residual module consists of a residual block (RB) and an identity connection. (b) The
residual feature aggregation (RFA) framework.

Recent deep convolutional neural network based methods have made great progress in reconstructing the HR images. The first successful attempt was done by Dong et
al. [4], who proposed the three-layer SRCNN for SISR
and achieved superior performance against conventional
methods. Kim et al. further increased the depth to 20 in
VDSR [13] and DRCN [14] by introducing residual learning to ease the training difficulty. Following these pioneering works, many CNN-based methods have been proposed
and achieved state-of-the-art results in SISR [15, 18, 40, 38,
3, 17, 7, 9, 39].
Although considerable improvements have been
achieved in SISR, existing CNN-based models are still
faced with some limitations. As the network depth grows,
the features in each convolutional layer would be hierarchical with different receptive fields. Most existing
CNN-based models do not make fully use of the information from the intermediate layers. Especially, residual
learning is widely used in CNN-based models to extract
the residual information of input features, while almost all
the existing SR models only use the residual learning as a
strategy to ease the training difficulty. For clarity, we call
the entire residual construct as a residual module and the
residual branch as a residual block. Usually, a SR model
is made by stacking a bunch of residual modules, where
the residual features are fused with the identity features
before propagating to the next module (Fig. 1(a)). As a

2359

