PropagationNet: Propagate Points to Curve to Learn Structure Information
Xiehe Huang1, 2

Weihong Deng1

Haifeng Shen2

Xiubao Zhang2

Jieping Ye2
1
Pattern Recognition & Intelligent System Laboratory, School of Information and
Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{xiehe.huang, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn
2

AI Labs, DiDi Chuxing

{huangxiehe i, shenhaifeng, zhangxiubao, yejieping}@didiglobal.com

Abstract
Deep learning technique has dramatically boosted the
performance of face alignment algorithms. However, due to
large variability and lack of samples, the alignment problem
in unconstrained situations, e.g. large head poses, exaggerated expression, and uneven illumination, is still largely unsolved. In this paper, we explore the instincts and reasons
behind our two proposals, i.e. Propagation Module and Focal Wing Loss, to tackle the problem. Concretely, we present
a novel structure-infused face alignment algorithm based
on heatmap regression via propagating landmark heatmaps
to boundary heatmaps, which provide structure information
for further attention map generation. Moreover, we propose
a Focal Wing Loss for mining and emphasizing the difficult
samples under in-the-wild condition. In addition, we adopt
methods like CoordConv and Anti-aliased CNN from other
fields that address the shift-variance problem of CNN for
face alignment. When implementing extensive experiments
on different benchmarks, i.e. WFLW, 300W, and COFW, our
method outperforms state-of-the-arts by a significant margin. Our proposed approach achieves 4.05% mean error
on WFLW, 2.93% mean error on 300W full-set, and 3.71%
mean error on COFW.

1. Introduction
Face alignment, aimed at localizing facial landmark,
plays an essential role in many face analysis applications,
e.g. face verification and recognition [23], face morphing
[10], expression recognition [13], and 3D face reconstruction [7]. Recent years have witnessed the constant emergence of fancy face alignment algorithms with considerable
performance on various datasets. Yet face alignment in unconstrained situations, e.g. large head pose, exaggerated expression, and uneven illumination, has plagued researchers

Convolution

Concatenation

Hourglass Module

Sigmoid
Hadamard Product

Figure 1. Building blocks of our propagation module. Landmark
heatmaps are input to multiple convolutional operations, then concatenated with the output feature maps of last hourglass module,
together processed by a two-stage hourglass module, and finally
normalized by a sigmoid layer to form an attention map that is
imposed on the feature maps.

over the years. Among many other factors, we attribute the
mentioned challenges to the disability of CNN to learn facial structure information: if a CNN is enabled to extract
the structure of a face in an image, then it can predict facial
landmarks more accurately since even the occluded parts of
a face, for instance, can be inferenced through the shape of
the face. This is also the intention of ASM [4]’s designers.
What exactly is structural information? In our work, we
deem it to be the statistical mean of landmark coordinates.
Perhaps with high variance (such as different head poses),
landmark coordinates are still subject to some distribution
due to the relative non-transformability of a face shape. In
order for a CNN to learn the information, we represent it
as facial boundary in this paper (see Fig. 2) following Wu
et al. [25]. A facial boundary could be the jawline, or the
outer contour of a face. Or it could be the edge surrounding
a mouth. These boundaries are commonly annotated with a
series of points by available datasets due to their difficulty
with modeling a line.

7265

