Bridging the Gap Between Anchor-based and Anchor-free Detection via
Adaptive Training Sample Selection

1

Shifeng Zhang1,2 , Cheng Chi3 , Yongqiang Yao4 , Zhen Lei1,2 *, Stan Z. Li5
CBSR, NLPR, CASIA 2 SAI, UCAS 3 AIR, CAS 4 BUPT 5 Westlake University

{shifeng.zhang,zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, chicheng15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, yao yq@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection has been dominated by anchor-based
detectors for several years. Recently, anchor-free detectors have become popular due to the proposal of FPN and
Focal Loss. In this paper, we first point out that the essential difference between anchor-based and anchor-free
detection is actually how to define positive and negative
training samples, which leads to the performance gap between them. If they adopt the same definition of positive
and negative samples during training, there is no obvious difference in the final performance, no matter regressing from a box or a point. This shows that how to select positive and negative training samples is important
for current object detectors. Then, we propose an Adaptive Training Sample Selection (ATSS) to automatically select positive and negative samples according to statistical
characteristics of object. It significantly improves the performance of anchor-based and anchor-free detectors and
bridges the gap between them. Finally, we discuss the necessity of tiling multiple anchors per location on the image
to detect objects. Extensive experiments conducted on MS
COCO support our aforementioned analysis and conclusions. With the newly introduced ATSS, we improve stateof-the-art detectors by a large margin to 50.7% AP without introducing any overhead. The code is available at
https://github.com/sfzhang15/ATSS.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a long-standing topic in the field of
computer vision, aiming to detect objects of predefined categories. Accurate object detection would have far reaching
impact on various applications including image recognition
and video surveillance. In recent years, with the development of convolutional neural network (CNN), object detection has been dominated by anchor-based detectors, which
can be generally divided into one-stage methods [36, 33]
* Corresponding author

and two-stage methods [47, 9]. Both of them first tile a large
number of preset anchors on the image, then predict the category and refine the coordinates of these anchors by one or
several times, finally output these refined anchors as detection results. Because two-stage methods refine anchors several times more than one-stage methods, the former one has
more accurate results while the latter one has higher computational efficiency. State-of-the-art results on common detection benchmarks are still held by anchor-based detectors.
Recent academic attention has been geared toward
anchor-free detectors due to the emergence of FPN [32] and
Focal Loss [33]. Anchor-free detectors directly find objects
without preset anchors in two different ways. One way is to
first locate several pre-defined or self-learned keypoints and
then bound the spatial extent of objects. We call this type of
anchor-free detectors as keypoint-based methods [26, 71].
Another way is to use the center point or region of objects to define positives and then predict the four distances
from positives to the object boundary. We call this kind
of anchor-free detectors as center-based methods [56, 23].
These anchor-free detectors are able to eliminate those hyperparameters related to anchors and have achieved similar performance with anchor-based detectors, making them
more potential in terms of generalization ability.
Among these two types of anchor-free detectors,
keypoint-based methods follow the standard keypoint estimation pipeline that is different from anchor-based detectors. However, center-based detectors are similar to anchorbased detectors, which treat points as preset samples instead
of anchor boxes. Take the one-stage anchor-based detector RetinaNet [33] and the center-based anchor-free detector FCOS [56] as an example, there are three main differences between them: (1) The number of anchors tiled per
location. RetinaNet tiles several anchor boxes per location,
while FCOS tiles one anchor point1 per location. (2) The
definition of positive and negative samples. RetinaNet resorts to the Intersection over Union (IoU) for positives and
1 A point in FCOS is equal to the center of an anchor box in RetinaNet,
thus we call it as the anchor point. A pair of anchor point and box is associated to the same location of feature map to be classified and regressed.

9759

