Deep Distance Transform for Tubular Structure Segmentation in CT Scans
Yan Wang1† Xu Wei2∗† Fengze Liu1 Jieneng Chen3∗ Yuyin Zhou1 Wei Shen1‡
Elliot K. Fishman4 Alan L. Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 University of California San Diego 3 Tongji University
4
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Abstract
Tubular structure segmentation in medical images, e.g.,
segmenting vessels in CT scans, serves as a vital step in
the use of computers to aid in screening early stages of related diseases. But automatic tubular structure segmentation in CT scans is a challenging problem, due to issues
such as poor contrast, noise and complicated background.
A tubular structure usually has a cylinder-like shape which
can be well represented by its skeleton and cross-sectional
radii (scales). Inspired by this, we propose a geometryaware tubular structure segmentation method, Deep Distance Transform (DDT), which combines intuitions from the
classical distance transform for skeletonization and modern deep segmentation networks. DDT first learns a multitask network to predict a segmentation mask for a tubular
structure and a distance map. Each value in the map represents the distance from each tubular structure voxel to the
tubular structure surface. Then the segmentation mask is
refined by leveraging the shape prior reconstructed from
the distance map. We apply our DDT on six medical image datasets. Results show that (1) DDT can boost tubular
structure segmentation performance significantly (e.g., over
13% DSC improvement for pancreatic duct segmentation),
and (2) DDT additionally provides a geometrical measurement for a tubular structure, which is important for clinical diagnosis (e.g., the cross-sectional scale of a pancreatic
duct can be an indicator for pancreatic cancer).

1. Introduction
Tubular structures are ubiquitous throughout the human
body, with notable examples including blood vessels, pancreatic duct and urinary tract. They occur in specific environments at the boundary of liquids, solids or air and surrounding tissues, and play a prominent role in sustaining
physiological functions of the human body.
∗ This work was done when Xu Wei and Jieneng Chen were at JHU.
† Equal Contribution.
‡ Corresponding Author (shenwei1231@gmail.com).

Figure 1. A tubular shape is presented as the envelope of a family
of spheres with continuously changing center points and radii [9].

In this paper, we investigate automatic tubular organ/tissue segmentation from CT scans, which is important
for the characterization of various diseases [18]. For example, pancreatic duct dilatation or abrupt pancreatic duct caliber change signifies high risk for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), which is the third most common cause
of cancer death in the US [11]. Another example is that obstructed vessels lead to coronary heart disease, which is the
leading cause of death in the US [27].
Segmenting tubular organs/tissues from CT scans is a
popular but challenging problem. Existing methods addressing this problem can be roughly categorized into two
groups: (1) Geometry-based methods, which build deformable shape models to fit tubular structures by exploiting
their geometrical properties [43, 45, 3, 25], e.g., a tubular
structure can be well represented by its skeleton, aka symmetry axis or medial axis, and it has a cylindrical surface.
But, due to the lack of powerful learning models, these
methods cannot deal with poor contrast, noise and complicated background. (2) Learning-based methods, which
learn a per-pixel classification model to detect tubular structures. The performance of this type of methods is largely
boosted by deep learning, especially fully convolutional
networks (FCN) [23, 49, 48]. FCN and its variants have
become out-of-the-box models for tubular organ/tissue segmentation and achieve state-of-the-art results [24, 47]. But,
these networks simply try to learn a class label per voxel,
which inevitably ignores the geometric arrangement of the
voxels in a tubular structure, and consequently can not guarantee that the obtained segmentation has the right shape.
Since a tubular structure can be well represented by its
skeleton and the cross-sectional radius of each skeleton

3833

