WaveletStereo: Learning Wavelet Coefficients of Disparity Map in
Stereo Matching
Menglong Yang, Fangrui Wu and Wei Li
School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sichuan University
Chengdu, Sichuan, PR China
mlyang@scu.edu.cn, wufangrui@stu.scu.edu.cn, li.wei@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Some stereo matching algorithms based on deep learning have been proposed and achieved state-of-the-art performances since some public large-scale datasets were put
online. However, the disparity in smooth regions and detailed regions is still difficult to accurately estimate simultaneously. This paper proposes a novel stereo matching
method called WaveletStereo, which learns the wavelet coefficients of the disparity rather than the disparity itself.
The WaveletStereo consists of several sub-modules, where
the low-frequency sub-module generates the low-frequency
wavelet coefficients, which aims at learning global context
information and well handling the low-frequency regions
such as textureless surfaces, and the others focus on the details. In addition, a densely connected atrous spatial pyramid block is introduced for better learning the multi-scale
image features. Experimental results show the effectiveness
of the proposed method, which achieves state-of-the-art performance on the large-scale test dataset Scene Flow.

1. Introduction
As a convenient and cheap means of obtaining object
depth, stereo vision acts a more and more pivotal part in
computer vision, with the increasing applications of virtual (augmented) reality, 3D object detection and recognition, motion sense game and unmanned aerial vehicle,
etc. Scholars have paid many attentions to stereo matching, which is a key step for stereo vision. Recent years, the
research on stereo matching has got satisfying achievement
since some public datasets were published online, such as
Middlebury [39] and KITTI stereo benchmark [10, 12],
which is convenient for researchers to compare their algorithms against state-of-the-art algorithms. However, stereo
matching for the complex environment including amounts
of ill-posed regions, such as textureless or detailed regions,
is still a challenging topic[32].

As Scharstein and Szeliski [39] summarized, there were
usually four steps in a typical traditional stereo matching algorithm, i.e., matching cost computation, cost aggregation,
optimization, and disparity refinement, respectively. Traditional stereo matching algorithms can be mainly split into
two categories, i.e., the local methods and the global (semiglobal) methods.
Most local stereo matching methods were more interested at studying the first two steps [16, 53], and often
accurately estimated the disparity in regions with highfrequency details, but frequently failed in low-frequency areas such as textureless and saturated regions.
To improve the performance in low-frequency region,
many global (semi-global) methods, such as graph cuts
[24, 36, 33], belief propagation (BP) [23, 52, 51, 60, 49] and
Semi-global matching (SGM) algorithm [15], focused more
on the research of latter two steps. A Conditional Random
Field (CRF) model was often constructed in global (semiglobal) algorithms, which contained the assumptions of
photo-consistency and smoothness. The photo-consistency
expects that the matching pixels have similar appearance
features, and the smoothness constrains the divergence
of neighboring pixels’ label except some disparity-jump
places, which measures the cost of assigning labels to
neighboring pixels, such as the pairwise smoothness [23,
52, 51, 60] or the higher-order smoothness [49, 47, 25].
Compared with local methods, these methods improved the
performance in the low-frequency regions, but solving the
CRF model is often time consuming and they may still
falsely predict the disparity for pixels in high-frequency regions.
Recent works based on deep learning use convolutional
neural networks to learn similarity computation and contextual information, and vastly improve the accuracy and
robustness of disparity estimation [55, 20]. However, there
are a lot of mismatches in ill-posed regions, especially the
high-frequency regions, such as thin surfaces, occlusion areas and repeated patterns, although these regions account
for only a small proportion and the false predictions in them

12885

