Advancing High Fidelity Identity Swapping for Forgery Detection
Lingzhi Li1∗

Jianmin Bao2†
Hao Yang2
Dong Chen2
1
2
Peking University
Microsoft Research

lilingzhi@pku.edu.cn
Source

Fang Wen2

{jianbao,haya,doch,fangwen}@microsoft.com

Target

Result

Source

Target

Result

Figure 1: The face in the source image is taken to replace the face in the target image. Results of FaceShifter appear on the right.

Abstract
In this work, we study various existing benchmarks
for deepfake detection researches. In particular, we examine a novel two-stage face swapping algorithm, called
FaceShifter, for high fidelity and occlusion aware face
swapping. Unlike many existing face swapping works that
leverage only limited information from the target image
when synthesizing the swapped face, FaceShifter generates
the swapped face with high-fidelity by exploiting and integrating the target attributes thoroughly and adaptively.
FaceShifter can handle facial occlusions with a second synthesis stage consisting of a Heuristic Error Acknowledging Refinement Network (HEAR-Net), which is trained to
recover anomaly regions in a self-supervised way without any manual annotations. Experiments show that existing deepfake detection algorithm performs poorly with
FaceShifter, since it achieves advantageous quality over all
existing benchmarks. However, our newly developed Face
X-Ray [23] method can reliably detect forged images created by FaceShifter.

1. Introduction
Face swapping has attracted great interest in the vision
and graphics community, because of its potential wide applications in movie composition, computer games, and privacy protection [35]. More worth mentioning is that better face swapping technologies will help build better face
forgery detection technologies.
Recent research [36] shows that the previous face swapping algorithms can be easily detected by a binary classifier.
∗ Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia
† Corresponding Author

This is because the quality of synthetic faces from these
algorithms are usually unsatisfactory. Early replacementbased works [6, 42] simply replace the pixels of inner face
region. Thus, they are sensitive to the variations in posture and perspective. 3D-based works [7, 12, 26, 31] used
a 3D model to deal with the posture or perspective difference. However the accuracy and robustness of 3D reconstruction of faces are all unsatisfactory. Recently, GANbased works [21, 28, 29, 30, 4] have illustrated impressive
results. But it remains challenging to synthesize both realistic and high-fidelity results.
In this work, we focus on improving the fidelity of face
swapping, and examine the face forgery face detection algorithm on the this new face swapping algorithm. In order
to make the results more perceptually appealing, it is important that the synthesized swapped face not only shares the
pose and expression of the target face, but also can be seamlessly fitted into the target image without inconsistency: the
rendering of the swapped face should be faithful to the lighting (e.g. direction, intensity, color) of the target scene, the
pixel resolution of the swapped face should also be consistent with the target image resolution. Neither of these can
be well handled by a simple alpha or Poisson blending. Instead, we need a thorough and adaptive integration of target
image attributes during the synthesis of the swapped face,
so that the attributes from the target image, including scene
lighting or image resolution, can help make the swapped
face more realistic.
However, previous face swapping methods either neglect
the requirement of this integration, or lack the ability to perform it in a thorough and adaptive way. In specific, many
previous methods use only pose and expression guidances
from the target image to synthesize the swapped face, the
face is then blended into the target image using masks of

5074

