Action Segmentation with Joint Self-Supervised Temporal Domain Adaptation
Min-Hung Chen1∗

Baopu Li2 Yingze Bao2 Ghassan AlRegib1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Baidu USA

Abstract

Source
Labels

Despite the recent progress of fully-supervised action
segmentation techniques, the performance is still not fully
satisfactory. One main challenge is the problem of spatiotemporal variations (e.g. different people may perform
the same activity in various ways). Therefore, we exploit
unlabeled videos to address this problem by reformulating the action segmentation task as a cross-domain problem with domain discrepancy caused by spatio-temporal
variations. To reduce the discrepancy, we propose SelfSupervised Temporal Domain Adaptation (SSTDA), which
contains two self-supervised auxiliary tasks (binary and sequential domain prediction) to jointly align cross-domain
feature spaces embedded with local and global temporal
dynamics, achieving better performance than other Domain Adaptation (DA) approaches. On three challenging benchmark datasets (GTEA, 50Salads, and Breakfast),
SSTDA outperforms the current state-of-the-art method by
large margins (e.g. for the F1@25 score, from 59.6% to
69.1% on Breakfast, from 73.4% to 81.5% on 50Salads, and
from 83.6% to 89.1% on GTEA), and requires only 65%
of the labeled training data for comparable performance,
demonstrating the usefulness of adapting to unlabeled target videos across variations. The source code is available
at https://github.com/cmhungsteve/SSTDA.

1. Introduction
The goal of action segmentation is to simultaneously
segment videos by time and predict an action class for
each segment, leading to various applications (e.g. human
activity analyses). While action classification has shown
great progress given the recent success of deep neural networks [38, 28, 27], temporally locating and recognizing action segments in long videos is still challenging. One main
challenge is the problem of spatio-temporal variations of
human actions across videos [16]. For example, different
people may make tea in different personalized styles even
if the given recipe is the same. The intra-class variations
∗ Work done during an internship at Baidu USA

Zsolt Kira1

Video Inputs

Fully-Supervised
Learning

Target
Unlabeled Videos

Unlabeled Videos

Labels

Spatio-Temporal Feature Embedding
Domain Discrepancy

Target
Model

Source
Model

SSTDA
Action Predictions

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed Self-Supervised
Temporal Domain Adaptation (SSTDA) for action segmentation. “Source” refers to the data with labels, and “Target” refers to the data without access to labels. SSTDA can
effectively adapts the source model trained with standard
fully-supervised learning to a target domain by diminishing the discrepancy of embedded feature spaces between the
two domains caused by spatio-temporal variations. SSTDA
only requires unlabeled videos from both domains with the
standard transductive setting, which eliminates the need of
additional labels to obtain the final target model.

cause degraded performance by directly deploying a model
trained with different groups of people.
Despite significant progress made by recent methods
based on temporal convolution with fully-supervised learning [20, 6, 23, 8], the performance is still not fully satisfactory (e.g. the best accuracy on the Breakfast dataset is still
lower than 70%). One method to improve the performance
is to exploit knowledge from larger-scale labeled data [2].
However, manually annotating precise frame-by-frame actions is time-consuming and challenging. Another way is to
design more complicated architectures but with higher costs
of model complexity. Thus, we aim to address the spatiotemporal variation problem with unlabeled data, which are
comparatively easy to obtain. To achieve this goal, we
propose to diminish the distributional discrepancy caused
by spatio-temporal variations by exploiting auxiliary unlabeled videos with the same types of human activities performed by different people. More specifically, to extend the
framework of the main video task for exploiting auxiliary

9454

