Joint Filtering of Intensity Images and Neuromorphic Events for
High-Resolution Noise-Robust Imaging
Zihao W. Wang†#§ Peiqi Duan‡# Oliver Cossairt† Aggelos Katsaggelos† Tiejun Huang‡ Boxin Shi‡∗
†
Northwestern University ‡ Peking University
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/guided-event-filtering

Abstract
We present a novel computational imaging system with
high resolution and low noise. Our system consists of a traditional video camera which captures high-resolution intensity images, and an event camera which encodes high-speed
motion as a stream of asynchronous binary events. To process the hybrid input, we propose a unifying framework that
first bridges the two sensing modalities via a noise-robust
motion compensation model, and then performs joint image
filtering. The filtered output represents the temporal gradient of the captured space-time volume, which can be viewed
as motion-compensated event frames with high resolution
and low noise. Therefore, the output can be widely applied
to many existing event-based algorithms that are highly
dependent on spatial resolution and noise robustness. In
experimental results performed on both publicly available
datasets as well as our new RGB-DAVIS dataset, we show
systematic performance improvement in applications such
as high frame-rate video synthesis, feature/corner detection
and tracking, as well as high dynamic range image reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Recently, a new breed of bio-inspired sensors called
event cameras, or Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS), has
gained growing attention with its distinctive advantages
over traditional frame cameras such as high speed, high dynamic range (HDR) and low power consumption [22, 45].
Thus far, event cameras have shown promising capability
in solving classical as well as new computer vision and
robotics tasks, including optical flow and scene depth estimation [1, 31, 40, 49], high frame-rate HDR video synthesis [15, 30, 37, 38, 41, 43, 52, 55], 3D reconstruction and
tracking [11, 19, 27, 36], visual SLAM [51], object/face detection [34, 35] and autonomous wheel steering [26].
Despite numerous advances in event-based vision [8],
# Equal contribution.

∗ Corresponding author.

§ Part of this work was finished while visiting Peking University.

brightness increase

brightness decrease

-6

0

8

(a) Joint plot of image & events (b) Motion-compensated events

(c) Captured image

(d) Filtered events

Figure 1: Compared to traditional frame cameras, event
cameras (e.g., DAVIS240) can capture high-speed motion
(a), but bear low resolution and severe noise (b). Our
system jointly filters between a high-resolution image (c)
and high-speed events to produce a high-resolution lownoise event frame (d), which can interface with downstream
event-based algorithms with improved performance.
current event sensor prototypes, e.g., DAVIS240, still bear
low spatial resolution and severe noise (Fig. 1(a) & (b)).
Moreover, the unique event sensing mechanism according to which each pixel individually responds to brightness
changes and outputs a cloud of continuously timestamped
address points (Fig. 1(a)) renders event-based super resolution and denoising elusively challenging. On the other
hand, commercial frame sensors can easily acquire millions
of pixels, and image-based super resolution and denoising
algorithms are highly advanced after decades of development. These sensory and algorithmic imbalances motivate
us to ask: Can we make complementary use of event and

1609

