Joint Texture and Geometry Optimization for RGB-D Reconstruction
Yanping Fu1
Qingan Yan2
Jie Liao1
Chunxia Xiao1,3,4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Silicon Valley Research Center, JD.com, United States
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University, China
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University, China
{ypfu,liaojie,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn, qingan.yan@jd.com

Abstract
Due to inevitable noises and quantization error, the reconstructed 3D models via RGB-D sensors always accompany geometric error and camera drifting, which consequently lead to blurring and unnatural texture mapping results. Most of the 3D reconstruction methods focus on either
geometry refinement or texture improvement respectively,
which subjectively decouples the inter-relationship between
geometry and texture. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that can jointly optimize the camera poses, texture
and geometry of the reconstructed model, and color consistency between the key-frames. Instead of computing ShapeFrom-Shading (SFS) expensively, our method directly optimizes the reconstructed mesh according to color and geometric consistency and high-boost normal cues, which can
effectively overcome the texture-copy problem generated by
SFS and achieve more detailed shape reconstruction. As the
joint optimization involves multiple correlated terms, therefore, we further introduce an iterative framework to interleave the optimal state. The experiments demonstrate that
our method can recover not only fine-scale geometry but
also high-fidelity texture.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of RGB-D sensors, it has become
more convenient to reconstruct the scenes and objects in
our daily life. Moreover, after the vigorous development
of the 3D reconstruction community in recent years, the
3D reconstruction technology using RGB-D sensor has
achieved a qualitative leap. We can reconstruct more detailed 3D models [3, 8, 18, 19, 21, 31, 32, 36, 38] and texture [2, 15, 20, 22, 28, 30, 40] for indoor scenes. However,
the reconstructed models are far from being directly applied
to applications, as the geometric accuracy and texture quality of 3D reconstruction results do not meet the requirement

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Joint texture and geometry optimization on RGB-D
scanned geometry. (a) Without any optimization. (b) With the
proposed joint optimization.

of applications like VR/AR, games, CAD manufacturing,
and 3D printing.
A high-quality 3D reconstructed model via the RGB-D
sensor should reach two basic requirements, correct geometry and high-fidelity texture. They are mainly degraded by
three factors: (1) the measuring error introduced by data acquirement equipment like noises, lens distortion and quantization error, (2) the accumulated errors during camera pose
estimation and (3) the geometric error due to the sharp geometric feature over-smoothed by the moving weighted average of truncated signed distance field (TSDF) [7], which
is commonly utilized as the implicit representation of depth
data integration. Due to the geometric error and the camera
drifting, the result of texture mapping in 3D reconstruction
inevitably exhibits blurring and ghosting artifacts.
To achieve high-quality 3D reconstruction based on
RGB-D sensor, various methods have been put forward. Wu
et al. [33] and Zollhöfer et al. [41] refined reconstructed geometries with the guidance of shading information provided
by color images, which have higher resolution than corresponding depth images, and hence are able to provide more
visual cues. However, SFS-based geometry refinement easily suffers from the texture-copy problem [25]. Rather than
modifying geometric shapes, Fu et al. [11], Bi et al. [2]

5950

