SpeedNet: Learning the Speediness in Videos
Sagie Benaim1,2∗ Ariel Ephrat1 Oran Lang1 Inbar Mosseri1 William T. Freeman1
Michael Rubinstein1 Michal Irani1,3 Tali Dekel1
1

Google Research

2

Tel Aviv University

3

Weizmann Institute

Abstract

1. Introduction
A human observer can often easily notice if an object’s
motion is sped up or slowed down. For example, if we play
a video of a dancer at twice the speed (2×), we can notice
unnatural, fast and jittery motions. In many cases, we have
prior knowledge about the way objects move in the world
(people, animals, cars); we know their typical dynamics and
their natural rate of motion.
In this paper, we seek to study how well we can train a
machine to learn such concepts and priors about objects’
motions. Solving this task requires high-level reasoning
and understanding of the way different objects move in the
world. We achieve this by training a single model, SpeedNet, to perform a basic binary classification task: estimate
whether an object in an input video sequence is moving at
its normal speed, or faster than the normal speed (Fig. 1,
top). That is, given a set of L frames in an L-fps video as
input, we set to predict whether those frames depict 1 second of the object’s motion in the world (normal speed), or
∗ Performed this work while an intern at Google.

Normal speed
or

Sped up?
SpeedNet

Input video segment

Predicted Speediness over time
Sped
up

Speediness

We wish to automatically predict the “speediness” of
moving objects in videos—whether they move faster, at, or
slower than their “natural” speed. The core component in
our approach is SpeedNet—a novel deep network trained to
detect if a video is playing at normal rate, or if it is sped
up. SpeedNet is trained on a large corpus of natural videos
in a self-supervised manner, without requiring any manual
annotations. We show how this single, binary classification network can be used to detect arbitrary rates of speediness of objects. We demonstrate prediction results by SpeedNet on a wide range of videos containing complex natural
motions, and examine the visual cues it utilizes for making those predictions. Importantly, we show that through
predicting the speed of videos, the model learns a powerful
and meaningful space-time representation that goes beyond
simple motion cues. We demonstrate how those learned features can boost the performance of self-supervised action
recognition, and can be used for video retrieval. Furthermore, we also apply SpeedNet for generating time-varying,
adaptive video speedups, which can allow viewers to watch
videos faster, but with less of the jittery, unnatural motions
typical to videos that are sped up uniformly.

Our SpeedNet Model

Normal speed

Slow-mo
Normal
speed

Slow-mo

Time

Slowed
down

Figure 1. Given an input video, our method automatically predicts the “speediness” of objects in the video—whether they move
faster, at, or slower than their natural speed. Bottom: a video of
a dancer alternates between normal speed and slow motion playback, as correctly captured by our speediness prediction over time.
Note that speediness 6= magnitude of motions, see Fig. 2. The
core component of our method is SpeedNet (top)—a novel deep
network that detects whether an object is moving at its normal
speed, or faster than its normal speed.

more than 1 second (the object/video is sped up). We preferred this approach over directly predicting (regressing to)
the playback rate of the video, because our ultimate goal is
to determine whether motion in a given video is natural or
not, a task for which a regression objective may be unnecessarily difficult to learn.
We dub this the “speediness” of the object. We then show
how this basic binary classification model can be applied at
test time to predict arbitrary rates of speediness in videos,
when objects are sped-up, or slowed-down, by different factors (Fig. 1, bottom). The model is trained on Kinetics [16],
a large corpus of natural videos of human actions, in a selfsupervised manner, without requiring manual labels.
Our motivation for this study is twofold. First, we ask if
it is possible to train a reliable classifier on a large-scale collection of videos to predict if an object’s motion is sped up
or played at normal speed—what would such a model learn
about the visual world in order to solve this task? Second,
we show that a well-trained model for predicting speediness
can support a variety of useful applications.
Training SpeedNet, however, is far from trivial. In hu19922

