Belief Propagation Reloaded: Learning BP-Layers for Labeling Problems
Patrick Knöbelreiter1

Christian Sormann1

Alexander Shekhovtsov2

knoebelreiter@icg.tugraz.at

christian.sormann@icg.tugraz.at

shekhovtsov@gmail.com

Friedrich Fraundorfer1
fraundorfer@icg.tugraz.at

Thomas Pock1

1

pock@icg.tugraz.at

2

Graz University of Technology
Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
It has been proposed by many researchers that combining
deep neural networks with graphical models can create more
efficient and better regularized composite models. The main
difficulties in implementing this in practice are associated
with a discrepancy in suitable learning objectives as well
as with the necessity of approximations for the inference. In
this work we take one of the simplest inference methods, a
truncated max-product Belief Propagation, and add what is
necessary to make it a proper component of a deep learning
model: We connect it to learning formulations with losses
on marginals and compute the backprop operation. This
BP-Layer can be used as the final or an intermediate block
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), allowing us to
design a hierarchical model composing BP inference and
CNNs at different scale levels. The model is applicable to
a range of dense prediction problems, is well-trainable and
provides parameter-efficient and robust solutions in stereo,
optical flow and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
We consider dense prediction tasks in computer vision
that can be formulated as assigning a categorical or real
value to every pixel. Of particular interest are the problems
of semantic segmentation, stereo depth reconstruction and
optical flow. The importance of these applications is indicated by the active development of new methods and intense
competition on common benchmarks.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have significantly pushed the limits in dense prediction tasks. However,
composing only CNN blocks, though a general solution,
becomes inefficient if we want to increase robustness and
accuracy: with the increase of the number of blocks and
respectively parameters the computational complexity and
the training data required grow significantly. The limitations
are in particular in handling long-range spatial interactions
and structural constraints, for which Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs) are much more suitable. Previous work has

Figure 1: BP-Layer in action. The BP-Layer can be used
for dense prediction problems such as stereo (top) semantic
segmentation (middle) or optical flow (bottom). Note the
sharp and precise edges for all three tasks. Input images are
from Kitti, Cityscapes and Sintel benchmarks.
shown that a combination of CNN+CRF models can offer
an increased performance, but incorporating inference in the
stochastic gradient training poses some difficulties.
In this work we consider several simple inference methods for CRFs: A variant of Belief Propagation (BP) [43],
tree-structured dynamic programming [2] and semi-global
matching [13]. We introduce a general framework, where we
view all these methods as specific schedules of max-product
BP updates and propose how to use such BP inference as a
layer in neural networks fully compatible with deep learning. The layer takes categorical probabilities on the input
and produces refined categorical probabilities on the output,
associated with marginals of the CRF. This allows for direct
training of the truncated inference method by propagating
gradients through the layer. The proposed BP-Layer can
have an associated loss function on its output probabilities,
which we argue to be more practical than other variants of

17900

