Explainable Object-induced Action Decision for Autonomous Vehicles
Yiran Xu Xiaoyin Yang Lihang Gong Hsuan-Chu Lin
Tz-Ying Wu Yunsheng Li Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{y5xu,x4yang,lgong,lhsuanch,tzw001,yul554,nuno}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
A new paradigm is proposed for autonomous driving. The new paradigm lies between the end-to-end and
pipelined approaches, and is inspired by how humans solve
the problem. While it relies on scene understanding, the
latter only considers objects that could originate hazard.
These are denoted as action inducing, since changes in
their state should trigger vehicle actions. They also define a set of explanations for these actions, which should
be produced jointly with the latter. An extension of the
BDD100K dataset, annotated for a set of 4 actions and 21
explanations, is proposed. A new multi-task formulation of
the problem, which optimizes the accuracy of both action
commands and explanations, is then introduced. A CNN architecture is finally proposed to solve this problem, by combining reasoning about action inducing objects and global
scene context. Experimental results show that the requirement of explanations improves the recognition of actioninducing objects, which in turn leads to better action predictions.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has enabled enormous progress in autonomous driving. Two major approaches have emerged.
End-to-end systems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] map the visual input directly into a driving action, such as “slow-down” or “turn”.
Pipelined systems first detect objects and obstacles, and
then use that information to decide on driving actions. Both
approaches have advantages and shortcomings. End-toend systems are theoretically optimal, since all visual information is used for decision-making. By the data processing theorem [6], intermediate decisions can only lead
to loss of information and compromise end-to-end optimality. However, end-to-end predictors are complex, requiring
large datasets and networks. Pipelines have the advantage
of modularity, decomposing the problem into a collection
of much smaller sub-problems, such as object detection,

Figure 1. Top: while autonomous vehicles face complex scenes,
composed of many objects, only a few of these are actioninducing. Bottom: each action-inducing object has an associated
explanation for the related action. The arrows represent actions
“move forward”, “turn left”, “stop/slow down”, and “turn right”
(count-clockwise order). Green identifies the acceptable action.

trajectory analysis and planning, etc. This approach has
spanned sub-literatures in 3D object detection [7, 8, 9, 10],
segmentation [11], depth estimation [12, 13], 3D reconstruction [14], among other topics. Nevertheless, the failure
of a single module can compromise the performance of the
whole system [15].
Beyond driving performance, interpretability is a major concern for autonomous driving. End-to-end systems
are notoriously poor in this regard given their black box
nature. While they can be complemented with explanations [16, 17], these are not yet fully reliable. Pipelined systems are more amenable to forensic analysis, by analysing
the performance of each module and assessing its potential
contribution to a system failure. However, current pipelined
approaches are not designed for this. Instead, each module
becomes a computer vision problem of its own, sometimes
with its own datasets and leaderboards. This makes it easy
to loose track of the overall goal when evaluating performance. For example, further progress on the detection of

9523

