Clean-Label Backdoor Attacks on Video Recognition Models
Shihao Zhao1 Xingjun Ma2† Xiang Zheng2 James Bailey2 Jingjing Chen1 Yu-Gang Jiang1†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to backdoor attacks which can hide backdoor triggers in DNNs by
poisoning training data. A backdoored model behaves normally on clean test images, yet consistently predicts a particular target class for any test examples that contain the
trigger pattern. As such, backdoor attacks are hard to detect, and have raised severe security concerns in real-world
applications. Thus far, backdoor research has mostly been
conducted in the image domain with image classification
models. In this paper, we show that existing image backdoor
attacks are far less effective on videos, and outline 4 strict
conditions where existing attacks are likely to fail: 1) scenarios with more input dimensions (eg. videos), 2) scenarios with high resolution, 3) scenarios with a large number
of classes and few examples per class (a “sparse dataset”),
and 4) attacks with access to correct labels (eg. clean-label
attacks). We propose the use of a universal adversarial trigger as the backdoor trigger to attack video recognition models, a situation where backdoor attacks are likely to be challenged by the above 4 strict conditions. We show on benchmark video datasets that our proposed backdoor attack can
manipulate state-of-the-art video models with high success
rates by poisoning only a small proportion of training data
(without changing the labels). We also show that our proposed backdoor attack is resistant to state-of-the-art backdoor defense/detection methods, and can even be applied
to improve image backdoor attacks. Our proposed video
backdoor attack not only serves as a strong baseline for improving the robustness of video models, but also provides
a new perspective for more understanding more powerful
backdoor attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are a family of powerful models that have been widely used to achieve stateof-the-art performance in many applications such as im† Correspondence to: Xingjun Ma (xingjun.ma@unimelb.edu.au) and
Yu-Gang Jiang (ygj@fudan.edu.cn)

Figure 1. An example of clean-label poisoned videos by cleanlabel backdoor attack Turner et al. [28] (top) and our proposed
attack with universal adversarial backdoor trigger (bottom).

age classification [10], natural language processing [24] and
video recognition [1]. Despite great success, DNNs have
been criticized due to their low transparency, poor interpretability, and more importantly vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks [25, 8, 16, 30, 32, 31] and backdoor attacks
[9, 2, 15, 28, 33]. This has raised concerns for the development of DNNs in applications such as face recognition
[21, 3], autonomous driving [5], video analysis [11], and
medical diagnosis [7, 17].
Compared with adversarial attacks which are test time
attacks but on clean models, backdoor attacks pose more severe threats by installing a hidden trigger into a target model
at training time. In particular, a backdoor attack poisons
training data with a backdoor trigger (or pattern) so as to set
up a link between the backdoor pattern and a target label.
Models trained on poisoned data will remember the trigger
pattern, and at test time, consistently predict a particular target class whenever the trigger pattern is present. Backdoor
attacks are hard to detect since backdoored models still perform accurately on clean validation or test data. Backdoor
attacks can happen in scenarios when users download DNN
models from an untrusted party or train models on data collected from unreliable sources, which is quite common in
deep learning. The study of backdoor attacks has thus be114443

