FM 2 u-Net: Face Morphological Multi-branch Network for Makeup-invariant
Face Verification
Wenxuan Wang1∗‡
1

Yanwei Fu1∗§

Xuelin Qian1‡

Fudan University, China

2

Yu-Gang Jiang1†‡

Qi Tian2¶

Xiangyang Xue1‡

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

Abstract
It is challenging in learning a makeup-invariant face verification model, due to (1) insufficient makeup/non-makeup
face training pairs, (2) the lack of diverse makeup faces,
and (3) the significant appearance changes caused by cosmetics. To address these challenges, we propose a unified
Face Morphological Multi-branch Network (FM 2 u-Net)
for makeup-invariant face verification, which can simultaneously synthesize many diverse makeup faces through
face morphology network (FM-Net) and effectively learn
cosmetics-robust face representations using attention-based
multi-branch learning network (AttM-Net). For challenges
(1) and (2), FM-Net (two stacked auto-encoders) can synthesize realistic makeup face images by transferring specific
regions of cosmetics via cycle consistent loss. For challenge (3), AttM-Net, consisting of one global and three local (task-driven on two eyes and mouth) branches, can effectively capture the complementary holistic and detailed
information. Unlike DeepID2 which uses simple concatenation fusion, we introduce a heuristic method AttM-FM,
attached to AttM-Net, to adaptively weight the features of
different branches guided by the holistic information. We
conduct extensive experiments on makeup face verification benchmarks (M-501, M-203, and FAM) and general
face recognition datasets (LFW and IJB-A). Our framework
FM 2 u-Net achieves state-of-the-art performances.

* indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.
‡ Wenxuan Wang, Xuelin Qian, Yu-Gang Jiang, Xiangyang Xue are
with School of Computer Science, and Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent
Information Processing, Fudan University. Email: {wxwang19, xlqian15,
ygj, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn.
§ Yanwei Fu is with School of Data Science, MOE Frontiers Center for
Brain Science, and Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University. Email: yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn.
¶ Qi Tian is with Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. Email:
tian.qi1@huawei.com.

Figure 1. (a) Faces with and without facial cosmetics. The same
identity is circled. (b) The bar chart shows the recognition accuracy of the four models on the three makeup face recognition
datasets, while the dotted green line shows the average accuracy
of the models on the general face recognition dataset LFW [23].

1. Introduction
This paper studies the task of face verification, which
judges whether a pair of face images are the same person
or not. Despite significant progress has been made by recent deep networks, the general recognition models of such
a face task, may not be robust to the makeup faces [15]. On
the one hand, we can apparently observe huge visual contrasts of the same identities with and without facial cosmetics in Fig. 1 (a). Furthermore, the perceptual and psychological studies in [38] show that the heavy facial makeup
can significantly change facial characteristics, making it
challenging and unbelievable to recognize face identities.
In addition, we evaluate several popular face recognition
models on face recognition datasets, results in Fig. 1 (b)
demonstrate a dramatic drop when involving the challenge
of makeup. This brings us a natural prospect in learning a
robust model for makeup-invariant face verification task.
Recent efforts to address this problem have resorted
to synthesizing the non-makeup faces by makeup removal
models [28, 7, 29, 13] to help general face models, rather
than directly learning a makeup-invariant facial representation as done in this paper. Unfortunately, it is nontrivial to efficiently and effectively learn towards removing
makeup, a synthesizer, e.g., Generative Adversarial Net-

5730

