Deep Unfolding Network for Image Super-Resolution
Kai Zhang
Luc Van Gool
Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{kai.zhang, vangool, timofter}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

https://github.com/cszn/USRNet

Abstract
Learning-based single image super-resolution (SISR)
methods are continuously showing superior effectiveness and efficiency over traditional model-based methods,
largely due to the end-to-end training. However, different
from model-based methods that can handle the SISR problem with different scale factors, blur kernels and noise levels under a unified MAP (maximum a posteriori) framework, learning-based methods generally lack such flexibility. To address this issue, this paper proposes an end-to-end
trainable unfolding network which leverages both learningbased methods and model-based methods. Specifically, by
unfolding the MAP inference via a half-quadratic splitting
algorithm, a fixed number of iterations consisting of alternately solving a data subproblem and a prior subproblem
can be obtained. The two subproblems then can be solved
with neural modules, resulting in an end-to-end trainable,
iterative network. As a result, the proposed network inherits the flexibility of model-based methods to super-resolve
blurry, noisy images for different scale factors via a single
model, while maintaining the advantages of learning-based
methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed deep unfolding network in terms of flexibility, effectiveness and also generalizability.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) refers to the process of recovering the natural and sharp detailed highresolution (HR) counterpart from a low-resolution (LR) image. It is one of the classical ill-posed inverse problems
in low-level computer vision and has a wide range of realworld applications, such as enhancing the image visual
quality on high-definition displays [42, 53] and improving
the performance of other high-level vision tasks [13].
Despite decades of studies, SISR still requires further
study for academic and industrial purposes [35, 64]. The
difficulty is mainly caused by the inconsistency between the

Degradation Process
y = (x ⊗ k) ↓s +n
SISR Process
x = f (y; s, k, σ)
(A single model?)

Figure 1. While a single degradation model (i.e., Eq. (1)) can result
in various LR images for an HR image, with different blur kernels,
scale factors and noise, the study of learning a single deep model
to invert all such LR images to HR image is still lacking.

simplistic degradation assumption of existing SISR methods and the complex degradations of real images [16]. Actually, for a scale factor of s, the classical (traditional)
degradation model of SISR [17, 18, 37] assumes the LR image y is a blurred, decimated, and noisy version of an HR
image x. Mathematically, it can be expressed by
y = (x ⊗ k) ↓s +n,

(1)

where ⊗ represents two-dimensional convolution of x with
blur kernel k, ↓s denotes the standard s-fold downsampler,
i.e., keeping the upper-left pixel for each distinct s × s patch
and discarding the others, and n is usually assumed to be
additive, white Gaussian noise (AWGN) specified by standard deviation (or noise level) σ [71]. With a clear physical
meaning, Eq. (1) can approximate a variety of LR images
by setting proper blur kernels, scale factors and noises for
an underlying HR images. In particular, Eq. (1) has been
extensively studied in model-based methods which solve a
combination of a data term and a prior term under the MAP
framework.
Though model-based methods are usually algorithmically interpretable, they typically lack a standard criterion
for their evaluation because, apart from the scale factor,
Eq. (1) additionally involves a blur kernel and added noise.
For convenience, researchers resort to bicubic degradation
without consideration of blur kernel and noise level [14,

3217

