Pose-guided Visible Part Matching for Occluded Person ReID
∗

Shang Gao1 , Jingya Wang3 , Huchuan Lu1,2 , Zimo Liu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Pengcheng Lab
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Center, The University of Sydney
gs940601k@gmail.com, jingya.wang@sydney.edu.au, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, lzm920316@gmail.com

Abstract
Occluded person re-identification is a challenging task
as the appearance varies substantially with various obstacles, especially in the crowd scenario. To address this issue,
we propose a Pose-guided Visible Part Matching (PVPM)
method that jointly learns the discriminative features with
pose-guided attention and self-mines the part visibility in an
end-to-end framework. Specifically, the proposed PVPM includes two key components: 1) pose-guided attention (PGA)
method for part feature pooling that exploits more discriminative local features; 2) pose-guided visibility predictor
(PVP) that estimates whether a part suffers the occlusion
or not. As there are no ground truth training annotations
for the occluded part, we turn to utilize the characteristic of part correspondence in positive pairs and self-mining
the correspondence scores via graph matching. The generated correspondence scores are then utilized as pseudolabels for visibility predictor (PVP). Experimental results
on three reported occluded benchmarks show that the proposed method achieves competitive performance to stateof-the-art methods. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/hh23333/PVPM

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) aims to retrieve a probe
pedestrian from non-overlapping camera views. It is an important research topic in computer vision ﬁeld with various
applications, such as autonomous driving, video surveillance and activity analysis [26, 19, 11]. Most existing ReID
approaches design the matching model with the assumption
that the entire body of the pedestrian is available. However,
this assumption is hard to be satisﬁed due to the inevitable
occlusions in real-world scenarios. For example, as shown
in Figure. 1, a person may be occluded by other pedestrians,
static obstacles like trees, walls and cars, etc. Therefore, it is
essential to seek an effective method to solve this occluded
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Illustration of occluded person re-id. Red bounding box
indicates the target person which is occluded by diversiﬁed obstacles with different colors, sizes and positions.

person re-identiﬁcation problem.
There are two main challenges for the occluded person ReID task. First, the global image-based supervision
for conventional person ReID may involve not only the information of the target person but also the interference of
occlusion. The diversiﬁed occlusions, such as colors, positions and sizes, enhance the difﬁculty of getting a robust feature for the target person. Second, the occluded
body parts sometimes show more discriminative information while the non-occluded body parts share a similar appearance, leading to the problem of mismatching.
An intuitive solution is to detect the non-occluded body
parts and then match the correspondents separately. As
there is no ground truth annotation for the occluded part,
most existing methods directly utilize visibility cues from
other tasks with different data source, e.g. body mask [1]
and pose landmark estimation [16], but suffering a huge
data bias without the ﬂexibility on target domain. In this
work, we proposed a Pose-guided Visible Part Matching
(PVPM) network by directly mining the visible score in
a self-learning manner. The concept of the proposed approach is demonstrated in Figure 2. As shown, PVPM includes two main components: a pose-guided part attention
(PGA) network and a pose-guided visibility predictor (PVP)
in an end-to-end framework. The training of the part visibility predictor is supervised by a pseudo-label obtained by
solving a feature correspondence problem via graph matching. In the end, the ﬁnal score can be computed via the
summation of body-part distance aggregation weighted by
the visibility score.
In conclusion, the main contribution of the proposed
11744

