Neural Contours: Learning to Draw Lines from 3D Shapes
Difan Liu1

3D model

Mohamed Nabail1
Aaron Hertzmann2
Evangelos Kalogerakis1
1
2
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Adobe Research

Occluding Contours

Apparent Ridges

pix2pixHD

Neural Contours

Figure 1: Given a 3D model (left), our network creates a line drawing that conveys its structure more accurately compared to
using other methods individually, such as Occluding Contours [1], Apparent Ridges [22], and pix2pix variants [37]. Please
see supplementary material for results on many more models.

Abstract
This paper introduces a method for learning to generate line drawings from 3D models. Our architecture incorporates a differentiable module operating on geometric
features of the 3D model, and an image-based module operating on view-based shape representations. At test time,
geometric and view-based reasoning are combined with the
help of a neural module to create a line drawing. The model
is trained on a large number of crowdsourced comparisons
of line drawings. Experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves significant improvements in line drawing over the
state-of-the-art when evaluated on standard benchmarks,
resulting in drawings that are comparable to those produced by experienced human artists.

1. Introduction
To draw an accurate line drawing of an object, an artist
must understand the 3D shape, and select lines that will
communicate that shape to a viewer. Modeling how artists
perform this process remains an important open problem,
intimately tied to 3D shape understanding, visual perception, and image stylization. Recent image stylization and

image translation algorithms learn styles from examples,
but do not take the underlying 3D geometry into account
and generally do not capture outline drawing styles well.
In contrast, analytic geometry-based algorithms effectively
capture basic line drawing properties, and have been used in
many computer animation films and games. However, these
methods can still fail to capture properties of real drawings,
and require parameter tuning for each individual model.
This paper presents a method for learning to generate
line drawings from 3D models. Our model employs two
branches. The first branch implements geometric line drawing based on suggestive contours, apparent ridges, ridges,
and valleys. Existing geometric line drawing approaches
employ hard-to-tune user-specified parameters that need
to be determined separately for each object. In contrast,
our method learns to automatically select these parameters
through a differentiable module. The second branch is represented as a standard image translation network, but using
view-based shape representations as input. We show that
combining both branches produces the best results.
A number of challenges exist in developing such an approach. First, classic geometric lines are not readily dif-

5428

