On the uncertainty of self-supervised monocular depth estimation
Matteo Poggi
Filippo Aleotti
Fabio Tosi
Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{m.poggi, filippo.aleotti2, fabio.tosi5, stefano.mattoccia }@unibo.it

Abstract
Self-supervised paradigms for monocular depth estimation are very appealing since they do not require ground
truth annotations at all. Despite the astonishing results
yielded by such methodologies, learning to reason about the
uncertainty of the estimated depth maps is of paramount importance for practical applications, yet uncharted in the literature. Purposely, we explore for the first time how to estimate the uncertainty for this task and how this affects depth
accuracy, proposing a novel peculiar technique specifically
designed for self-supervised approaches. On the standard
KITTI dataset, we exhaustively assess the performance of
each method with different self-supervised paradigms. Such
evaluation highlights that our proposal i) always improves
depth accuracy significantly and ii) yields state-of-the-art
results concerning uncertainty estimation when training
on sequences and competitive results uniquely deploying
stereo pairs.

Far

Close

Low

High

Figure 1. How much can we trust self-supervised monocular
depth estimation? From a single input image (top) we estimate
depth (middle) and uncertainty (bottom) maps. Best with colors.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is often pivotal to a variety of highlevel tasks in computer vision, such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and more. Although active sensors
such as LiDAR are deployed for some of the applications
mentioned above, estimating depth from standard cameras
is generally preferable due to several advantages. Among
them: the much lower cost of standard imaging devices,
their higher resolution and frame rate allow for more scalable and compelling solutions.
In computer vision, depth perception from two [59] or
multiple images [60] has a long history. Nonetheless, only
in the last decade depth estimation from a single image [57]
became an active research topic. On the one hand, this direction is particularly attractive because it overcomes several limitations of the traditional multi-view solutions (e.g.,
occlusions, overlapping framed area, and more), enabling
depth perception with any device equipped with a camera.
Unfortunately, it is an extremely challenging task due to the

ill-posed nature of the problem.
Deep learning ignited the spread of depth-from-mono
frameworks [13, 38, 15], at the cost of requiring a large
number of image samples annotated with ground truth depth
labels [47, 68] to achieve satisfying results. However,
sourcing annotated depth data is particularly expensive and
cumbersome. Indeed, in contrast to many other supervised
tasks for which offline handmade annotation is tedious,
yet relatively easy, gathering accurate depth labels requires
active (and often expensive) sensors and specific calibration, making offline annotation hardly achievable otherwise.
Self-supervised [19, 82, 45, 56, 53] or weakly supervised
[76, 65, 72] paradigms, leveraging on image reprojection
and noisy labels respectively, have removed this issue and
yield accuracy close to supervised methods [15], neglecting at all the deployment of additional depth sensors for labeling purposes. Among self-supervised paradigms, those
deploying monocular sequences are more challenging since

3227

