A Transductive Approach for Video Object Segmentation
Yizhuo Zhang2⋆
Zhirong Wu1⋆
1
Microsoft Research Asia

Houwen Peng1
Stephen Lin1
2
Carnegie Mellon University

Semi-supervised video object segmentation aims to separate a target object from a video sequence, given the mask
in the first frame. Most of current prevailing methods utilize information from additional modules trained in other
domains like optical flow and instance segmentation, and
as a result they do not compete with other methods on common ground. To address this issue, we propose a simple
yet strong transductive method, in which additional modules, datasets, and dedicated architectural designs are not
needed. Our method takes a label propagation approach
where pixel labels are passed forward based on feature similarity in an embedding space. Different from other propagation methods, ours diffuses temporal information in a
holistic manner which take accounts of long-term object
appearance. In addition, our method requires few additional computational overhead, and runs at a fast ∼37 fps
speed. Our single model with a vanilla ResNet50 backbone achieves an overall score of 72.3% on the DAVIS
2017 validation set and 63.1% on the test set. This simple yet high performing and efficient method can serve
as a solid baseline that facilitates future research. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
microsoft/transductive-vos.pytorch.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation addresses the problem of extracting object segments from a video sequence given the
annotations in the starting frame. This semi-supervised setting is challenging as it requires the system to generalize
to various objects, deformations, and occlusions. Nevertheless, video object segmentation has received considerable attention because of its broad practical applications in
surveillance, self-driving cars, robotics, and video editing.
Despite the simplicity of the formulation, video object segmentation is closely related to many other visual
problems, such as instance segmentation [19], object reidentification [13], optical flow estimation [15], and object
⋆ Equal contribution. Work done when Yizhuo was an intern at MSRA.

Region & contour quality (J&F)

Abstract

FPS

Figure 1: A comparison of performance and speed for
semi-supervised video object segmentation methods on the
DAVIS 2017 validation set. Ours performs comparably
to the state-of-the-art methods, while running at an online
speed ( > 30 fps).
tracking [5]. As these tasks share similar challenges with
video object segmentation, previous efforts [29, 30] attempt
to transfer the modules trained for such tasks into video object segmentation pipeline. More specifically, optical flow
and tracking encourage local dependencies by estimating
displacements in nearby frames, while instance segmentation and object re-identification enforces global dependencies by learning invariances to large appearance changes.
The integration of such modules allows a significant performance improvement in video object segmentation.
The idea of enforcing local and global dependencies
has been a central topic in general semi-supervised learning [49, 14] (also known as transductive inference). The
basic assumptions are: 1) nearby samples tend to have the
same label and 2) samples that lie on the same manifold
should should have the same label. The local and global dependencies describe a sufficiently smooth affinity distribution, so that label propagation on the unlabeled data gives
reliable estimates. Prior classical approaches that realize
this idea include random walk [37], graph-cut [6] and spectral methods [4].
This inspires us to explore a unified approach for semisupervised video object segmentation without the integration of the modules derived from other domains. We model
16949

