State-Relabeling Adversarial Active Learning
Beichen Zhang1 , Liang Li2∗, Shijie Yang1, 2 , Shuhui Wang2 , Zheng-Jun Zha3 , Qingming Huang1, 2, 4
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, China, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China,
{beichen.zhang, shijie.yang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {liang.li, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn,
zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Active learning is to design label-efficient algorithms by
sampling the most representative samples to be labeled by
an oracle. In this paper, we propose a state relabeling
adversarial active learning model (SRAAL), that leverages
both the annotation and the labeled/unlabeled state information for deriving the most informative unlabeled samples. The SRAAL consists of a representation generator and
a state discriminator. The generator uses the complementary annotation information with traditional reconstruction
information to generate the unified representation of samples, which embeds the semantic into the whole data representation. Then, we design an online uncertainty indicator
in the discriminator, which endues unlabeled samples with
different importance. As a result, we can select the most
informative samples based on the discriminator’s predicted
state. We also design an algorithm to initialize the labeled
pool, which makes subsequent sampling more efficient. The
experiments conducted on various datasets show that our
model outperforms the previous state-of-art active learning
methods and our initially sampling algorithm achieves better performance.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural network models have made great
success in many areas, they still heavily rely on large-scale
labeled data to train large number of parameters. Unfortunately, it is very difficult, time-consuming, or expensive
to obtain labeled samples, which becomes the main bottleneck for deep learning methods [10]. To reduce the demand
of labeled data, learning methods like unsupervised learning [6, 35], semi-supervised learning [19, 30], weakly supervised learning [46, 28] and active learning have attracted
a lot of attention. Unsupervised and semi-supervised meth∗ Corresponding author

Mechanical Turk

Figure 1. A traditional pool-based active learning cycle. At each
iteration, the sampling model is trained with labeled data. After
training, a subset of unlabeled samples is selected based on the
model inference and then labeled by an oracle. The active learning
system will repeat this iteration until the model performance meets
user’s requirements or the label budget runs out.

ods aim to fully utilize the unlabeled samples while active
learning is to select as few samples to be labeled as possible
for efficient training. This paper focuses on active learning, which is widely used in computer vision tasks such as
classification [37, 2] and segmentation [42, 17].
In active learning, this means the selected samples
should be the most informative ones. As shown in Fig. 1,
active learning algorithm is typically an iterative process in
which a set of samples is selected to be labeled from an
unlabeled pool at each iteration. These selected unlabeled
subsets are labeled by an oracle, integrated into the labeled
data pool. How to select the most informative samples from
the unlabeled pool is the key problem in active learning.
To solve this problem, previous works have made full
use of the annotation information of labeled data from the
oracle. Many methods [2, 37, 14, 42] built deep learning
models, trained them under the supervision of the labeled

8756

