Boosting Few-Shot Learning with Adaptive Margin Loss
Aoxue Li1∗ Weiran Huang2

Xu Lan3

Jiashi Feng4

Zhenguo Li2

Liwei Wang1

1

School of EECS, Peking University, China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
3
Queen Mary University of London, UK
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore
lax@pku.edu.cn, weiran.huang@outlook.com, x.lan@qmul.ac.uk,
elefjia@nus.edu.sg, li.zhenguo@huawei.com, wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Embedding Space
dog

Few-shot learning (FSL) has attracted increasing attention in recent years but remains challenging, due to the intrinsic difficulty in learning to generalize from a few examples. This paper proposes an adaptive margin principle to improve the generalization ability of metric-based
meta-learning approaches for few-shot learning problems.
Specifically, we first develop a class-relevant additive margin loss, where semantic similarity between each pair of
classes is considered to separate samples in the feature embedding space from similar classes. Further, we incorporate the semantic context among all classes in a sampled
training task and develop a task-relevant additive margin
loss to better distinguish samples from different classes.
Our adaptive margin method can be easily extended to a
more realistic generalized FSL setting. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method can boost
the performance of current metric-based meta-learning approaches, under both the standard FSL and generalized
FSL settings.

wolf

+

Adaptive Margin Loss

sofa

dog

cabinet

wolf
dog

wolf

cabinet
sofa

Semantic Space

cabinet

sofa

Adaptive Margin

Improved Embedding Space

Figure 1. The illustration of the key insight of our adaptive margin loss. In our approach, semantic similarities between different
classes (measured in the semantic space of classes) are leveraged
to generate adaptive margin between classes. Then, the margin is
integrated into the classification loss to make similar classes more
separable in the embedding space, which benefits FSL.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in various computer vision tasks [10, 26]. However, with a large number
of parameters, deep neural networks require large amounts
of labeled data for model training. This severely limits their
scalability – for many rare classes, it is infeasible to collect a large number of labeled samples. In contrast, humans can recognize an object after seeing it once. Inspired
by the few-shot learning ability of humans, there has been
an increasing interest in the few-shot learning (FSL) prob∗ This work was done when the first author was an intern at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.

lem [6, 13, 25, 27]. Given a set of base classes with sufficient labeled samples, and a set of novel classes with only
a few labeled samples, FSL aims to learn a classifier for the
novel classes by learning a generic knowledge from the base
classes.
Recently, metric-based meta-learning approaches [8, 14,
16, 27, 29] have shown the superior performance in solving the FSL problem, with attractive simplicity. These
approaches usually learn a good embedding space, where
samples from the same class are clustered together while
samples from different classes are far away from each other.
In this way, a new sample from the novel class can be rec-

12576

