Learning Invariant Representation for Unsupervised Image Restoration
Wenchao Du, Hu Chen† , Hongyu Yang
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
Wenchaodu.scu@gmail.com, huchen@scu.edu.cn, yanghongyu@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, cross domain transfer has been applied for
unsupervised image restoration tasks. However, directly
applying existing frameworks would lead to domain-shift
problems in translated images due to lack of effective supervision. Instead, we propose an unsupervised learning
method that explicitly learns invariant presentation from
noisy data and reconstructs clear observations. To do
so, we introduce discrete disentangling representation and
adversarial domain adaption into general domain transfer framework, aided by extra self-supervised modules including background and semantic consistency constraints,
learning robust representation under dual domain constraints, such as feature and image domains. Experiments
on synthetic and real noise removal tasks show the proposed
method achieves comparable performance with other stateof-the-art supervised and unsupervised methods, while having faster and stable convergence than other domain adaption methods. Code has been released.

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) attempts to reconstruct clean signals from their corrupted observations, which is known to
be an ill-posed inverse problem. By accommodating different types of corruption distributions, the same mathematical model applies to problems such as image denoising,
super-resolution and deblurring. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[10] have shown their superior performance in various lowlevel vision tasks. Nonetheless, most of these methods need
paired training data for speciﬁc tasks, which limits their
generality, scalability and practicality in real-world multimedia applications. In addition, strong supervision may
suffer from the overﬁtting training and lower generalization
to real image corruption types.
More recently, the domain transfer based unsupervised
learning methods have attracted lots of attention due to the
great progress [9, 18, 20, 21, 40] achieved in style transfer, attribute editing and image translation, e.g., CycleGAN

(a) Input

(b) CycleGAN

(c) UNIT

(d) Ours

Figure 1: The typical results for Gaussian Noise. Our
method has better ability on noise removal and texture
preservation than other domain-transfer methods.

[40], UNIT [21] and DRIT [18]. Although these methods
have been expanded to speciﬁc restoration tasks, they could
not reconstruct the high-quality images due to losing ﬁner
details or inconsistency backgrounds, as shown in Fig. 1.
Different from DNNs based supervised models, which aim
at learning a powerful mapping between the noisy and clean
images. Directly applying existing domain-transfer methods is unsuitable for generalized image inverse problems
due to the following reasons:
• Indistinct Domain Boundary. Image translation aims to
learn abstract shared-representations from unpaired data
with clear domain characteristics, such as horse-to-zebra,
day-to-night, etc. On the contrary, varying noise levels
and complicated backgrounds blur domain boundaries between unpaired inputs.
• Weak Representation. Unsupervised domain-adaption
methods extract high-level representations from unpaired
data by shared-weight encoder and explicit target domain
discriminator. For slight noisy signals, it is easy to cause
domain shift problems in translated images and lead to
low-quality reconstruction.
• Poor Generalization. Image translation learns a domain mapping from one-to-one image, which hardly captures the generalized semantic and texture representations. This also exacerbates the instability of GAN.
In order to address these problems, inspired by image
sparse representation [24] and domain adaption [7, 8], we

14483

