Spatiotemporal Fusion in 3D CNNs: A Probabilistic View
Yizhou Zhou∗1
Xiaoyan Sun†2
Chong Luo2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
zyz0205@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Zheng-Jun Zha1
Wenjun Zeng2
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{xysun,cluo,wezeng}@microsoft.com

(a) Existing Approaches (ad-hoc designs)

Abstract

Basic units
S

Despite the success in still image recognition, deep neural networks for spatiotemporal signal tasks (such as human
action recognition in videos) still suffers from low efficacy
and inefficiency over the past years. Recently, human experts have put more efforts into analyzing the importance of
different components in 3D convolutional neural networks
(3D CNNs) to design more powerful spatiotemporal learning backbones. Among many others, spatiotemporal fusion
is one of the essentials. It controls how spatial and temporal signals are extracted at each layer during inference.
Previous attempts usually start by ad-hoc designs that empirically combine certain convolutions and then draw conclusions based on the performance obtained by training
the corresponding networks. These methods only support
network-level analysis on limited number of fusion strategies. In this paper, we propose to convert the spatiotemporal fusion strategies into a probability space, which allows
us to perform network-level evaluations of various fusion
strategies without having to train them separately. Besides,
we can also obtain fine-grained numerical information such
as layer-level preference on spatiotemporal fusion within
the probability space. Our approach greatly boosts the efficiency of analyzing spatiotemporal fusion. Based on the
probability space, we further generate new fusion strategies which achieve the state-of-the-art performance on four
well-known action recognition datasets.

ST
S+ST
SMART[29]
&
MiCT[43]

Top
Heavy[36]

Bottom
Heavy[36]

R(2+1)D[27]

(b) Our Probabilistic Approach

LGD[21]

Network-level Observations

…

Template
Network

…
Embedding

Layer-level Preference

…
…
Network Depth

Figure 1: Spatiotemporal fusions in 3D CNNs. (a) Exemplified fusion methods reported in the literature, which are
designed empirically and evaluated by training each corresponding network. (b) The proposed probabilistic approach. We propose to analyze the spatiotemporal fusion
by finding a probability space where each individual fusion
strategy is considered as a random event with a meaningful probability. We first introduce a template network based
on basic fusion units to support a variety of fusion strategies. We then embed all possible fusion strategies into the
probability space defined by the posteriori distribution over
fusion strategy. As a result, various fusion strategies can be
evaluated/analyzed without separate network training to obtain network-level observations and layer-level preference.
Here S, ST and S + ST are basic fusion units instantiated
by 2D, 3D, and a mix of 2D/3D convolutions, respectively.

1. Introduction
For numerous video applications, such as action recognition [31, 43, 33], video annotation [41] and person reidentification [37], spatiotemporal fusion is an integral component. Taking action recognition as an example, the spatiotemporal fusion in deep networks can be roughly classified into two main categories: fusion/ensemble of two
modalities (i.e, spatial semantics in RGB and temporal dynamics in optical flow) in a two-stream architecture [31, 23]
and fusion of spatial and temporal clues in single-stream 3D

CNNs [29, 43]. In this paper, we focus on the latter.
Conceptually, 3D CNNs are capable of learning spatiotemporal features responding to both appearance and
movement in videos. Recent research also shows that pure
3D CNNs can outperform 2D ones on large scale benchmarks [7]. However, we still observe noticeable variations
in accuracy by employing additional spatial or temporal
∗ This work was performed while Yizhou Zhou was an intern with
Microsoft Research Asia. † Corresponding author.

9829

