Fixed-Point Back-Propagation Training
Xishan Zhang1,2 , Shaoli Liu∗1 , Rui Zhang1,2 , Chang Liu1 , Di Huang1 , Shiyi Zhou1 , Jiaming Guo1 ,
Qi Guo2 , Zidong Du1,2 , Tian Zhi1,2 and Yunji Chen2
1

2

Cambricon Technologies Corporation Limited, Beijing, China
State Key Lab of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China

Abstract
Recent emerged quantization technique (i.e., using low
bit-width ﬁxed-point data instead of high bit-width floatingpoint data) has been applied to inference of deep neural
networks for fast and efﬁcient execution. However, directly
applying quantization in training can cause signiﬁcant accuracy loss, thus remaining an open challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel training approach, which applies
a layer-wise precision-adaptive quantization in deep neural
networks. The new training approach leverages our key insight that the degradation of training accuracy is attributed
to the dramatic change of data distribution. Therefore, by
keeping the data distribution stable through a layer-wise
precision-adaptive quantization, we are able to directly
train deep neural networks using low bit-width ﬁxed-point
data and achieve guaranteed accuracy, without changing
hyper parameters. Experimental results on a wide variety of
network architectures (e.g., convolution and recurrent networks) and applications (e.g., image classiﬁcation, object
detection, segmentation and machine translation) show that
the proposed approach can train these neural networks with
negligible accuracy losses (-1.40%∼1.3%, 0.02% on average), and speed up training by 252% on a state-of-the-art
Intel CPU.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks have become state-of-theart techniques for a wide range of machine learning applications, such as image recognition [14], object detection [21],
machine translation [32, 8], the computation costs of deep
neural networks are continuously increasing, which greatly
hampers the development and deployment of deep neural
∗ Shaoli Liu is the corresponding author of this paper (Email:
liushaoli@cambricon.com). This work was funded and supported by Cambricon Technologies.

,17WR=HURV

,17

D

=HURV

=HURV

,17

E

,17

F

G

Figure 1: AlexNet fc2 layer activation gradient distribution
(base-2 logarithm) and training convergence.

networks. For example, 10,000 GPU hours are used to perform neural architecture search on ImageNet [2]. Quantization is a promising technique to reduce the computation
cost of neural network training, which can replace high-cost
ﬂoating-point numbers (e.g., ﬂoat32) with low-cost ﬁxedpoint numbers (e.g., int8/int16). Recently, both the software society [6, 12, 16, 19, 27, 35] and the hardware society [11, 24, 23, 31] have carried out extensive researches on
quantization of deep neural network for inference tasks.
Though various investigations have demonstrated that
deep learning inference can be accurately performed
with low bit-width ﬁxed-point numbers through quantization [16, 17, 6, 33, 35, 35, 37], the quantiﬁed training
remains an open challenge. Some existing approaches
quantify the backward-pass to low-bit (e.g., int8) but incur signiﬁcant accuracy drop, for examples, 3˜7% loss for
AlexNet [38, 36]. [7] uses int16 for both forward-pass
12330

