Hierarchical Feature Embedding for Attribute Recognition
Jie Yang1,2 , Jiarou Fan1 , Yiru Wang1 , Yige Wang1 , Weihao Gan 1∗, Lin Liu2 , Wei Wu1
1
SenseTime Group Limited, 2 Tsinghua University
takanashiyj@gmail.com,{fanjiarou,wangyiru,ganweihao,wuwei}@sensetime.com,
yige.wang@tum.de,linliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Attribute recognition is a crucial but challenging task
due to viewpoint changes, illumination variations and appearance diversities, etc. Most of previous work only consider the attribute-level feature embedding, which might
perform poorly in complicated heterogeneous conditions.
To address this problem, we propose a hierarchical feature
embedding (HFE) framework, which learns a fine-grained
feature embedding by combining attribute and ID information. In HFE, we maintain the inter-class and intra-class
feature embedding simultaneously. Not only samples with
the same attribute but also samples with the same ID are
gathered more closely, which could restrict the feature embedding of visually hard samples with regard to attributes
and improve the robustness to variant conditions. We establish this hierarchical structure by utilizing HFE loss consisted of attribute-level and ID-level constraints. We also introduce an absolute boundary regularization and a dynamic
loss weight as supplementary components to help build up
the feature embedding. Experiments show that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art results on two pedestrian attribute datasets and a facial attribute dataset.

1. Introduction
Attributes, such as gender, hair length, clothing style,
are discriminative semantic descriptors that can be used as
soft-biometrics in visual surveillance. Attribute recognition concentrates on discerning these attributes of the target human in a given image. It includes pedestrian attribute recognition (PAR), face attribute recognition (FAR),
etc. Recently, attribute recognition has received extraordinary attention owing to the potential applications in person re-identification (Re-ID) [22, 26, 36], face verification
[21, 6, 46, 34, 45], and human identification [15]. Being
a classification problem by nature, it still faces great challenges in real-world scenarios for these reasons: (1) Images
∗ Corresponding author

ID1

HFE

ID3

ID2
Carrying
Backpack

No
Backpack
(a) CE

Carrying
Backpack

No
Backpack

(b) HFE

Figure 1. Hierarchical feature embedding on ‘backpack’ attribute.
Images with the same IDs are represented with the same color borders. (a) represents the Cross Entropy feature space, where most of
samples can be classified correctly while the hard sample with pink
dotted border (whose backpack is totally occluded by the body) is
misclassified. (b) With the help of ID constraint, features with
the same IDs form fine-grained clusters can pull the hard example
back.

might be low-resolution or blurry because of the shot distance or the movements of pedestrians. (2) Different scenes,
time slots, angles and poses lead to illumination alterations,
viewpoint changes, and appearance variations. (3) Some
parts of an object might be occluded by others, resulting in
invisibility or ambiguity.
Recently, some methods are introduced to solve these
problems and achieve admirable performance. A-AOG
[35] explicitly represents the decomposition and articulation of body parts, and accounts for the correlations between
poses and attributes. LGNet [28] assigns attribute-specific
weights to local features based on the affinity between preextracted proposals and attribute locations. These methods aim at applying pivotal parts of images or an attention
module to reduce the impact of irrelevant factors to some
extent, still they do not cope with the visual appearance
variations of attributes as well as occlusion directly. Only
attribute-level optimization is focused on in these methods,
however the information from attribute recognition related
fields, such as person Re-ID, could assist to alleviate vari-

13055

