Background Matting: The World is Your Green Screen

Soumyadip Sengupta, Vivek Jayaram, Brian Curless, Steve Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
University of Washington

Figure 1: Using a handheld smartphone camera, we capture two images of a scene, one with the subject and one without. We employ a
deep network with an adversarial loss to recover alpha matte and foreground color. We composite the result onto a novel background.

Abstract
We propose a method for creating a matte – the per-pixel
foreground color and alpha – of a person by taking photos or videos in an everyday setting with a handheld camera. Most existing matting methods require a green screen
background or a manually created trimap to produce a good
matte. Automatic, trimap-free methods are appearing, but
are not of comparable quality. In our trimap free approach,
we ask the user to take an additional photo of the background without the subject at the time of capture. This step
requires a small amount of foresight but is far less timeconsuming than creating a trimap. We train a deep network
with an adversarial loss to predict the matte. We first train a
matting network with supervised loss on ground truth data
with synthetic composites. To bridge the domain gap to
real imagery with no labeling, we train another matting network guided by the first network and by a discriminator that
judges the quality of composites. We demonstrate results on
a wide variety of photos and videos and show significant
improvement over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Imagine being able to easily create a matte — the
per-pixel color and alpha — of a person by taking photos or videos in an everyday setting with just a handheld smartphone. Today, the best methods for extracting (“pulling”) a good quality matte require either a green
screen studio, or the manual creation of a trimap (fore-

ground/background/unknown segmentation), a painstaking
process that often requires careful painting around strands
of hair. Methods that require neither of these are beginning
to appear, but they are not of comparable quality. Instead,
we propose taking an additional photo of the (static) background just before or after the subject is in frame, and using
this photo to perform background matting. Taking one extra
photo in the moment requires a small amount of foresight,
but the effort is tiny compared to creating a trimap after the
fact. This advantage is even greater for video input. Now,
the world is your green screen.
We focus on a method that is tuned to human subjects.
Still, even in this setting — pulling the matte of a person
given a photo of the background — the problem is ill-posed
and requires novel solutions.
Consider the compositing equation for image I given
foreground F , background B, and mixing coefficient α:
I = αF + (1 − α)B. For color images and scalar α, and
given B, we have four unknowns (F and α), but only three
observations per pixel (I). Thus, the background matting
problem is underconstrained. Background/foreground differences provide a signal, but the signal is poor when parts
of the person are similar in color to the background. Furthermore, we do not generally have an image of the ideal
background: the subject can cast shadows and cause reflections not seen in the photo taken without the subject,
and exact, pixel-level alignment with no resampling artifacts between handheld capture of two photos is generally
not attainable. In effect, rather than the true B that produced
12291

