Zero-Assignment Constraint for Graph Matching with Outliers
Fudong Wang1 , Nan Xue1 , Jin-Gang Yu2 , Gui-Song Xia1∗
1
Wuhan University, China
{fudong-wang, xuenan, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn
2

South China University of Technology, China
jingangyu@scut.edu.cn

1

Abstract

0.8

0.6

Graph matching (GM), as a longstanding problem in
computer vision and pattern recognition, still suffers from
numerous cluttered outliers in practical applications. To
address this issue, we present the zero-assignment constraint (ZAC) for approaching the graph matching problem in the presence of outliers. The underlying idea is to
suppress the matchings of outliers by assigning zero-valued
vectors to the potential outliers in the obtained optimal
correspondence matrix. We provide elaborate theoretical
analysis to the problem, i.e., GM with ZAC, and figure out
that the GM problem with and without outliers are intrinsically different, which enables us to put forward a sufficient
condition to construct valid and reasonable objective function. Consequently, we design an efficient outlier-robust algorithm to significantly reduce the incorrect or redundant
matchings caused by numerous outliers. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve the stateof-the-art performance in terms of accuracy and efficiency,
especially in the presence of numerous outliers.

1. Introduction
In many real applications of computer vision and pattern recognition, the feature sets of interest represented as
graphs are usually cluttered with numerous outliers [3, 42,
38, 30], which often reduce the accuracy of GM. Although
recent works on GM [7, 11, 21, 22, 34, 44] can achieve satisfactory results for simple graphs that consist of only inliers
or a few outliers, they still lack of ability to tolerate numerous outliers arising in complicated graphs. Empirically, the
inliers in one graph are nodes that have highly-similar corresponding nodes in the other graph, while the outliers do
not. Based on the empirical criterion, the aforementioned
methods hope to match inliers to inliers correctly and force
outliers to only match outliers. However, due to the com∗ Corresponding author

0.4

0.2

0

(a) Left: incorrect/redundant matchings (lines in red) caused by outliers.
Right: generated (yellow) v.s. the ideal (red) correspondence matrix.
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

(b) Left: our graph matching result. Right: our correspondence matrix
with zero-assignment constraint of outliers.

Figure 1: ZAC for graph matching in the presence of outliers. To suppress the undesired matchings of outliers in
(a), we aim to assign the potential outliers with zero-valued
vectors in our optimal correspondence matrix in (b), based
on which we can both establish a theoretical foundation
for graph matching with outliers and put forward an outlier
identification approach that can significantly reduce incorrect or redundant matches caused by outliers in practice.

plicated mutual relationships between inliers and outliers,
they usually result in incorrect matchings between inliers or
redundant matchings between outliers (e.g., Fig. 1 (a)).
In this paper, we are motivated to address this challenge
by introducing the zero-assignment constraint for outliers:
unlike the previous methods that hope to match outliers only
to outliers, it’s more reasonable to suppress the matchings
of outliers. Equivalently, we try to assign each potential
outlier with a zero-valued vector (i.e., the zero-assignment
constraint for outliers) in the solution of our objective function (e.g., the correspondence matrix in Fig. 1 (b)).
To make our idea more reasonable and practical, we
try our efforts in two aspects. First, based on the zeroassignment constraint, we establish the theoretical bases including the formulation of inliers and outliers and the quantitative distinguishability between them, and then find out a
13033

