Unsupervised Instance Segmentation in Microscopy Images via Panoptic Domain
Adaptation and Task Re-weighting
Dongnan Liu1

Donghao Zhang1
Heng Huang4

Yang Song2
Mei Chen5

Fan Zhang3
Lauren O’Donnell3
1
Weidong Cai

1

2

School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
3
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
5
Microsoft Corporation, USA
{dliu5812, dzha9516}@uni.sydney.edu.au, yang.song1@unsw.edu.au
{fzhang, odonnell}@bwh.harvard.edu, henghuanghh@gmail.com
may4mc@gmail.com, tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for nuclei instance segmentation is important for digital pathology, as it
alleviates the burden of labor-intensive annotation and domain shift across datasets. In this work, we propose a Cycle Consistency Panoptic Domain Adaptive Mask R-CNN
(CyC-PDAM) architecture for unsupervised nuclei segmentation in histopathology images, by learning from fluorescence microscopy images. More specifically, we first propose a nuclei inpainting mechanism to remove the auxiliary
generated objects in the synthesized images. Secondly, a semantic branch with a domain discriminator is designed to
achieve panoptic-level domain adaptation. Thirdly, in order to avoid the influence of the source-biased features, we
propose a task re-weighting mechanism to dynamically add
trade-off weights for the task-specific loss functions. Experimental results on three datasets indicate that our proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art UDA methods significantly, and demonstrates a similar performance as fully supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Nuclei instance segmentation in histopathology images
is an important step in the digital pathology workflow.
Pathologists are able to diagnose and prognose cancers according to mitosis counts, the morphological structure of
each nucleus, and spatial distribution of a group of nuclei [7, 25, 5, 1, 34]. Currently, supervised learning-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Example images of our proposed framework. (a) fluorescence microscopy images; (b) real histopathology images; (c)
our synthesized histopathology images; (d) nuclei segmentation
generated by our proposed UDA method; (e) ground truth.

based methods for nuclei instance segmentation are prevalent as they are efficient while preserving high accuracy
[24, 35, 3, 9, 33, 50, 29, 28]. However, their performance
heavily relies on large-scale training data, which requires
expertise for annotation. This process is time-consuming
and labor-intensive due to the complicated cellular structures, as shown in Fig. 1(b), and large image sizes. For
example, annotating a histopathology dataset with 50 images and 12M pixels costs a pathologist 120 to 230 hours
[16]. Moreover, in real clinical studies, even one whole
slide image in 40× objective magnification contains 1B pixels [10]. Therefore, investigating methods without depending on histopathology annotations is necessary. It can help
pathologists to reduce the workload, and tackle the issue of
lacking histopathology annotations.
The recently proposed unsupervised domain adaptation
14243

