Understanding Human Hands in Contact at Internet Scale
Dandan Shan1 , Jiaqi Geng*1 , Michelle Shu*2 , David F. Fouhey1
1
University of Michigan, 2 Johns Hopkins University
{dandans,jiaqig,fouhey}@umich.edu, msh1@jhu.edu

Abstract
Hands are the central means by which humans manipulate their world and being able to reliably extract hand
state information from Internet videos of humans engaged
in their hands has the potential to pave the way to systems
that can learn from petabytes of video data.
This paper proposes steps towards this by inferring a
rich representation of hands engaged in interaction method
that includes: hand location, side, contact state, and a box
around the object in contact. To support this effort, we
gather a large-scale dataset of hands in contact with objects consisting of 131 days of footage as well as a 100K
annotated hand-contact video frame dataset. The learned
model on this dataset can serve as a foundation for handcontact understanding in videos. We quantitatively evaluate
it both on its own and in service of predicting and learning
from 3D meshes of human hands.

t

100DOH

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The goal of this paper is to infer a rich representation
for helping understand hands engaged in contact with the world at
Internet scale. Our system produces a rich output in terms of hand
location (boxes), side (left/right), contact state (here – a portable
object) and what object each hand is in contact with. To support
this, we collect a new large-scale hand video interaction dataset,
100 Days of Hands (100DOH). We use this, plus videos from
VLOG [14], to make a 100K image dataset annotated with our
rich representation.

The hand is the key to how humans interact with the
world. If machines are to understand our actions and intentions as well as the world we have build for and with our
hands, they must have a deep understanding of our hands.
For instance, in Figure 1, we can readily recognize that there
are two hands (one left and one right), opening a bag and
even imagine how one might pull up the flap. The goal of
this paper is to build the foundation for studying hands engaged in interaction with objects at Internet scale.
Hand analysis is, of course, an area of long-standing interest in the field with work on pose estimation [41, 34], reconstruction [21, 42], and grasp analysis [30, 7]. These approaches, however, have largely focused on in-lab settings,
often with a pre-localized hand or in settings with limited
variety. While there has been substantial progress, deploying these on the rich world of Internet videos [3, 39] poses
a challenge due to the dizzying diversity in viewpoint and
context. A single system must handle data ranging from
a fifty pixel high hand in a cooking video to an enormous
thousand pixel high hand closeup showing DIY.

Our work aims to enable hand analysis at Internet scale
and diversity. To this end, we introduce a model, described
in Section 4 that identifies, for every single hand in a single
RGB image (demonstrated on a wide variety of scales and
contexts): a hand box; its side (left/right); its contact state
(none / self / other person / non-portable object / portable
object); and, for the hand in contact, an object box around
the object or person in contact. These enable crucial downstream problems like reconstruction and grasp analysis. For
example, the detection of hand location and side enables the
use of recent mesh reconstruction systems [21, 42].
This system, along with an existing mesh reconstruction
method [21], yields a system that can detect hands, their
contact state, their 3D reconstruction, and what object they
are touching. We believe this output enables large-scale
fine-grained learning about human-object interaction. As
an example, we introduce a method to identify bad mesh
reconstructions (necessary for learning from meshes) and
provide a demonstration of learning on consumer videos.
19869

