What Makes Training Multi-modal Classification Networks Hard?
Weiyao Wang, Du Tran, Matt Feiszli
Facebook AI
{weiyaowang,trandu,mdf}@fb.com
Abstract
Consider end-to-end training of a multi-modal vs. a unimodal network on a task with multiple input modalities:
the multi-modal network receives more information, so it
should match or outperform its uni-modal counterpart. In
our experiments, however, we observe the opposite: the best
uni-modal network often outperforms the multi-modal network. This observation is consistent across different combinations of modalities and on different tasks and benchmarks
for video classification.
This paper identifies two main causes for this performance drop: first, multi-modal networks are often prone
to overfitting due to their increased capacity. Second, different modalities overfit and generalize at different rates, so
training them jointly with a single optimization strategy is
sub-optimal. We address these two problems with a technique we call Gradient-Blending, which computes an optimal blending of modalities based on their overfitting behaviors. We demonstrate that Gradient Blending outperforms widely-used baselines for avoiding overfitting and
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on various tasks including human action recognition, ego-centric action recognition, and acoustic event detection.

1. Introduction
Consider a late-fusion multi-modal network, trained endto-end to solve a task. Uni-modal solutions are a strict subset of the solutions available to the multi-modal network;
a well-optimized multi-modal model should, in theory, always outperform the best uni-modal model. However, we
show here that current techniques do not always achieve
this. In fact, what we observe is contrary to common sense:
the best uni-modal model often outperforms the joint model,
across different modalities (Table 1) and datasets (details in
section 3). Anecdotally, the performance drop with multiple input streams appears to be common and was noted
in [24, 3, 38, 44]. This (surprising) phenomenon warrants
investigation and solution.
Upon inspection, the problem appears to be overfitting:

Dataset

Multi-modal

A + RGB
RGB + OF
A + OF

Kinetics

A + RGB + OF

V@1
71.4
71.3
58.3
70.0

Best Uni

RGB
RGB
OF
RGB

V@1
72.6
72.6
62.1
72.6

Drop
-1.2
-1.3
-3.8
-2.6

Table 1: Uni-modal networks consistently outperform multimodal networks. Best uni-modal networks vs late fusion multimodal networks on Kinetics using video top-1 validation accuracy.
Single stream modalities include video clips (RGB), Optical Flow
(OF), and Audio (A). Multi-modal networks use the same architectures as uni-modal, with late fusion by concatenation at the last
layer before prediction.
RGB
late-concat
pre-train
early-stop
dropout
mid-concat
SE-gate
NL-gate

72.6
71.4
71.7
71.3
72.9
72.8
71.4
72
71

71.5

72

72.5

73

Top-1 Accuracy on Kinetics

Figure 1: Standard regularizers do not provide a good improvement over the best Uni-modal network. Best uni-modal
network (RGB) vs standard approaches on a multi-modal network (RGB+Audio) on Kinetics. Various methods to avoid overfitting (orange: Pre-training, Early-stopping, and Dropout) do
not solve the issue. Different fusion architectures (red: Midconcatenation fusion, SE-gate, and NL-gate) also do not help.
Dropout and Mid-concatenation fusion approaches provide small
improvements (+0.3% and +0.2%), while other methods degrade
accuracy.

multi-modal networks have higher train accuracy and lower
validation accuracy. Late fusion audio-visual (A+RGB)
network has nearly two times the parameters of a visual network, and one may suspect that the overfitting is caused by
the increased number of parameters.
There are two ways to approach this problem. First, one
can consider solutions such as dropout [43], pre-training, or
early stopping to reduce overfitting. On the other hand, one
may speculate that this is an architectural deficiency. We
experiment with mid-level fusion by concatenation [37] and
fusion by gating [31], trying both Squeeze-and-Excitation
(SE) [26] gates and Non-Local (NL) [50] gates.
Remarkably, none of these provide an effective solu112695

