Learning the Redundancy-free Features for Generalized Zero-Shot Object
Recognition
Zongyan Han† , Zhenyong Fu∗† , and Jian Yang∗†
PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
{hanzy, z.fu, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot object recognition or zero-shot learning aims
to transfer the object recognition ability among the semantically related categories, such as fine-grained animal or bird
species. However, the images of different fine-grained objects tend to merely exhibit subtle differences in appearance,
which will severely deteriorate zero-shot object recognition.
To reduce the superfluous information in the fine-grained
objects, in this paper, we propose to learn the redundancyfree features for generalized zero-shot learning. We achieve
our motivation by projecting the original visual features
into a new (redundancy-free) feature space and then restricting the statistical dependence between these two feature spaces. Furthermore, we require the projected features
to keep and even strengthen the category relationship in the
redundancy-free feature space. In this way, we can remove
the redundant information from the visual features without
losing the discriminative information. We extensively evaluate the performance on four benchmark datasets. The results show that our redundancy-free feature based generalized zero-shot learning (RFF-GZSL) approach can outperform the state-of-the-arts often by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Object recognition has progressed remarkably in recent years thanks to the deployments of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [24, 18]. However, existing
CNN-based models, with tens to hundreds of millions of parameters, excel only when large amounts of labeled data are
available for each object class, and generally struggle when
∗ Corresponding authors.
† Zongyan Han, Zhenyong Fu and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key
Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video
Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

(a) Cardinal

(b) Purple finch (c) House wren (d) Winter wren

Figure 1: Examples of four fine-grained bird species. The
subtle difference in appearance or the common living environment of these examples challenges the zero-shot object
recognition.
labeled data are scarce. The data-hungry nature of deep
models limits their ability to recognize rare object classes,
such as fine-grained animal species. This is because collecting and annotating a large set of images of these classes
is often labor-intensive and sometimes impossible (e.g., extinct species). Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL), also known as
learning from side information, provides a promising approach to addressing this problem [26, 40]. Specifically,
zero-shot learning aims to recognize the unseen classes, of
which the labeled images are unavailable, when the labeled
images only from some seen classes are provided [27, 54].
In ZSL, the seen classes are associated with the unseen
classes in a semantic descriptor space, such as the semantic
attribute or word vector space [2], which bridges the knowledge gap between the seen and unseen classes.
Although the conventional ZSL prevails in the early researches, the realistic but more challenging Generalized
Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) has drawn increasing attention recently. The conventional ZSL assumes all test images coming from the unseen classes only, whereas the test
set in GZSL consists of data from both the seen and unseen classes. Semantic embedding is the most important
approach in conventional ZSL, but generally performs poor
in the new GZSL setting. The semantic embedding methods [13, 27, 2] learn to embed the visual features into the
semantic descriptor space and then predict the labels of vi-

12865

