TBT: Targeted Neural Network Attack with Bit Trojan
Adnan Siraj Rakin, Zhezhi He and Deliang Fan
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
dfan@asu.edu

Abstract
Security of modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is under severe scrutiny as the deployment of these models become widespread in many intelligence-based applications.
Most recently, DNNs are attacked through Trojan which can
effectively infect the model during the training phase and
get activated only through specific input patterns (i.e, trigger) during inference. In this work, for the first time, we
propose a novel Targeted Bit Trojan(TBT) method, which
can insert a targeted neural Trojan into a DNN through
bit-flip attack. Our algorithm efficiently generates a trigger specifically designed to locate certain vulnerable bits of
DNN weights stored in main memory (i.e., DRAM). The objective is that once the attacker flips these vulnerable bits,
the network still operates with normal inference accuracy
with benign input. However, when the attacker activates
the trigger by embedding it with any input, the network is
forced to classify all inputs to a certain target class. We
demonstrate that flipping only several vulnerable bits identified by our method, using available bit-flip techniques (i.e,
row-hammer), can transform a fully functional DNN model
into a Trojan-infected model. We perform extensive experiments of CIFAR-10, SVHN and ImageNet datasets on both
VGG-16 and Resnet-18 architectures. Our proposed TBT
could classify 92% of test images to a target class with as
little as 84 bit-flips out of 88 million weight bits on Resnet18 for CIFAR10 dataset. 1

1. Introduction
Nowadays the state-of-the-art Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) have achieved human surpassing and recordbreaking performance, which inspires more and more applications to adopt DNN for cognitive computing tasks [10, 13,
2]. Nevertheless, DNNs trained by back-propagation with
massive data is vulnerable to various attacks in real-world
deployment. Among all, several major security concerns
are adversarial input/example attack [26, 7, 29], adversarial
1 Code
is
released
at:
adnansirajrakin/TBT-2020

https://github.com/

parameter attack [31, 14] and Trojan attack [23, 9]. Adversarial input attack aims to fool the DNN with the help of
malicious input, whereas parameter attack fools the DNN
through corrupting some targeted parameters (i.e, weight)
as shown in figure 2. Unlike traditional attacks which are restricted in only input and weight domain, the neural Trojan
attack utilizes both corrupted inputs and weights to cause
targeted miss-behavior of DNN.
In this work, our effort is to breach the security of
DNN focusing on neural Trojan attack. Recently, several
works have proposed methods to inject Trojan into DNN
which can be activated through designated input patterns
[23, 9, 36]. Figure 1 depicts a standard neural Trojan attack
setup delineated by the previous works. For example, in object recognition, a clean DNN, without Trojan attack, performs accurate classification on most input images. However, a Trojan-infected model miss-classifies all the inputs
to a targeted class (i.e. ‘Bird’ as shown in Figure 1) with
very high confidence when a specially designed input pattern or patch is concealed with input. Such embedded patch
is known as trigger. On the other case, when the trigger
is removed from input data, such Trojan-infected DNN will
operate normally with almost same accuracy as the clean
model counterpart.
Typical neural Trojan attacks assume attacker could access to the supply chain of DNN (e.g., data-collection/ training/ production). A recognized assumption [9, 25, 23] is
that the computing resource-hungry DNN training procedure is outsourced to the powerful high-performance cloud
server, while the trained DNN model will be deployed to
a resource-constrained edge-server/mobile-device for inference. Almost all the existing neural Trojan attack techniques [23, 9, 22] are conducted during the training phase,
namely inserting Trojan before deploying the trained model
to the inference computing platform. For example, Gu et al.
[9] assumes the attacker has permission to freely edit training data to poison network training. Rather than poisoning
the clean data, another neural Trojan attack proposed in [23]
can generate its re-training data, where the neural Trojan insertion is conducted by re-training the target DNN using the
generated poisoned data. In contrast to the previous works,
113198

