Deep Grouping Model for Unified Perceptual Parsing
Zhiheng Li1 Wenxuan Bao2 * Jiayang Zheng1 Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester 2 Tsinghua University
{zhiheng.li,jiayang.zheng,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu bwx16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The perceptual-based grouping process produces a hierarchical and compositional image representation that helps
both human and machine vision systems recognize heterogeneous visual concepts. Examples can be found in the classical hierarchical superpixel segmentation or image parsing
works. However, the grouping process is largely overlooked
in modern CNN-based image segmentation networks due
to many challenges, including the inherent incompatibility
between the grid-shaped CNN feature map and the irregularshaped perceptual grouping hierarchy. Overcoming these
challenges, we propose a deep grouping model (DGM) that
tightly marries the two types of representations and defines
a bottom-up and a top-down process for feature exchanging.
When evaluating the model on the recent Broden+ dataset
for the unified perceptual parsing task, it achieves state-ofthe-art results while having a small computational overhead
compared to other contextual-based segmentation models.
Furthermore, the DGM has better interpretability compared
with modern CNN methods.

1. Introduction
Deep CNN methods have achieved substantial performance improvement compared with non-CNN methods in
the field of semantic segmentation [29, 5]. Many of them
can achieve even better performance by incorporating good
practices that have long been discovered in non-CNN methods, e.g., multiscale features [59, 48, 44] and contextual
information [57, 55, 19, 16, 58]. However, recent works still
have some key limitations. First, many CNN-based methods
are solely driven by the cross-entropy loss computed against
ground-truth pixel labels, lacking an explicit modeling of
the perceptual grouping process, which is an integral part in
the human visual system [4]. Second, most modelings are
still focusing on regular-shaped feature maps, which creates
not only significant overhead in a multi-scale representation
when considering feature-to-feature attention but also is sub* The work was performed while Wenxuan Bao was a visiting student at
University of Rochester.

CNN

DGM

grid feature map

grouping hierarchy

Unified Perceptual Parsing Task:
kitchen
scene

object

part

material

texture

Figure 1: Perceptual grouping process. From fine to coarse:
neighboring pixels form a part; parts group into an object;
and objects combine into a contextual region. The DGM
aims to marry a CNN with the grouping hierarchy for unified
perceptual parsing of images. The grouping hierarchy is
dynamically computed based on the CNN features, and the
CNN features are enhanced by the grouping cues from the
graph hierarchy. The model is applied to unified perceptual
parsing task to show superiority of DGM.
optimal for modeling irregular-shaped semantic regions on
the image.
To overcome these limitations, we revisit the classical
perceptual grouping methods, e.g., superpixel segmentation [37, 13, 31, 35] and image parsing [41, 38, 53], which
were extensively studied before the predominance of CNNs
in segmentation. The seminal work by Tu et al. [41] represents an image as a hierarchical graph, a.k.a. parsing
graph. In their depicted example, an image of a football
match scene is first decomposed into three elements: person,
sports field, and spectator, then these elements are further
decomposed, e.g., the person consists of face and body texture. Such a graph is both compositional (e.g., lower-level
semantics induce grouping cues for higher-level semantics)
14053

