Fast Texture Synthesis via Pseudo Optimizer
Wu Shi
Yu Qiao
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
wu.shi@siat.ac.cn

yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Texture synthesis using deep neural networks can generate high quality and diversified textures. However, it usually
requires a heavy optimization process. The following works
accelerate the process by using feed-forward networks, but
at the cost of scalability. diversity or quality. We propose a
new efficient method that aims to simulate the optimization
process while retains most of the properties. Our method
takes a noise image and the gradients from a descriptor network as inputs, and synthesis a refined image with respect
to the target image. The proposed method can synthesize
images with better quality and diversity than the other fast
synthesis methods do. Moreover, our method trained on a
large scale dataset can generalize to synthesize unseen textures.

1. Introduction
The pioneering work of Gatys et al. [5] can generate
high-quality and diversified texture images given an example image. Their key idea is to match the statistics of the
synthesized image with the reference image by using an
iterative optimization process. The reference statistics are
extracted by a descriptive network that is trained on recognition tasks. This process requires numerous steps to modify the synthesized image based on the gradient information
from the descriptive network until it is close to the reference statistics enough. It typically takes several minutes to
synthesize an image of a moderate size even with a modern
GPU.
Several following works [21, 13, 10, 14] have been proposed to accelerate the inference process, but at the cost of
scalability, diversity or quality. [21] trains a feed-forward
network to synthesize a single target texture by imposing
the texture loss [5] on the synthesized image. The main
shortcoming is that the trained network cannot generate new
textures except for the one used in training. [13] designs
a deep neural network with conditional labels to synthe-

Texture
Loss
n steps

x

Gradients

L-BFGS
or Adam

Δx

x

Texture
Loss
one step

Gradients

Pseudo
Optimizer

Δx

Figure 1. We propose a feed-forward framework, Pseudo Optimizer, to simulate the optimization process of [5] in one step.

size multiple textures in a user-controlled manner. This
method greatly extends the scalability of the synthesis network. However, this method cannot generate novel textures
in an online manner like [5]. [10] proposes to use Adaptive
Instance Normalization to do fast arbitrary style transfer. In
this method, the activations of the input image are normalized and then scaled and shifted by the statistics of the reference image. Thus, the reference image can be inserted
at the inference time adaptively. It is shown to generalize
well in the task of style transfer. WCT [14] further extends
the linear transformation to a combination of whitening and
coloring transforms. This method computes the covariance
matrices from the features and uses the SVD decomposition to compute the transform matrix. This is not suitable
for computing on GPU. We notice that the common idea of
their methods is to integrate the information to change from
the input image to the reference image with the transform
network.
We incorporate the idea of fast feed-forward methods
into the optimization-based method and propose a novel
fast texture synthesis framework named Pseudo Optimizer
(PO). In our framework, the optimization process of [5] is
reduced to a prediction problem by training a feed-forward
network to map the gradient information to the optimal solution (Figure 3). We make a careful investigation into the

5498

