Old is G old : Redefining the Adversarially Learned One-Class Classifier Training
Paradigm

1

Muhammad Zaigham Zaheer1,2 , Jin-ha Lee1,2 , Marcella Astrid1,2 , Seung-Ik Lee1,2
University of Science and Technology, 2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute,
Daejeon, South Korea
{mzz, jhlee, marcella.astrid}@ust.ac.kr, the silee@etri.re.kr

Abstract
A popular method for anomaly detection is to use the
generator of an adversarial network to formulate anomaly
score over reconstruction loss of input. Due to the rare occurrence of anomalies, optimizing such networks can be a
cumbersome task. Another possible approach is to use both
generator and discriminator for anomaly detection. However, attributed to the involvement of adversarial training,
this model is often unstable in a way that the performance
fluctuates drastically with each training step. In this study,
we propose a framework that effectively generates stable
results across a wide range of training steps and allows us
to use both the generator and the discriminator of an adversarial model for efficient and robust anomaly detection.
Our approach transforms the fundamental role of a discriminator from identifying real and fake data to distinguishing
between good and bad quality reconstructions. To this end,
we prepare training examples for the good quality reconstruction by employing the current generator, whereas poor
quality examples are obtained by utilizing an old state of the
same generator. This way, the discriminator learns to detect subtle distortions that often appear in reconstructions
of the anomaly inputs. Extensive experiments performed on
Caltech-256 and MNIST image datasets for novelty detection show superior results. Furthermore, on UCSD Ped2
video dataset for anomaly detection, our model achieves a
frame-level AUC of 98.1%, surpassing recent state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Due to rare occurrence of anomalous scenes, the
anomaly detection problem is usually seen as one-class
classification (OCC) in which only normal data is used to
learn a novelty detection model [22, 57, 25, 51, 11, 45, 40,
10, 44, 34, 35]. One of the recent trends to learn one-class
data is by using an encoder-decoder architecture such as de-

noising auto-encoder [41, 52, 53, 49]. Generally, in this
scheme, training is carried out until the model starts to produce good quality reconstructions [41, 43]. During the test
time, it is expected to show high reconstruction loss for abnormal data which corresponds to a high anomaly score.
With the recent developments in Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [8], some researchers also explored the
possibility of improving the generative results using adversarial training [43, 32]. Such training fashion substantially
enhances the data regeneration quality [30, 8, 43]. At the
test time, the trained generator G is then decoupled from the
discriminator D to be used as a reconstruction model. As
reported in [41, 35, 36], a wide difference in reconstruction
loss between the normal and abnormal data can be achieved
due to adversarial training, which results in a better anomaly
detection system. However, relying only on the reconstruction capability of a generator does not oftentimes work well
because the usual encoder-decoder style generators may unexpectedly well-reconstruct the unseen data which drastically degrades the anomaly detection performance.
A natural drift in this domain is towards the idea of using
D along with the conventional utilization of G for anomaly
detection. The intuition is to gain maximum benefits of the
one-class adversarial training by utilizing both G and D instead of only G. However, this also brings along the problems commonly associated with such architectures. For example, defining a criteria to stop the training is still a challenging problem [8, 30]. As discussed in Sabokrou et al.
[41], the performance of such adversarially learnt one-class
classification architecture is highly dependent on the criteria
of when to halt the training. In the case of stopping prematurely, G will be undertrained and in the case of overtraining, D may get confused because of the real-looking fake
data. Our experiments show that a G+D trained as a collective model for anomaly detection (referred to as a baseline)
will not ensure higher convergence at any arbitrary training step over its predecessor. Figure 1 shows frame-level
area under the curve (AUC) performance of the baseline
over several epochs of training on UCSD Ped2 dataset [4].

14183

