DMCP: Differentiable Markov Channel Pruning for Neural Networks
Shaopeng Guo

Yujie Wang Quanquan Li
SenseTime Research

Junjie Yan

{guoshaopeng, wangyujie, liquanquan, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

74

Abstract

72

1. Introduction
Channel pruning [10, 2, 4] has been widely used for
model acceleration and compression. The core idea behind is that large CNN models are regarded as overparameterized. By removing the large model’s unnecessary or less important weights, we can obtain a more efficient and compact model with a marginal performance drop.
Conventional channel pruning methods mainly rely on the
human-designed paradigm. A typical pipeline of conventional pruning method can be summarized as three stages:
pre-train a large model, prune “unimportant” weights of the
large model according to the pre-defined criterion, fine-tune
the pruned model [6, 15, 18, 11].
Recent work [17] showed a new perspective of channel
pruning that the structure of the pruned model is the key of
determining the performance of a pruned model, rather than

70
Accuracy

Recent works imply that the channel pruning can be regarded as searching optimal sub-structure from unpruned
networks. However, existing works based on this observation require training and evaluating a large number of
structures, which limits their application. In this paper, we
propose a novel differentiable method for channel pruning,
named Differentiable Markov Channel Pruning (DMCP),
to efficiently search the optimal sub-structure. Our method
is differentiable and can be directly optimized by gradient
descent with respect to standard task loss and budget regularization (e.g. FLOPs constraint). In DMCP, we model the
channel pruning as a Markov process, in which each state
represents for retaining the corresponding channel during
pruning, and transitions between states denote the pruning
process. In the end, our method is able to implicitly select
the proper number of channels in each layer by the Markov
process with optimized transitions. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we perform extensive experiments
on Imagenet with ResNet and MobilenetV2. Results show
our method can achieve consistent improvement than stateof-the-art pruning methods in various FLOPs settings.

68
66
64
62

MobileNetV2
MetaPruning
AMC
Ours

60
58
50

100

150
200
MFLOPs

250

300

Figure 1. MFLOPs vs. Accuracy on the ImageNet classification dataset. The original model is MobileNetV2 [21]. Our
method outperforms existing pruning methods MetaPruning [16]
and AMC [7] on mobile settings (<300MFLOPs) at all FLOPs.
See Table 6 for more results. Best viewed in color.

the inherited “important” weights. Based on this observation, some works try to design a pruning process to directly
search optimal sub-structure from the unpruned structure.
AMC [7] adopted reinforcement learning (RL) to train a
controller to output the pruning ratio of each layer in the
unpruned structure, while MetaPruning [16] used evolution
algorithm to search structures. However, the optimization
of these pruning process need to train and evaluate a large
number of structures sampled from the unpruned network,
thus the scalability of these methods is limited. Although
AMC don’t fine-tune the pruned structures and MetaPruning trained a meta-network to predict network’s weights to
avoid training the searched structures, the limitation of scalability still remains.
A similar problem in neural architecture search (NAS)
has been tackled by differentiable method DARTS [14].
However, the differentiable method proposed by DARTS
cannot be directly applied to channel pruning. First, the
definition of search space is different. The search space of
DARTS is a category of pre-defined operations (convolution, max-pooing, etc), while in the channel pruning, the
search space is the number of channels in each layer. Second, the operations in DARTS are independent with each
11539

