Searching for Actions on the Hyperbole
Teng Long1∗, Pascal Mettes2 , Heng Tao Shen1†, Cees Snoek2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China1 , University of Amsterdam2

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce hierarchical action search.
Starting from the observation that hierarchies are mostly
ignored in the action literature, we retrieve not only individual actions but also relevant and related actions, given
an action name or video example as input. We propose
a hyperbolic action network, which is centered around a
hyperbolic space shared by action hierarchies and videos.
Our discriminative hyperbolic embedding projects actions
on the shared space while jointly optimizing hypernymhyponym relations between action pairs and a large margin separation between all actions. The projected actions
serve as hyperbolic prototypes that we match with projected
video representations. The result is a learned space where
videos are positioned in entailment cones formed by different subtrees. To perform search in this space, we start
from a query and increasingly enlarge its entailment cone
to retrieve hierarchically relevant action videos. Experiments on three action datasets with new hierarchy annotations show the effectiveness of our approach for hierarchical action search by name and by video example, regardless of whether queried actions have been seen or not during training. Our implementation is available at https:
//github.com/Tenglon/hyperbolic_action

1. Introduction
This paper strives to search an action by its name or by
an example video. A typical approach in the literature is to
frame the retrieval as a recognition problem. Deep networks
are trained to match videos to one-hot vectors of action
classes [6, 18, 37], which can be used to rank videos using
class scores. Others investigate action search by matching
videos directly with embedded action names [20, 24, 27, 40]
or by matching with a query video [31, 41]. While effective
for searching individual actions, common amongst all these
works is that hierarchical relations between actions are ignored. Implying the search is optimized for a single action
rather than groups of related actions. Hence, search mis∗ Work done while at University of Amsterdam.
† Corresponding author.

Sports

Martial

House
hold

Leisure

Action
Hierarchy
Eat
Drink

Arts

Taichi

Capoeira
Karate

Personal
Care

Kickbox

Martial

Figure 1: Hyperboles for action search. We propose hierarchical search of actions in videos by matching actions and
videos in a shared hyperbolic space. In this way, we can
search actions by their name or by video examples while
abiding to the hierarchical structure of actions.

takes can be arbitrarily bad as each action is deemed equally
dissimilar. To overcome such limitations, we add hierarchical relations to the action search.
We are inspired by recent advances in hyperbolic embeddings for hierarchies [16, 29]. The hyperbole provides
a natural space for tree hierarchies, as the disc area and
circle length grow exponentially with the radius of the
space [10, 29]. Hyperbolic spaces such as the Poincaré
disk can in fact embed tree hierarchies with arbitrarily low
distortion [10]. We seek to obtain a hyperbolic space that
is shared by action hierarchies and videos, such that we
can perform hierarchical search, see Figure 1. We extend
hyperbolic embeddings with a large margin separation to
project actions discriminatively on the hyperbole. We use
the projected actions as hyperbolic prototypes and introduce a matching with projected video representations. Once
trained, we show how to retrieve actions by increasingly enlarging the entailment cone of a query in the shared space.
We make three contributions in this work. First, we introduce discriminative hyperbolic embeddings to position
action hierarchies on a hyperbole suitable for search. Second, we propose a matching function between projected actions and videos in the shared hyperbolic space. The pro4321
1141

