MISC: Multi-condition Injection and Spatially-adaptive Compositing
for Conditional Person Image Synthesis
Shuchen Weng#1 Wenbo Li#2 Dawei Li2 Hongxia Jin2 Boxin Shi∗1
1
NELVT, Dept. of CS, Peking University 2 Samsung Research America AI Center
{shuchenweng,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, {wenbo.li1,dawei.l,hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Abstract

Conditional person image synthesis is vital in many application scenarios, e.g., augmented reality and data creation. This problem can be formulated as two phases (Figure 1): (i) conditional generation phase: on the basis of
a geometry condition, generating the ﬁne-grained textures
for this person following the pattern and color conditions as
precisely as possible; (ii) adaptive compositing phase: adjusting the color tone of the generated person adaptively towards different backgrounds, so that the generated textures
not only look realistic by themselves, but also remain realistic after being composited with the background.
For conditional image generation, recent works [10, 12,
14, 20] suggest that a proper injection of conditions into
the generation pipeline is crucial to the generation quality. However, existing methods are designed based on either the assumption of a unique condition or the independence among multiple conditions, and few of them attempt
to improve the condition injection by leveraging the intercondition correlations. Speciﬁc to the conditional person
generation phase, it takes three conditions as input, i.e., ge# Equal contributions. * Corresponding author.

Compositing

pants color: black and blue,
skin color: red,
upper_clothes color: green,
hair color: black

1. Introduction

Person Generation

pants color: black
skin color: red and orange
upper_clothes color: purple
hair color: black

In this paper, we explore synthesizing person images with
multiple conditions for various backgrounds. To this end,
we propose a framework named “MISC” for conditional
image generation and image compositing. For conditional
image generation, we improve the existing condition
injection mechanisms by leveraging the inter-condition
correlations. For the image compositing, we theoretically
prove the weaknesses of the cutting-edge methods, and
make it more robust by removing the spatially-invariance
constraint, and enabling the bounding mechanism and
the spatial adaptability. We show the effectiveness of our
method on the Video Instance-level Parsing dataset, and
demonstrate the robustness through controllability tests.

Attribute

Figure 1. Illustration of the conditional person image synthesis
problem, which includes a generation and a compositing phase.

ometry, pattern (viz., gray-scale textures) and color, which
are instantiated herein as the parsing mask, Gaussian noise,
and multi-valued color attributes, respectively. The geometry condition is visually concrete, while the pattern and
color are abstract and are correlated with the geometry.
Thus, the conditional person generation can be regarded as
a visual concretization of the abstract conditions which is
constrained by the innate concrete conditions.
On the other hand, an image compositing model is necessary for harmonizing the generated person foreground and
the target background. Cutting-edge works, e.g., [1, 24],
perform the compositing by adjusting the global color tone
of the foreground with an inferred spatially-invariant afﬁne
transformation. However, we discover that such a spatiallyinvariant transformation at the pixel level could lead to the
over-saturated effects due to the unbounded value range of
the transformed foreground image. Therefore, a more robust compositing model is desired for handling our task.
In this paper, we present MISC (Multi-condition Injection and Spatially-adaptive Compositing), an end-to-end
trainable deep neural network to address the above mentioned problems for conditional person image synthesis.
MISC includes a conditional person generation model and
17741

