Prior Guided GAN Based Semantic Inpainting
Avisek Lahiri1 *, Arnav Kumar Jain2∗†, Sanskar Agrawal1 , Pabitra Mitra1 , Prabir Kumar Biswas1
1
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 2 Microsoft

Abstract
Contemporary deep learning based semantic inpainting
can be approached from two directions. First, and the more
explored, approach is to train an offline deep regression
network over the masked pixels with an additional refinement by adversarial training. This approach requires a single feed-forward pass for inpainting at inference. Another
promising, yet unexplored approach is to first train a generative model to map a latent prior distribution to natural
image manifold and during inference time search for the
‘best-matching’ prior to reconstruct the signal. The primary aversion towards the latter genre is due to its inference time iterative optimization and difficulty to scale to
higher resolution. In this paper, going against the general trend, we focus on the second paradigm of inpainting
and address both of its mentioned problems. Most importantly, we learn a data driven parametric network to directly predict a matching prior for a given masked image.
This converts an iterative paradigm to a single feed forward inference pipeline with around 800× speedup. We
also regularize our network with structural prior (computed
from the masked image itself) which helps in better preservation of pose and size of the object to be inpainted. Moreover, to extend our model for sequence reconstruction, we
propose a recurrent net based grouped latent prior learning. Finally, we leverage recent advancements in high resolution GAN training to scale our inpainting network to
256×256. Experiments (spanning across resolutions from
64×64 to 256×256) conducted on SVHN, Standford Cars,
CelebA, CelebA-HQ and ImageNet image datasets, and
FaceForensics video datasets reveal that we consistently improve upon contemporary benchmarks from both schools of
approaches.

1. Introduction
Semantic inpainting refers to filling up of holes or
masked regions with plausible pixel values coherent with
* Denotes equal contribution.
† Work done when author was at IIT Kharagpur.

Correspondence to: avisek@ece.iitkgp.ac.in, arj@microsoft.com

Figure 1: Examples of inpainting on ImageNet (first two rows) and CelebA-HQ
(bottom row). On complex multi category dataset such as Imagenet, our network is
significantly more capable of recovering semantic parts of the objects to be inpainted
compared to state-of-the-art frameworks of MC-CNN [42], PIC [49] and GIP [47].
On simpler structures such as faces we perform comparable (sometimes better) to
competing methods. All images are of 256×256. Zoom-in for better visualization.

the neighborhood context. Traditional techniques [4, 17]
were mainly successful in inpainting background and
scenes with repetitive textures by matching and copying
background patches into holes. However, these methods fail
on cases where patterns are unique or non-repetitive such
as on faces and objects. Recent state-of-the-art generative
models usually leverage advancements in deep generative
models such as Variational Autoencoeder (VAE) [23] and
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [16]. There are
mainly two schools of approach, a) ‘single-pass-inference’
and b) ‘iterative inference’ . The first approach has drawn
majority of recent attraction [35, 21, 47, 29, 28] due to its
fast inference speed and appreciable performance at high
resolution. In general, this paradigm trains on a paired
dataset of masked and unmasked images and is initially
guided with traditional reconstruction loss over the masked
regions. To get the finer details, the next step is to refine
the reconstructions with an adversarial loss. The second approach is to first train a generative model such as a GAN
on clean/unmasked images and then, based on the masked
image at inference time, predict a suitable latent prior to
complete the image. From a generative modeling research
view point, this approach is appealing because the model is
never explicitly guided by reconstruction loss over masked
113696

