Sparse Layered Graphs for Multi-Object Segmentation
Niels Jeppesen, Anders N. Christensen, Vedrana A. Dahl, Anders B. Dahl
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
niejep,anym,vand,abda@dtu.dk

Abstract
We introduce the novel concept of a Sparse Layered
Graph (SLG) for s-t graph cut segmentation of image data.
The concept is based on the widely used Ishikawa layered technique for multi-object segmentation, which allows
explicit object interactions, such as containment and exclusion with margins. However, the spatial complexity of
the Ishikawa technique limits its use for many segmentation problems. To solve this issue, we formulate a general
method for adding containment and exclusion interaction
constraints to layered graphs. Given some prior knowledge, we can create a SLG, which is often orders of magnitude smaller than traditional Ishikawa graphs, with identical segmentation results. This allows us to solve many
problems that could previously not be solved using general
graph cut algorithms. We then propose three algorithms
for further reducing the spatial complexity of SLGs, by using ordered multi-column graphs. In our experiments, we
show that SLGs, and in particular ordered multi-column
SLGs, can produce high-quality segmentation results using
extremely simple data terms. We also show the scalability of ordered multi-column SLGs, by segmenting a highresolution volume with several hundred interacting objects.

1. Introduction
Most image segmentation research using graph cuts is
demonstrated on problems with less than ten labels. This
is enough for high-level segmentation tasks like organ,
brain, and bone segmentation. However, many segmentation tasks, such as microscopy imaging in medicine and materials science, involve hundreds or more objects. Segmentation tasks with this number of labels have previously been
difficult, or even impossible to solve using s-t graph cuts.
With our method for constructing graphs, well-known graph
cut algorithms can efficiently solve segmentation tasks with
hundreds of labels.
Computational speed is essential for the practical use of

segmentation. Much of the success of graph cuts is owed to
the Boykov-Kolmogorov (BK) implementation of the FordFulkerson maxflow/mincut algorithm, which performs well
for many image-related optimization problems and gives
a globally optimal solution for submodular problems [1].
More recently, the Incremental Breadth-First Search (IBFS)
algorithm by Goldberg et al. [6] has shown even better performance and run-time guarantees. Another way to speed
up the computations is to use a parallel algorithm [4, 18].
However, to our knowledge, these algorithms only work on
regular grid-based graphs.
By definition, s-t graph cuts provide a binary labeling.
For multi-label segmentation with graph cuts, one option is
to use the iterative α-expansion method [2]. However, it
often gets stuck in weak local minima. Another common
approach is to use the Ishikawa layered graph construction
[10], where each layer corresponds to one label. Using this
technique, it is possible to solve multi-label problems, while
enforcing label interaction constraints, such as containment
and two-label exclusion [5]. These interaction constraints
are often necessary to ensure that an object is inside another
object or that objects do not overlap. However, because the
exclusion term is non-submodular, the approach of [5] does
not work for more than two exclusive objects.
To enable multi-object exclusion, one approach is to use
the QPBO algorithm [11, 16], which can incorporate nonsubmodular terms, at the cost of completeness. The algorithm guarantees partial optimality, but may not find a complete solution, i.e. there may be unlabelled nodes. A higherlevel alternative is the Path-Moves algorithm (HINTS) [8],
which is also able to incorporate non-submodular terms.
Unlike QPBO, it is an iterative algorithm that always provides a complete labeling and has been shown to find good
solutions, although they are not guaranteed to be optimal.
The number of objects that can be segmented using the
Ishikawa technique is in practice limited by the size of the
layered graph. If Ω is a set of nodes, usually corresponding
to the pixels of an image, and L is the set of labels/objects,
then the spatial complexity of the nodes in the layered graph
is O(|Ω||L|). However, the number of objects is not the

12777

