Enhancing Generic Segmentation with Learned Region Representations
Or Isaacs∗
Oran Shayer∗
Michael Lindenbaum
Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
orisaacs@gmail.com

oran.sh@gmail.com

mic@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Current successful approaches for generic (nonsemantic) segmentation rely mostly on edge detection and
have leveraged the strengths of deep learning mainly by improving the edge detection stage in the algorithmic pipeline.
This is in contrast to semantic and instance segmentation,
where DNNs are applied directly to generate pixel-wise segment representations. We propose a new method for learning a pixel-wise representation that reflects segment relatedness. This representation is combined with an edge map
to yield a new segmentation algorithm. We show that the
representations themselves achieve state-of-the-art segment
similarity scores. Moreover, the proposed combined segmentation algorithm provides results that are either state of
the art or improve upon it, for most quality measures.

1. Introduction
Generic segmentation is the well-studied task of partitioning an image into parts that correspond to objects for
which no prior information is available. Deep learning approaches to this task thus far have been indirect and relied
on edge detection. The COB algorithm [21], for example,
uses a learned edge detector to suggest a high-quality contour map, and then creates a segmentation hierarchy from it
using the oriented watershed transform [2].
In this work, we follow the approach used for semantic
segmentation: learning pixel-wise representations that capture region and segment characteristics. However, we apply
this approach for the first time to the generic (non-semantic)
segmentation task. This paper focuses on creating such representations, along with combining them with edge-based
information to a generic segmentation algorithm improving
the current state of the art.
Deep learning has been successfully used in a supervised
regime, where the network is learned end-to-end on supervised tasks (e.g., classification [14], object detection [29],
semantic segmentation [6], or edge detection [36]). Generic
∗ Both authors contributed equally

Figure 1: The algorithm flow: the proposed region representation (top right) and the edges (bottom left) of the input
image (top left) are extracted and then combined to the resulting segmentation (bottom right).

segmentation, however, cannot be formulated as such. Unlike semantic segmentation, the properties of regions inside
segments of new (”test”) images are not well specified with
respect to the regions or the objects in a training set, and
therefore, the direct classification approach does not apply.
The common task of face verification ([34], [31], [26])
shares this difficulty. Even if we learn on thousands of labeled faces, there may be millions of unseen faces that must
be handled. To succeed, we may learn a model, or representation, that captures properties capable of distinguishing between different faces, even those not encountered in
training. Similarly, in generic segmentation, the images to
be partitioned might contain objects not seen in the training
set. The problem is further complicated by the fact that the
annotated segments have unknown semantic meaning (i.e.,
we do not know what objects or parts are marked).
Thus, we learn pixel-wise representations that express
segment relatedness. That is, the representations are
grouped together in representation space for pixels of the
same segment, and kept further apart for pixels from different segments. We use a supervised algorithm which follows the principles of the DeepFace algorithm [34] but addresses the differences between the tasks. We compare it to

12946

