PolarMask: Single Shot Instance Segmentation with Polar Representation
Enze Xie 1,2 , Peize Sun3∗, Xiaoge Song4∗ , Wenhai Wang4 ,
Xuebo Liu2 , Ding Liang2 , Chunhua Shen5 , Ping Luo1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Sensetime Group Ltd
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University 4 Nanjing University 5 The University of Adelaide
xieenze@hku.hk, peizesun@gmail.com, {wangwenhai362,xgs514}@163.com
liuxuebo,liangding@sensetime.com, chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au, pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce an anchor-box free and single shot instance segmentation method, which is conceptually simple, fully convolutional and can be used by easily embedding it into most off-the-shelf detection methods.
Our method, termed PolarMask, formulates the instance
segmentation problem as predicting contour of instance
through instance center classification and dense distance
regression in a polar coordinate. Moreover, we propose
two effective approaches to deal with sampling high-quality
center examples and optimization for dense distance regression, respectively, which can significantly improve the performance and simplify the training process. Without any
bells and whistles, PolarMask achieves 32.9% in mask mAP
with single-model and single-scale training/testing on the
challenging COCO dataset.
For the first time, we show that the complexity of instance segmentation, in terms of both design and computation complexity, can be the same as bounding box
object detection and this much simpler and flexible instance segmentation framework can achieve competitive accuracy. We hope that the proposed PolarMask framework
can serve as a fundamental and strong baseline for single shot instance segmentation task. Code is available at:
github.com/xieenze/PolarMask.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in
computer vision, which enables numerous downstream vision applications. It is challenging as it requires to predict
both the location and the semantic mask of each instance in
an image. Therefore intuitively instance segmentation can
be solved by bounding box detection then semantic segmentation within each box, adopted by two-stage methods, such
∗ indicates equal contribution.

(a) Original image

(b) Pixel-wise Representation
90o
60o

120o

4
3

30o

150o
2

1
0

1

2

3

0o

o

4 180

0

1

2

3

4

330o

210o

240o

300o
270o

(c) Cartesian Representation

(d) Polar Representation

Figure 1 – Instance segmentation with different mask representations.
(a) is the original image. (b) is the pixel-wise mask representation. (c)
and (d) represent a mask by its contour, in the Cartesian and Polar coordinates, respectively.

as Mask R-CNN [15]. Recent trends in the vision community have spent more effort in designing simpler pipelines of
bounding box detectors [17, 23, 29, 31, 33, 10, 19] and subsequent instance-wise recognition tasks including instance
segmentation [2, 4, 34], which is also the main focus of our
work here. Thus, our aim is to design a conceptually simple mask prediction module that can be easily plugged into
many off-the-shelf detectors, enabling instance segmentation.
Instance segmentation is usually solved by binary classification in a spatial layout surrounded by bounding boxes,

12193

