Three-dimensional Reconstruction of Human Interactions
Mihai Fieraru1 Mihai Zanfir1 Elisabeta Oneata1
Alin-Ionut Popa1 Vlad Olaru1 Cristian Sminchisescu2,1
1

Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, 2 Lund University
1

{firstname.lastname}@imar.ro, 2 cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

Abstract
Understanding 3d human interactions is fundamental
for fine grained scene analysis and behavioural modeling.
However, most of the existing models focus on analyzing a
single person in isolation, and those who process several
people focus largely on resolving multi-person data association, rather than inferring interactions. This may lead to
incorrect, lifeless 3d estimates, that miss the subtle human
contact aspects–the essence of the event–and are of little
use for detailed behavioral understanding. This paper addresses such issues and makes several contributions: (1) we
introduce models for interaction signature estimation (ISP)
encompassing contact detection, segmentation, and 3d contact signature prediction; (2) we show how such components can be leveraged in order to produce augmented losses
that ensure contact consistency during 3d reconstruction;
(3) we construct several large datasets for learning and
evaluating 3d contact prediction and reconstruction methods; specifically, we introduce CHI3D, a lab-based accurate 3d motion capture dataset with 631 sequences containing 2, 525 contact events, 728, 664 ground truth 3d poses,
as well as FlickrCI3D, a dataset of 11, 216 images, with
14, 081 processed pairs of people, and 81, 233 facet-level
surface correspondences within 138, 213 selected contact
regions. Finally, (4) we present models and baselines to
illustrate how contact estimation supports meaningful 3d
reconstruction where essential interactions are captured.
Models and data are made available for research purposes
at http://vision.imar.ro/ci3d.

1. Introduction
Human sensing has recently seen a revival[34, 28,
24, 48] due to advances in large-scale deep learning architectures, powerful 3d kinematic and statistical shape
models[23, 14, 32], as well as large scale 2d and 3d annotated datasets[20, 1, 13, 25]. While considerable progress
has been achieved in localizing multiple humans in im-

Figure 1: Monocular 3d reconstruction, constrained by contact signatures, preserves the essence of the physical interaction between people and supports behavioral reasoning.

ages, or reconstructing 3d humans in isolation, in a personcentred frame, little work has focused on inferring the pose
and placement of multiple people in a three-dimensional,
scene-centered coordinate system.
Moreover, the few approaches that have pursued such
goals recently[29, 50, 51, 19, 40, 3, 16], concentrated
mostly on the arguably difficult problem of multi-person
data association, rather than the more subtle aspects such
as close interactions during human contact. This leads to
predictions that even when impressive in terms of plausible pose and shape from a distance, miss the essence
of the event at close scrutiny, when e.g. two reconstructions fail to capture the contact during a handshake, a tap
on the shoulder, or a hug. Such interactions are particularly difficult to resolve as effects compound: on one hand
depth and body shape uncertainty could result in compensation by pushing limbs in front or further away from their
ground truth position, when inferring 3d from monocular
images[39]; on the other hand, partial occlusion and the relatively scarce detail (resolution) for contact areas in images,
typical of many human interactions, can make visual evidence inconclusive.
In this paper, we propose a first set of methodological
elements to address the reconstruction of interacting
humans, in a more principled manner, by relying on
recognition, segmentation, mapping, and 3d reconstruction.
More precisely, we break down the problem of producing
veridical 3d reconstructions of interacting humans into

7214

