Siamese Box Adaptive Network for Visual Tracking
Zedu Chen1 , Bineng Zhong1, 6∗, Guorong Li2 , Shengping Zhang3,4 , Rongrong Ji5,4
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huaqiao University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
6
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of
Ministry of Education, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
zeduchen@stu.hqu.edu.cn, bnzhong@hqu.edu.cn, liguorong@ucas.ac.cn
s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

scale #1

anchor
boxes
with
different
ratios

scale #2

Most of the existing trackers usually rely on either a
multi-scale searching scheme or pre-defined anchor boxes
to accurately estimate the scale and aspect ratio of a target.
Unfortunately, they typically call for tedious and heuristic
configurations. To address this issue, we propose a simple
yet effective visual tracking framework (named Siamese Box
Adaptive Network, SiamBAN) by exploiting the expressive
power of the fully convolutional network (FCN). SiamBAN
views the visual tracking problem as a parallel classification and regression problem, and thus directly classifies objects and regresses their bounding boxes in a unified FCN.
The no-prior box design avoids hyper-parameters associated with the candidate boxes, making SiamBAN more flexible and general. Extensive experiments on visual tracking
benchmarks including VOT2018, VOT2019, OTB100, NFS,
UAV123, and LaSOT demonstrate that SiamBAN achieves
state-of-the-art performance and runs at 40 FPS, confirming its effectiveness and efficiency. The code will be available at https://github.com/hqucv/siamban.

scale #3

Multi-scale Search

Anchor-based

predicted
four
offsets

Anchor-free (ours)

(a) Different scale or aspect ratio handing methods

SiamRPN++

ECO

Ours

(b) Qualitative comparison results

Figure 1. (a) Methods used to estimate the target scale or aspect ratio: multi-scale search (such as SiamFC, ECO), anchorbased (such as SiamRPN, SiamRPN++), and anchor-free (such
as ours).(b) Some representative experiment results from our
SiamBAN tracker and two state-of-the-art trackers. Observed
from the visualization results, our tracker is better than the other
two trackers in terms of scale and aspect ratio.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental but challenging task in
computer vision. Given the target state in the initial frame
of a sequence, the tracker needs to predict the target state
in each subsequent frame. Despite great progress in recent
years, visual tracking still faces challenges due to occlusion,
scale variation, background clutters, fast motion, illumination variation, and appearance variations.
In a real-world video, the target scale and aspect ratio are
∗ Corresponding author.

also changing due to target or camera movement and target
appearance changes. Accurately estimating the scale and
aspect ratio of the target becomes a challenge in the field
of visual tracking. However, many existing trackers ignore
this problem and rely on a multi-scale search to estimate the
target size. For example, the current state-of-the-art correlation filter based trackers [6, 3] rely on their classification components, and the target scale is simply estimated by
multi-scale search. Recently, Siamese network based visual

6668

