End-to-End Optimization of Scene Layout
Andrew Luo1 Zhoutong Zhang2 Jiajun Wu3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum2
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Stanford University

Abstract

television

bed

cabinet

We propose an end-to-end variational generative model
for scene layout synthesis conditioned on scene graphs. Unlike unconditional scene layout generation, we use scene
graphs as an abstract but general representation to guide
the synthesis of diverse scene layouts that satisfy relationships included in the scene graph. This gives rise to more
flexible control over the synthesis process, allowing various forms of inputs such as scene layouts extracted from
sentences or inferred from a single color image. Using our
conditional layout synthesizer, we can generate various layouts that share the same structure of the input example. In
addition to this conditional generation design, we also integrate a differentiable rendering module that enables layout
refinement using only 2D projections of the scene. Given
a depth and a semantics map, the differentiable rendering module enables optimizing over the synthesized layout
to fit the given input in an analysis-by-synthesis fashion.
Experiments suggest that our model achieves higher accuracy and diversity in conditional scene synthesis and allows
exemplar-based scene generation from various input forms.

on

behind

left of

desk

In front of

chair

1. Introduction
Interior scene layout generation is primarily concerned
with the positioning of objects that are commonly encountered indoors, such as furniture and appliances. It is of great
interest due to its important role in simulated navigation,
home automation, and interior design. The predominant approach is to perform unconditioned layout generation using
implicit likelihood models [34]. These unconditional models can produce diverse possible layouts, but often lack the
fine-grained control that allows a user to specify additional
requirements or modify the scene. In contrast to the unconditional models, conditional layout generation uses various
types of inputs, such as activity traces, partial layouts, or
text-based descriptions, enabling more flexible synthesis.
In this work, we use the 3D scene graph representation as
a high-level abstraction, with the graph not only encoding
object attributes and identities, but also 3D spatial relationships. Not only does this design enable more control over

(a) input scene graph

(b)

(c)

(d)

(f)

(g)

(e)

Figure 1: Conditional scene synthesis. (a) The input is a
scene graph describing object relationships. (b)–(g) Diverse
layouts synthesized conforming to the input scene graph.
the generated content, as users can directly manipulate the
input scene graph, it also serves as a general intermediate
representation between various modalities of scene descriptions, such as text-based descriptions and exemplar images.
Many previous methods have used scene graphs as an intermediate representation for downstream vision tasks such
as image synthesis, where they mostly formulate the problem in a deterministic manner. In contrast, our model respects the stochastic nature of the actual scene layout conditioned on the abstract description of a scene graph. The
model we introduce, named 3D Scene Layout Network (3DSLN), is a general framework for scene layout synthesis
from scene graphs. 3D-SLN combines a variational autoencoder with a graph convolutional network to generate
diverse and plausible layouts that are described by the relationships given in the 3D scene graph, as shown in Figure 1.
We further demonstrate how a differentiable renderer can
be used to refine the generated layout using a single 2.5D
sketch (depth/surface normal) and the semantic map of a
3D scene. In addition, our framework can be applied to perform exemplar-based layout generation, where we synthesize different scene layouts that share the same scene graph
extracted from text or inferred from a reference image.
In summary, our contributions are threefold. First, we
introduce 3D-SLN, a conditional variational autoencoder–
based network that generates diverse and realistic scene layouts conditioned on a scene graph. Second, we demonstrate
our model can be fine-tuned to generate 3D scene layouts

13754

