C2FNAS: Coarse-to-Fine Neural Architecture Search
for 3D Medical Image Segmentation
Qihang Yu1∗ Dong Yang2 Holger Roth2
Yutong Bai1 Yixiao Zhang1∗ Alan L. Yuille1 Daguang Xu2
1
2
The Johns Hopkins University
NVIDIA

Abstract
3D convolution neural networks (CNN) have been
proved very successful in parsing organs or tumours in
3D medical images, but it remains sophisticated and timeconsuming to choose or design proper 3D networks given
different task contexts. Recently, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) is proposed to solve this problem by searching for the best network architecture automatically. However, the inconsistency between search stage and deployment stage often exists in NAS algorithms due to memory constraints and large search space, which could become more serious when applying NAS to some memory
and time-consuming tasks, such as 3D medical image segmentation. In this paper, we propose a coarse-to-fine neural architecture search (C2FNAS) to automatically search
a 3D segmentation network from scratch without inconsistency on network size or input size. Specifically, we divide the search procedure into two stages: 1) the coarse
stage, where we search the macro-level topology of the
network, i.e. how each convolution module is connected
to other modules; 2) the fine stage, where we search at
micro-level for operations in each cell based on previous
searched macro-level topology. The coarse-to-fine manner
divides the search procedure into two consecutive stages
and meanwhile resolves the inconsistency. We evaluate our
method on 10 public datasets from Medical Segmentation
Decalthon (MSD) challenge, and achieve state-of-the-art
performance with the network searched using one dataset,
which demonstrates the effectiveness and generalization of
our searched models.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation is an important prerequisite of computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) which has
been applied in a wide range of clinical applications. With
the emerging of deep learning, great achievements have
been made in this area. However, it remains very difficult
∗ Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

Figure 1. Image and mask examples from MSD tasks (from left
to right and top to bottom): brain tumours, lung tumours, hippocampus, hepatic vessel and tumours, pancreas tumours, and
liver tumours, respectively. The abnormalities, texture variance,
and anisotropic properties make it very challenging to achieve satisfying segmentation performance. Red, green, and blue correspond to labels 1, 2 and 3, respectively, of each dataset.

to get satisfying segmentation for some challenging structures, which could be extremely small with respect to the
whole volume, or vary a lot in terms of location, shape, and
appearance. Besides, abnormalities, which results in a huge
change in texture, and anisotropic property (different voxel
spacing) make the segmentation tasks even harder. Some
examples are showed in Fig 1.
Meanwhile, manually designing a high-performance 3D
segmentation network requires adequate expertise. Most
researchers are building upon existing 3D networks, such
as 3D U-Net [8] and V-Net [19], with moderate modifications. In some case, an individual network is designed and
only works well for certain task. To leverage this problem,
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) technique is proposed
in [42], which aims at automatically discovering better
neural network architectures than human-designed ones in
terms of performance, parameters amount, or computation
cost. Starting from NASNet [43], many novel search spaces

4126

