Blindly Assess Image Quality in the Wild Guided by A
Self-Adaptive Hyper Network
Shaolin Su† , Qingsen Yan† , Yu Zhu‡ , Cheng Zhang, Xin Ge, Jinqiu Sun, Yanning Zhang ∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University
https://github.com/SSL92/hyperIQA

Abstract
Blind image quality assessment (BIQA) for authentically
distorted images has always been a challenging problem,
since images captured in the wild include varies contents
and diverse types of distortions. The vast majority of prior
BIQA methods focus on how to predict synthetic image
quality, but fail when applied to real-world distorted images. To deal with the challenge, we propose a self-adaptive
hyper network architecture to blind assess image quality in
the wild. We separate the IQA procedure into three stages
including content understanding, perception rule learning
and quality predicting. After extracting image semantics,
perception rule is established adaptively by a hyper network, and then adopted by a quality prediction network. In
our model, image quality can be estimated in a self-adaptive
manner, thus generalizes well on diverse images captured in
the wild. Experimental results verify that our approach not
only outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on challenging authentic image databases but also achieves competing
performances on synthetic image databases, though it is not
explicitly designed for the synthetic task.

1. Introduction
The goal of image quality assessment (IQA) is to enable
computers to perceive image quality like humans. In the
past decades, huge efforts have been devoted and a variety
of IQA methods have been proposed. Despite the success
they have achieved for assessing laboratory generated synthetically distorted images, IQA for authentically distorted
images remains a challenge. The challenge lies mainly in
three aspects:
Firstly, IQA in the wild is limited to the field of blind
IQA (BIQA) since there exists no access to a reference im∗ † The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
This
work was partially supported by NSFC (61871328, 61901384), ARC
(DP160100703) and National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated AeroSpace-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology. S. Su was supported by a scholarship from HUAWEI. ‡ Corresponding author: Yu Zhu.

MOS=68.99

GM-LOG=65.36

MOS=69.02

GM-LOG=23.16

MOS=67.69

GM-LOG=44.29

MOS=68.27

GM-LOG=87.65

Figure 1. Images captured in the wild contain complex distortions
and various contents, resulting in that extracted features differ
from each other, though images showed above share similar quality scores. Top left: a synthetically distorted image taken from the
LIVE database and GM-Log [38] features extracted, the rest images are taken from the authentic IQA database LIVE Challenge.
MOS scores from two databases are aligned to the same scale.

age. As widely accepted, the limitation of reference image has made BIQA the most difficult problem among the
three IQA categories, i.e. full-reference IQA (FR-IQA),
reduced-reference IQA (RR-IQA) and BIQA, also known
as non-reference IQA (NR-IQA). Secondly, different from
the common synthetic distortions (e.g. Gaussian blur, JPEG
compression) added to the whole area of image, authentic distortions are more complicated. The captured images
not only suffer from global uniform distortions (e.g. out
of focus, low illumination), but also contain other kinds
of non-uniform distortions (e.g. object moving, over lighting, ghosting) in local areas. As a result, algorithms are
challenged to accurately capture both global and local distortions to merge them into a proper quality prediction.
Thirdly, compared to synthetic IQA databases, image content variation, which is a typical challenge in IQA task,
presents even more difficulty to authentic IQA databases.
Existing synthetic IQA databases LIVE [34], TID2013 [32]
and CSIQ [21] only include no more than 30 reference images as limited in the sense of image contents, while authentic IQA database LIVE Challenge [8] and KonIQ-10k
[13] consists of 1169 and 10073 images containing differ-

3667

