PointGroup: Dual-Set Point Grouping for 3D Instance Segmentation
Li Jiang1∗ Hengshuang Zhao1∗ Shaoshuai Shi1 Shu Liu2 Chi-Wing Fu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SmartMore
{lijiang, hszhao, cwfu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

ssshi@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Jiaya Jia1,2

sliu@smartmore.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation is an important task for scene understanding. Compared to the fully-developed 2D, 3D instance segmentation for point clouds have much room to
improve. In this paper, we present PointGroup, a new endto-end bottom-up architecture, specifically focused on better grouping the points by exploring the void space between
objects. We design a two-branch network to extract point
features and predict semantic labels and offsets, for shifting each point towards its respective instance centroid. A
clustering component is followed to utilize both the original
and offset-shifted point coordinate sets, taking advantage
of their complementary strength. Further, we formulate
the ScoreNet to evaluate the candidate instances, followed
by the Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to remove duplicates. We conduct extensive experiments on two challenging datasets, ScanNet v2 and S3DIS, on which our method
achieves the highest performance, 63.6% and 64.0%, compared to 54.9% and 54.4% achieved by former best solutions in terms of mAP with IoU threshold 0.5.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental and challenging
task that requires to predict not only the semantic labels
but also the instance IDs for every object in the scene. It
has drawn much interest recently, given the potential applications for both outdoor and indoor environment regarding
autonomous driving, robot navigation, to name a few.
Convolutional neural networks has boosted the performance of 2D instance segmentation [10, 17, 29, 5]. However, given unordered and unstructured 3D point clouds, 2D
methods cannot be directly extended to 3D points and make
the latter remains very challenging [49, 19, 53]. In this
paper, we address the challenging 3D point cloud instance
segmentation task by exploring the void space between 3D
objects, along with the semantic information, to better segment individual objects.
∗ Equal Contribution.

Input

Instance Prediction

Figure 1: Example of 3D instance segmentation by our
method from ScanNet v2. Instances are in different colors.
Specifically, we design a bottom-up end-to-end framework named PointGroup for 3D instance segmentation,
with the key target of better grouping of points. Our pipeline
is to first extract per-point semantic prediction and conduct efficient point grouping to harvest candidate object instances. We utilize a semantic segmentation backbone to
extract descriptive features and predict a semantic label for
each point. Parallel to the segmentation head, we adopt an
offset branch to learn a relative offset to bring each point to
its respective ground-truth instance centroid. By this means,
we shift points of the same object instance towards the same
centroid and gather them closer, thus enabling better grouping of points into objects and separation of nearby objects
of the same class.
With the predicted semantic labels and offsets, we then
adopt a simple and yet effective algorithm to group points
into clusters. For each point, we take its coordinates as a
reference, group it with nearby points of the same label,
and expand the group progressively. Importantly, we consider two coordinate sets in two separate passes – the original point positions and those shifted by the predicted offsets. We call the process “Dual-Set Point Grouping.” The
two types of results complement each other for accomplishing better performance. Further, we design the ScoreNet
to evaluate and pick candidate groups. Non-maximum suppression is finally adopted to remove duplicate predictions.
We conduct extensive experiments on the challenging
ScanNet v2 [8] and S3DIS [2] datasets. PointGroup
achieves the highest accuracy on both of them. For Scan-

4867

