The GAN that Warped: Semantic Attribute Editing with Unpaired Data
Garoe Dorta 1,2 Sara Vicente 2 Neill D. F. Campbell 1
1
2
University of Bath
Anthropics Technology Ltd.
{g.dorta.perez,n.campbell}@bath.ac.uk

(a) Input image (previously unseen)

sara@anthropics.com

Ivor J. A. Simpson 2,3
3
University of Sussex
i.simpson@sussex.ac.uk

(b) User requested edit: “beak larger than head” (c) User requested edit: “beak smaller than head”

Figure 1: Semantic image editing at high resolution (2480×1850). The user requests a change in a semantic attribute and the input image
(a) is automatically transformed by our method into, e.g., an image with “beak larger than head” (b) or “beak smaller than head” (c). The
content of the original input, including fine details, is preserved. Our focus is on face editing, as previous work, yet the method is general
enough to be applied to other datasets. Please see the supplemental material for videos of these and other edits. (Zoom in for details)1

Abstract
Deep neural networks have recently been used to edit images with great success, in particular for faces. However,
they are often limited to only being able to work at a restricted range of resolutions. Many methods are so flexible
that face edits can often result in an unwanted loss of identity. This work proposes to learn how to perform semantic
image edits through the application of smooth warp fields.
Previous approaches that attempted to use warping for semantic edits required paired data, i.e. example images of
the same subject with different semantic attributes. In contrast, we employ recent advances in Generative Adversarial
Networks that allow our model to be trained with unpaired
data. We demonstrate face editing at very high resolutions
(4k images) with a single forward pass of a deep network at
a lower resolution. We also show that our edits are substantially better at preserving the subject’s identity. The robustness of our approach is demonstrated by showing plausible
image editing results on the Cub200 [32] birds dataset. To
our knowledge this has not been previously accomplished,
due the challenging nature of the dataset.

1 Image courtesy of Flickr user Christoph Landers.

1. Introduction
Face editing has a long history in computer vision [20,
23, 30] and has been made increasingly relevant with the
rise in the number of pictures people take of themselves or
others. The type of edits that are performed usually manipulate a semantic attribute, such as removing a moustache or
changing the subject’s expression from a frown to a smile.
In the last few years, deep learning approaches have become the standard in most editing tasks, including inpainting [24] and super-resolution [17]. Particularly, image-toimage translation methods [14] have been proposed, which
learn how to transform an image from a source domain to a
target domain. Cycle-GAN [39] allows learning such translations from unpaired data, i.e. for each source image in the
dataset a corresponding target image is not required.
We are interested in photo-realistic image editing, which
is a subset of image-to-image translation. We also focus
on methods that provide a simple interface for users to edit
images, i.e. a single control per semantic attribute [5, 26],
as this makes editing easier for novice users.
A disadvantage of current methods for editing [14, 5, 35]
is that they focus on binary attribute changes. In order to allow partial edits an extensive collection of soft attribute data
is usually required, which is labor intensive. Also, at inference each intermediate value requires a forward pass of the

5356

