Learning from Web Data with Self-Organizing Memory Module
Yi Tu, Li Niu,* Junjie Chen, Dawei Cheng, and Liqing Zhang*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{tuyi1991,ustcnewly,chen.bys,dawei.cheng}@sjtu.edu.cn,zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning from web data has attracted lots of research
interest in recent years. However, crawled web images usually have two types of noises, label noise and background
noise, which induce extra difficulties in utilizing them effectively. Most existing methods either rely on human supervision or ignore the background noise. In this paper,
we propose a novel method, which is capable of handling
these two types of noises together, without the supervision
of clean images in the training stage. Particularly, we formulate our method under the framework of multi-instance
learning by grouping ROIs (i.e., images and their region
proposals) from the same category into bags. ROIs in each
bag are assigned with different weights based on the representative/discriminative scores of their nearest clusters,
in which the clusters and their scores are obtained via our
designed memory module. Our memory module could be
naturally integrated with the classification module, leading
to an end-to-end trainable system. Extensive experiments
on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is a data-hungry method that demands
large numbers of well-labeled training samples, but acquiring massive images with clean labels is expensive, timeconsuming, and labor-intensive. Considering that there are
abundant freely available web data online, learning from
web images could be promising. However, web data have
two severe flaws: label noise and background noise. Label noise means the incorrectly labeled images. Since web
images are usually retrieved by using the category name
as the keyword when searching from public websites, unrelated images might appear in the searching results. Different from label noise, background noise is caused by the
cluttered and diverse contents of web images compared with
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Two web images crawled with keyword “dog”. Left:
Dog food; Right: A kid and a dog on the grassland.

standard datasets. Specifically, in manually labeled datasets
like Cifar-10, the target objects of each category usually appear at the center and occupy relatively large areas, yielding
little background noise. However, in web images, background or irrelevant objects may occupy the majority of
the whole image. One example is provided in Figure 1,
in which two images are crawled with the keyword “dog”.
The left image belongs to label noise since it has dog food,
which is indirectly related to “dog”. Meanwhile, the right
image belongs to background noise because the grassland
occupies the majority of the whole image, and a kid also
takes a salient position.
There are already many studies [33, 23, 36, 46, 52, 16,
31, 32, 34] on using web images to learn classifiers. However, most of them [53, 24, 13, 33, 23, 28, 19] only focused
on label noise. In contrast, some recent works began to consider the background noise. In particular, Zhuang et al. [60]
used attention maps to suppress background noise, but this
method did not fully exploit the relationship among different regions, which might limit its ability to remove noisy
regions. Sun et al. [46] utilized weakly supervised region
proposal network to distill clean region proposals from web
images, but this approach requires extra clean images in the
training stage.
In this work, we propose a novel method to address
the label noise and background noise simultaneously without using human annotation. We first use an unsupervised
proposal extraction method [61] to capture image regions
which are likely to contain meaningful objects. In the re-

12846

