End-to-end 3D Point Cloud Instance Segmentation without Detection
Haiyong Jiang1,2 , Feilong Yan4 , Jianfei Cai2,3 , Jianmin Zheng2 , Jun Xiao1∗
1
University of Chinese Academy of Science, 2 Nanyang Technological University,
3
Monash University, 4 Huya Live

Abstract
3D instance segmentation plays a predominant role in
environment perception of robotics and augmented reality.
Many deep learning based methods have been presented recently for this task. These methods rely on either a detection
branch to propose objects or a grouping step to assemble
same-instance points. However, detection based methods
do not ensure a consistent instance label for each point,
while the grouping step requires parameter-tuning and is
computationally expensive. In this paper, we introduce an
assign-and-suppress network, dubbed as AS-Net, to enable
end-to-end instance segmentation without detection and a
separate step of grouping. The core idea is to frame instance segmentation as a candidate assignment problem. At
first, a set of instance candidates are sampled. Then we propose an assignment module for candidate assignment and a
suppression module to eliminate redundant candidates. A
mapping between instance labels and instance candidates
is further sought to construct an instance grouping loss
for the network training. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method is more effective and efficient than previous
detection-free approaches.

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation has wide applications spanning from 3D perception in autonomous systems to 3D reconstruction in augmented reality and virtual reality. For
example, it is critical for an indoor robot to identify obstacles and targets in a scene so that it can interact with a specific object and move around the scene. Achieving this goal
requires to distinguish different semantic labels as well as
different instances with the same semantic label. Therefore,
it is important to investigate the problem of 3D instance segmentation.
3D instance segmentation from point clouds is a very
challenging task. While bearing the difficulties incurred by
scattered data and an additional dimension, it also shares
∗ indicates the corresponding author. Email: haiyong.jiang1990@gmail
The work was carried out at Nanyang Technological University.

prediction

inputs

merging

Detections and masks

Instances and errors

(a)
prediction
inputs

prediction

grouping

Instance-aware
features

(b)

instances

inputs

instances

(c)

Figure 1. An illustration of different frameworks for 3D instance
segmentation. (a) Detection-based framework, (b) detection-free
framework, (c) ours. Note that there are inconsistent or missing
labels when detection-based results are merged, as highlighted in
red and yellow in (a).

the same problems as its 2D counterpart. Firstly, instance
labels are in a random order, which is quite different from
semantic labels and makes it difficult to directly optimize
instance labels in an end-to-end way. Secondly, the number
of instances, which greatly impacts instance segmentation,
is unknown during inference, thus posing additional challenges.
Great progress has been made in 2D/3D instance segmentation [4, 7, 11, 12, 18, 22, 28, 29, 31]. In general, existing methods can be classified into two categories:
detection-based and detection-free. Detection-based approaches [11, 12, 31] can well handle random instance labels and an irregular number of instances by using a detection branch to mask different objects. However, they
cannot ensure consistent labeling for each point. For example, a point may get multiple instance labels or no label
depending on how many segmented regions contain it, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(a). On the other hand, detection-free
approaches [18, 22, 28, 29] harness an additional grouping step to sidestep ordering and irregular number of instances, e.g. using mean-shift algorithm [22, 29], as depicted in Fig. 1(b). The additional group step usually relies
on hyper-parameters setting like clustering bandwidth [21]
for good performance. In addition, these methods often optimize a proxy objective instead of instance segmentation,
e.g. respectively minimizing or maximizing the embedding
feature distance between points of the same instance or two

12796

