Learning to Restore Low-Light Images via Decomposition-and-Enhancement
Ke Xu1,2
Xin Yang1,†
Baocai Yin1,3
Rynson W.H. Lau2,†
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 City University of Hong Kong 3 Pengcheng Lab

Abstract
Low-light images typically suffer from two problems.
First, they have low visibility (i.e., small pixel values). Second, noise becomes significant and disrupts the image content, due to low signal-to-noise ratio. Most existing lowlight image enhancement methods, however, learn from
noise-negligible datasets. They rely on users having good
photographic skills in taking images with low noise. Unfortunately, this is not the case for majority of the low-light
images. While concurrently enhancing a low-light image
and removing its noise is ill-posed, we observe that noise
exhibits different levels of contrast in different frequency
layers, and it is much easier to detect noise in the lowfrequency layer than in the high one. Inspired by this observation, we propose a frequency-based decompositionand-enhancement model for low-light image enhancement.
Based on this model, we present a novel network that first
learns to recover image objects in the low-frequency layer
and then enhances high-frequency details based on the recovered image objects. In addition, we have prepared a new
low-light image dataset with real noise to facilitate learning. Finally, we have conducted extensive experiments to
show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches in enhancing practical noisy low-light images.

1. Introduction
Low-light imaging is very popular, for various purposes,
e.g., night-time surveillance and personal scenery imaging
at sunset. However, the visibility of low-light images in the
standard RGB (sRGB, 24 bits/pixel) space does not match
with human perception, due to quantization. This low
visibility hinders vision tasks (e.g., object detection [31]
and tracking [8]), or image editing tasks (e.g., image matting [45]). Hence, recovering low-light images is essential.
Typical image enhancement methods [46, 51, 24, 7, 40,
34, 48, 4] propose to recover low-light images to match with
human perception. These methods rely on users to have
good photographic skills in taking images with low noise,
so that these methods can focus on learning to manipulate
† Xin Yang and Rynson Lau are the corresponding authors. Rynson
Lau led this project.

(a) sRGB input

(b) Hist. eq.

(c) Low-freq.

(d) High-freq.

(e) DeepUPE [40] (f) DSLR [24]

(g) Ground truth

(h) Ours

Figure 1. Given a low-light sRGB image of 24-bit color depth (a),
typical enhancement methods cannot produce a pleasant image
with details recovered and noise suppressed (b, e, f). To illustrate
our idea, we apply a Gaussian filter to decompose (b) into a lowfrequency layer (c) and a high frequency layer (d), and observe
that the low-frequency layer preserves sufficient information for
recovering objects and colors, which can then be used to enhance
high-frequency details. This inspires us to learn a decompositionand-enhancement method for low-light images (h).

the tones, colors or contrasts of the images. As such, they
cannot be used to enhance majority of the practical lowlight images with noise, which are taken by casual users.
Figure 1 shows one example, where image contents are not
only buried by low pixel intensity values, but also disrupted
by noise, due to the inherent low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
at low light [6]. Existing enhancement methods may either
enhance both the noise and scene details (Figure 1(b, f)), or
fail to recover the low visibility of low-light images (Figure 1(e)). In addition, these enhanced images still have low
SNRs, providing limited useful contextual information for
detecting noise from scene details. Hence, they fail existing
image denoising methods [11, 49, 50, 27, 37, 32, 19].
In this paper, we address the low-light sRGB image enhancement problem, which involves two issues: image enhancement as well as denoising. Our motivation is based
on two observations. First, the image low-frequency layer preserves more information, e.g., objects and colors, and
is less affected by noise (Figure 1(c)) than the image highfrequency layer (Figure 1(d)). This suggests that it is easier
to enhance the low-frequency image layer than to directly enhance the whole image. Second, the very low intrinsic dimensionality of image primitives makes it possible for
neural networks to learn a full knowledge of image primitives [29, 41]. Hence, given the low-frequency informa12281

