Learning When and Where to Zoom with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Burak Uzkent
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University

Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University

buzkent@cs.stanford.edu

ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
While high resolution images contain semantically more
useful information than their lower resolution counterparts,
processing them is computationally more expensive, and in
some applications, e.g. remote sensing, they can be much
more expensive to acquire. For these reasons, it is desirable
to develop an automatic method to selectively use high resolution data when necessary while maintaining accuracy
and reducing acquisition/run-time cost. In this direction,
we propose PatchDrop a reinforcement learning approach
to dynamically identify when and where to use/acquire high
resolution data conditioned on the paired, cheap, low resolution images. We conduct experiments on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, ImageNet and fMoW datasets where we use significantly less high resolution data while maintaining similar
accuracy to models which use full high resolution images.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks achieve state-of-the-art performance in many computer vision tasks, including image
recognition [4], object detection [23], and object tracking [18]. However, one drawback is that they require high
quality input data to perform well, and their performance
drops significantly on degraded inputs, e.g., lower resolution images [49], lower frame rate videos [28], or under
distortions [38]. For example, [45] studied the effect of image resolution, and reported a 14% performance drop on
CIFAR10 after downsampling images by a factor of 4.
Nevertheless, downsampling is often performed for computational and statistical reasons [51]. Reducing the resolution of the inputs decreases the number of parameters, resulting in reduced computational and memory cost and mitigating overfitting [2]. Therefore, downsampling is often
applied to trade off computational and memory gains with
accuracy loss [25]. However, the same downsampling level
is applied to all the inputs. This strategy can be suboptimal
because the amount of information loss (e.g., about a label)

depends on the input [7]. Therefore, it would be desirable
to build an adaptive system to utilize a minimal amount of
high resolution data while preserving accuracy.
In addition to computational and memory savings, an
adaptive framework can also benefit application domains
where acquiring high resolution data is particularly expensive. A prime example is remote sensing, where acquiring
a high resolution (HR) satellite image is significantly more
expensive than acquiring its low resolution (LR) counterpart [26, 32, 9]. For example, LR images with 10m-30m
spatial resolution captured by Sentinel-1 satellites [8] are
publicly and freely available whereas an HR image with
0.3m spatial resolution captured by DigitalGlobe satellites
can cost in the order of 1,000 dollars [6]. Similar examples arise in medical and scientific imaging, where acquiring higher quality images can be more expensive or even
more harmful to patients [16, 15].
In all these settings, it would be desirable to be able to
adaptively acquire only specific parts of the HR quality input. The challenge, however, is how to perform this selection automatically and efficiently, i.e., minimizing the number of acquired HR patches while retaining accuracy. As
expected, naive strategies can be highly suboptimal. For
example, randomly dropping patches of HR satellite images
from the functional Map of the World (fMoW) [3] dataset
will significantly reduce accuracy of a trained network as
seen in Fig. 1a. As such, an adaptive strategy must learn
to identify and acquire useful patches [27] to preserve the
accuracy of the network.
To address this challenges, we propose PatchDrop, an
adaptive data sampling-acquisition scheme which only samples patches of the full HR image that are required for inferring correct decisions, as shown in Fig. 1b. PatchDrop
uses LR versions of input images to train an agent in a
reinforcement learning setting to sample HR patches only
if necessary. This way, the agent learns when and where
to zoom in the parts of the image to sample HR patches.
PatchDrop is extremely effective on the functional Map of
the World (fMoW) [3] dataset. Surprisingly, we show that
we can use only about 40% of full HR images without any
112345

