Deep Relational Reasoning Graph Network for Arbitrary Shape Text Detection
Shi-Xue Zhang1 , Xiaobin Zhu1 , Jie-Bo Hou1 , Chang Liu1
Chun Yang1 , Hongfa Wang4 , Xu-Cheng Yin1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
3

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Science and Technology Beijing

USTB-EEasyTech Joint Lab of Artificial Intelligence, 4 Tencent Technology (Shenzhen) Co.

Ltd

zhangshixue111@163.com, {zhuxiaobin, chunyang, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn
houjiebo@gmail.com, lasercat@gmx.us, hongfawang@tencent.com

Abstract
Arbitrary shape text detection is a challenging task due
to the high variety and complexity of scenes texts. In this paper, we propose a novel unified relational reasoning graph
network for arbitrary shape text detection. In our method,
an innovative local graph bridges a text proposal model
via Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and a deep relational reasoning network via Graph Convolutional Network (GCN), making our network end-to-end trainable. To
be concrete, every text instance will be divided into a series of small rectangular components, and the geometry attributes (e.g., height, width, and orientation) of the small
components will be estimated by our text proposal model.
Given the geometry attributes, the local graph construction model can roughly establish linkages between different text components. For further reasoning and deducing the likelihood of linkages between the component and
its neighbors, we adopt a graph-based network to perform deep relational reasoning on local graphs. Experiments on public available datasets demonstrate the stateof-the-art performance of our method. Code is available at
https://github.com/GXYM/DRRG.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has been widely applied in various
applications, such as online education, product search, instant translation, and video scene parsing [39, 26]. With
the prosperity of deep learning, text detection algorithms
[27, 42, 21, 19] have achieved impressive performance in
controlled environments where text instances have regular
shapes or aspect ratios. However, because of the limited text
representation forms, pioneer works tend to fail in detecting
texts with arbitrary shapes. Recently, some methods, e.g.,
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of relational reasoning: Generating local
graphs based on the geometry attributes of text components; inferring linkage likelihood via GCN; finally grouping node classification results into text.

TextSnake [17] and CRAFT [1], try to solve this problem
with the Connected Component (CC) strategy. However,
these methods haven’t fully explored the abundant relations
between text components, which can benefit the aggregation of text components for final text instance.
In the CC-based method, one essential task is to excavate the rational relations between separated character/component regions for linking them into holistic text instances. The existing methods usually use pre-defined rule,
link map or embedding map to group the detected components into text instance. Generally speaking, grouping
the text components with learned link relationship or embedding relationship is more robust than using pre-defined
rules, especially in the cases of long and curve texts. From
our key observations and experiments, deep relational reasoning for mining the stable relations between these component regions can greatly enhance the performance of ar-

9699

