Data-Efficient Semi-Supervised Learning by Reliable Edge Mining
Peibin Chen1 , Tao Ma1 , Xu Qin1 , Weidi Xu2 , Shuchang Zhou3 ,
1 Peking University, 2 Ant Financial Services Group, 3 Megvii
{pbchen, taoma, qinxu}@pku.edu.cn, weidi.xwd@alibaba-inc.com, zsc@megvii.com

Abstract
Learning powerful discriminative features is a challenging task in Semi-Supervised Learning, as the estimation of
the feature space is more likely to be wrong with scarcer labeled data. Previous methods utilize a relation graph with
edges representing ’similarity’ or ’dissimilarity’ between
nodes. Similar nodes are forced to output consistent features, while dissimilar nodes are forced to be inconsistent.
However, since unlabeled data may be wrongly labeled, the
judgment of edges may be unreliable. Besides, the nodes
connected by edges may already be well fitted, thus contributing little to the model training. We propose Reliable
Edge Mining (REM), which forms a reliable graph by only
selecting reliable and useful edges. Guided by the graph,
the feature extractor is able to learn discriminative features
in a data-efficient way, and consequently boosts the accuracy of the learned classifier. Visual analyses show that the
features learned are more discriminative and better reveals
the underlying structure of the data. REM can be combined
with perturbation-based methods like Π-model, TempEns
and Mean Teacher to further improve accuracy. Experiments prove that our method is data-efficient on simple tasks
like SVHN and CIFAR-10, and achieves state-of-the-art results on the challenging CIFAR-100.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network has shown promising advantages
in many applications of machine learning, such as computation vision, speech recognition, and nature language process [15]. One of the key reasons why the technique of
deep neural networks achieved such rapid developments is
there are huge amounts of labeled datasets. However, it
usually takes a lot of time and human efforts to construct
fully-labeled datasets because of the complicated works of
determining the exact labels for different samples. By contrast, since it is much easier to collect unlabeled data, there
have been a lot of efforts made for utilizing the information
of unlabeled data, and Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is
an important branch among them.

SSL aims to benefit from the limited labeled data and
large amounts of unlabeled data. In order to generalize better with the unlabeled data, the methods of SSL suppose that
the points which have the close proximity in a high-density
region should have close outputs [2, 36]. Based upon this
assumption, many perturbation-based methods have been
proposed [25, 26, 33, 24]. Π method [14] and Mean Teacher
[14] force consistent output between student network and
teacher network. VAT [21] generates a virtual adversarial
example for each input and expects the model to give close
output. Although these methods have achieved promising
results, they only consider of the unlabeled examples but
ignore the associated relationships between these examples.
Some methods, such as Luo et al. [19], utilize the underlying structure of data by building a teacher graph in the embedding space. The nodes represent the data and the edges
represent the consistency of labels between nodes1 . Then
the feature extractor is expected to output similar features
for nodes from the same class (the edge is 1), while output dissimilar features for nodes from different classes (the
edge is 0). However, on the one hand, they ignore the reliability of the edges (the values of these edges may be wrong),
which may leads to the wrong guidance of model training.
On the other hand, they ignore the usefulness2 of the edges,
which may leads to the inefficient utilization of data.
We are concerned with the task of constructing a reliable
sub-graph given the original graph mentioned before. To
guide the model training with the whole dataset, we expect
the sub-graph to maintain the nodes in the original graph.
But for efficient data utilization and reliable guidance, only
useful and reliable edges are expected to be added to the
sub-graph. We call the constructed sub-graph as a ’reliable
graph’.
In this work, we propose Reliable Edge Mining (REM)
to construct such a reliable graph (see Fig. 1). Specifically,
we add two attributes to each edge in the original graph:
usefulness and certainty. According to the attribute of usefulness, we select useful edges to form some candidate sets,
from which the reliable edges are mined according to the
1 Unlabeled data use the model prediction as their labels.
2 Usefulness means that the edge contributes to model training.

9192

