Generalized ODIN: Detecting Out-of-distribution Image without Learning from
Out-of-distribution Data
Yen-Chang Hsu1 , Yilin Shen2 , Hongxia Jin2 , Zsolt Kira1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Samsung Research America

Abstract
Deep neural networks have attained remarkable performance when applied to data that comes from the same distribution as that of the training set, but can significantly
degrade otherwise. Therefore, detecting whether an example is out-of-distribution (OoD) is crucial to enable a system that can reject such samples or alert users. Recent
works have made significant progress on OoD benchmarks
consisting of small image datasets. However, many recent
methods based on neural networks rely on training or tuning with both in-distribution and out-of-distribution data.
The latter is generally hard to define a-priori, and its selection can easily bias the learning. We base our work on a
popular method ODIN1 [21], proposing two strategies for
freeing it from the needs of tuning with OoD data, while
improving its OoD detection performance. We specifically
propose to decompose confidence scoring as well as a modified input pre-processing method. We show that both of
these significantly help in detection performance. Our further analysis on a larger scale image dataset shows that the
two types of distribution shifts, specifically semantic shift
and non-semantic shift, present a significant difference in
the difficulty of the problem, providing an analysis of when
ODIN-like strategies do or do not work.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art machine learning models, specifically
deep neural networks, are generally designed for a static and
closed world. The models are trained under the assumption
that the input distribution at test time will be the same as
the training distribution. In the real world, however, data
distributions shift over time in a complex, dynamic manner.
Even worse, new concepts (e.g. new categories of objects)
can be presented to the model at any time. Such withinclass distribution shift and unseen concepts both may lead to
catastrophic failures since the model still attempts to make
predictions based on its closed-world assumption. These
1 ODIN: Out-of-DIstribution detector for Neural networks [21]

failures are therefore often silent in that they do not result
in explicit errors in the model.
The above issue had been formulated as a problem of
detecting whether an input data is from in-distribution (i.e.
the training distribution) or out-of-distribution (i.e. a distribution different from the training distribution) [13]. This
problem has been studied for many years [12] and has been
discussed in several views such as rejection [8, 5], anomaly
detection [1], open set recognition [2], and uncertainty estimation [22, 23, 24]. In recent years, a popular neural
network-based baseline is to use the max value of class posterior probabilities output from a softmax classifier, which
can in some cases be a good indicator for distinguishing indistribution and out-of-distribution inputs [13].
ODIN [21], based on a trained neural network classifier,
provides two strategies, temperature scaling and input preprocessing, to make the max class probability a more effective score for detecting OoD data. Its performance has been
further confirmed by [34], where 15 OoD detection methods
are compared with a less biased evaluation protocol. ODIN
out-performs popular strategies such as MC-Dropout [7],
DeepEnsemble [18], PixelCNN++ [33], and OpenMax [3].
Despite its effectiveness, ODIN has a requirement that it
needs OoD data to tune hyperparameters for both its strategies, leading to a concern that hyperparameters tuned with
one out-of-distribution dataset might not generalize to others, discussed in [34]. In fact, other neural network-based
methods [20, 38], which follow the same problem setting,
have a similar requirement. [6, 14] push the idea of utilizing
OoD data further by using a carefully chosen OoD dataset to
regularize the learning of class posteriors so that OoD data
have much lower confidence than in-distribution. Lastly,
[19] uses a generative model to generate out-of-distribution
data around the boundary of the in-distribution for learning.
Although the above works show that learning with OoD
data is effective, the space of OoD data (ex: image pixel
space) is usually too large to be covered, potentially causing
a selection bias for the learning. Some previous works have
done a similar attempt to learn without OoD data, such as
[35], which uses word embeddings for extra supervision,
and [25] which applies metric learning criteria. However,

10951

