Zooming Slow-Mo: Fast and Accurate One-Stage Space-Time Video
Super-Resolution
Xiaoyu Xiang1,∗ , Yapeng Tian2,∗ , Yulun Zhang3 , Yun Fu3 , Jan P. Allebach1,† , Chenliang Xu2,†
1
Purdue University, 2 University of Rochester, 3 Northeastern University
{xiang43,allebach}@purdue.edu, {yapengtian,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu,
yulun100@gmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Overlayed LR inputs

HR intermediate frame Overlayed LR inputs

DAIN+Bicubic

DAIN+EDVR

Ours

Figure 1: Example of space-time video super-resolution. We propose a one-stage space-time video super-resolution
(STVSR) network to directly predict high frame rate (HFR) and high-resolution (HR) frames from the corresponding lowresolution (LR) and low frame rate (LFR) frames without explicitly interpolating intermediate LR frames. A HR intermediate
frame t and its neighboring low-resolution frames: t − 1 and t + 1 as an overlayed image are shown. Compare to a state-ofthe-art two-stage method: DAIN [1]+EDVR [37] on the HR intermediate frame t, our method is more capable of handling
visual motions and therefore restores more accurate image structures and sharper edges. In addition, our network is more
than 3 times faster on inference speed with a 4 times smaller model size than the DAIN+EDVR.

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the space-time video superresolution task, which aims to generate a high-resolution
(HR) slow-motion video from a low frame rate (LFR), lowresolution (LR) video. A simple solution is to split it into two
sub-tasks: video frame interpolation (VFI) and video superresolution (VSR). However, temporal interpolation and spatial super-resolution are intra-related in this task. Twostage methods cannot fully take advantage of the natural
property. In addition, state-of-the-art VFI or VSR networks
require a large frame-synthesis or reconstruction module
for predicting high-quality video frames, which makes the
two-stage methods have large model sizes and thus be timeconsuming. To overcome the problems, we propose a onestage space-time video super-resolution framework, which
directly synthesizes an HR slow-motion video from an LFR,
LR video. Rather than synthesizing missing LR video frames
as VFI networks do, we firstly temporally interpolate LR
frame features in missing LR video frames capturing local
temporal contexts by the proposed feature temporal inter∗ Equal contribution; † Equal advising.

polation network. Then, we propose a deformable ConvLSTM to align and aggregate temporal information simultaneously for better leveraging global temporal contexts. Finally, a deep reconstruction network is adopted to predict
HR slow-motion video frames. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
not only achieves better quantitative and qualitative performance but also is more than three times faster than recent
two-stage state-of-the-art methods, e.g., DAIN+EDVR and
DAIN+RBPN.

1. Introduction
Space-Time Video Super-Resolution (STVSR) [30] aims
to automatically generate a photo-realistic video sequence
with a high space-time resolution from a low-resolution and
low frame rate input video. Since HR slow-motion videos
are more visually appealing containing fine image details
and clear motion dynamics, they are desired in rich applications, such as film making and high-definition television.
To tackle the problem, most existing works in previous
literatures [30, 22, 33, 28, 6, 14] usually adopt hand-crafted

3370

