Geometrically Principled Connections in Graph Neural Networks
Shunwang Gong1∗
Mehdi Bahri1∗
1
Imperial College London

Michael M. Bronstein1,2,3
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,4
2
Twitter 3 USI Lugano 4 FaceSoft.io

{shunwang.gong16, m.bahri, m.bronstein, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph convolution operators bring the advantages of
deep learning to a variety of graph and mesh processing
tasks previously deemed out of reach. With their continued
success comes the desire to design more powerful architectures, often by adapting existing deep learning techniques
to non-Euclidean data. In this paper, we argue geometry
should remain the primary driving force behind innovation
in the emerging field of geometric deep learning. We relate
graph neural networks to widely successful computer graphics and data approximation models: radial basis functions
(RBFs). We conjecture that, like RBFs, graph convolution
layers would benefit from the addition of simple functions to
the powerful convolution kernels. We introduce affine skip
connections, a novel building block formed by combining
a fully connected layer with any graph convolution operator. We experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of our
technique, and show the improved performance is the consequence of more than the increased number of parameters.
Operators equipped with the affine skip connection markedly
outperform their base performance on every task we evaluated, i.e., shape reconstruction, dense shape correspondence,
and graph classification. We hope our simple and effective
approach will serve as a solid baseline and help ease future
research in graph neural networks.

1. Introduction
The graph formalism has established itself as the lingua
franca of non-Euclidean deep learning, as graphs provide
a powerful abstraction for very general systems of interactions. In the same way that classical deep learning developed
around the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and their
ability to capture patterns on grids by exploiting local correlation and to build hierarchical representations by stacking
multiple convolutional layers, most of the work on graph
neural networks (GNNs) has focused on the formulation of
convolution-like local operators on graphs.
∗ Authors contributed equally.

+
Fixed RBF Kernel
(Non-linear residual)

Affine Component

Complex Multidimensional
Signal

+
Fully-Connected

Learned Kernel:
Graph Convolution

Figure 1: The comparison made in this paper between
learned graph convolution kernels and RBF interpolation suggests augmenting graph convolution operators with additive
affine transformations, implemented as parametric connections between layers. Our affine skip connections improve
the network’s ability to represent certain transformations,
and enable better use of the vertex features.
In computer vision and graphics, early attempts at applying deep learning to 3D shapes were based on dense voxel
representations [42] or multiple planar views [48]. These
methods suffer from three main drawbacks, stemming from
their extrinsic nature: high computational cost of 3D convolutional filters, lack of invariance to rigid motions or non-rigid
deformations, and loss of detail due to rasterisation.
A more efficient way of representing 3D shapes is modeling them as surfaces (two-dimensional manifolds). In computer graphics and geometry processing, a popular type of
efficient and accurate discretisation of surfaces are meshes
or simplicial complexes (see, e.g., [8, 10, 25, 7, 37, 21, 14]),
which can be considered as graphs with additional structure
(faces). Geometric deep learning [9] seeks to formulate intrinsic analogies of convolutions on meshes accounting for
these structures.
As a range of effective graph and mesh convolution operators are now available, the attention of the community is
turning to improving the basic GNN architectures used in
111415

