ProAlignNet : Unsupervised Learning for Progressively Aligning Noisy Contours
VSR Veeravasarapu, Abhishek Goel, Deepak Mittal, Maneesh Singh
Verisk AI, Verisk Analytics
{s.veeravasarapu, a.goel, d.mittal, m.singh}@verisk.com

Source

Abstract
Contour shape alignment is a fundamental but challenging problem in computer vision, especially when the observations are partial, noisy, and largely misaligned. Recent
ConvNet-based architectures that were proposed to align
image structures tend to fail with contour representation
of shapes, mostly due to the use of proximity-insensitive
pixel-wise similarity measures as loss functions in their
training processes. This work presents a novel ConvNet,
”ProAlignNet,” that accounts for large scale misalignments
and complex transformations between the contour shapes.
It infers the warp parameters in a multi-scale fashion with
progressively increasing complex transformations over increasing scales. It learns –without supervision– to align
contours, agnostic to noise and missing parts, by training
with a novel loss function which is derived an upperbound
of a proximity-sensitive and local shape-dependent similarity metric that uses classical Morphological Chamfer Distance Transform. We evaluate the reliability of these proposals on a simulated MNIST noisy contours dataset via
some basic sanity check experiments. Next, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed models in two real-world
applications of (i) aligning geo-parcel data to aerial image
maps and (ii) refining coarsely annotated segmentation labels. In both applications, the proposed models consistently
perform superior to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Contour shape alignment with noisy image observations
is a fundamental, but challenging, problem in computer
vision and graphics fields, with diverse applications including skeleton/silhouette alignment [2] (for animation retargeting), semantic boundary alignment [28] and shape-toscan alignment [15] etc. For instance, consider the first row
of Figure 1. It represents a process of geo-parcel alignment
that requires aligning geo-parcel data (legal land boundaries maintained by local counties) to aerial image maps.
These two modalities of geo-spatial data, if well aligned,
are useful to assist the processes of property assessment and
tax/insurance underwritings. Classically, contour alignment

Target

Aligned

Overlaid

Figure 1: This work considers the problem of learning to align
source (1st column) with target (2nd column) contour images.
Aligned results are shown in 3rd column. Visualizations (4th column) are input image canvases overlaid with original (Blue) and
aligned (Red) source contours. Three rows contain sample results
from the applications we considered in this work: (i) noisy digit
contour alignment (ii) geo-parcel alignment and (ii) coarse-label
refinement.

problems have been approached by finding key points or
features of the shapes and aligning them by optimizing for
the parameters of a predefined class of transformations such
as affine or rigid transforms [25]. These methods may not
work for the shapes whose alignment requires a transform
different from the hired ones. Nonrigid registration methods have also been proposed in the literature, mainly using intensity-based similarity metrics [19]. However, these
methods are often computationally expensive and sensitive
towards corrupted parts of the shapes.
Motivated by the strong invasion and great success of
deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) in various vision tasks, some recent works [17, 20, 13, 14,
7] have designed ConvNet based architectures for shape
alignment/registration and shown impressive results on the
datasets with limited misalignments. However, we observe
that these approaches tend to fail in noisy, partially observed and largely misaligned contour shape contexts. We
19671

