Epipolar Transformers
Yihui He∗ Rui Yan∗ Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Shoou-I Yu
Facebook Reality Labs
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

{he2@alumni,ruiyan@alumni,katef@cs}.cmu.edu

shoou-i.yu@fb.com

Abstract
fused features

A common approach to localize 3D human joints in a
synchronized and calibrated multi-view setup consists of
two-steps: (1) apply a 2D detector separately on each
view to localize joints in 2D, and (2) perform robust
triangulation on 2D detections from each view to acquire
the 3D joint locations. However, in step 1, the 2D
detector is limited to solving challenging cases which could
potentially be better resolved in 3D, such as occlusions and
oblique viewing angles, purely in 2D without leveraging any
3D information. Therefore, we propose the differentiable
“epipolar transformer”, which enables the 2D detector to
leverage 3D-aware features to improve 2D pose estimation.
The intuition is: given a 2D location p in the current
view, we would like to first find its corresponding point
p′ in a neighboring view, and then combine the features
at p′ with the features at p, thus leading to a 3D-aware
feature at p. Inspired by stereo matching, the epipolar
transformer leverages epipolar constraints and feature
matching to approximate the features at p′ . Experiments
on InterHand and Human3.6M [13] show that our
approach has consistent improvements over the baselines.
Specifically, in the condition where no external data is used,
our Human3.6M model trained with ResNet-50 backbone
and image size 256×256 outperforms state-of-the-art by
4.23mm and achieves MPJPE 26.9 mm. Code is available1 .

1. Introduction
In order to estimate the 3D pose of a human body or
hand, there are two common settings. The first setting
is single-view 3D pose estimation [46, 44, 2, 9], where
the algorithm directly estimates 3D pose from a single
image. This is extremely challenging due to the ambiguity
in depth when only one view is available. The second
setting, which is the focus of our paper, is multi-view
∗ Equal contribution
1 github.com/yihui-he/epipolar-transformers

(H×W×256)

matches
(H×W×256)

similarity
query
candidates

(256)

(256×K)

deep features

deep features

(H×W×256)

(HxWx256)

𝑝

Reference view

𝑝’

Source view

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed epipolar transformer, which
enables 2D detectors to leverage 3D-aware features for more
accurate pose estimation. For a query vector (e.g., with length
256) on the intermediate deep feature maps of the reference view
(H×W×256), we extract K samples along the corresponding
epipolar line in the source view. Dot-product and softmax are
used to compute similarity between the query and sampled vectors,
which in turn is used to compute the corresponding feature. The
corresponding feature is then fused with the reference view feature
to arrive at a 3D-aware feature for the reference view.

3D pose estimation, where the algorithm can leverage
multiple synchronized and geometrically calibrated views
to resolve depth ambiguity. A common framework [30, 16]
to resolve depth ambiguity and accurately estimate the 3D
position of joints follows a two-step process: (1) apply
a 2D pose detector on each view separately to localize
joints in 2D, and (2) perform robust triangulation based on
camera calibration and 2D detections from each view to
acquire the 3D position of joints. Robust triangulation is
required as the prediction of the 2D pose detector could
be incorrect or missing due to occlusions. One main
disadvantage of this framework is that the detection in step 1

7779

