MINA: Convex Mixed-Integer Programming for Non-Rigid Shape Alignment
Florian Bernard

Zeeshan Khan Suri

MPI Informatics

input

Christian Theobalt

Saarland Informatics Campus

our matching

mesh to point cloud

different topology

partial overlaps

Figure 1. Left: MINA matches the straight cylinder X non-rigidly to the curved cylinder Y (their orientations are arbitrary, but we visualise
them with same orientation). It finds the globally optimal correspondences P ∈ P between a sparse set of points (coloured dots), as well
as the non-rigid deformation τ of X so that τ (X ) aligns with Y. MINA is highly flexible, e.g. it can match a mesh to a point cloud
(middle left), match shapes with different topologies (middle right, where the hands in X are not touching, while the hands in Y are, see
the geodesic paths between both hands shown as red lines), or deal with partial overlaps (right). (Best viewed on screen when zoomed in)

Abstract
We present a convex mixed-integer programming formulation for non-rigid shape matching. To this end, we propose a novel shape deformation model based on an efficient
low-dimensional discrete model, so that finding a globally
optimal solution is tractable in (most) practical cases. Our
approach combines several favourable properties: it is independent of the initialisation, it is much more efficient to
solve to global optimality compared to analogous quadratic
assignment problem formulations, and it is highly flexible
in terms of the variants of matching problems it can handle.
Experimentally we demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing methods for sparse shape matching, that it
can be used for initialising dense shape matching methods,
and we showcase its flexibility on several examples.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences in geometric data is a longstanding problem in vision, graphics, and beyond. The applications range from the creation of statistical shape models, 3D reconstruction, object tracking, or recognition, to
more recent settings such as the alignment of geometric
data to enable the training of deep learning models. In this
work we consider the problem of finding correspondences
between two given shapes, known as shape matching.
We assume that one shape is a geometrically transformed
version of the other shape. With that, matching shape X to
shape Y can be phrased as finding a transformation τ (which

belongs to a particular class Ω of transformations) such that
the transformed shape τ (X ) best aligns with Y. Formally,
this can be written as the optimisation problem
min
τ ∈Ω

d(τ (X ), Y) ,

(1)

where d(·, ·) is a suitable metric that quantifies the discrepancy between both shapes. The particular shape matching setting depends on the choice of the metric d(·, ·) and
the class of transformations Ω. For example, rigid shape
matching refers to Ω = SE(d), where SE(d) is the special Euclidean group in dimension d. In this work we study
the non-rigid shape matching problem, where Ω comprises
non-rigid deformations (to be defined in Sec. 3).
Although many previous works have addressed non-rigid
shape matching, there are several open challenges: (i) due to
the non-convex nature of Problem (1) for virtually all relevant choices of d(·, ·) and Ω, existing methods cannot guarantee to find global optima. Hence, these methods heavily
depend on the initial choice of τ . (ii) Oftentimes, non-rigid
shape matching methods require that both shapes have the
same representation (e.g. meshes). (iii) Existing approaches
have a limited flexibility in terms of the matching formulation that can be handled, e.g. they can only handle bijective matchings, or they cannot guarantee injectivity, they do
not allow for additional constraints (e.g. bounding the maximum distortion of a matching), or they cannot deal with
shapes that have different topologies. (iv) Moreover, existing formulations that purely aim for preserving pairwise
distances when finding a matching (see quadratic assignment problem in Sec. 2) are not guaranteed to maintain the

13826

