PVN3D: A Deep Point-wise 3D Keypoints Voting Network for 6DoF Pose
Estimation
Yisheng He1

Wei Sun2 Haibin Huang3 Jianran Liu2 Haoqiang Fan2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
3
Megvii Inc.
Kuaishou Technology

Jian Sun2

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel data-driven method for
robust 6DoF object pose estimation from a single RGBD image. Unlike previous methods that directly regressing pose
parameters, we tackle this challenging task with a keypointbased approach. Specifically, we propose a deep Hough
voting network to detect 3D keypoints of objects and then
estimate the 6D pose parameters within a least-squares fitting manner. Our method is a natural extension of 2Dkeypoint approaches that successfully work on RGB based
6DoF estimation. It allows us to fully utilize the geometric constraint of rigid objects with the extra depth information and is easy for a network to learn and optimize.
Extensive experiments were conducted to demonstrate the
effectiveness of 3D-keypoint detection in the 6D pose estimation task. Experimental results also show our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by large margins
on several benchmarks. Code and video are available at
https://github.com/ethnhe/PVN3D.git.

Figure 1. Pipeline of PVN3D: With an input RGBD image (a),
we use a deep Hough voting network to predict the per-point translation offset to the selected keypoint (b). Each point on the same
object votes for the selected keypoint and the center of the cluster is selected as a predicted keypoint (c). A least-squares fitting
method is then applied to estimate 6D pose parameters (d)-(e). The
model transformed by estimated pose parameters is shown in Figure (f).

1. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we study the problem of 6DoF pose estimation, i.e. recognize the 3D location and orientation of an
object in a canonical frame. It is an important component in
many real-world applications, such as robotic grasping and
manipulation [6, 48, 55], autonomous driving [11, 5, 53],
augmented reality [31] and so on.
6DoF estimation has been proven a quite challenging
problem due to variations of lighting, sensor noise, occlusion of scenes and truncation of objects. Traditional methods like [19, 30] used hand-crafted features to extract the
correspondence between images and object mesh models.
Such empirical human-designed features would suffer from
limited performance with changing illumination conditions
This work is supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFC0831700).

and scenes with heavy occlusion. More recently, with the
explosive growth of machine learning and deep learning
techniques, Deep Neural Network (DNN) based methods
have been introduced into this task and reveal promising
improvements. [50, 52] proposed to regress rotation and
translation of objects directly with DNNs. However, these
methods usually had poor generalization due to the nonlinearity of the rotation space explained by [37]. Instead,
recent works utilized DNNs to detect 2D keypoints of an
object, and computed 6D pose parameters with Perspectiven-Point (PnP) algorithms [37, 36, 41, 47]. Although these
two-stage approaches performed more stable, most of them
were built on top of the 2D projection. Errors that are small
in projection can be large in real 3D space. Also, different keypoints in 3D space may be overlapped after 2D projection, making them hard to be distinguished. Moreover,
geometric constraint information of rigid objects would be

11632

