Just Go with the Flow: Self-Supervised Scene Flow Estimation
Himangi Mittal
Carnegie Mellon University

Brian Okorn
Carnegie Mellon University

David Held
Carnegie Mellon University

hmittal@andrew.cmu.edu

bokorn@andrew.cmu.edu

dheld@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
When interacting with highly dynamic environments,
scene flow allows autonomous systems to reason about the
non-rigid motion of multiple independent objects. This is
of particular interest in the field of autonomous driving, in
which many cars, people, bicycles, and other objects need
to be accurately tracked. Current state-of-the-art methods require annotated scene flow data from autonomous
driving scenes to train scene flow networks with supervised learning. As an alternative, we present a method
of training scene flow that uses two self-supervised losses,
based on nearest neighbors and cycle consistency. These
self-supervised losses allow us to train our method on
large unlabeled autonomous driving datasets; the resulting
method matches current state-of-the-art supervised performance using no real world annotations and exceeds stateof-the-art performance when combining our self-supervised
approach with supervised learning on a smaller labeled
dataset.

1. Introduction
For an autonomous vehicle, understanding the dynamics of the surrounding environment is critical to ensure safe
planning and navigation. It is essential for a self-driving vehicle to be able to perceive the actions of various entities
around it, such as other vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists.
In the context of data recorded as 3D point clouds, a motion can be estimated for each 3D point; this is known as
scene flow, which refers to the 3D velocity of each 3D point
in a scene. Its 2D analog, optical flow, is the projection of
scene flow onto the image plane of a camera. An alternative
to scene flow estimation is to use 3D object detection for
object-level tracking and to assume that all points within
a bounding box have the same rigid motion. However, in
such a pipeline, errors in object detection can lead to errors
in tracking. In contrast, scene flow methods can avoid such
errors by directly estimating the motion of each 3D point.
Recent state-of-the-art methods learn to estimate the
scene flow from 3D point clouds [9, 6, 23, 26]. However,

Figure 1: We use two self-supervised losses to learn scene
flow on large unlabeled datasets. The “nearest neighbor
loss” penalizes the distance between the predicted point
cloud (green) and each predicted point’s nearest neighbor
in the second point cloud (red). To avoid degenerate solutions, we also estimate the flow between these predicted
points (green) in the reverse direction back to the original
point cloud (blue) to form a cycle. The new predicted points
from the cycle (purple) should align with the original points
(blue); the distance between these two set of points forms
our second self-supervised loss: “cycle consistency.”
these methods are fully supervised and require annotated
datasets for training. Such annotations are costly to obtain as they require labeling the motion for every point in
a scene. To compensate for the lack of real world data,
learning-based methods for scene flow have been trained
primarily on synthetic datasets and fine tuned on real world
data. This requirement of labeled training data limits the
effectiveness of such methods in real world settings.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a selfsupervised method for scene flow estimation. Using a combination of two self-supervised losses, we are able to mimic
the supervision created by human annotation. Specifically,
we use a cycle consistency loss, which ensures that the
scene flow produced is consistent in time (i.e. we ensure
that a temporal cycle ends where it started). We also use

11177

