Temporal Pyramid Network for Action Recognition
Ceyuan Yang†,1 , Yinghao Xu†,1 , Jianping Shi2 , Bo Dai1 , Bolei Zhou1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 SenseTime Group Limited
{yc019, xy119, bdai, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, shijianping@sensetime.com

Visual tempo characterizes the dynamics and the temporal scale of an action. Modeling such visual tempos of
different actions facilitates their recognition. Previous works
often capture the visual tempo through sampling raw videos
at multiple rates and constructing an input-level frame pyramid, which usually requires a costly multi-branch network to
handle. In this work we propose a generic Temporal Pyramid
Network (TPN) at the feature-level, which can be flexibly
integrated into 2D or 3D backbone networks in a plug-andplay manner. Two essential components of TPN, the source
of features and the fusion of features, form a feature hierarchy for the backbone so that it can capture action instances
at various tempos. TPN also shows consistent improvements
over other challenging baselines on several action recognition datasets. Specifically, when equipped with TPN, the 3D
ResNet-50 with dense sampling obtains a 2% gain on the validation set of Kinetics-400. A further analysis also reveals
that TPN gains most of its improvements on action classes
that have large variances in their visual tempos, validating
the effectiveness of TPN.1

1. Introduction
While great progress has been made by deep neural networks to improve the accuracy of video action recognition
[5, 32, 33, 36, 30], an important aspect of characterizing
dfferent actions is often missed in the design of these recognition networks - the visual tempos of action instances. Visual tempo actually describes how fast an action goes, which
tends to determine the effective duration at the temporal scale
for recognition. As shown at the bottom of Figure 1, action
classes naturally have different visual tempos (e.g. hand
clapping and walking). In some cases the key to distinguish
different action classes is their visual tempos, as they might
share high similarities in visual appearance, such as walking, jogging and running. Moreover, as shown at the top of
Figure 1, when performing the same action, each performer
1 Code and models are available at this link.
† indicates equal contribution.

Intra class
(a) Moving something down at a fast tempo

(b) Moving something down at a slow tempo

Inter class

160

Variance

Abstract

0

Somersaulting

Shearing sheep

Category

399

Figure 1. Visual tempo variation of intra- and inter-class. The
action examples above show that people tend to act at different tempos even for the same action. The plot below shows different action
categories sorted by their variances of visual tempos. Specifically
Somersaulting has the largest variance in the visual tempo of its
instances while Shearing sheep has the smallest variance. Details
of variation measurements can be found in the experiment section.

may act at his/her own visual tempo, due to various factors
such as age, mood, and energy level. e.g. ,an elder man tends
to move slower than a younger man, so as a man with a heavier weight. Precise modeling of such intra- and inter-class
variances in visual tempos of action instances can potentially
bring a significant improvement to action recognition.
Previous attempts [5, 35, 33] for extracting the dynamic
visual tempos of action instances mainly rely on constructing
a frame pyramid, where each pyramid level samples the input
frames at a different temporal rate. For example, we can sample from the total 64 frames of an video instance at intervals
16 and 2 respectively, to construct a two-level frame pyramid consisting of 4 and 32 frames. Subsequently, frames at
each level are fed into different backbone subnetworks, and
their output features are further combined together to make
the final prediction. By sampling frames at different rates
as input, backbone networks in [5, 35] are able to extract
features of different receptive fields and represent the input
action instance at different visual tempos. These backbone
1591

