ImVoteNet: Boosting 3D Object Detection in Point Clouds with Image Votes
Charles R. Qi∗†

Xinlei Chen∗1
1
Facebook AI

Or Litany1,2
Leonidas J. Guibas1,2
2
Stanford University

Abstract
3D object detection has seen quick progress thanks to
advances in deep learning on point clouds. A few recent
works have even shown state-of-the-art performance with
just point clouds input (e.g. VOTE N ET). However, point
cloud data have inherent limitations. They are sparse, lack
color information and often suffer from sensor noise. Images, on the other hand, have high resolution and rich texture. Thus they can complement the 3D geometry provided
by point clouds. Yet how to effectively use image information to assist point cloud based detection is still an open
question. In this work, we build on top of VOTE N ET and
propose a 3D detection architecture called I M VOTE N ET
specialized for RGB-D scenes. I M VOTE N ET is based on
fusing 2D votes in images and 3D votes in point clouds.
Compared to prior work on multi-modal detection, we explicitly extract both geometric and semantic features from
the 2D images. We leverage camera parameters to lift these
features to 3D. To improve the synergy of 2D-3D feature
fusion, we also propose a multi-tower training scheme. We
validate our model on the challenging SUN RGB-D dataset,
advancing state-of-the-art results by 5.7 mAP. We also provide rich ablation studies to analyze the contribution of
each design choice.

1. Introduction
Recognition and localization of objects in a 3D environment is an important first step towards full scene understanding. Even such low dimensional scene representation can serve applications like autonomous navigation
and augmented reality. Recently, with advances in deep
networks for point cloud data, several works [33, 56, 41]
have shown state-of-the-art 3D detection results with point
cloud as the only input. Among them, the recently proposed
VOTE N ET [33] work by Qi et al., taking 3D geometry input only, showed remarkable improvement for indoor object recognition compared with previous works that exploit
*: equal contributions.
†: work done while at Facebook.

Figure 1. Voting using both an image and a point cloud from
an indoor scene. The 2D vote reduces the search space of the 3D
object center to a ray while the color texture in image provides a
strong semantic prior. Motivated by the observation, our model
lifts the 2D vote to 3D to boost 3D detection performance.

all RGB-D channels. This leads to an interesting research
question: Is 3D geometry data (point clouds) sufficient for
3D detection, or is there any way RGB images can further
boost current detectors?
By examining the properties of point cloud data and RGB
image data (see for example Fig. 1), we believe the answer
is clear: RGB images have value in 3D object detection. In
fact, images and point clouds provide complementary information. RGB images have higher resolution than depth
images or LiDAR point clouds and contain rich textures
that are not available in the point domain. Additionally,
images can cover “blind regions” of active depth sensors
which often occur due to reflective surfaces. On the other
hand, images are limited in the 3D detection task as they
lack absolute measures of object depth and scale, which are
exactly what 3D point clouds can provide. These observations, strengthen our intuition that images can help point
cloud-based 3D detection.
However, how to make effective use of 2D images in a
3D detection pipeline is still an open problem. A naı̈ve way
is to directly append raw RGB values to the point clouds
– since the point-pixel correspondence can be established
through projection. But since 3D points are much sparser,
in doing so we will lose the dense patterns from the image domain. In light of this, more advanced ways to fuse
2D and 3D data have been proposed recently. One line of
14404

