TailorNet: Predicting Clothing in 3D as a Function of Human Pose, Shape and
Garment Style
Chaitanya Patel∗
Zhouyingcheng Liao∗
Gerard Pons-Moll
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{cpatel, zliao, gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1: We present TailorNet, a model to estimate the clothing deformations with fine details from input body shape, body
pose and garment style. From the left: the first two avatars show two different styles on the same shape, the following two
show the same two styles on another shape, and the last two avatars illustrate that our method works for different garments.

Abstract
In this paper, we present TailorNet, a neural model which
predicts clothing deformation in 3D as a function of three
factors: pose, shape and style (garment geometry), while
retaining wrinkle detail. This goes beyond prior models,
which are either specific to one style and shape, or generalize to different shapes producing smooth results, despite being style specific. Our hypothesis is that (even non-linear)
combinations of examples smooth out high frequency components such as fine-wrinkles, which makes learning the
three factors jointly hard. At the heart of our technique
is a decomposition of deformation into a high frequency
and a low frequency component. While the low-frequency
component is predicted from pose, shape and style parameters with an MLP, the high-frequency component is predicted with a mixture of shape-style specific pose models.
The weights of the mixture are computed with a narrow
bandwidth kernel to guarantee that only predictions with
similar high-frequency patterns are combined. The style
variation is obtained by computing, in a canonical pose,
a subspace of deformation, which satisfies physical constraints such as inter-penetration, and draping on the body.
TailorNet delivers 3D garments which retain the wrinkles
∗ Equal contribution.

from the physics based simulations (PBS) it is learned from,
while running more than 1000 times faster. In contrast to
classical PBS, TailorNet is easy to use and fully differentiable, which is crucial for computer vision and learning algorithms. Several experiments demonstrate TailorNet produces more realistic results than prior work, and even generates temporally coherent deformations on sequences of
the AMASS [34] dataset, despite being trained on static
poses from a different dataset. To stimulate further research in this direction, we will make a dataset consisting
of 55800 frames, as well as our model publicly available at
https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/tailornet/.

1. Introduction
Animating digital humans in clothing has numerous applications in 3D content production, games, entertainment
and virtual try on. The predominant approach is still physics
based simulation (PBS). However, the typical PBS pipeline
requires editing the garment shape in 2D with patterns,
manually placing it on the digital character and fine tuning
parameters to achieve desired results, which is laborious,
time consuming and requires expert knowledge. Moreover,
high quality PBS methods are computationally expensive,
complex to implement and to control, and are not trivially
17365

