Single-step Adversarial training with Dropout Scheduling
Vivek B.S. and R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
Deep learning models have shown impressive performance across a spectrum of computer vision applications
including medical diagnosis and autonomous driving. One
of the major concerns that these models face is their susceptibility to adversarial attacks. Realizing the importance
of this issue, more researchers are working towards developing robust models that are less affected by adversarial
attacks. Adversarial training method shows promising results in this direction. In adversarial training regime, models are trained with mini-batches augmented with adversarial samples. Fast and simple methods (e.g., single-step gradient ascent) are used for generating adversarial samples,
in order to reduce computational complexity. It is shown
that models trained using single-step adversarial training method (adversarial samples are generated using noniterative method) are pseudo robust. Further, this pseudo
robustness of models is attributed to the gradient masking
effect. However, existing works fail to explain when and why
gradient masking effect occurs during single-step adversarial training. In this work, (i) we show that models trained
using single-step adversarial training method learn to prevent the generation of single-step adversaries, and this is
due to over-fitting of the model during the initial stages of
training, and (ii) to mitigate this effect, we propose a singlestep adversarial training method with dropout scheduling.
Unlike models trained using existing single-step adversarial training methods, models trained using the proposed
single-step adversarial training method are robust against
both single-step and multi-step adversarial attacks, and the
performance is on par with models trained using computationally expensive multi-step adversarial training methods,
in white-box and black-box settings.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models are susceptible to adversarial
samples: samples with imperceptible, engineered noise designed to manipulate model’s output [15, 2, 34, 3, 13, 27].
Further, Szegedy et al. [34] observed that these adversarial

samples are transferable across multiple models i.e., adversarial samples generated on one model might mislead other
models. Due to which, models deployed in the real world
are susceptible to black-box attacks [20, 28], where limited
or no knowledge of the deployed model is available to the
attacker. Various schemes have been proposed to defend
against adversarial attacks (e.g., [13, 29, 23]), in this direction Adversarial Training (AT) procedure [13, 35, 22, 40]
shows promising results.
In adversarial training regime, models are trained with
mini-batches containing adversarial samples typically generated by the model being trained. Adversarial sample generation methods range from simple methods [13] to complex optimization methods [24]. In order to reduce computational complexity, non-iterative methods such as Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [13] are typically used for generating adversarial samples. Further, it has been shown that
models trained using single-step adversarial training methods are pseudo robust [35]:
• Although these models appears to be robust to singlestep attacks in white-box setting (complete knowledge
of the deployed model is available to the attacker), they
are susceptible to single-step attacks (non-iterative
methods) in black-box attack setting [35].
• Further, these models are susceptible to multi-step attacks (iterative methods) in both white-box setting [18]
and black-box setting [10].
Tramer et al. [35] demonstrated that models trained using
single-step adversarial training method converges to degenerative minima, and exhibit gradient masking effect. Singlestep adversarial sample generation methods such as FGSM,
compute adversarial perturbations based on the linear approximation of the model’s loss function i.e., image is perturbed in the direction of the gradient of loss with respect
to the input image. Gradient masking effect causes this linear approximation of loss function to become unreliable for
generating adversarial samples during single-step adversarial training. Madry et al. [22] demonstrated that models
trained using adversarial samples that maximize the training loss are robust against single-step and multi-step at-

950

