Single Image Optical Flow Estimation with an Event Camera
Liyuan Pan1,2 , Miaomiao Liu1,2 , and Richard Hartley1,2
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia, 2 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{liyuan.pan, miaomiao.liu, Richard.Hartley}@anu.edu.au

180

Abstract

160
140
120

1. Introduction
Event cameras (such as DVS [28] and DAVIS [7]) measure intensity changes at each pixel independently with microsecond accuracy. Unlike conventional cameras recording images at a fixed frame rate, event cameras trigger the
event whenever the change in intensity at a given pixel exceeds a preset threshold. Event cameras are gaining attention for their high temporal resolution, robustness to low
lighting and highly dynamic scenes which can be used for
tasks such as tracking [42, 18], deblurring [38], and SLAM
[26, 27, 50]. However, standard vision algorithms cannot
be applied to event cameras directly. Hence, new methods
are required to be tailored to event cameras and unlock their
potential. In this paper, we aim to show how events can

100

y

Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that asynchronously report intensity changes in microsecond resolution. DAVIS can capture high dynamics of a scene and
simultaneously output high temporal resolution events and
low frame-rate intensity images. In this paper, we propose
a single image (potentially blurred) and events based optical flow estimation approach. First, we demonstrate how
events can be used to improve flow estimates. To this end,
we encode the relation between flow and events effectively
by presenting an event-based photometric consistency formulation. Then, we consider the special case of image blur
caused by high dynamics in the visual environments and
show that including the blur formation in our model further constrains flow estimation. This is in sharp contrast to
existing works that ignore the blurred images while our formulation can naturally handle either blurred or sharp images to achieve accurate flow estimation. Finally, we reduce
flow estimation, as well as image deblurring, to an alternative optimization problem of an objective function using the
primal-dual algorithm. Experimental results on both synthetic and real data (with blurred and non-blurred images)
show the superiority of our model in comparison to stateof-the-art approaches.

80
60
40
20
0

0

50

100

150

200

240

x

(a) Input image

(b) Input events

(c) Gong et al. [19]

(d) EV-FlowNet [57]

(e) Our deblurred image

(f) Our optical flow

Figure 1. Optical flow estimation. (a) and (b) are the input to
our method, where (a) shows the intensity image from DAVIS, and
(b) visualises the integrated events over a temporal window (blue:
positive event; red: negative event). (c) Flow result of [19] by
using a single blurred image. (d) Flow result of [57], by using
events. (e) and (f) are our results. Our methods is able to handle
large motion scenery. (Best viewed on screen).

improve flow estimates, even with a blurred image.
Optical flow estimation is an active topic in the computer
vision community and serves as the backbone for eventbased moving object segmentation [47], human pose estimation [11], and action recognition [1]. Traditional flow estimation approaches [20, 25, 54] are proposed based on the
brightness consistency assumption for corresponding pixels
across the image pair, and cannot handle the asynchronous
event data [15]. A common trend [2, 16, 59, 17] to esti11672

