Memory-Efficient Hierarchical Neural Architecture Search for Image Denoising∗
Haokui Zhang†‡ , Ying Li† , Hao Chen‡ , Chunhua Shen‡
†
‡
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) methods have
attracted much attention and outperformed manually designed architectures on a few high-level vision tasks. In
this paper, we propose HiNAS (Hierarchical NAS), an effort towards employing NAS to automatically design effective neural network architectures for image denoising. HiNAS adopts gradient based search strategies and employs
operations with adaptive receptive field to build an flexible
hierarchical search space. During the search stage, HiNAS
shares cells across different feature levels to save memory
and employ an early stopping strategy to avoid the collapse
issue in NAS, and considerably accelerate the search speed.
The proposed HiNAS is both memory and computation efficient, which takes only about 4.5 hours for searching using a single GPU. We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed HiNAS on two different datasets, namely an additive
white Gaussian noise dataset BSD500, and a realistic noise
dataset SIM1800. Experimental results show that the architecture found by HiNAS has fewer parameters and enjoys
a faster inference speed, while achieving highly competitive performance compared with state-of-the-art methods.
We also present analysis on the architectures found by NAS.
HiNAS also shows good performance on experiments for
image de-raining.

timization problem and can be time-consuming for inference [4, 9]. Recently, deep learning models have been successfully applied in various computer vision tasks and set
new state-of-the-art. Motivated by this, most recent works
on image denoising have shifted their approaches to deep
learning, which builds a mapping function from noisy images to the desired corresponding clean images with deep
learning models and have often outperformed conventional
methods significantly [27, 33, 22]. Nonetheless, discovering state-of-the-art neural network architectures requires
substantial efforts.
Recently a growing interest is witnessed in developing algorithmic solutions to automate the manual process
of architecture design. Architectures automatically found
by algorithms have achieved highly competitive performance in high-level vision tasks such as image classification [46], object detection [8, 36] and semantic segmentation [17, 29]. Inspired by this, here we design algorithms to
automatically search for neural architectures efficiently for
image denoising tasks. Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
1. Based on gradient based search algorithms, we propose a memory-efficient hierarchical neural architecture search approach for image denoising, termed HiNAS. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to
apply differentiable architecture search algorithms to
low-level vision tasks.

1. Introduction

2. The proposed HiNAS is able to search for both inner
cell structures and outer layer widths. It is also memory and computation efficient, taking only about 4.5
hours for searching with a single GPU.

Single image denoising is an important task in low-level
computer vision, which restores a clean image from a noisy
one. Owing to the fact that noise corruption always occurs
in the image sensing process and may degrade the visual
quality of collected images, image denoising is needed for
various computer vision tasks [2].
Traditional image denoising methods generally focus on
modeling natural image priors and use the priors to restore the clean image, including sparse models [5, 26],
Markov random field models [13], etc. One drawback of
these methods is that most of them involve a complex op-

3. We apply our proposed HiNAS on two denoising
datasets of different noise modes for evaluation. Experiments show that the networks found by our HiNAS achieves highly competitive performance compared with state-of-the-art algorithms, while having
fewer parameters and a faster speed.
4. We conduct comparison experiments to analyse the
network architectures found by our NAS algorithm in
terms of the internal structure, offering some insights
in architectures found by NAS.

∗ This work was done when H. Zhang was visiting The University of
Adelaide. Correspondence: C. Shen (chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au).

3657

