Cloth in the Wind:
A Case Study of Physical Measurement through Simulation
Tom F. H. Runia

Kirill Gavrilyuk
Cees G. M. Snoek
Arnold W. M. Smeulders
QUVA Deep Vision Lab, University of Amsterdam
{runia,kgavrilyuk,cgmsnoek,a.w.m.smeulders}@uva.nl

Abstract
For many of the physical phenomena around us, we have
developed sophisticated models explaining their behavior.
Nevertheless, measuring physical properties from visual observations is challenging due to the high number of causally
underlying physical parameters – including material properties and external forces. In this paper, we propose to measure
latent physical properties for cloth in the wind without ever
having seen a real example before. Our solution is an iterative refinement procedure with simulation at its core. The
algorithm gradually updates the physical model parameters
by running a simulation of the observed phenomenon and
comparing the current simulation to a real-world observation. The correspondence is measured using an embedding
function that maps physically similar examples to nearby
points. We consider a case study of cloth in the wind, with
curling flags as our leading example – a seemingly simple
phenomena but physically highly involved. Based on the
physics of cloth and its visual manifestation, we propose an
instantiation of the embedding function. For this mapping,
modeled as a deep network, we introduce a spectral layer
that decomposes a video volume into its temporal spectral
power and corresponding frequencies. Our experiments
demonstrate that the proposed method compares favorably to
prior work on the task of measuring cloth material properties
and external wind force from a real-world video.

1. Introduction
There is substantial evidence [17, 10] that humans run
mental models to predict physical phenomena. We predict the
trajectory of objects in mid-air, estimate a liquid’s viscosity
and gauge the velocity at which an object slides down a
ramp. In analogy, simulation models usually optimize their
parameters by performing trial runs and selecting the best.
Over the years, physical models of the world have become
so visually appealing through simulations and rendering
[46, 28, 7, 36] that it is worthwhile to consider them for
physical scene understanding. This alleviates the need for
meticulous annotation of the pose, illumination, texture and
scene dynamics as the model delivers them for free.

simulations

simulations

real-world
observations

xsim

xsim

xsim
sϕ

sϕ

learning

xreal

sϕ

sϕ
measuring

Dij
Dij
sim-sim physical similarity

sim-real physical similarity

Figure 1. We propose to measure real-world physical cloth parameters without ever having seen the phenomena before. From
cloth simulations only, we learn a distance metric that encodes
both intrinsic and extrinsic physical properties. After learning, we
use the embedding function to measure physical parameters from
real-world video by comparison to its simulated counterpart.

In this paper, we consider ﬂags and cloth in the wind as
a case study. Measurements and visual models of ﬂags and
cloth are important for virtual clothing try-on [55], energy
harvesting and biological systems [37, 19]. The cloth’s
intrinsic material properties, together with the external wind
force, determine its dynamics. Untangling the dynamics
of fabric is challenging due to the involved nature of the
air-cloth interaction: a ﬂag exerts inertial and elastic forces
on the surrounding air, while the air acts on the fabric through
pressure and viscosity [19]. As we seek to measure both the
cloth’s intrinsic material properties and the external wind
force, our physical model couples a non-linear cloth model
[46] with external wind force [48].
The task is challenging, as physical models of cloth tend to
have high numbers of unknown parameters and bear intricate
coupling of intrinsic and external forces. Our solution is
to compare pairs of real and simulated observations and
measure their physical similarity. As there is a fundamental
caveat in the use of simulation and rendering for learning:
“visually appealing” does not necessarily imply the result is
realistic, the main question is how to assess the similarity
of the causally underlying physical parameters rather than
visual correspondence. It might be the case that the image
looks real but never occurs in reality.

10498

