Deep Snake for Real-Time Instance Segmentation
Sida Peng1

Wen Jiang1
1

Huaijin Pi1

Xiuli Li2

Zhejiang University

2

Hujun Bao1

Xiaowei Zhou1∗

Deepwise AI Lab

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel contour-based approach
named deep snake for real-time instance segmentation. Unlike some recent methods that directly regress the coordinates of the object boundary points from an image, deep
snake uses a neural network to iteratively deform an initial
contour to match the object boundary, which implements the
classic idea of snake algorithms with a learning-based approach. For structured feature learning on the contour, we
propose to use circular convolution in deep snake, which
better exploits the cycle-graph structure of a contour compared against generic graph convolution. Based on deep
snake, we develop a two-stage pipeline for instance segmentation: initial contour proposal and contour deformation,
which can handle errors in object localization. Experiments
show that the proposed approach achieves competitive
performances on the Cityscapes, KINS, SBD and COCO
datasets while being efficient for real-time applications with
a speed of 32.3 fps for 512×512 images on a 1080Ti GPU.
The code is available at https://github.com/zju3dv/snake/.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is the cornerstone of many computer vision tasks, such as video analysis, autonomous driving, and robotic grasping, which require both accuracy and
efficiency. Most of the state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods [18, 27, 5, 19] perform pixel-wise segmentation within a bounding box given by an object detector
[36], which may be sensitive to the inaccurate bounding
box. Moreover, representing an object shape as dense binary pixels generally results in costly post-processing.
An alternative shape representation is the object contour,
which is a set of vertices along the object silhouette. In contrast to pixel-based representation, a contour is not limited
within a bounding box and has fewer parameters. Such a
contour-based representation has long been used in image
segmentation since the seminal work by Kass et al. [21],
∗ The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

1x1 conv

(a) Initial contour

(b) Feature learning on the contour

(c) Offsets

Figure 1. The basic idea of deep snake. Given an initial contour,
image features are extracted at each vertex (a). Since the contour is
a cycle graph, circular convolution is applied for feature learning
on the contour (b). The blue, yellow and green nodes denote the
input features, the kernel of circular convolution, and the output
features, respectively. Finally, offsets are regressed at each vertex
to deform the contour to match the object boundary (c).

which is well known as snakes or active contours. Given an
initial contour, the snake algorithm iteratively deforms it to
match the object boundary by optimizing an energy functional defined with low-level features, such as image intensity or gradient. While many variants [6, 7, 15] have been
developed in literature, these methods are prone to local optima as the objective functions are handcrafted and typically
nonconvex.
Some recent learning-based segmentation methods [20,
42, 41] also represent objects as contours and try to directly regress the coordinates of contour vertices from an
RGB image. Although such methods are fast, most of them
do not perform as well as pixel-based methods. Instead,
Ling et al. [25] adopt the deformation pipeline of traditional snake algorithms and train a neural network to evolve
an initial contour to match the object boundary. Given a
contour with image features, it regards the input contour
as a graph and uses a graph convolutional network (GCN)
to predict vertex-wise offsets between contour points and
the target boundary points. It achieves competitive accuracy compared with pixel-based methods while being much
faster. However, the method proposed in [25] is designed to
help annotation and lacks a complete pipeline for automatic
instance segmentation. Moreover, treating the contour as a
general graph with a generic GCN does not fully exploit the
special topology of a contour.
18533

