Unsupervised Intra-domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
through Self-Supervision
Fei Pan

Inkyu Shin

Francois Rameau
Seokju Lee
KAIST, South Korea

In So Kweon

{feipan, dlsrbgg33, frameau, seokju91, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Convolutional neural network-based approaches have
achieved remarkable progress in semantic segmentation.
However, these approaches heavily rely on annotated data
which are labor intensive. To cope with this limitation,
automatically annotated data generated from graphic engines are used to train segmentation models. However, the
models trained from synthetic data are difficult to transfer
to real images. To tackle this issue, previous works have
considered directly adapting models from the source data
to the unlabeled target data (to reduce the inter-domain
gap). Nonetheless, these techniques do not consider the
large distribution gap among the target data itself (intradomain gap). In this work, we propose a two-step selfsupervised domain adaptation approach to minimize the
inter-domain and intra-domain gap together. First, we conduct the inter-domain adaptation of the model, from this
adaptation, we separate target domain into an easy and
hard split using an entropy-based ranking function. Finally, to decrease the intra-domain gap, we propose to employ a self-supervised adaptation technique from the easy
to the hard subdomain. Experimental results on numerous benchmark datasets highlight the effectiveness of our
method against existing state-of-the-art approaches. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
feipan664/IntraDA.git.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at assigning each pixel in
the image to a semantic class. Recently, convolutional
neural network-based segmentation models [13, 33] have
achieved remarkable progresses, leading to various applications in computer vision systems, such as autonomous
driving [14, 31], robotics [15, 23], and disease diagnosis [35, 32]. Training such a segmentation network requires
large amounts of annotated data. However, collecting large
scale datasets with pixel-level annotations for semantic seg-

Figure 1: We propose a two-step self-supervised domain
adaptation technique for semantic segmentation. Previous
works solely adapt the segmentation model from the source
domain to the target domain. Our work also consider adapting from the clean map to the noisy map within the target
domain.

mentation is difficult since they are expensive and labor intensive. Recently, photorealistic data rendered from simulators and game engines [19, 20] with precise pixel-level
semantic annotations have been utilized to train segmentation networks. However, the models trained from synthetic data are hardly transferable to real data due to the
cross-domain difference [11]. To address this issue, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) techniques have been
proposed to align the distribution shift between the labeled
source data and the unlabeled target data. For the particular task of semantic segmentation, adversarial learningbased UDA approaches demonstrate efficiency in aligning
features at the image [16, 11] or output [26, 25] level.
13764

