Visual Reaction: Learning to Play Catch with Your Drone
Kuo-Hao Zeng1
1

Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2

Luca Weihs2

Ali Farhadi1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI

Abstract
In this paper we address the problem of visual reaction:
the task of interacting with dynamic environments where
the changes in the environment are not necessarily caused
by the agent itself. Visual reaction entails predicting the
future changes in a visual environment and planning accordingly. We study the problem of visual reaction in the
context of playing catch with a drone in visually rich synthetic environments. This is a challenging problem since
the agent is required to learn (1) how objects with different
physical properties and shapes move, (2) what sequence
of actions should be taken according to the prediction, (3)
how to adjust the actions based on the visual feedback from
the dynamic environment (e.g., when objects bouncing off
a wall), and (4) how to reason and act with an unexpected
state change in a timely manner. We propose a new dataset
for this task, which includes 30K throws of 20 types of objects in different directions with different forces. Our results show that our model that integrates a forecaster with
a planner outperforms a set of strong baselines that are
based on tracking as well as pure model-based and modelfree RL baselines. The code and dataset are available at
github.com/KuoHaoZeng/Visual_Reaction.

1. Introduction
One of the key aspects of human cognition is the ability
to interact and react in a visual environment. When we play
tennis, we can predict how the ball moves and where it is
supposed to hit the ground so we move the tennis racket accordingly. Or consider the scenario in which someone tosses
the car keys in your direction and you quickly reposition
your hands to catch them. These capabilities in humans start
to develop during infancy and they are at the core of the
cognition system [3, 8].
Visual reaction requires predicting the future followed
by planning accordingly. The future prediction problem has
received a lot of attention in the computer vision community.
The work in this domain can be divided into two major
categories. The first category considers predicting future
actions of people or trajectories of cars (e.g., [5, 22, 25,

Current Ball Position

Ball at t = 1

Ball at t = 0

Forecasted Ball
Positions

Ball at t = 0

Ball at t = 1

Current Ball Position

Agent's View

Figure 1: Our goal is to train an agent that can visually
react with an interactive scene. In the studied task, the environment can evolve independently of the agent. There is
a launcher in the scene that throws an object with different
force magnitudes and in different angles. The drone learns
to predict the trajectory of the object from ego-centric observations and move to a position that can catch the object.
The trajectory of the thrown objects varies according to their
weight and shape and also the magnitude and angle of the
force used for throwing.
58]). Typically, there are multiple correct solutions in these
scenarios, and the outcome depends on the intention of the
people. The second category is future prediction based on
the physics of the scene (e.g., [27, 32, 60, 66]). The works
in this category are mostly limited to learning from passive
observation of images and videos, and there is no interaction
or feedback involved during the prediction process.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of visual reaction:
the task of predicting the future movements of objects in a
dynamic environment and planning accordingly. The interaction enables us to make decisions on the fly and receive
feedback from the environment to update our belief about the

11573

