Geometric Structure Based and Regularized Depth Estimation
From 360◦ Indoor Imagery
Lei Jin1∗

Yanyu Xu1∗
1

Jia Zheng1

Jingyi Yu1
ShanghaiTech University

Junfei Zhang2

Rui Tang2

Shenghua Gao1†
2

{jinlei,xuyy2,zhengjia,yujingyi,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
3

Shugong Xu3

KooLab, Kujiale.com

{ahui,ati}@qunhemail.com

Shanghai University

shugong@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Motivated by the correlation between the depth and the
geometric structure of a 360◦ indoor image, we propose
a novel learning-based depth estimation framework that
leverages the geometric structure of a scene to conduct
depth estimation. Specifically, we represent the geometric structure of an indoor scene as a collection of corners,
boundaries and planes. On the one hand, once a depth
map is estimated, this geometric structure can be inferred
from the estimated depth map; thus, the geometric structure functions as a regularizer for depth estimation. On
the other hand, this estimation also benefits from the geometric structure of a scene estimated from an image where
the structure functions as a prior. However, furniture in indoor scenes makes it challenging to infer geometric structure from depth or image data. An attention map is inferred
to facilitate both depth estimation from features of the geometric structure and also geometric inferences from the
estimated depth map. To validate the effectiveness of each
component in our framework under controlled conditions,
we render a synthetic dataset, Shanghaitech-Kujiale Indoor
360◦ dataset with 3550 360◦ indoor images. Extensive experiments on popular datasets validate the effectiveness of
our solution. We also demonstrate that our method can also
be applied to counterfactual depth.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental task in vision research, with widespread applications from map reconstruction and navigation in robotics [32] to general scene understanding in the 3D world. With the recent emergence of
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Image

Depth

Structure
1

Room
without
furniture

3

Room
with
furniture

3

4

5

6

5

6

2
1
4
2

Figure 1. The panorama images and their corresponding depth
maps and structures. These two images correspond to the same
room. The number indicates the order of the planes.

portable and compact spherical cameras, estimating depth
data from omnidirectional 1 content is gaining more attention, as this is a natural solution for many indoor applications.
Some research [22, 31, 39] has been conducted on depth
estimation from 360◦ imagery. These research adapt the solutions of perspective depth estimation to 360◦ imagery or
propose various types of distortion-aware convolution filters. However, few have explored the large FOV nature
provided by omnidirectional images — a typical indoor
panoramic image, for example, covers global structural information contained within the whole room.
Considering these characteristics of 360◦ imagery, we
present a deep learning framework that leverages geometric
structure for indoor depth estimation. Specifically, as shown
in Fig. 1, the geometric structure of an indoor scene, which
is usually characterized by corners, plane-plane intersection
lines and planes, is closely correlated with depth. Depth
within the same geometric primitives show strong patterns;
related to the location and height of the camera; meanwhile,
depth provides a strong clue towards inferring the geometric
1 Omnidirectional, spherical and 360◦ are used interchangeably in this
paper.

889

