Learning a Neural Solver for Multiple Object Tracking
Guillem Brasó∗

Laura Leal-Taixé

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Graphs offer a natural way to formulate Multiple Object
Tracking (MOT) within the tracking-by-detection paradigm.
However, they also introduce a major challenge for learning methods, as defining a model that can operate on
such structured domain is not trivial. As a consequence,
most learning-based work has been devoted to learning
better features for MOT, and then using these with wellestablished optimization frameworks. In this work, we exploit the classical network flow formulation of MOT to
define a fully differentiable framework based on Message
Passing Networks (MPNs). By operating directly on the
graph domain, our method can reason globally over an entire set of detections and predict final solutions. Hence, we
show that learning in MOT does not need to be restricted to
feature extraction, but it can also be applied to the data association step. We show a significant improvement in both
MOTA and IDF1 on three publicly available benchmarks.
Our code is available at https://bit.ly/motsolv.

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) is the task of determining the trajectories of all object instances in a video. It is a
fundamental problem in computer vision, with applications
such as autonomous driving, biology, and surveillance. Despite its relevance, it remains a challenging task and a relatively unexplored territory in the context of deep learning.
In recent years, tracking-by-detection has been the dominant paradigm among state-of-the-art methods in MOT.
This two step approach consists in first obtaining frameby-frame object detections, and then linking them to form
trajectories. While the first task can be addressed with
learning-based detectors [53, 1], the latter, data association, is generally formulated as a graph partitioning problem [65, 71, 73, 42, 8]. In this graph view of MOT, a node
represents an object detection, and an edge represents the
connection between two nodes. An active edge indicates
the two detections belong to the same trajectory. Solving the
∗ Correspondence to: guillem.braso@tum.de.

graph partitioning task, i.e., finding the set of active edges or
trajectories, can also be decomposed into two stages. First,
a cost is assigned to each edge in the graph encoding the
likelihood of two detections belonging to the same trajectory. After that, these costs are used within a graph optimization framework to obtain the optimal graph partition.
Previous works on graph-based MOT broadly fall into
two categories: those that focus on the graph formulation,
and those that focus on learning better costs. In the first
group, numerous research has been devoted to establishing
complex graph optimization frameworks that combine several sources of information, with the goal of encoding highorder dependencies between detections [63, 31, 27, 28].
Such approaches often use costs that are handcrafted to
some extent. In the second group, several works adopt
a simpler and easier to optimize graph structure, and focus instead on improving edge cost definition by leveraging
deep learning techniques [39, 62, 60, 76, 68]. By exploiting
siamese convolutional neural networks (CNN), these approaches can encode reliable pairwise interactions among
objects, but fail to account for high-order information in the
scene. Overall, these two lines of work present a dilemma:
should MOT methods focus on improving the graph optimization framework or the feature extraction?
We propose to combine both tasks into a unified
learning-based solver that can: (i) learn features for MOT,
and (ii) learn to provide a solution by reasoning over the
entire graph. To do so, we exploit the classical network
flow formulation of MOT [74] to define our model. Instead
of learning pairwise costs and then using these within an
available solver, our method learns to directly predict final partitions of the graph into trajectories. Towards this
end, we perform learning directly in the natural MOT domain, i.e., in the graph domain, with a message passing
network (MPN). Our MPN learns to combine deep features
into high-order information across the graph. Hence, our
method is able to account for global interactions among detections despite relying on a simple graph formulation. We
show that our framework yields substantial improvements
with respect to state of the art, without requiring heavily engineered features and being up to one order of magnitude
faster than some traditional graph partitioning methods.

6247

