Modality Shifting Attention Network for Multi-modal Video Question Answering
Junyeong Kim1 * Minuk Ma1
Trung Pham1
Kyungsu Kim2
Chang D. Yoo1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Samsung Research
1

{junyeong.kim, akalsdnr, trungpx, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

2

ks0326.kim@samsung.com

Abstract
This paper considers a network referred to as Modality
Shifting Attention Network (MSAN) for Multimodal Video
Question Answering (MVQA) task. MSAN decomposes the
task into two sub-tasks: (1) localization of temporal moment
relevant to the question, and (2) accurate prediction of the
answer based on the localized moment. The modality required for temporal localization may be different from that
for answer prediction, and this ability to shift modality is essential for performing the task. To this end, MSAN is based
on (1) the moment proposal network (MPN) that attempts to
locate the most appropriate temporal moment from each of
the modalities, and also on (2) the heterogeneous reasoning
network (HRN) that predicts the answer using an attention
mechanism on both modalities. MSAN is able to place importance weight on the two modalities for each sub-task using a component referred to as Modality Importance Modulation (MIM). Experimental results show that MSAN outperforms previous state-of-the-art by achieving 71.13% test
accuracy on TVQA benchmark dataset. Extensive ablation
studies and qualitative analysis are conducted to validate
various components of the network.

1. Introduction
Bridging the field of computer vision and that of natural language processing appears to be a desiderata of current vision-language tasks. Sundry efforts that have made
progress towards binding the two fields include [8, 5, 22,
32] in visual grounding, [31, 30, 36, 25] in image/video
captioning, [10, 2, 35, 37] in video moment retrieval, and
* This work was partly supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP) grant funded by the
Korea government(MSIT) (2017-0-01780, The technology development
for event recognition/relational reasoning and learning knowledge based
system for video understanding) and partly supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP)
grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2019-0-01396, Development of framework for analyzing, detecting, mitigating of bias in AI
model and training data)

Figure 1. Multimodal Video QA is a challenging task as it requires
retrieving the queried information which is interspersed in multiple modalities. For complex question such as “What did Robin do
after he said I have a half hour to make it to the studio?”, we first
need to localize the moment by observing subtitle and then infer
the answer by looking into video.

[3, 33, 1, 11] in visual question answering. Among the
many tasks, VQA is especially challenging as it requires the
capability to perform fine-grained reasoning using both image and text. This task that requires reasoning has been extended to video question answering (VideoQA) and multimodal video question answering (MVQA).
This paper focuses on the task of answering multiplechoice questions regarding a scene in a long untrimmed
video based on both video clip and its subtitle. This task is
referred to as MVQA. In comparison to VQA or VideoQA,
MVQA is a more challenging task as it (1) requires to locate the temporal moment relevant to the QA, and (2) also
requires to perform reasoning on video and subtitle modalities. To illustrate, consider the question in Fig. 1 “What did
Robin do after he said I have a half hour to make it to the
studio?”. To accurately answer the question, the QA system
would require the video modality to decipher Robin’s action
to answer “What did Robin do”, and the subtitle modality
to localize time-index corresponding to “after he said ...”.
The first challenge of MVQA is to locate vital moments
in all heterogeneous modalities conducive to answering the
question. As [14] pointed out, the information in the video
required to answer the question is not distributed uniformly
110106

