Optical Flow in the Dark
Yinqiang Zheng1,* , Mingfang Zhang2,3,* , Feng Lu2,4,†
1
National Institute of Informatics, 2 Pengcheng Laboratory, 3 Nanjing University,
4
State Key Lab. of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
yqzheng@nii.ac.jp,

161220169@smail.nju.edu.cn,

lufeng@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Many successful optical flow estimation methods have
been proposed, but they become invalid when tested in
dark scenes because low-light scenarios are not considered
when they are designed and current optical flow benchmark datasets lack low-light samples. Even if we preprocess to enhance the dark images, which achieves great visual perception, it still leads to poor optical flow results or
even worse ones, because information like motion consistency may be broken while enhancing. We propose an endto-end data-driven method that avoids error accumulation
and learns optical flow directly from low-light noisy images. Specifically, we develop a method to synthesize largescale low-light optical flow datasets by simulating the noise
model on dark raw images. We also collect a new optical
flow dataset in raw format with a large range of exposure
to be used as a benchmark. The models trained on our synthetic dataset can relatively maintain optical flow accuracy
as the image brightness descends and they outperform the
existing methods greatly on low-light images.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation can be used for motion detection, object segmentation, and so on. In real life, many of
the applications need to deal with low-light data. For example, there are certain circumstances for a drone to fly at
night but it’s difficult to achieve the goal because optical
flow is hard to obtain in dark environments, which is useful to avoid obstacles and control the speed through dense
surroundings. Current optical flow methods show poor performance with low-light data. To address this problem, a
straightforward solution is to use auxiliary lighting systems
*Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61972012 and Grant 61732016.
This work is finished during Y. Zheng’s visit and M. Zhang’s internship at Pengcheng Laboratory.

(a)

(d)
Our Result

Well-exposed
Underexposed

(e)
(b)
Enhance
(SID)

(f)

(c)

(g)

Figure 1. A comparison between our method (e) and existing
methods (d,f,g), conducted on the well-exposed input (a), underexposed input (b) and the enhanced input (c) using SID [6] method.
Specifically, (a) and (b) are images of the same scene. (e,f,g) are
produced by PWC-Net [28] and (d) is produced by FlowNet2 [14]
which is 17 times larger than PWC-Net.

for drones, which would inevitably shorten the battery life.
As a result, an efficient optical flow method to process lowlight data is greatly demanded, which is the main goal of
our work.
Horn and Schunck [13] introduce an energy minimization approach to compute optical flow and many excellent
methods adapt it and achieve better and better results. However, the optimizing problem of a complex energy function
is usually computationally expensive for real-time applications. In order to create a fast and accurate method, endto-end convolutional neural network frameworks are pro16749

