Global Texture Enhancement for Fake Face Detection In the Wild
Zhengzhe Liu, Xiaojuan Qi1,2 , Philip H. S. Torr1
1
University of Oxford, 2 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can generate
realistic fake face images that can easily fool human beings.
On the contrary, a common Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) discriminator can achieve more than 99.9% accuracy
in discerning fake/real images. In this paper, we conduct an
empirical study on fake/real faces, and have two important
observations: firstly, the texture of fake faces is substantially
different from real ones; secondly, global texture statistics
are more robust to image editing and transferable to fake
faces from different GANs and datasets. Motivated by the
above observations, we propose a new architecture coined
as Gram-Net, which leverages global image texture representations for robust fake image detection. Experimental
results on several datasets demonstrate that our Gram-Net
outperforms existing approaches. Especially, our Gram-Net
is more robust to image editings, e.g. down-sampling, JPEG
compression, blur, and noise. More importantly, our GramNet generalizes significantly better in detecting fake faces
from GAN models not seen in the training phase and can
perform decently in detecting fake natural images.

1. Introduction
With the development of GANs [9, 12, 13, 1], computers can generate vivid face images that can easily deceive
human beings as shown in Figure 1. (Can you guess which
images are generated from GANs?) These generated fake
faces will inevitably bring serious social risks, e.g. fake news
and evidence, and pose threats to security. Thus, powerful
techniques to detect these fake faces are highly desirable.
However, in contrast to the intensive studies in GANs, our
understanding of generated faces is fairly superficial and
how to detect fake faces is still an under-explored problem.
Moreover, fake faces in practical scenarios are from different
unknown sources, i.e. different GANs, and may undergo unknown image distortions such as downsampling, blur, noise
and JPEG compression, which makes this task even more
challenging. In this paper, we aim to produce new insights on
understanding fake faces from GANs and propose a new ar1 The first three are real and the last three are fake.

Figure 1. Can you determine which are real and which are fake?
(answer key below)1

chitecture to tackle the above challenges. Our contributions
are as follows.
Contribution 1. To facilitate the understanding of face images from GANs, we systematically study the behavior of
human beings and CNN models in discriminating fake/real
faces detailed in Section 3.1. In addition, we conduct extensive ablation experiments to diagnose the CNN discriminator
and perform low-level statistics analysis as verification.
These empirical studies lead us to the following findings.
• Texture statistics of fake faces are substantially different
from natural faces.
• Human focus on visible shape/color artifacts to detect
fake face while CNNs focus more on texture regions.
• CNNs take textures as an important cue for fake face
detection. A ResNet model performs almost perfectly
in detecting untouched fake faces if the training data
and testing data are from the same source.
Contribution 2. Although a CNN based fake face detector
performs significantly better than human beings, it is still not
robust enough to handle real-world scenarios, where images
may be modified and/or from different unknown sources.
With further analysis of the relationship between texture and
fake face detection, we found large texture information is
18060

