Neural Data Server: A Large-Scale Search Engine for Transfer Learning Data
Xi Yan1,2∗
David Acuna1,2,3∗
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
3
NVIDIA

xi.yan@mail.utoronto.ca, {davidj, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

dataserver

Mixture of Experts Models

Indexed Large-Scale Image Datasets

Transfer learning has proven to be a successful technique to train deep learning models in the domains where
little training data is available. The dominant approach
is to pretrain a model on a large generic dataset such as
ImageNet and finetune its weights on the target domain.
However, in the new era of an ever increasing number of
massive datasets, selecting the relevant data for pretraining is a critical issue. We introduce Neural Data Server
(NDS), a large-scale search engine for finding the most useful transfer learning data to the target domain. NDS consists of a dataserver which indexes several large popular
image datasets, and aims to recommend data to a client,
an end-user with a target application with its own small
labeled dataset. The dataserver represents large datasets
with a much more compact mixture-of-experts model, and
employs it to perform data search in a series of dataserverclient transactions at a low computational cost. We show
the effectiveness of NDS in various transfer learning scenarios, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance on several target datasets and tasks such as image classification,
object detection and instance segmentation. Neural Data
Server is available as a web-service at http://aidemo
s.cs.toronto.edu/nds/.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen an explosive growth of
the number and the variety of computer vision applications. These range from generic image classification tasks
to surveillance, sports analytics, clothing recommendation,
early disease detection, and to mapping, among others. Yet,
we are only at the beginning of our exploration of what is
possible to achieve with Deep Learning.
One of the critical components of the new age of computer vision applications is the need for labeled data. To
achieve high performance, typically a massive amount of
data needs to be used to train deep learning models. Transfer learning provides a promising approach to reduce the
need for large-scale labeled data for each target application.
In transfer learning, a neural network is pretrained [11, 24,
∗ authors contributed equally

Neural Data Server
…

1 Download
Dataset Experts

A search engine for finding relevant
transfer learning data for A.I. applications

3

links to
4 Download
recommended data points

Upload
accuracies

Optimal Data
Subset

2
Fast Adapt
Fast Adapt to
Client Dataset

Client
Dataset

I have a small dataset,
what data can I use to
pre-train my model?

client

Figure 1: Neural Data Server: Search engine for finding relevant transfer
learning data for the user’s target domain. In NDS, a dataserver indexes
several popular image datasets, represents them with a mixture-of-experts
model, and uses client’s target data to determine most relevant samples.
Note that NDS indexes available public datasets and does not host them.
Data recommendation is done by providing links to relevant examples.

43] on existing large generic datasets and then fine-tuned in
the target domain. While transfer learning is a well studied
concept that has been proven successful in many applications [11, 24, 43], deciding which data to use for pretraining the model is an open research question that has received
surprisingly little attention in the literature. We argue that
this is a crucial problem to be answered in light of the ever
increasing scale of the available datasets.
To emphasize our point, recent efforts on curating computer vision benchmarks1 list over 400 public datasets,
ranging from generic imagery, faces, fashion photos, to selfdriving data. Furthermore, the dataset sizes are significantly
increasing: the recently released OpenImages [31] contains
9M labeled images (600GB in size), and is 20 times larger
compared to its predecessor MS-COCO [33] (330K images, 30GB). The video benchmark YouTube8m [1] (1.9B
frames, 1.5TB), is 800× larger compared to Davis [9] (10k
frames, 1.8GB), while the recently released autonomous
driving dataset nuScenes [10] contains 100× the number
of frames than KITTI [20] which was released in 2012.
It is evident that downloading and storing these datasets
locally is already cumbersome and expensive. This is further amplified by the computational resources required for
training neural networks on this massive amount of data.
1 Websites listing CV datasets: https://www.visualdata.io/, ht
tps://pytorch.org/docs/stable/torchvision/datasets.html,
https://datasetsearch.research.google.com/

3893

