Novel Object Viewpoint Estimation through Reconstruction Alignment
Mohamed El Banani Jason J. Corso David F. Fouhey
University of Michigan

The goal of this paper is to estimate the viewpoint for
a novel object. Standard viewpoint estimation approaches
generally fail on this task due to their reliance on a 3D
model for alignment or large amounts of class-specific
training data and their corresponding canonical pose. We
overcome those limitations by learning a reconstruct and
align approach. Our key insight is that although we do
not have an explicit 3D model or a predefined canonical
pose, we can still learn to estimate the object’s shape in
the viewer’s frame and then use an image to provide our
reference model or canonical pose. In particular, we propose learning two networks: the first maps images to a
3D geometry-aware feature bottleneck and is trained via an
image-to-image translation loss; the second learns whether
two instances of features are aligned. At test time, our
model finds the relative transformation that best aligns the
bottleneck features of our test image to a reference image.
We evaluate our method on novel object viewpoint estimation by generalizing across different datasets, analyzing the
impact of our different modules, and providing a qualitative
analysis of the learned features to identify what representations are being learnt for alignment.

1. Introduction
Consider the two views of the owl in Figure 1. How
are they related? As humans, we can easily imagine how to
move from view 1 to view 2, even if we have never seen this
object before. This problem of understanding object pose
and viewpoint has long fascinated researchers in both computer vision (starting with the first PhD thesis on computer
vision [21]) and psychology [23, 27]. Within computer vision, many approaches have been proposed to estimate an
image’s viewpoint with respect to a given, or assumed, oriented 3D model. Despite the success of those approaches on
known classes, they struggle with novel objects since both
the 3D model and its canonical pose are unknown. In this
work, we learn to predict the relative viewpoint for a novel
object using a single reference view.

Test

Abstract

Train

{mbanani,jjcorso,fouhey}@umich.edu

!"#$%&'(#

Figure 1. Humans can not help but see the 3D structure in those
two views, which makes aligning their viewpoints very easy. This
paper proposes a reconstruct-and-align approach to learning viewpoint estimation for novel objects.

Historically, there has been two general approaches
to viewpoint estimation. First, 3D model alignment approaches find a transformation that aligns an image to a
known 3D model [9, 20, 39]. Despite their efficacy, those
approaches were limited to objects with available 3D models. Second, end-to-end discriminative approaches learn to
directly estimate the image’s viewpoint with respect to a
canonical pose (e.g., head-on for a car) [24, 29, 30, 33].
While those approaches do not rely on explicit 3D models, their predictions are with respect to an implicitlydefined, canonically-oriented model. Due to their reliance
on explicitly- or implicitly-defined 3D models, those approaches struggle with novel objects where neither the
model nor its canonical orientation are known.
How can we estimate the viewpoint of a novel object?
Viewpoint is defined with respect to a class-specific coordinate frame or a canonical pose (e.g., head-on for a car) [33].
For small generalization (e.g., from bikes to motorcycles),
one can exploit similarity in viewpoint appearance between

3113

