Universal Physical Camouflage Attacks on Object Detectors
Lifeng Huang1,2 Chengying Gao1 Yuyin Zhou3 Cihang Xie3 Alan Yuille3 Changqing Zou4,5 Ning Liu1,2
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
3
Department of Computer Science, The Johns Hopkins University
4
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 5 University of Maryland, College Park
huanglf6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {mcsgcy, liuning2}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
{zhouyuyiner, cihangxie306, alan.l.yuille, aaronzou1125}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study physical adversarial attacks on
object detectors in the wild. Previous works mostly craft
instance-dependent perturbations only for rigid or planar
objects. To this end, we propose to learn an adversarial pattern to effectively attack all instances belonging to
the same object category, referred to as Universal Physical
Camouflage Attack (UPC). Concretely, UPC crafts camouflage by jointly fooling the region proposal network, as well
as misleading the classifier and the regressor to output errors. In order to make UPC effective for non-rigid or nonplanar objects, we introduce a set of transformations for
mimicking deformable properties. We additionally impose
optimization constraint to make generated patterns look
natural to human observers. To fairly evaluate the effectiveness of different physical-world attacks, we present the
first standardized virtual database, AttackScenes, which
simulates the real 3D world in a controllable and reproducible environment. Extensive experiments suggest the
superiority of our proposed UPC compared with existing
physical adversarial attackers not only in virtual environments (AttackScenes), but also in real-world physical environments. Code and dataset are available at https://
mesunhlf.github.io/index_physical.html.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved outstanding performances on many computer vision tasks [37, 8,
10]. Nonetheless, DNNs have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [38] — maliciously crafted
inputs that mislead DNNs to make incorrect predictions,
which present potential threats for the deployment of DNNbased systems in the real world.
∗ Corresponding author.

(a)

Physical Attacks In Virtual Scenes

(b)

Physical Attacks In Real World
correct detection

error detection

Figure 1. Fooling the object detector, faster r-cnn, in the physical space. (a) Physical attacks (UPC) in virtual scenes and (b)
Physical attacks (UPC) in real world. Column 1 shows detection
results with natural patterns. Column 2-4 display results with camouflage patterns under different viewing conditions.

Adversarial attacks [26, 2] in general can be divided into
the following categories: 1) digital attacks, which mislead
DNNs by modifying the input data directly in the digital
space (e.g., pixel value [26, 11, 23], text content [15, 31]);
2) physical attacks, which attack DNNs by altering visible characteristics of an object (e.g., color [33], appearance [6]) in the physical world. Current mainstream works
focus on the digital domain, which can be hardly transferred
to the real world due to the lack of considering physical constraints (e.g., invariant to different environmental conditions
such as viewpoint, lighting) [6]. In this paper, we study
adversarial attacks in the physical world, which are more
threatening to real-world systems [14]. Compared with previous works [3, 12, 1] which mostly focus on attacking image classification systems, we consider the far more realistic
computer vision scenario, i.e., object detection.
Though prior works have revealed the vulnerability of
object detectors to adversarial perturbations in the real
world [4, 36, 46], there are several limitations: (1) focusing
on only attacking a specific object (e.g. a stop sign [6, 4]
, commercial logo [35] or car [46]); (2) generating perturbations only for rigid or planar objects (e.g., traffic sign,

720

∗

