Where am I looking at? Joint Location and Orientation Estimation by
Cross-View Matching

1

Yujiao Shi,1, 2 Xin Yu,1, 2, 3 Dylan Campbell,1, 2 Hongdong Li1, 2
Australian National University 2 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision 3 University of Technology Sydney
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Cross-view geo-localization is the problem of estimating the position and orientation (latitude, longitude and
azimuth angle) of a camera at ground level given a largescale database of geo-tagged aerial (e.g., satellite) images.
Existing approaches treat the task as a pure location estimation problem by learning discriminative feature descriptors, but neglect orientation alignment. It is well-recognized
that knowing the orientation between ground and aerial images can significantly reduce matching ambiguity between
these two views, especially when the ground-level images
have a limited Field of View (FoV) instead of a full fieldof-view panorama. Therefore, we design a Dynamic Similarity Matching network to estimate cross-view orientation
alignment during localization. In particular, we address the
cross-view domain gap by applying a polar transform to the
aerial images to approximately align the images up to an
unknown azimuth angle. Then, a two-stream convolutional
network is used to learn deep features from the ground and
polar-transformed aerial images. Finally, we obtain the orientation by computing the correlation between cross-view
features, which also provides a more accurate measure of
feature similarity, improving location recall. Experiments
on standard datasets demonstrate that our method significantly improves state-of-the-art performance. Remarkably,
we improve the top-1 location recall rate on the CVUSA
dataset by a factor of 1.5× for panoramas with known orientation, by a factor of 3.3× for panoramas with unknown
orientation, and by a factor of 6× for 180◦ -FoV images with
unknown orientation.

1. Introduction
Given an image captured by a camera at ground level, it
is reasonable to ask: where is the camera and which direction is it facing? Cross-view image geo-localization aims
to determine the geographical location and azimuth angle
of a query image by matching it against a large geo-tagged

Figure 1. Given a query ground image, we aim to recover its
geographical location (latitude and longitude) and orientation (azimuth angle) by matching it against a large database of geo-tagged
aerial images. To do so, we first apply a polar transform to aerial
images to approximately align them with the ground view images,
up to an unknown azimuth angle. We next compute the correlation between ground and aerial features along the axis of azimuth
angles (horizontal direction) to estimate the orientation alignment
of the ground image with respect to the aerial image. We then
shift and crop out the corresponding aerial features, and compute
their distance to the ground features, which provides a similarity
measure for location retrieval.

satellite map covering the region. Due to the accessibility and extensive coverage of satellite imagery, ground-toaerial image alignment is becoming an attractive proposition for solving the image-based geo-localization problem.
However, cross-view alignment remains very difficult
due to the extreme viewpoint change between ground and
14064

