Bundle Adjustment on a Graph Processor
Joseph Ortiz1 , Mark Pupilli2 , Stefan Leutenegger1 , Andrew J. Davison1
1
Imperial College London, Department of Computing, UK. 2 Graphcore.
j.ortiz@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph processors such as Graphcore’s Intelligence Processing Unit (IPU) are part of the major new wave of novel
computer architecture for AI, and have a general design
with massively parallel computation, distributed on-chip
memory and very high inter-core communication bandwidth
which allows breakthrough performance for message passing algorithms on arbitrary graphs.
We show for the first time that the classical computer
vision problem of bundle adjustment (BA) can be solved
extremely fast on a graph processor using Gaussian Belief Propagation. Our simple but fully parallel implementation uses the 1216 cores on a single IPU chip to, for instance, solve a real BA problem with 125 keyframes and
1919 points in under 40ms, compared to 1450ms for the
Ceres CPU library. Further code optimisation will surely
increase this difference on static problems, but we argue
that the real promise of graph processing is for flexible inplace optimisation of general, dynamically changing factor
graphs representing Spatial AI problems. We give indications of this with experiments showing the ability of GBP to
efficiently solve incremental SLAM problems, and deal with
robust cost functions and different types of factors.

Figure 1: We map a bundle adjustment factor graph onto
the tiles (cores) of Graphcore’s IPU and show that Gaussian Belief Propagation can be used for rapid, distributed,
in-place inference for large problems. Here we display the
most simple mapping in which each node in the factor graph
is mapped onto a single arbitrary tile. Keyframe nodes are
blue, landmark nodes are green and measurement factor
nodes are orange.

1. Introduction
Real-world applications which require a general realtime ‘Spatial AI’ capability from computer vision are becoming more prevalent in areas such as robotics, UAVs and
AR headsets, but it is clear that a large gap still exists between the ideal performance required and what can be delivered within the constraints of real embodied products, such
as low power usage. An increasingly important direction
is the design of processor and sensor hardware specifically
for vision and AI workloads to replace the general purpose
CPUs, GPUs and frame-based video cameras which are currently prevalent [8, 24]. The space of AI and vision algorithm design continues to change rapidly and we believe
that it is not the right time to make very specific decisions
such as ‘baking in’ a particular SLAM algorithm to proces-

sor hardware, except perhaps for very specific use cases.
However, new architectures are emerging which have
made quite general design choices about processing for AI
workloads. Efficient and low power computation must be
massively parallel and minimise data transfer. To this end,
storage and processing should be distributed, and as much
computation as possible should happen ‘in place’. A key
example is Graphcore’s Intelligence Processing Unit (IPU)
[1], which implements this concept within a single large
chip which is composed of 1216 cores called tiles, each with
local memory arranged in a fully connected graph structure.
It is massively parallel like a GPU, but its tiles have a completely different interconnect structure. The IPU has break12416

