Learning Visual Emotion Representations from Web Data
Zijun Wei1 , Jianming Zhang1 , Zhe Lin1 , Joon-Young Lee1 ,
Niranjan Balasubramanian2 , Minh Hoai2 , Dimitris Samaras2
1
Adobe Inc., 2 Stony Brook University

Abstract
We present a scalable approach for learning powerful
visual features for emotion recognition. A critical bottleneck in emotion recognition is the lack of large scale
datasets that can be used for learning visual emotion features. To this end, we curated a webly derived large scale
dataset, StockEmotion, which has more than a million images. StockEmotion uses 690 emotion related tags as labels giving us a fine-grained and diverse set of emotion
labels, circumventing the difficulty in manually obtaining
emotion annotations. We used this dataset to train a feature extraction network, EmotionNet, which we further regularized using joint text and visual embedding and text distillation. Our experimental results establish that EmotionNet trained on the StockEmotion dataset outperforms SOTA
models on four different visual emotion tasks. An added
benefit of our joint embedding training approach is that
EmotionNet achieves competitive zero-shot recognition performance against fully supervised baselines on a challenging visual emotion dataset, EMOTIC, which further highlights the generalizability of the learned emotion features.

1. Introduction
Understanding the emotion conveyed in an image or a
video is an important computer vision task, one that has
a wide range of applications from digital content management [3, 6, 19, 45] and marketing [17, 27, 50] to education [10, 35] and healthcare [7]. In this paper, we address
the need for a general visual emotion representation. We
propose EmotionNet, a convolutional network that can take
any input image and output a feature vector representing
the emotion conveyed in the input image. The output feature vector can then be used for various downstream tasks
such as emotion recognition, conditional image captioning and generation—much like how the feature vector from
ResNet [13] pretrained on ImageNet can be used for many
downstream visual recognition tasks such as image classification, object detection, person tracking, and semantic seg-

mentation. In other words, EmotionNet for visual emotions
is analogous to a pretrained VGG16 for object categories.
EmotionNet is an emotion specific feature extraction network. One might question its merits over other general feature extraction networks such as a ResNet pretrained on ImageNet [9]. Unfortunately, such general feature extraction
networks are not suitable for emotion analysis, as demonstrated in our experiments. This is understandable because
ImageNet pretraining mainly forces the networks to distinguish between object categories, not visual emotions. Detecting emotion requires more than being able to recognize
object classes – the same object can evoke different emotions depending on the context in which it appears.
To build a useful feature extraction model, it is crucial to
have relevant training data; in our case, an emotion dataset
at the scale of ImageNet with a million images and a welldefined taxonomy over hundreds of categories is desirable.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to use the same approach as ImageNet to collect an annotated dataset for emotion. Due
to language ambiguities and the abstract nature of emotion definitions, identifying emotion in an image is a much
harder task than labeling object categories when there is no
definitive emotion taxonomy over hundreds of categories.
Most existing visual emotion datasets only provide annotations for a small set of emotion categories on a limited
scale. Thus, features learned on such limited datasets generalize poorly to other emotion datasets [16, 33].
In this paper, we propose to learn EmotionNet by leveraging web data. We use commercial stock images and their
associated tags as our data source and annotation. Different
from previous datasets that are manually labeled based on
predefined emotion taxonomies with limited categories, we
curate our stock image dataset based on 690 common tags
that are related to more fine-grained and open categories
of emotions. The resulting dataset, StockEmotion, is composed of over one million stock images, covering diverse
emotion concepts related to humans, scenes, and symbols.
However, annotated stock image tags can be incomplete
and noisy. The owner or creator of an image might only
provide a few tags for each image, or might associate an
image with concepts that are unrelated or only remotely re113106

