Visual-textual Capsule Routing for Text-based Video Segmentation
Bruce McIntosh

Kevin Duarte

Yogesh S Rawat

Mubarak Shah

bwmcint@gmail.com

kevin95duarte@gmail.com

yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, 32816

Abstract
Joint understanding of vision and natural language is a
challenging problem with a wide range of applications in
artificial intelligence. In this work, we focus on integration of video and text for the task of actor and action video
segmentation from a sentence. We propose a capsule-based
approach which performs pixel-level localization based on
a natural language query describing the actor of interest.
We encode both the video and textual input in the form of
capsules, which provide a more effective representation in
comparison with standard convolution based features. Our
novel visual-textual routing mechanism allows for the fusion of video and text capsules to successfully localize the
actor and action. The existing works on actor-action localization are mainly focused on localization in a single frame
instead of the full video. Different from existing works, we
propose to perform the localization on all frames of the
video. To validate the potential of the proposed network
for actor and action video localization, we extend an existing actor-action dataset (A2D) with annotations for all
the frames. The experimental evaluation demonstrates the
effectiveness of our capsule network for text selective actor and action localization in videos. The proposed method
also improves upon the performance of the existing stateof-the art works on single frame-based localization.

1. Introduction
Deep learning and artificial neural networks have led to
outstanding advancements in the fields of computer vision
and natural language processing (NLP). In recent years, the
vision and NLP communities have proposed several tasks
which require methods to understand both visual and textual
inputs. These include visual question answering [1], image
and video captioning [29, 30], visual text correction [21],
and video generation from text inputs [18]. In this work, we
focus on detection of actors and actions in a video through

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. For a given video,
we want to localize the actor and action which are described by an
input textual query. Capsules are extracted from both the video and
the textual query, and a joint EM routing algorithm creates high
level capsules, which are further used for localization of selected
actors and actions.

natural language queries.
Actor and action detection in a video is an important
task in computer vision and it has many applications, such
as video retrieval, human-machine interaction, and surveillance. Most of the existing methods focus on detection of
actor/action which are from a fixed set of categories. Instead of having these fixed categories, one can leverage natural language to describe the actors and actions which needs
to be localized. This describes the task of actor and action
video segmentation from a sentence [8]: given a video and
a natural language sentence input, the goal is to output a
pixel-level localization of the actor described by the sentence. For a method to perform this task, it must effectively
merge the visual and textual inputs to generate a segmentation mask for the actor of interest.
The existing methods for video encoding are mainly
based on 3D convolutions. The availability of large-scale
datasets allow us to train effective 3D convolution based
models, however, this encoded representation has some limitations as it fails to capture the relationship between different features. Capsule-based networks address some of
these limitations and are effective in modeling visual entities and capturing their relationships [24]. Capsule net4321
9942

