Self-Supervised Scene De-occlusion
Xiaohang Zhan1 , Xingang Pan1 , Bo Dai1 , Ziwei Liu1 , Dahua Lin1 , and Chen Change Loy2
1

CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Nanyang Technological University
1

(a) original image

{zx017, px117, bdai, zwliu, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
2
ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

(b) scene de-occlusion

(c) manipulation on
order and positions

(d) recomposed image

Figure 1: Scene de-occlusion decomposes an image, extracting cluttered objects in it into entities of indiviual intact objects. Orders and
positions of the extracted objects can be manipulated to recompose new scenes.

Abstract
Natural scene understanding is a challenging task, particularly when encountering images of multiple objects that
are partially occluded. This obstacle is given rise by varying object ordering and positioning. Existing scene understanding paradigms are able to parse only the visible
parts, resulting in incomplete and unstructured scene interpretation. In this paper, we investigate the problem of
scene de-occlusion, which aims to recover the underlying
occlusion ordering and complete the invisible parts of occluded objects. We make the first attempt to address the
problem through a novel and unified framework that recovers hidden scene structures without ordering and amodal
annotations as supervisions. This is achieved via Partial Completion Network (PCNet)-mask (M) and -content
(C), that learn to recover fractions of object masks and
contents, respectively, in a self-supervised manner. Based
on PCNet-M and PCNet-C, we devise a novel inference
scheme to accomplish scene de-occlusion, via progres-

sive ordering recovery, amodal completion and content
completion. Extensive experiments on real-world scenes
demonstrate the superior performance of our approach
to other alternatives. Remarkably, our approach that is
trained in a self-supervised manner achieves comparable
results to fully-supervised methods. The proposed scene
de-occlusion framework benefits many applications, including high-quality and controllable image manipulation and
scene recomposition (see Fig. 1), as well as the conversion of existing modal mask annotations to amodal mask
annotations. Project page: https://xiaohangzhan.
github.io/projects/deocclusion/.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is one of the foundations of machine perception. A real-world scene, regardless of its
context, often comprises multiple objects of varying ordering and positioning, with one or more object(s) being occluded by other object(s). Hence, scene understanding systems should be able to process modal perception, i.e., pars-

3784

