Hierarchically Robust Representation Learning
Qi Qian1

Juhua Hu2 Hao Li1
1
Alibaba Group
2
School of Engineering and Technology
University of Washington, Tacoma, USA
{qi.qian, lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com juhuah@uw.edu

Abstract
ImageNet

With the tremendous success of deep learning in visual
tasks, the representations extracted from intermediate layers of learned models, that is, deep features, attract much
attention of researchers. Previous empirical analysis shows
that those features can contain appropriate semantic information. Therefore, with a model trained on a large-scale
benchmark data set (e.g., ImageNet), the extracted features
can work well on other tasks. In this work, we investigate
this phenomenon and demonstrate that deep features can be
suboptimal due to the fact that they are learned by minimizing the empirical risk. When the data distribution of the target task is different from that of the benchmark data set, the
performance of deep features can degrade. Hence, we propose a hierarchically robust optimization method to learn
more generic features. Considering the example-level and
concept-level robustness simultaneously, we formulate the
problem as a distributionally robust optimization problem
with Wasserstein ambiguity set constraints, and an efficient
algorithm with the conventional training pipeline is proposed. Experiments on benchmark data sets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the robust deep representations.

1. Introduction
Extracting appropriate representations is essential for visual recognition. In the past decades, various hand-crafted
features have been developed to capture semantics of images, e.g., SIFT [16], HOG [7], etc. The conventional
pipeline works in two phases. In the first phase, representations are extracted from each image with a given schema.
Thereafter, a specific model (e.g., SVM [6]) is learned with
these features for a target task. Since the hand-crafted features are task-independent, the performance of this pipeline
can be suboptimal.
Deep learning proposes to incorporate these phases by
training end-to-end convolutional neural networks. Without
an explicit feature design like SIFT [16], a task-dependent

CIFAR-10

SOP

Figure 1. Examples from ImageNet, CIFAR-10 and SOP.
Example-level distribution difference within a class can be observed from the 7th image of ImageNet and 2nd image of CIFAR10 for the car class in various aspects, e.g., resolution and pose.
Concept-level distribution difference is significant between ImageNet and SOP. ImageNet includes many classes from the concept
“animal” while SOP only contains classes from “artifact”.

representation will be learned through multiple layers and a
fully connected layer is attached at the end as a linear classifier for recognition. Benefited from this coherent structure,
deep learning promotes the performance on visual tasks dramatically, e.g., categorization [15], detection [21], etc. Despite the success of deep learning on large-scale data sets,
deep neural networks (DNNs) are easy to overfit small data
sets due to the large number of parameters. Besides, DNNs
require GPU for efficient training, which is expensive.
Researchers attempt to leverage pre-trained DNNs to improve the feature design mechanism. Surprisingly, it is
observed that the features extracted from the last few layers perform well on the generic tasks when the model is
pre-trained on a large-scale benchmark data set, e.g., ImageNet [22]. Deep features, which are outputs from intermediate layers of a deep model, become popular as the substitute of training deep models for light computation. Systematic comparison shows that these deep features outperform the existing hand-crafted features with a large margin [8, 17, 20].
The objective of learning deep models for specific tasks
and deep features for generic tasks can be different, but little
efforts have been devoted to further investigating deep fea-

7336

