Organ at Risk Segmentation for Head and Neck Cancer using Stratified
Learning and Neural Architecture Search
Dazhou Guo1 Dakai Jin1 Zhuotun Zhu3 Tsung-Ying Ho2 Adam P. Harrison1 Chun-Hung Chao4
Jing Xiao5 Le Lu1
1

PAII Inc.

2

Chang Gung Memorial Hospital

3

The Johns Hopkins University

4

National Tsing Hua University

5

Ping An Technology

Abstract
Organ at risk (OAR) segmentation is a critical step in radiotherapy of head and neck (H&N) cancer, where inconsistencies across radiation oncologists and prohibitive labor
costs motivate automated approaches. However, leading
methods using standard fully convolutional network workflows that are challenged when the number of OARs becomes large, e.g. > 40. For such scenarios, insights can
be gained from the stratification approaches seen in manual clinical OAR delineation. This is the goal of our work,
where we introduce stratified organ at risk segmentation
(SOARS), an approach that stratifies OARs into anchor,
mid-level, and small & hard (S&H) categories. SOARS
stratifies across two dimensions. The first dimension is
that distinct processing frameworks are used for each OAR
category. In particular, inspired by clinical practices, anchor OARs are used to guide the mid-level and S&H categories. The second dimension is that distinct network architectures are used to manage the significant contrast, size,
and anatomy variations between different OARs. We use
differentiable neural architecture search (NAS), allowing
the network to choose among 2D, 3D or Pseudo-3D convolutions. Extensive 4-fold cross-validation on 142 H&N
cancer patients with 42 manually labeled OARs, the most
comprehensive OAR dataset to date, demonstrates that both
framework- and NAS-stratification significantly improves
quantitative performance over the state-of-the-art (from
70.44% to 75.14% in absolute Dice scores). Thus, SOARS
provides a powerful and principled means to manage the
highly complex segmentation space of OARs.

1. Introduction
Head and neck (H&N) cancer is one of the most common
cancers worldwide [17]. High-precision radiation therapy,
e.g. intensity-modulated radiotherapy, has been widely used

Figure 1. Illustration of 42 OARs in 3D demonstrating their various contrasts, sizes, and shapes in RTCT.

for H&N cancer treatment because of its ability for highly
conformal dose delivery. In this process, the radiation dose
to normal anatomical structures, i.e. organs at risk (OARs),
should be controlled to minimize post-treatment complications [11]. This requires accurate delineation of tumors and
OARs in radiotherapy computed tomography (RTCT) images [2, 18, 19, 22, 27, 37]. Clinically, OAR segmentation is predominantly carried out manually by radiation oncologists. Manual delineation is not only time consuming,
e.g. > 2 hrs for 9 OARs, but also suffers from large interpractitioner variability [11]. Unsurprisingly, with more
OARs included, time requirements increase significantly,
limiting the number of patients who may receive timely radiotherapy [26]. These issues have spurred efforts toward
automatic OAR segmentation in H&N cancer [29]. Despite this progress, performance gaps remain, calling for
approaches better tailored to this distinct and challenging
problem. This is the goal of our work.
By their nature, H&N OARs are 1) complex in anatomical shapes, 2) dense in spatial distributions, 3) large in
size variations, and 4) low in RTCT image contrast. Currently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a
dominant approach[1, 9, 15, 27, 37–39, 41, 46]. How14223

