FastDVDnet: Towards Real-Time Deep Video Denoising Without Flow
Estimation
Matias Tassano
GoPro France

Julie Delon
MAP5, Université de Paris & IUF

Thomas Veit
GoPro France

mtassano@gopro.com

julie.delon@parisdescartes.fr

tveit@gopro.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a state-of-the-art video denoising algorithm based on a convolutional neural network architecture. Until recently, video denoising with neural networks had been a largely under explored domain, and existing methods could not compete with the performance of
the best patch-based methods. The approach we introduce
in this paper, called FastDVDnet, shows similar or better
performance than other state-of-the-art competitors with
significantly lower computing times. In contrast to other
existing neural network denoisers, our algorithm exhibits
several desirable properties such as fast runtimes, and the
ability to handle a wide range of noise levels with a single network model. The characteristics of its architecture
make it possible to avoid using a costly motion compensation stage while achieving excellent performance. The combination between its denoising performance and lower computational load makes this algorithm attractive for practical
denoising applications. We compare our method with different state-of-art algorithms, both visually and with respect to
objective quality metrics.

1. Introduction
Despite the immense progress made in recent years in
photographic sensors, noise reduction remains an essential
step in video processing, especially when shooting conditions are challenging (low light, small sensors, etc.).
Although image denoising has remained a very active
research field through the years, too little work has been
devoted to the restoration of digital videos. It should be
noted, however, that some crucial aspects differentiate these
two problems. On the one hand, a video contains much
more information than a still image, which could help in
the restoration process. On the other hand, video restoration
requires good temporal coherency, which makes the restoration process much more demanding. Furthermore, since all
recent cameras produce videos in high definition—or even

larger—very fast and efficient algorithms are needed.
In this paper we introduce another network for deep
video denoising: FastDVDnet. This algorithm builds on
DVDnet [38], but at the same time introduces a number
of important changes with respect to its predecessor. Most
notably, instead of employing an explicit motion estimation stage, the algorithm is able to implicitly handle motion thanks to the traits of its architecture. This results in
a state-of-the-art algorithm which outputs high quality denoised videos while featuring very fast running times—even
thousands of times faster than other relevant methods.

1.1. Image denoising
Contrary to video denoising, image denoising has enjoyed consistent popularity in past years. A myriad of
new image denoising methods based on deep learning techniques have drawn considerable attention due to their outstanding performance. Schmidt and Roth proposed in [31]
the cascade of shrinkage fields method. The trainable nonlinear reaction diffusion model proposed by Chen and Pock
in [8] builds on the former. In [5], a multi-layer perceptron was successfully applied for image denoising. Methods
such as these achieve performances comparable to those of
well-known patch-based algorithms such as BM3D [10] or
non-local Bayes (NLB [21]). However, their limitations include performance restricted to specific forms of prior, or
the fact that a different set of weights must be trained for
each noise level.
Another widespread approach involves the use of
convolutional neural networks (CNN), e.g. RBDN [30],
MWCNN [24], DnCNN [43], and FFDNet [44]. Their performance compares favorably to other state-of-the-art image denoising algorithms, both quantitatively and visually.
These methods are composed of a succession of convolutional layers with nonlinear activation functions in between
them. A salient feature that these CNN-based methods
present is the ability to denoise several levels of noise with
only one trained model. Proposed by Zhang et al. in [43],
DnCNN is an end-to-end trainable deep CNN for image denoising. One of its main features is that it implements resid11354

