Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network for Video-based
Person Re-identification
Jinrui Yang1,3 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3∗ , Qize Yang1,3 , Yingcong Chen4 , and Qi Tian5
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
5
The Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
{yangjr27,yangqz}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,wszheng@ieee.org,yingcong.ian.chen@gmail.com
,tian.qi1@huawei.com

Some body
parts are
occluded in
some frames,
but reappear
in others.

Abstract
While video-based person re-identification (Re-ID) has
drawn increasing attention and made great progress in recent years, it is still very challenging to effectively overcome
the occlusion problem and the visual ambiguity problem for
visually similar negative samples. On the other hand, we
observe that different frames of a video can provide complementary information for each other, and the structural
information of pedestrians can provide extra discriminative
cues for appearance features. Thus, modeling the temporal
relations of different frames and the spatial relations within
a frame has the potential for solving the above problems.
In this work, we propose a novel Spatial-Temporal Graph
Convolutional Network (STGCN) to solve these problems.
The STGCN includes two GCN branches, a spatial one and
a temporal one. The spatial branch extracts structural information of a human body. The temporal branch mines
discriminative cues from adjacent frames. By jointly optimizing these branches, our model extracts robust spatialtemporal information that is complementary with appearance information. As shown in the experiments, our model
achieves state-of-the-art results on MARS and DukeMTMCVideoReID datasets.

1. Introduction
The widely deployed close-circuit television cameras
produce a mass of visual surveillance data everyday. This
brings the necessities of automatic surveillance video understanding. Because of the privacy or economic issue,
there is always non-overlapping regions. Thus it is challenging to conduct tracking or activity analysis on a non∗ Corresponding author

Providing complementary
information for missing
same patches

(a)

Providing complementary
information for other patches

(b)

Samples of different
identities with similar
appearance.

Large gap on structure.

Large gap on
appearance.

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Four image sequences from four different pedestrians
on MARS dataset. In (a), it is easy to find the same body parts
are occluded in some frames but reappear in others. It’s easy
to differentiate the pedestrians of (c) and (d) due to their large
gap in appearance. However, only using the appearance features
are not discriminative enough to distinguish (b) and (d), but their
structural information of the body is different. Exploiting spatialtemporal relations of parts among the sequence can alleviate these
problems.

overlapping camera network. In this regard, it is crucial
to re-identify pedestrians across non-overlapping camera
views, which is called person re-identification (Re-ID).
Existing Re-ID methods can be divided into two categories, i.e., image-based [10, 13, 31, 29, 36, 74, 60, 27, 1,
56, 59, 51, 30, 68, 69, 49] and video-based [8, 4, 61, 11].
Image-based Re-ID takes one or several images as input
without considering the temporal information. Generally,
it heavily relies on appearance features that are related to
color/texture of clothes. When the bounding boxes are not
perfect, or there exist noise or occlusions, appearance-based
features could be less effective, and image-based Re-ID
may not work well in this case. In contrast, by taking a

3289

