Select, Supplement and Focus for RGB-D Saliency Detection
Miao Zhang1,2

∗

∗

†

Weisong Ren1
Yongri Piao1
Zhengkun Rong1
Huchuan Lu1,3
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Lab for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province,
Dalian University of Technology, China
3
Pengcheng Lab

{miaozhang, yrpiao, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn 深度图
{beatlescoco, rzk911113}@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Depth data containing a preponderance of discriminative power in location have been proven beneficial for
accurate saliency prediction. However, RGB-D saliency detection methods are also negatively influenced by randomly
distributed erroneous or missing regions on the depth map
or along the object boundaries. This offers the possibility of
achieving more effective inference by well designed models.
In this paper, we propose a new framework for accurate
RGB-D saliency detection taking account of global location
and local detail complementarities from two modalities.
This is achieved by designing a complimentary interaction
module (CIM) to discriminatively select useful representation from the RGB and depth data, and effectively integrate
cross-modal features. Benefiting from the proposed CIM,
the fused features can accurately locate salient objects with
fine edge details. Moreover, we propose a compensationaware loss to improve the network’s confidence in detecting
hard samples. Comprehensive experiments on six public
datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms 18 stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to distinguish
the most attractive object in a scene. This fundamental
task plays an important role in a wide range of computer
vision and robotic vision tasks [3], such as video/image
segmentation [11], visual tracking [18], image captioning
[9]. Many previous works in SOD focus on RGB images.
Despite great progress RGB SOD methods have achieved,
they may remain sensitive when it comes to challenging
scenes. This is mainly because without accurate spatial
constraints, appearance features alone are often intrinsically
∗ Equal Contributions
† Corresponding Author

Image

depth map

DMRA

CPFP

OURS

GT

Figure 1. Samples from RGB-D saliency datasets. First row shows
that ideal depth maps can significantly help the detection task.
However, as shown in the other rows, undesirable depth maps can
also significantly affect the prediction effect.

less predictive for saliency detection when the color
contrasts between foreground and background are quite
low, or the background is cluttered.
Depth maps with affluent spatial structure information
have been proven beneficial for accurate saliency prediction. Within the last few years, tremendous efforts have
been made towards RGB-D saliency detection [27, 37, 6,
5, 1]. The accuracy in RGB-D saliency detection is highly
rely on the quality of the depth maps, which can be easily
influenced by a variety of noise, such as the temperature
of the camera, background illumination, and distance and
reflectivity of the observed objects. Therefore, depth maps
captured in real-life scenarios pose huge challenges to accurate RGB-D saliency detection in terms of two aspects.
First, randomly distributed erroneous or missing regions are
introduced on the depth map [33]. This is usually produced
from sensors, absorption, or poor reflection, for example, a
part of the object appears at the incorrect depth as shown in
the 3rd row of Figure 1. We also demonstrate in Figure 2
that the latest representative RGB-D methods are gradually
losing the battle against the top ranking RGB method as
similarity errors in the depth map increase. Second, erroneous depth measurements occur predominantly near object

3472

