ActiveMoCap: Optimized Viewpoint Selection
for Active Human Motion Capture
Sena Kiciroglu1 Helge Rhodin1,2 Sudipta N. Sinha3 Mathieu Salzmann1 Pascal Fua1
1
2
3
CVLAB, EPFL
Imager Lab, UBC
Microsoft

Abstract
The accuracy of monocular 3D human pose estimation
depends on the viewpoint from which the image is captured.
While freely moving cameras, such as on drones, provide
control over this viewpoint, automatically positioning them
at the location which will yield the highest accuracy remains an open problem. This is the problem that we address
in this paper. Specifically, given a short video sequence,
we introduce an algorithm that predicts which viewpoints
should be chosen to capture future frames so as to maximize 3D human pose estimation accuracy. The key idea
underlying our approach is a method to estimate the uncertainty of the 3D body pose estimates. We integrate several sources of uncertainty, originating from deep learning
based regressors and temporal smoothness. Our motion
planner yields improved 3D body pose estimates and outperforms or matches existing ones that are based on person
following and orbiting.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Method overview. The 2D and 3D human pose is inferred from the current frame of the drone footage, using off the
shelf CNNs. The 2D pose and relative 3D pose of the last k frames
is then used to optimize for the global 3D human motion. The next
view of the drone is chosen so that the uncertainty of the human
pose estimation from that view is minimized, which improves reconstruction accuracy.

Monocular approaches for 3D human pose estimation
have improved significantly in recent years, but their accuracy remains relatively low. In this paper, we explore the
use of a moving camera whose motion we can control to resolve ambiguities inherent to monocular 3D reconstruction
and to increase pose estimation accuracy. This is known as
active vision and has received surprisingly little attention in
the context of using modern approaches to body pose estimation. An active motion capture system, such as one based
on a personal drone, would allow one to film themselves
performing a physical activity and analyze their motion,
for example to get feedback on their performance. When
using only one camera, the quality of such feedback will
strongly depend on selecting the most beneficial viewpoints
for pose estimation. Fig. 1 depicts an overview of our approach based on a drone-based monocular camera.
In this paper, we introduce an algorithm designed to continuously position a moving camera at optimal viewpoints

to maximize the 3D pose estimation accuracy for a freely
moving subject. We achieve this by moving the camera in
6D pose space to viewpoints that maximize a utility function designed to predict reconstruction accuracy. However,
the utility function cannot be defined in terms of reconstruction accuracy because doing so would require knowing the
true person and camera position, leading to a chicken and
egg problem. Instead we use prediction uncertainty as a surrogate for accuracy. This is a common strategy used in robot
navigation systems for unknown scenes where the robot explores areas that are most incomplete in its internal map
representation [20]. However, in our situation, estimating
uncertainty is much more difficult since multiple sources of
uncertainty need to be considered. These include uncertainties about what the subject will do next, the reliability of
the pose estimation algorithm, and the accuracy of distance
estimation along the camera’s line of sight.

103

