Unsupervised Learning of Intrinsic Structural Representation Points
Nenglun Chen1 , Lingjie Liu2 , Zhiming Cui1 , Runnan Chen1 , Duygu Ceylan3 ,
Changhe Tu4 , Wenping Wang1
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Adobe Research 4 Shandong University

Abstract
Learning structures of 3D shapes is a fundamental problem in the field of computer graphics and geometry processing. We present a simple yet interpretable unsupervised
method for learning a new structural representation in the
form of 3D structure points. The 3D structure points produced by our method encode the shape structure intrinsically and exhibit semantic consistency across all the shape
instances with similar structures. This is a challenging goal
that has not fully been achieved by other methods. Specifically, our method takes a 3D point cloud as input and encodes it as a set of local features. The local features are then
passed through a novel point integration module to produce
a set of 3D structure points. The chamfer distance is used
as reconstruction loss to ensure the structure points lie close
to the input point cloud. Extensive experiments have shown
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on the semantic shape correspondence task and achieves comparable performance with the state-of-the-art on the segmentation label transfer task. Moreover, the PCA based shape embedding built upon consistent structure points demonstrates
good performance in preserving the shape structures. Code
is available at https://github.com/NolenChen/
3DStructurePoints

1. Introduction
Analyzing 3D shape structures is a fundamental problem in the field of computer graphics and geometry processing. One common way is to co-analyze a large collection of
shapes, such as shape co-segmentation [4, 48], shape correspondence estimation [14], shape abstraction [37, 22, 33]
and 3D keypoint discovery [35]. An important requirement for such co-analysis is to leverage the semantic consistency among different shapes to discover semantically
consistent features or structures that can facilitate different

tasks. Quite a few structural representations have been proposed for 3D shapes, such as medial axis, curve skeleton
and keypoints, which are designed for different tasks. Early
works mainly use hand-crafted features and formulate it as
optimization problems. While, they usually rely on parameter tuning, and are designed for specific tasks or datasets.
Recently, deep learning techniques have been emerged to
address these problems[13, 26]. In this work, we propose
a method to learn a new structural representation for establishing semantic correspondence for 3D point clouds.

Figure 1: (a) Semantic correspondence. (b) Segmentation
label transfer. (c) Visualization of one principal component
of PCA embedding space.
There has recently been active research on deep learning
techniques for processing 3D point clouds. PointNet [28] is
a pioneer work in this direction. After that, a number of network structures have been proposed and have achieved great
success in various tasks. Most existing works mainly focus
on generating accurate reconstruction of the target shapes,
but the generated point clouds lack of structure information. Recently, several works [36, 47, 41, 8, 31] have been
proposed to generate structured point clouds, but with no
guarantee for point-wise correspondence.
To address this issue, we propose a novel unsupervised
method to learn semantically consistent structure points for
19121

