Learning Texture Invariant Representation
for Domain Adaptation of Semantic Segmentation
Myeongjin Kim
Hyeran Byun
Yonsei University
{myeongjin.kim,hrbyun}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

Stylized source data
!"#$

Since annotating pixel-level labels for semantic segmentation is laborious, leveraging synthetic data is an attractive solution. However, due to the domain gap between synthetic domain and real domain, it is challenging for a model
trained with synthetic data to generalize to real data. In this
paper, considering the fundamental difference between the
two domains as the texture, we propose a method to adapt
to the target domain’s texture. First, we diversity the texture
of synthetic images using a style transfer algorithm. The
various textures of generated images prevent a segmentation model from overfitting to one specific (synthetic) texture. Then, we fine-tune the model with self-training to get
direct supervision of the target texture. Our results achieve
state-of-the-art performance and we analyze the properties
of the model trained on the stylized dataset with extensive
experiments.

1. Introduction
Until now, many studies have dealt with semantic segmentation. For supervised semantic segmentation, a large
volume of labeled data is required for training. However,
the manual annotation for pixel-wise ground truth labels is
extremely laborious. For example, it takes 90 min per image
to make ground truth label for the Cityscape [5] dataset.
To reduce the cost of annotation, datasets such as GTA5
[20] and SYNTHIA [21] are proposed. Since these datasets
are generated by computer graphics, the images and pixellevel annotations are automatically generated. However,
due to the domain gap between the synthetic domain and
the real domain, a model trained with the synthetic data is
hard to generalize to the real data.
Domain adaptation addresses the above issue by reducing the domain gap. One approach is pixel-level adaptation. The pixel-level adaptation uses image translation algorithms like CycleGAN [29] to reduce the gap in visual
appearance between two domains. Since the synthetic im-

Translated source data

Segmentation Network

Segmentation output

Target data

Discriminator
!%&'

Figure 1: Process of learning texture-invariant representation. We consider both the stylized image and the translated
image as the source image. The red line indicates the flow of
the source image and the blue line indicates the flow of the
target image. By segmentation loss of the stylized source
data, the model learns texture-invariant representation. By
adversarial loss, the model reduces the distribution gap in
feature space.

age is translated into the style of the real domain, a model
can learn representation for the real domain more easily.
Although CycleGAN reduces the visual gap between
two domains to some extent, overcoming the fundamental
difference, the texture, is still challenging. In Figure 2, the
second column shows translated results by CycleGAN. Although the translated images get the Cityscapes’ gray color
tone, CycleGAN cannot completely translate the synthetic
texture into the real texture. Therefore, the possibility of a
model to overfit to the synthetic texture still exists.
To overcome this limitation, we propose a method to
adapt to the target domain’s texture. First, we generate a
texture-diversified source dataset by using a style transfer
algorithm. Each source image loses the synthetic texture
and gets a random texture. Because of the increased variation of textures, a model trained on the texture-diversified

12975

