Differentiable Adaptive Computation Time for Visual Reasoning
Cristóbal Eyzaguirre and Álvaro Soto
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
ceyzaguirre4@uc.cl, asoto@ing.puc.cl

Abstract
This paper presents a novel attention-based algorithm
for achieving adaptive computation called DACT, which,
unlike existing ones, is end-to-end differentiable. Our
method can be used in conjunction with many networks;
in particular, we study its application to the widely know
MAC architecture, obtaining a significant reduction in the
number of recurrent steps needed to achieve similar accuracies, therefore improving its performance to computation
ratio. Furthermore, we show that by increasing the maximum number of steps used, we surpass the accuracy of even
our best non-adaptive MAC in the CLEVR dataset, demonstrating that our approach is able to control the number of
steps without significant loss of performance. Additional
advantages provided by our approach include considerably
improving interpretability by discarding useless steps and
providing more insights into the underlying reasoning process. Finally, we present adaptive computation as an equivalent to an ensemble of models, similar to a mixture of expert formulation. Both the code and the configuration files
for our experiments are made available to support further
research in this area.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep learning (DL) techniques
have achieved state-of-the-art performance in most, if not
all, computer vision tasks [17, 21, 8, 10]. While these
methods are powerful in terms of representational capacity,
they lack a suitable mechanism to allocate computational
resources according to the complexity of each particular inference. In effect, most popular DL based models used in
computer vision applications, such as CNN [18], RNN [18],
Transformer [24], and MAC [10] have a fixed processing
pipeline whose depth is independent of the complexity of
the current input/output relation.
The drawbacks associated with the use of a fixed processing pipeline can be illustrated by considering tasks that
require a complex sequential inference. This is the case of
new Visual Question Answering (VQA) scenarios that have

Figure 1. Examples of questions in the CLEVR [15] dataset that
show a significant variation in the number of reasoning steps that
are needed to answer them correctly.

been recently proposed to support research in the area of
visual reasoning, such as the CLEVR and GQA datasets
[15, 11]. These datasets pose challenging natural language
questions about images whose solution requires the use
of perceptual abilities, such as recognizing objects or attributes, identifying spatial relations, or implementing highlevel capabilities like counting. As an example, Figure 1
shows two instances from the CLEVR dataset [15]. In this
case, each visual question entails a different level of complexity to discover the correct answer. Specifically, while
the first question involves just the identification of a specific attribute from a specific object, the second question
requires the identification and comparative analysis of several attributes from several objects. Despite this significant
difference, current visual reasoning models use the same
processing pipeline to answer both questions.
From the previous example, it is possible to foresee that
computational efficiency, at training and inference time, is a
relevant disadvantage of using a fixed processing pipeline.
In effect, the usual goal of a DL model is to maximize accuracy, and as a consequence, the model is forced to calibrate its processing structure according to the most com112817

