Instance Credibility Inference for Few-Shot Learning
Yikai Wang1,4

Chengming Xu1
Chen Liu1
Li Zhang2
Yanwei Fu1,3,4∗
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
4
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University

{yikaiwang19, cmxu18, chenliu18, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn, lz@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to recognize new objects
with extremely limited training data for each category. Previous efforts are made by either leveraging meta-learning
paradigm or novel principles in data augmentation to alleviate this extremely data-scarce problem. In contrast,
this paper presents a simple statistical approach, dubbed
Instance Credibility Inference (ICI) to exploit the distribution support of unlabeled instances for few-shot learning. Specifically, we first train a linear classifier with the
labeled few-shot examples and use it to infer the pseudolabels for the unlabeled data. To measure the credibility of
each pseudo-labeled instance, we then propose to solve another linear regression hypothesis by increasing the sparsity
of the incidental parameters and rank the pseudo-labeled
instances with their sparsity degree. We select the most
trustworthy pseudo-labeled instances alongside the labeled
examples to re-train the linear classifier. This process is
iterated until all the unlabeled samples are included in the
expanded training set, i.e. the pseudo-label is converged for
unlabeled data pool. Extensive experiments under two fewshot settings show that our simple approach can establish
new state-of-the-arts on four widely used few-shot learning benchmark datasets including miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, CIFAR-FS, and CUB. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/Yikai-Wang/ICI-FSL

1. Introduction
Learning from one or few examples is an important ability for humans. For example, children have no problem
forming the concept of “giraffe” by only taking a glance
from a picture in a book, or hearing its description as looking like a deer with a long neck [58]. In contrast, the most
successful recognition systems [20, 42, 14, 16] still highly
∗ Corresponding author.

rely on an avalanche of labeled training data. This thus increases the burden in rare data collection (e.g. accident data
in the autonomous driving scenario) and expensive data annotation (e.g. disease data for medical diagnose), and more
fundamentally limits their scalability to open-ended learning of the long tail categories in the real-world.
Motivated by these observations, there has been a recent resurgence of research interest in few-shot learning [10, 43, 46, 53]. It aims to recognize new objects with
extremely limited training data for each category. Basically, a few-shot learning model has the chance to access
the source/base dataset with many labeled training instances
for model training and then is able to generalize to a disjoint
but relevant target/novel dataset with only scarce labeled
data. A simplest baseline to transfer learned knowledge to
the novel set is fine-tuning [57]. However, it would cause
severely overfitting as one or a few instances are insufficient to model the data distributions of the novel classes.
Data augmentation and regularization techniques can alleviate overfitting in such a limited-data regime, but they do
not solve it. Several recent efforts are made in leveraging
learning to learn, or meta-learning paradigm by simulating
the few-shot scenario in the training process [24]. However, Chen et al. [6] empirically argue that such a learning
paradigm often results in inferior performance compared to
a simple baseline with a linear classifier coupled with a deep
feature extractor.
Given such a limited-data regime (one or few labeled examples per category), one of the fundamental problems for
few-shot learning is that one can hardly estimate the data
distribution without introducing the inductive bias. To address this problem, two types of strategy resort to model
the data distribution of novel category beyond traditional
inductive few-shot learning: (i) semi-supervised few-shot
learning (SSFSL) [28, 37, 45] supposes that we can utilize
unlabeled data (about ten times more than labeled data) to
help to learn the model; furthermore, (ii) transductive inference [18] for few-shot learning (TFSL) [28, 34] assumes

12836

