Varicolored Image De-hazing
Akshay Dudhane, Kuldeep Biradar, Prashant Patil, Praful Hambarde and Subrahmanyam Murala
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Lab,
Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, INDIA
2017eez0001@iitrpr.ac.in

Abstract
The quality of images captured in bad weather is often affected by chromatic casts and low visibility due to
the presence of atmospheric particles. Restoration of the
color balance is often ignored in most of the existing image
de-hazing methods. In this paper, we propose a varicolored end-to-end image de-hazing network which restores
the color balance in a given varicolored hazy image and
recovers the haze-free image. The proposed network comprises of 1) Haze color correction (HCC) module and 2)
Visibility improvement (VI) module. The proposed HCC
module provides required attention to each color channel
and generates color balanced hazy image. While the proposed VI module processes the color balanced hazy image
through novel inception attention block to recover the hazefree image. We also propose a novel approach to generate a
large-scale varicolored synthetic hazy image database. An
ablation study has been carried out to demonstrate the effect of different factors on the performance of the proposed
network for image de-hazing. Three benchmark synthetic
datasets have been used for quantitative analysis of the proposed network. Visual results on set of real-world hazy images captured in different weather conditions demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach for varicolored
image de-hazing.

1. Introduction
Under severe weather conditions, aerosols suspended in
the atmosphere greatly absorb and scatter the light rays.
Captured images in bad weather appears hazy and are having low visibility. Apparently, color casts of captured images in bad weather often depends upon the size of atmospheric particle and its properties [11]. For example, the
mixture of smoke and fog particles causes smoggy weather.
Image captured in smog is generally dominated by yellowish and orange color. This varicolored appearance of the
haze in captured images may degrade the performance of
the high-level computer vision applications. To improve the

Figure 1. Sample real-world varicoloured hazy images and respective haze-free images recovered using the proposed network. (a)
and (h) belongs to the grayish dense fog, (b) belongs to the nighttime haze, (c), (f), (g) represents the smog category, (d) is an exceptional case of the sunshine and (e) is a light hazy image.

quality of images captured in inclement weather, image dehazing is an essential task. The existing image de-hazing
approaches [6, 9, 13, 16–19, 21, 28, 30, 31, 36, 37, 39–46] focused mainly on the visibility improvement and ignored the
restoration of color balance in de-hazed image. The restoration of color balance is also equally important along with
the visibility improvement. Thus, there is a dire need of a
versatile image de-hazing approach which is independent of
the varicolored haze and is able to restore the color balance
along with the visibility improvement in de-hazed image.
In this paper, a varicolored end-to-end image de-hazing
network is proposed which restores the color balance in
given varivolored hazy image and recovers the haze-free image. Sample varicolored hazy images and recovered hazefree images using the proposed network are shown in the
Figure 1. Figure 1 witnessed the versatile performance of
the proposed network for removal of various (almost all)
types of colored haze. In next Section, we have discussed
the existing image de-hazing approaches.
14564

