12-in-1: Multi-Task Vision and Language Representation Learning
Jiasen Lu3 * Vedanuj Goswami1 * Marcus Rohrbach1 Devi Parikh1,3 Stefan Lee2
1
Facebook AI Research 2 Oregon State University 3 Georgia Institute of Technology
{vedanuj, mrf}@fb.com leestef@oregonstate.edu {jiasenlu, parikh}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Much of vision-and-language research focuses on a
small but diverse set of independent tasks and supporting
datasets often studied in isolation; however, the visuallygrounded language understanding skills required for success at these tasks overlap significantly. In this work, we investigate these relationships between vision-and-language
tasks by developing a large-scale, multi-task training
regime. Our approach culminates in a single model on
12 datasets from four broad categories of task including
visual question answering, caption-based image retrieval,
grounding referring expressions, and multi-modal verification. Compared to independently trained single-task models, this represents a reduction from approximately 3 billion
parameters to 270 million while simultaneously improving
performance by 2.05 points on average across tasks. We
use our multi-task framework to perform in-depth analysis of the effect of joint training diverse tasks. Further, we
show that finetuning task-specific models from our single
multi-task model can lead to further improvements, achieving performance at or above the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
A compelling reason to study language and vision jointly
is the promise of language as a universal and natural interface for visual reasoning problems – useful both in specifying a wide range of problems and in communicating AI
responses. However, the current research landscape for
visually-grounded language understanding is a patchwork
of many specialized tasks like question answering or caption generation, each supported by a handful of datasets.
As such, progress in this field has been measured by the
independent improvement of bespoke models designed and
trained for each of these specific tasks and datasets.
The recent rise of general architectures for vision-andlanguage [1, 23, 24, 27, 43, 45, 54] reduces the architectural differences across tasks. These models pretrain common architectures on self-supervised tasks to learn general
visio-linguistic representations then fine-tune for specific

Visual Question Answering

What color is the child’s outfit? Orange
Referring Expressions

child sheep

basket

people sitting on chair

Multi-modal Verification

The child is petting a dog. false
Caption-based Image Retrieval

A child in orange clothes plays with sheep.

Figure 1: We introduce an approach for effective multi-task learning, training a single model on 12 popular vision-and-language
datasets. This single model performs at par or even better than independent task-specific state-of-the-art approaches for many tasks.

datasets; however, the result is still a menagerie of independent task-specific models rather than a single unified model.
This is dissatisfying in practice – the model that understands
questions cannot ground noun phrases, the grounding model
cannot retrieve images based on a description, and so forth.
Further, this approach does not scale well as each new task
requires storing a new model.
Beyond being intellectually dissatisfying, this task-based
fracturing leaves quite a lot on the table. While individual
tasks present different challenges and diverse interfaces, the
underlying associations between language and visual concepts are often common across tasks. For example, learning to ground the referring expression “small red vase” requires understanding the same concepts as answering the
question “What color is the small vase?”. Training multiple tasks jointly can potentially pool these different sources
of grounding supervision. Further, developing models that
can perform well on a wide range of tasks simultaneously
can help guard against the research community overfitting
to specific datasets and metrics.
In this work, we develop a multi-task model for discriminative vision-and-language tasks based on the recently proposed ViLBERT [27] model. We consider four categories
of tasks – training jointly on a total of 12 different datasets.
Our results not only show that a single model can perform
all these tasks, but also that joint training can improve the
performance compared to single-task training with the same
architecture. Before undertaking this effort, it was not obvious to us that this would be the case – multitask training

* Equal contribution

10437

