Discriminative Multi-modality Speech Recognition
Bo Xu, Cheng Lu, Yandong Guo and Jacob Wang
Xpeng motors
xiaoboboer@gmail.com

Abstract
Vision is often used as a complementary modality for audio speech recognition (ASR), especially in the noisy environment where performance of solo audio modality significantly deteriorates. After combining visual modality,
ASR is upgraded to the multi-modality speech recognition
(MSR). In this paper, we propose a two-stage speech recognition model. In the first stage, the target voice is separated from background noises with help from the corresponding visual information of lip movements, making the
model ‘listen’ clearly. At the second stage, the audio modality combines visual modality again to better understand the
speech by a MSR sub-network, further improving the recognition rate. There are some other key contributions: we introduce a pseudo-3D residual convolution (P3D)-based visual front-end to extract more discriminative features; we
upgrade the temporal convolution block from 1D ResNet
with the temporal convolutional network (TCN), which is
more suitable for the temporal tasks; the MSR sub-network
is built on the top of Element-wise-Attention Gated Recurrent Unit (EleAtt-GRU), which is more effective than Transformer in long sequences. We conducted extensive experiments on the LRS3-TED and the LRW datasets. Our twostage model (audio enhanced multi-modality speech recognition, AE-MSR) consistently achieves the state-of-the-art
performance by a significant margin, which demonstrates
the necessity and effectiveness of AE-MSR.

1. Introduction
In the book The Listening Eye: A Simple Introduction to
the Art of Lip-reading [17], Clegg mentions that “When you
are deaf you live inside a well-corked glass bottle. You see
the entrancing outside world, but it does not reach you. After learning to lip read, you are still inside the bottle, but the
cork has come out and the outside world slowly but surely
comes in to you.” Lip reading is an approach for people
with hearing impairments to communicate with the world,
so that they can interpret what other say by looking at the
movements of lips [7, 16, 22, 32, 46]. Lip reading is a dif-

Sentence/word
predictions
Multi-modality
speech recognition

Enhanced
Mag

Audio
Enhancement
Visual
features

Mag

Visual
Frontend

STFT

Video

Audio

Audio
Enhancement
Network
Visual
features

Mag

Speech Enhancement

Figure 1: Overview of the audio enhanced multi-modality
speech recognition network (AE-MSR). Mag: magnitude.
Different from other MSR methods [2, 14, 47, 41, 35] with
only single visual awareness, we firstly filter the voices
of speakers and background noises with help from visual
awareness. Then we combine visual awareness again for
MSR to benefit speech recognition.

ficult skill for human to grasp and requires intensive training [20, 41]. Lip reading is also an inexact art, because
different characters may exhibit the similar lip movements
(e.g. ‘b’ and ‘p’) [2]. Consequently, several machine lip
reading models are proposed to discriminate such subtle difference [18, 31, 34]. However they still suffer difficulties on
extracting spatio-temporal features from the video.
Automatic lip reading becomes achievable due to rapid
development of deep neural network in computer vision [30, 39, 43], and with help from large scale training
datasets [14, 15, 18, 19, 37, 47]. In addition to serving as
a powerful solution to hearing impairment, lip reading can
also contribute to audio speech recognition (ASR) in adversary environments, such as in high noise level where hu-

14433

