HybridPose: 6D Object Pose Estimation under Hybrid Representations
Chen Song*, Jiaru Song∗ , Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
song@cs.utexas.edu, jiarus@cs.utexas.edu, huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We introduce HybridPose, a novel 6D object pose estimation approach. HybridPose utilizes a hybrid intermediate representation to express different geometric information in the input image, including keypoints, edge vectors,
and symmetry correspondences. Compared to a unitary
representation, our hybrid representation allows pose regression to exploit more and diverse features when one type
of predicted representation is inaccurate (e.g., because of
occlusion). Different intermediate representations used by
HybridPose can all be predicted by the same simple neural
network, and outliers in predicted intermediate representations are filtered by a robust regression module. Compared to state-of-the-art pose estimation approaches, HybridPose is comparable in running time and is significantly
more accurate. For example, on Occlusion Linemod [3]
dataset, our method achieves a prediction speed of 30 fps
with a mean ADD(-S) accuracy of 79.2%, representing a
67.4% improvement from the current state-of-the-art approach. The implementation of HybridPose is available at
https://github.com/chensong1995/HybridPose.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6D pose of an object from an RGB image is a fundamental problem in 3D vision and has diverse
applications in object recognition and robot-object interaction. Advances in deep learning have led to significant
breakthroughs in this problem. While early works typically formulate pose estimation as end-to-end pose classification [39] or pose regression [16, 42], recent pose estimation methods usually leverage keypoints as an intermediate
representation [38, 34], and align predicted 2D keypoints
with ground-truth 3D keypoints. In addition to ground-truth
pose labels, these methods incorporate keypoints as an intermediate supervision, facilitating smooth model training.
Keypoint-based methods are built upon two assumptions:
(1) a machine learning model can accurately predict 2D
keypoint locations; and (2) these predictions provide suf* Authors contributed equally

(a) Input image

(b) Keypoints

(c) Edge vectors

(d) Symmetry correspondences

(e) Groud-truth pose

(f) Predicted pose

Figure 1. HybridPose predicts keypoints, edge vectors, and symmetry correspondences. In (a), we show the input RGB image, in
which the object of interest (driller) is partially occluded. In (b),
red markers denote predicted 2D keypoints. In (c), edge vectors
are defined by a fully-connected graph among all keypoints. In (d),
symmetry correspondences connect each 2D pixel on the object
to its symmetric counterpart. For illustrative purposes, we only
draw symmetry correspondences of 50 random samples from 5755
detected object pixels in this example. The predicted pose (f) is
obtained by jointly aligning all predictions with the 3D template,
which involves solving a non-linear optimization problem.

ficient constraints to regress the underlying 6D pose. Both
assumptions easily break in many real-world settings. Due
to object occlusions and representational limitations of the
prediction network, it is often impossible to accurately predict 2D keypoint coordinates from an RGB image alone.
In this paper, we introduce HybridPose, a novel 6D
pose estimation approach that leverages multiple intermediate representations to express the geometric information
in the input image. In addition to keypoints, HybridPose
integrates a prediction network that outputs edge vectors
between adjacent keypoints. As most objects possess a
(partial) reflection symmetry, HybridPose also utilizes predicted dense pixel-wise correspondences that reflect the underlying symmetric relations between pixels. Compared
to a unitary representation, this hybrid representation enjoys a multitude of advantages. First, HybridPose integrates
more signals in the input image: edge vectors encode spa-

431

