KFNet: Learning Temporal Camera Relocalization using Kalman Filtering
Lei Zhou1
Zixin Luo1
Mingmin Zhen1
Yao Yao1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
1
2

Tianwei Shen1
Tian Fang3
2

Tsinghua University

Jiahui Zhang2
Long Quan1
3

Everest Innovation Technology

{lzhouai,zluoag,tshenaa,mzhen,yyaoag,quan}@cse.ust.hk

jiahui-z15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal camera relocalization estimates the pose with
respect to each video frame in sequence, as opposed to
one-shot relocalization which focuses on a still image.
Even though the time dependency has been taken into account, current temporal relocalization methods still generally underperform the state-of-the-art one-shot approaches
in terms of accuracy. In this work, we improve the temporal relocalization method by using a network architecture
that incorporates Kalman filtering (KFNet) for online camera relocalization. In particular, KFNet extends the scene
coordinate regression problem to the time domain in order to recursively establish 2D and 3D correspondences
for the pose determination. The network architecture design and the loss formulation are based on Kalman filtering
in the context of Bayesian learning. Extensive experiments
on multiple relocalization benchmarks demonstrate the high
accuracy of KFNet at the top of both one-shot and temporal relocalization approaches. Our codes are released at
https://github.com/zlthinker/KFNet.

1. Introduction
Camera relocalization serves as the subroutine of applications including SLAM [15], augmented reality [9] and
autonomous navigation [45]. It estimates the 6-DoF pose
of a query RGB image in a known scene coordinate system.
Current relocalization approaches mostly focus on one-shot
relocalization for a still image. They can be mainly categorized into three classes [13, 50]: (1) the relative pose regression (RPR) methods which determine the relative pose w.r.t.
the database images [3, 29], (2) the absolute pose regression (APR) methods regressing the absolute pose through
PoseNet [25] and its variants [23, 24, 60] and (3) the
structure-based methods that establish 2D-3D correspondences with Active Search [48, 49] or Scene Coordinate Regression (SCoRe) [52] and then solve the pose by PnP algorithms [18, 42]. Particularly, SCoRe is widely adopted recently to learn per-pixel scene coordinates from dense train-

3

fangtian@altizure.com

ing data for a scene, due to its ability to form dense and
accurate 2D-3D matches even in texture-less scenes [5, 6].
As extensively evaluated in [5, 6, 50], the structure-based
methods generally show better pose accuracy than the RPR
and APR methods, because they explicitly exploit the rules
of the projective geometry and the scene structures [50].
Apart from one-shot relocalization, temporal relocalization with respect to video frames is also worthy of investigation. However, almost all the temporal relocalization
methods are based on PoseNet [25], which, in general, even
underperform the structure-based one-shot methods in accuracy. This is mainly because their accuracies are fundamentally limited by the retrieval nature of PoseNet. As analyzed in [50], PoseNet based methods are essentially analogous to approximate pose estimation via image retrieval,
and cannot go beyond the retrieval baseline in accuracy.
In this work, we are motivated by the high accuracy of
structure-based relocalization methods and resort to SCoRe
to estimate per-pixel scene coordinates for pose computation. Besides, we propose to extend SCoRe to the time domain in a recursive manner to enhance the temporal consistency of 2D-3D matching, thus allowing for more accurate
online pose estimations for sequential images. Specifically,
a recurrent network named KFNet is proposed in the context of Bayesian learning [37] by embedding SCoRe into the
Kalman filter within a deep learning framework. It is composed of three subsystems below, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
• The measurement system features a network termed
SCoordNet to derive the maximum likelihood (ML) predictions of the scene coordinates for a single image.
• The process system uses OFlowNet that models the optical flow based transition process for image pixels across
time steps and yields the prior predictions of scene coordinates. Additionally, the measurement and process systems provide uncertainty predictions [40, 23] to model
the noise dynamics over time.
• The filtering system fuses both predictions and leads to
the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimations of the final scene coordinates.

4919

