Shape Reconstruction by Learning Differentiable Surface Representations
Jan Bednařı́k

Shaifali Parashar

Erhan Gündoğdu

Mathieu Salzmann

Pascal Fua

CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

GT mesh

GT point cloud

predicted patches

computed normals

computed mean curvature

Figure 1. Our method predicts a multi-patch representation where the patches are guaranteed not to collapse and to minimally
overlap. Thanks to its explicit access to the surface’s differential properties, our method computes normals and curvature analytically for
any predicted point of the modeled surface.

Abstract
Generative models that produce point clouds have
emerged as a powerful tool to represent 3D surfaces, and
the best current ones rely on learning an ensemble of parametric representations. Unfortunately, they offer no control
over the deformations of the surface patches that form the
ensemble and thus fail to prevent them from either overlapping or collapsing into single points or lines. As a consequence, computing shape properties such as surface normals and curvatures becomes difficult and unreliable.
In this paper, we show that we can exploit the inherent differentiability of deep networks to leverage differential
surface properties during training so as to prevent patch
collapse and strongly reduce patch overlap. Furthermore,
this lets us reliably compute quantities such as surface normals and curvatures. We will demonstrate on several tasks
that this yields more accurate surface reconstructions than
the state-of-the-art methods in terms of normals estimation
and amount of collapsed and overlapped patches.

cause they can capture high frequency geometric details
without requiring much memory. State-of-the-art methods
rely on encoder/decoder architectures to create latent representations from input data and then decode them using one
or more learned mappings from a 2D parameter space to
the 3D surface. Each one of these mappings can be thought
of as transforming a 2D rectangular patch into a set of 3D
points lying on the surface to be modeled. FoldingNet [33]
and AtlasNet [16] are among the best representatives of this
approach, and the move from one single patch to multiple
ones has proved effective to achieve higher accuracy.

Point clouds are becoming increasingly popular as a
compact and expressive way to represent 3D surfaces be-

However, this increase in accuracy comes at a price.
Nothing guarantees that each patch will represent a substantial portion of the target surface and some may in fact
collapse, meaning that they generate a single point or a line
instead of a surface-like cloud. Another potential problem
is that the 3D clouds generated by different patches will
overlap so that the same parts of the underlying surface
are represented by several patches, thus resulting in potential inconsistencies across the patches and ineffectively using the decoder’s capacity. While these problems may not
occur when the training data contains many diverse categories of objects, such as when using the whole of ShapeNet
dataset [10], they become apparent in practical scenarios
where one aims to model the shape of a specific surface,
such as a piece of clothing, as shown in Fig. 1.

This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

In this paper, we address these two issues by leveraging
the observation that first and second derivatives of the de-

1. Introduction

4716

