RPM-Net: Robust Point Matching using Learned Features
Zi Jian Yew
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{zijian.yew, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration refers to the problem of
finding the rigid transformation to align two given point
clouds with unknown point correspondences. It has applications in many areas of computer vision and robotics, e.g.
robot and object pose estimation, point cloud-based odometry and mapping, etc. Rigid point cloud registration is a
chicken-and-egg problem that requires solving for both unknown point correspondences and rigid transformation to
align the point clouds, and is thus commonly known as
the simultaneous pose and correspondence problem [17].
Knowledge of either point correspondences or rigid transformation trivializes the problem.
1 https://github.com/yewzijian/RPMNet

Inputs
Iteration 1
Iteration 4

…

Iterative Closest Point (ICP) solves the rigid point cloud
registration problem iteratively in two steps: (1) make hard
assignments of spatially closest point correspondences, and
then (2) find the least-squares rigid transformation. The
hard assignments of closest point correspondences based
on spatial distances are sensitive to the initial rigid transformation and noisy/outlier points, which often cause ICP
to converge to wrong local minima. In this paper, we propose the RPM-Net – a less sensitive to initialization and
more robust deep learning-based approach for rigid point
cloud registration. To this end, our network uses the differentiable Sinkhorn layer and annealing to get soft assignments of point correspondences from hybrid features
learned from both spatial coordinates and local geometry.
To further improve registration performance, we introduce
a secondary network to predict optimal annealing parameters. Unlike some existing methods, our RPM-Net handles missing correspondences and point clouds with partial visibility. Experimental results show that our RPM-Net
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to existing
non-deep learning and recent deep learning methods. Our
source code is available at the project website1 .

Estimated soft correspondences

Our result (iteration 5)

RPM Result

Figure 1. Our RPM-Net estimates soft correspondences from hybrid features learned from both spatial coordinates and local geometry of the points, and converges to the correct solution after 5
iterations. In contrast, RPM [12] gets trapped in a local minima.

ICP [3] is widely accepted to be the de facto algorithm
for solving the rigid point cloud registration problem. It
solves for both the point correspondences and rigid transformation by alternating between two steps: (1) assigns each
point from the reference point cloud to its spatially closest
point in the source point cloud, and (2) computes the leastsquares rigid transformation between the correspondences.
Unfortunately, ICP is highly sensitive to initialization and
often converges to wrong local minima. It can also fail in
the presence of noisy/outlier points. This limits ICP to relatively low noise and outlier-free scenarios with good initial
rigid transforms, and precludes its use in applications such
111824

