Learning to Manipulate Individual Objects in an Image
Yanchao Yang∗
UCLA Vision Lab

Yutong Chen†∗
Tsinghua University

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

yanchao.yang@cs.ucla.edu

chen-yt16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We describe a method to train a generative model with
latent factors that are (approximately) independent and localized. This means that perturbing the latent variables
affects only local regions of the synthesized image, corresponding to objects. Unlike other unsupervised generative
models, ours enables object-centric manipulation, without
requiring object-level annotations, or any form of annotation for that matter. The key to our method is the combination of spatial disentanglement, enforced by a Contextual Information Separation loss, and perceptual cycleconsistency, enforced by a loss that penalizes changes in
the image partition in response to perturbations of the latent factors. We test our method’s ability to allow independent control of spatial and semantic factors of variability on
existing datasets, and also introduce two new ones which
highlight the limitations of current methods.1

1. Introduction
Generative models typically aim to capture the natural
statistics while isolating independent factors of variation.
This can be beneficial if such factors correspond to variables of interest in tasks to be instantiated post-hoc, or if
the model is to be used for image synthesis where the user
wants to independently control the outcome. Generative
models learned from large image collections, for instance
variational auto-encoders (VAEs) or generative adversarial
networks (GANs) do isolate independent factors of variation, but those affect the global statistics of the image. We
are interested in spatially-localized factors of variation, so
that manipulation of image statistics can occur at the level
of objects, rather than of the whole image. While one could
learn conditional generative models, this usually requires
annotation of the independent factors. We aim to learn spatially and semantically independent latent factors without
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work is done during the author’s visit at UCLA.
1 Code available at: https://github.com/ChenYutongTHU/Learning-tomanipulate-individual-objects-in-an-image-Implementation

Figure 1. Perturbing the factors learned without knowing objects
affects the synthesized scene globally (middle). Object-centric
generative factors enable changing the color of the pillar from
green (left) to yellow without affecting the other objects (right).

the need for any annotation. We call these object-centric
generative factors.
The existing literature on object-centric generative models is restricted to piece-wise constant or smooth images.
We introduce two variational constraints, one derived from
the Contextual Information Separation (CIS) principle [36],
but extended to multiple objects, and one derived by enforcing perceptual cycle-consistency, which is that the partition
of the image into independently controlled region is stable
with respect to perturbations of the latent factors. We illustrate the characteristics of our model on existing datasets,
and introduce two new datasets of increased complexity.

2. Related Work
There are two approaches to representation learning, task
driven, where the goal is to learn a function of the data that
captures all information relevant to the task and discards
everything else (sufficient invariant) [1], and disentangled,
where the goal is to reconstruct the data while separating the
independent factors of variation [3, 32]. Technically speaking, the latter is a special case of the former, when the task
variable is the data itself, and the independence of latent factor can be framed as the secondary task. However, the literature has largely progressed on separate tracks. An independent taxonomy can be devised based on the level of supervision. While disentangled representations usually refer
to unsupervised learning, task-driven representations can be
unsupervised (if the task is, for instance, prediction, or reconstruction), semi-supervised, or fully supervised. Among
unsupervised representation learning methods, variational
autoencoders (VAE) [24] attempt to extract “meaningful”

6558

