Memory Aggregation Networks for
Efficient Interactive Video Object Segmentation

1

Jiaxu Miao1,2 Yunchao Wei2 Yi Yang2†
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

jiaxu.miao@student.uts.edu.au, {yunchao.wei, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Interactive video object segmentation (iVOS) aims at efficiently harvesting high-quality segmentation masks of the
target object in a video with user interactions. Most previous state-of-the-arts tackle the iVOS with two independent networks for conducting user interaction and temporal propagation, respectively, leading to inefficiencies during the inference stage. In this work, we propose a unified
framework, named Memory Aggregation Networks (MANet), to address the challenging iVOS in a more efficient
way. Our MA-Net integrates the interaction and the propagation operations into a single network, which significantly
promotes the efficiency of iVOS in the scheme of multi-round
interactions. More importantly, we propose a simple yet
effective memory aggregation mechanism to record the informative knowledge from the previous interaction rounds,
improving the robustness in discovering challenging objects
of interest greatly. We conduct extensive experiments on the
validation set of DAVIS Challenge 2018 benchmark. In particular, our MA-Net achieves the J@60 score of 76.1% without any bells and whistles, outperforming the state-of-thearts with more than 2.7%.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims at separating a
foreground object from a video sequence and can benefit many important applications, including video editing,
scene understanding, and self-driving cars. Most existing
VOS approaches can be roughly divided into two settings:
unsupervised (no manual annotation) and semi-supervised
(give the annotation at the first frame). However, these
two settings have their own limitations and are not realistic in practice: 1) unsupervised methods have no guiding
signal for the user to select the object of interest, which
† Corresponding author.
‡ Part of this work was done when Jiaxu Miao was an intern at Baidu
Research.

Frame 58
Frame 70
Interaction 1

Frame 28
Round 1

Abstract

…

…

Round 2

…

…

Interaction 3

Round 3
…

…

Interaction 2
…

…

…

…

User Interaction in Each Round

…

…

…

Temporal Propagation through Frames

Figure 1. Round-based iVOS. The mask of the target object is generated by user annotations at one frame (e.g. green scribbles at
frame 58), and the computed mask is propagated to generate the
masks for the entire video. The user can refine the segmentation
masks by repeatedly providing annotations on the false negative
and false positive areas (e.g. green and red scribbles at frame 28).

is problematic especially for the multiple-object case; 2)
semi-supervised methods need a fully annotated mask of
the first frame, which is tedious to acquire (around 79 seconds per instance) [6]. Furthermore, for both two schemes,
users have no chance to correct those low-quality segments
to meet their requirements.
Interactive video object segmentation (iVOS) overcomes the above-mentioned limitations by providing a userfriendly annotation form, e.g., scribbles. In this scheme,
users can gradually refine the outputs by drawing scribbles on the falsely predicted regions. Previous iVOS methods [29, 25, 1] utilize a rotoscoping procedure [4, 15],
where a user sequentially processes a video frame-byframe. These methods are inefficient due to requiring a lot
of user interactions at each frame.
Recently, Caelles et al. [6] propose a round-based interaction scheme, as shown in Fig. 1. In this setting, users
firstly draw scribbles on the target objects at one selected
frame, and an algorithm is then employed to compute the
segmentation masks for all video frames with temporal

10366

