Seeing the World in a Bag of Chips
Jeong Joon Park

Aleksander Holynski
University of Washington, Seattle

Steven M. Seitz

{jjpark7,holynski,seitz}@cs.washington.edu

(a) Input images

(b) Estimated environment (top), ground truth (bottom)

(c) Zoom-in

Figure 1: From a hand-held RGBD sequence of an object (a), we reconstruct an image of the surrounding environment (b, top) that closely
resembles the real environment (b, bottom), entirely from the specular reflections. Note the reconstruction of fine details (c) such as a
human figure and trees with fall colors through the window. We use the recovered environment for novel view rendering.†

Abstract
We address the dual problems of novel view synthesis and
environment reconstruction from hand-held RGBD sensors.
Our contributions include 1) modeling highly specular objects, 2) modeling inter-reflections and Fresnel effects, and
3) enabling surface light field reconstruction with the same
input needed to reconstruct shape alone. In cases where
scene surface has a strong mirror-like material component,
we generate highly detailed environment images, revealing
room composition, objects, people, buildings, and trees visible through windows. Our approach yields state of the art
view synthesis techniques, operates on low dynamic range
imagery, and is robust to geometric and calibration errors.

1. Introduction
The glint of light off an object reveals much about its
shape and composition – whether it’s wet or dry, rough or
polished, round or flat. Yet, hidden in the pattern of highlights is also an image of the environment, often so distorted
that we don’t even realize it’s there. Remarkably, images of
the shiny bag of chips (Fig. 1) contain sufficient clues to be
able to reconstruct a detailed image of the room, including
the layout of lights, windows, and even objects outside that
are visible through windows.
† Video URL: https://youtu.be/9t_Rx6n1HGA

In their visual microphone work, Davis et al. [13] showed
how sound and even conversations can be reconstructed
from the minute vibrations visible in a bag of chips. Inspired by their work, we show that the same bag of chips
can be used to reconstruct the environment. Instead of high
speed video, however, we operate on RGBD video, as obtained with commodity depth sensors.
Visualizing the environment is closely connected to the
problem of modeling the scene that reflects that environment. We solve both problems; beyond visualizing the
room, we seek to predict how the objects and scene appear from any new viewpoint — i.e., to virtually explore
the scene as if you were there. This view synthesis problem has a large literature in computer vision and graphics,
but several open problems remain. Chief among them are
1) specular surfaces, 2) inter-reflections, and 3) simple capture. In this paper we address all three of these problems,
based on the framework of surface light fields [68].
Our environment reconstructions, which we call specular reflectance maps (SRMs), represent the distant environment map convolved with the object’s specular BRDF. In
cases where the object has strong mirror-like reflections,
this SRM provides sharp, detailed features like the one seen
in Fig. 1. As most scenes are composed of a mixture of materials, each scene has multiple basis SRMs. We therefore
reconstruct a global set of SRMs, together with a weighted

11417

