Decoupled Representation Learning for Skeleton-Based Gesture Recognition
Jianbo Liu†‡ Yongcheng Liu†‡ Ying Wang∗† Véronique Prinet† Shiming Xiang†‡ Chunhong Pan†
†

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Email: {jianbo.liu, yongcheng.liu, ywang, prinet, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Skeleton-based gesture recognition is very challenging,
as the high-level information in gesture is expressed by a sequence of complexly composite motions. Previous works often learn all the motions with a single model. In this paper,
we propose to decouple the gesture into hand posture variations and hand movements, which are then modeled separately. For the former, the skeleton sequence is embedded
into a 3D hand posture evolution volume (HPEV) to represent fine-grained posture variations. For the latter, the shifts
of hand center and fingertips are arranged as a 2D hand
movement map (HMM) to capture holistic movements. To
learn from the two inhomogeneous representations for gesture recognition, we propose an end-to-end two-stream network. The HPEV stream integrates both spatial layout and
temporal evolution information of hand postures by a dedicated 3D CNN, while the HMM stream develops an efficient
2D CNN to extract hand movement features. Eventually, the
predictions of the two streams are aggregated with high efficiency. Extensive experiments on SHREC’17 Track, DHG14/28 and FPHA datasets demonstrate that our method is
competitive with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Gesture recognition is an attractive research topic due to
its wide range of applications in many fields, e.g. assisted
living, virtual game control and sign language interpretation. Early works for this task are mainly based on RGB
videos or depth sequences. However, both modalities have
the drawback of plausible background changes, which is often harmful to gesture recognition. More recently, hand
skeleton has become a popular modality. Skeleton inherently highlights the key information of hand gestures, whilst
being robust to various illuminations and complex back∗ Corresponding author: Ying Wang


 
  

 
  


 

Figure 1. The motivation of this paper. Dynamic hand gesture can
be decomposed into hand posture variations and hand movements.

grounds. Accordingly, skeleton-based gesture recognition
has drawn much attention in recent years.
Motivated by the remarkable success of deep learning in vision tasks, much effort has focused on applying
CNN [9, 19, 23, 25], RNN [10, 34] and LSTM [22, 25, 30]
to skeleton-based gesture recognition. In these methods,
hand skeletons are usually constructed as a sequence of
joint-coordinate vectors or a pseudo image. More recently,
some authors apply graph convolutional network (GCN) to
analyze hand skeletons [4]. They often embed skeleton sequences into a predefined spatio-temporal graph structure.
These deep learning-based methods represent skeleton sequences in a predefined and fixed structure. Hand gestures
always contain the interactions of different joints. Aggregating the local features of these joints is crucial for hand
gesture recognition. However, the fixed structure for skeletons could be under-effective to capture local features for all
interactive joints, since these joints may be nonadjacent in
the predefined structure. Moreover, most of these methods
work with a single deep model, which may have difficulty
in analyzing the complexly composite hand gestures.
As is shown in Figure 1, a dynamic hand gesture can be
decomposed into hand posture variations and hand movements. Previous deep learning based works aim to learn the

5751

