𝑢

𝑢

𝑣

𝑣

𝑥

𝑑

𝑦

𝑧

DSGN: Deep Stereo Geometry Network for 3D Object Detection
Yilun Chen1 Shu Liu2 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
𝑢

𝑣

{sliu, xiaoyong}@smartmore.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is a challenging task in 3D perception, which serves as a basic component for autonomous
driving and robotics. Due to the great capability of LiDAR
sensors to accurately retrieve 3D information, we witness
fast progress on 3D object detection. Various 3D object detectors were proposed [9, 23, 58, 26, 27, 33, 39, 52, 54] to
exploit LiDAR point cloud representation. The limitation
of LiDAR is on the relatively sparse resolution of data with
several laser beams and on the high price of the devices.
In comparison, video cameras are cheaper and are with
much denser resolutions. The way to compute scene depth
on stereo images is to consider disparity via stereo correspondence estimation. Albeit recently several 3D detectors based on either monocular [36, 7, 6, 30, 48] or stereo
[25, 45, 37, 56] setting push the limit of image-based 3D object detection, the accuracy is still left far behind compared
with the LiDAR-based approaches.

𝑣
Stereo image pair

Projection & Shift

𝑢

Siamese Network

Most state-of-the-art 3D object detectors heavily rely
on LiDAR sensors because there is a large performance
gap between image-based and LiDAR-based methods. It
is caused by the way to form representation for the prediction in 3D scenarios. Our method, called Deep Stereo Geometry Network (DSGN), significantly reduces this gap by
detecting 3D objects on a differentiable volumetric representation – 3D geometric volume, which effectively encodes
3D geometric structure for 3D regular space. With this representation, we learn depth information and semantic cues
simultaneously. For the first time, we provide a simple and
effective one-stage stereo-based 3D detection pipeline that
jointly estimates the depth and detects 3D objects in an endto-end learning manner. Our approach outperforms previous stereo-based 3D detectors (about 10 higher in terms
of AP) and even achieves comparable performance with
several LiDAR-based methods on the KITTI 3D object detection leaderboard. Our code will be (or is) available at
https://github.com/chenyilun95/DSGN .

3D Object Detection

Depth Estimation

Feature pair

𝑢

𝑣

𝑑

Plane-Sweep Volume

3D world space
3D Unprojection

{ylchen, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

𝑥
𝑦

𝑧

3D Geometric Volume

Figure 1. DSGN jointly estimates depth and detects 3D objects
from a stereo image pair. It intermediately generates a planesweep volume and 3D geometric volume to represent 3D structure
in two different 3D space.

Challenges One of the greatest challenges for imagebased approaches is to give appropriate and effective representation for predicting 3D objects. Most recent work
[25, 36, 48, 37, 40, 2] divides this task into two sub ones,
i.e., depth prediction and object detection. Camera projection is a process that maps 3D world into a 2D image. One
3D feature in different object poses causes local appearance
changes, making it hard for a 2D network to extract stable
3D information.
Another line of solutions [45, 56, 47, 30] generate intermediate point cloud followed by a LiDAR-based 3D object
detector. This 3D representation is less effective since the
transformation is non-differentiable and incorporates several independent networks. Besides, the point cloud faces
the challenge of object artifacts [18, 47, 56] that limits the
detection accuracy of the following 3D object detector.
Our Solution In this paper, we propose a stereo-based
end-to-end 3D object detection pipeline (Figure 1) – Deep
Stereo Geometry Network (DSGN), which relies on space
transformation from 2D features to an effective 3D structure, called 3D geometric volume (3DGV).
The insight behind 3DGV lies in the approach to construct the 3D volume that encodes 3D geometry. 3D geometric volume is defined in 3D world space, transformed
from a plane-sweep volume (PSV) [10, 11] constructed in
the camera frustum. The pixel-correspondence constraint
can be well learned in PSV, while 3D features for real-world
112536

