On the General Value of Evidence, and
Bilingual Scene-Text Visual Question Answering
Xinyu Wang1∗ ,
Yuliang Liu1,2∗,
Chunhua Shen1†,
Chun Chet Ng3 ,
Canjie Luo2
2
3
1
Lianwen Jin , Chee Seng Chan , Anton van den Hengel ,
Liangwei Wang4
1

University of Adelaide

2

South China University of Technology

3

University of Malaya

4

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) methods have made
incredible progress, but suffer from a failure to generalize.
This is visible in the fact that they are vulnerable to learning coincidental correlations in the data rather than deeper
relations between image content and ideas expressed in language. We present a dataset that takes a step towards addressing this problem in that it contains questions expressed
in two languages, and an evaluation process that co-opts a
well understood image-based metric to reflect the method’s
ability to reason. Measuring reasoning directly encourages
generalization by penalizing answers that are coincidentally correct. The dataset reflects the scene-text version of
the VQA problem, and the reasoning evaluation can be seen
as a text-based version of a referring expression challenge.
Experiments and analyses are provided that show the value
of the dataset. The dataset is available at www.est-vqa.org.

1. Introduction
The fact that Visual Questions Answering [3] methods
are able to answer natural language questions that relate to
a wide variety of image contents has been an incredible development. The limitations of existing methods, and particularly their tendency to focus on spurious correlations in the
data, have been repeatedly identified (see [1, 7, 10], for example). This is visible in the tendency of methods to answer
questions on the basis of text alone. The answer to ‘How
many’ questions, for instance, is predominantly ‘Two’.
Focusing on coincidental correlations in the data represents a failure to generalize. These correlations are not stable across datasets, meaning that once the test data moves
beyond the distribution of the training set, the correlations
fail to hold, and methods that exploit them fail to work. The
underlying reasoning, in contrast, is stable across datasets.
∗ XW and YL contributed equally. YL’s contribution was made when
visiting The University of Adelaide.
† Corresponding author, e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Q: What is the cheapest fruit?
Evidence-Based VQA
Evidence

POMMS

Conventional VQA
GRAPES

??

?

Figure 1. By requiring that vision-and-language methods provide
evidence for their decisions encourages the development of approaches that depend on reasoning, and thus that are better able to
generalize to new situations. It also helps to build up confidence
in the provided answer.

Encouraging VQA methods to reason about the image content is thus critical to achieving methods that generalize.
One of the underlying problems with encouraging VQA
methods to generalize has been that it is impossible to tell
whether a method arrived at the right answer through for
the right reasons. An answer is equally correct whether it
results from analysis of the underlying reasoning or through
exploiting a coincidental correlation in the data. A series
of works have developed more sophisticated measures of
performance for vision and language problems [2, 7, 36],
and this work falls in this category. What distinguishes this
approach is that it uses image-based grounding to encourage
generalization, despite the fact that it is not actually required
to achieve the desired task.
We propose here an approach to measure VQA performance that encourages generalization by demanding that
the algorithm justifies its reasoning (see Fig. 1). Previous
methods have applied the same rational, but suffered be-

10126

