Spherical Space Domain Adaptation with Robust Pseudo-label Loss
Xiang Gu, Jian Sun ( ) and Zongben Xu
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
xianggu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {jiansun, zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial domain adaptation (DA) has been an effective approach for learning domain-invariant features by adversarial training. In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial DA approach completely defined in spherical feature space, in which we define spherical classifier for label prediction and spherical domain discriminator for discriminating domain labels. To utilize pseudo-label robustly,
we develop a robust pseudo-label loss in the spherical feature space, which weights the importance of estimated labels of target data by posterior probability of correct labeling, modeled by Gaussian-uniform mixture model in spherical feature space. Extensive experiments show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art results, and also confirm
effectiveness of spherical classifier, spherical discriminator
and spherical robust pseudo-label loss.

1. Introduction
Deep learning approach has achieved great success in visual recognition [18, 22, 50]. Unfortunately, these performance improvements rely on massive labeled training data,
and data labeling is expensive and time consuming. Domain adaption [37] alleviates the dependency on large scale
labeled training dataset by transferring knowledge from relevant source domain with rich labeled data. Distribution
discrepancy between source and target domains is a major
obstacle in adapting predictive models across domains.
Domain adaptation mainly attempts to reduce domain
shift between source and target domains [10, 37]. Previous shallow domain adaptation methods either learn invariant feature representation or estimate instance importance of source domain data [16, 20, 36] for learning predictive model for target domain. Recently, deep learning
approach has been a dominant approach in domain adaptation [13, 30, 53]. These methods take advantage of deep network for learning domain invariant features by aligning distributions [21, 31, 33, 38, 56, 58, 62]. Adversarial domain
adaptation [13, 14, 31, 33, 57, 58, 62] matches feature distributions of source and target domains by domain discrimina-

tor for distinguishing source and target domains, and learns
feature extractor to fool the discriminator by adversarial
training. Pseudo-labels of target domain, i.e., the estimated
labels of target domain data, have shown to be useful for
domain adaptation [4, 5, 47, 58, 61]. Since pseudo-labels
unavoidably contain noises, how to select correctly labeled
data is crucial when using pseudo-labels to guide domain
adaptation task.
Though they have shown promising performance in real
applications, current domain adaption methods still face
great challenges, including the design of effective invariant
feature space, and utilization of the pseudo-labels in a more
robust way, etc. In this work, we tackle these two challenges
in a unified model by proposing a spherical space domain
adaptation method. Our method performs DA completely in
spherical space by defining spherical classifier and discriminator and defining a robust pseudo-label loss in spherical
feature space based on Gaussian-uniform mixture model.
The proposed techniques can be embedded into other DA
methods as orthogonal tools. This proposed domain adaption approach is dubbed as robust spherical domain adaption (RSDA). Our novelties are summarized as follows.
Firstly, since spherical (L2 normalized) features have
shown improved performance in recognition and domain
adaptation [29, 42, 46, 55, 59], we further extend this idea
and design a novel spherical space DA approach with all
DA operations defined in spherical feature space, fully taking advantages of the intrinsic structures of spherical space.
To achieve that goal, we propose spherical discriminator
and spherical classifier for adversarial DA performed in the
spherical feature space. Both spherical discriminator and
classifier are constructed based on spherical perceptron layers and spherical logistic regression layer defined in Sect. 5.
Secondly, we propose a novel robust pseudo-label loss
in spherical feature space for utilizing target pseudo-labels
more robustly. We measure the correctness of pseudo-label
of target data based on feature distance to corresponding
class center in spherical feature space. We treat the wrongly
labeled data as outliers, then model the conditional probability of outlier / inlier based on Gaussian-uniform mixture
model, which is defined in Sect. 4. Experiments will justify

9101

