Bundle Pooling for Polygonal Architecture Segmentation Problem
Huayi Zeng1
Kevin Joseph2
1
Washington University in St. Louis

Adam Vest3
Yasutaka Furukawa2
2
3
Simon Fraser University
Nike

Figure 1. Complex house structures can be parsed as a combination of simple primitives. Our system turns a photograph of a residential
house (top left) into an assembly of simple polygonal primitives (top middle), while a standard detection system produces only axis-aligned
bounding boxes (bottom middle). The polygonal representation enables applications such as photo-realistic virtual remodeling (bottom
left), surface normal estimation (top right) or pop-up 3D billboards (bottom right).

Abstract
This paper introduces a polygonal architecture segmentation problem, proposes bundle-pooling modules for line
structure reasoning, and demonstrates a virtual remodeling
application that produces production quality results. Given
a photograph of a house with a few vanishing point candidates, we decompose the house into a set of architectural
components, each of which is represented as a simple geometric primitive. A bundle-pooling module pools convolutional features along a bundle of line segments (e.g., a
family of vanishing lines) and fuses the bundle of features
to determine polygonal boundaries or assign a corresponding vanishing point. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate significant improvements over the existing techniques based on our metric and benchmark dataset.
We will share the code for further research.

1. Introduction
Houses are comprised of architectural components such
as walls, windows, and roofs. Human vision effortlessly
perceives a structure as a combination of simple polygonal
shapes such as triangles, quadrilaterals, or trapezoids (See
Fig. 1). This representation allows for easy human postprocessing as well as virtual remodeling applications such
as replacing wall materials or adding a new window.
Image segmentation has seen breakthroughs in recent
years thanks to the emergence of deep neural networks

(DNNs). A state-of-the-art technique, Mask R-CNN [13],
can detect object instances and produce pixel-wise segmentation masks for each instance. However, it fails to delineate
the boundaries precisely or represent the shape as a compact
polygon, which is critical for high-end graphics applications
such as virtual remodeling [1]. The task of extracting compact polygonal segments is a trivial task for human perception but remains difficult for computer vision.
Towards robust polygonal image segmentation, this paper proposes a new polygonal architecture segmentation
problem. The input is a photograph of a house and a number
of vanishing point candidates. The task is to decompose the
house into architectural components (i.e., a wall, a window,
a door, a garage, or a roof), each of which is represented as
a simple geometric primitive (i.e., a triangle, a quadrilateral,
a pentagon, or a trapezoid).
We tackle the problem by proposing a family of novel
neural modules that analyze a bundle of lines. Specifically,
the paper proposes three bundle pooling (BP) modules, each
of which (1) considers a bundle of line segments; 2) pools
convolutional features along the bundle; and (3) fuses the
bundle of pooled features to determine polygonal boundaries or assign a corresponding vanishing point. For instance, given a bounding box containing a window, we consider a bundle of vanishing lines for each vanishing point
and infer its polygonal boundaries.
We introduce a new dataset including the ground-truth
architectural polygon segmentation, and a metric for evaluations. The qualitative and quantitative evaluations demon1750

