Neural Cages for Detail-Preserving 3D Deformations
Wang Yifan1

Noam Aigerman2
1

Vladimir G. Kim2

ETH Zurich

2

Siddhartha Chaudhuri 2,3

Adobe Research

Abstract
We propose a novel learnable representation for detailpreserving shape deformation. The goal of our method is
to warp a source shape to match the general structure of
a target shape, while preserving the surface details of the
source. Our method extends a traditional cage-based deformation technique, where the source shape is enclosed by
a coarse control mesh termed cage, and translations prescribed on the cage vertices are interpolated to any point
on the source mesh via special weight functions. The use of
this sparse cage scaffolding enables preserving surface details regardless of the shape’s intricacy and topology. Our
key contribution is a novel neural network architecture for
predicting deformations by controlling the cage. We incorporate a differentiable cage-based deformation module in
our architecture, and train our network end-to-end. Our
method can be trained with common collections of 3D models in an unsupervised fashion, without any cage-specific
annotations. We demonstrate the utility of our method for
synthesizing shape variations and deformation transfer.

1. Introduction
Deformation of 3D shapes is a ubiquitous task, arising
in many vision and graphics applications. For instance, deformation transfer [25] aims to infer a deformation from
a given pair of shapes and apply the same deformation to
a novel target shape. As another example, a small dataset
of shapes from a given category (e.g., chairs) can be augmented by synthesizing variations, where each variation deforms a randomly chosen shape to the proportions and morphology of another while preserving local detail [29, 32].
Deformation techniques usually need to simultaneously
optimize at least two competing objectives. The first is
alignment with the target, e.g., matching limb positions
while deforming a human shape to another human in a different pose. The second objective is adhering to quality
metrics, such as distortion minimization and preservation of
local geometric features, such as the human’s face. These
two objectives are contradictory, since a perfect alignment
of a deformed source shape to the target precludes preserving the original details of the source.

Sources

Training
domain
(SMPL)

3

Olga Sorkine-Hornung1

IIT Bombay

Targets

Targets

Sparse
correspondences
for a neutral pose

Figure 1: Applications of our neural cage-based deformation method.
Top: Complex source chairs (brown) deformed (blue) to match target
chairs (green), while accurately preserving detail and style with nonhomogeneous changes that adapt different regions differently. No correspondences are used at any stage. Bottom: A cage-based deformation network trained on many posed humans (SMPL) can transfer various poses of
novel targets (SCAPE, skeleton, X-Bot, in green) to a very dissimilar robot
of which only a single neutral pose is available. A few matching landmarks
between the robot and a neutral SMPL human are required. Dense correspondences between SMPL humans are used only during training.

Due to these conflicting objectives, optimization techniques [17] require parameter tuning to balance the two
competing terms, and are heavily reliant on an inferred or
manually supplied correspondence between the source and
the target. These parameters vary based on the shape category, representation, and the level of dissimilarity between
the source and the target.
To address these limitations, recent techniques train a
neural network to predict shape deformations. This is
achieved by predicting new positions for all vertices of a
template shape [26] or by implicitly representing the deformation as a mapping of all points in 3D, which is then used
to map each vertex of a source shape [6, 29]. Examples of
the results of some of these methods can be seen in Fig 4,
which demonstrates the limitations of such approaches: the
predicted deformations corrupt features and exhibit distortion, especially in areas with thin structures, fine details or
1 75

