CIAGAN: Conditional Identity Anonymization Generative Adversarial
Networks
Maxim Maximov*
Technical University Munich

Ismail Elezi*
University of Venice

Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University Munich

Figure 1: Given a face image, our network anonymizes the face based on the desired identity. In the figure, it can be seen the
variability of the generated faces, controlled from a given label. In each triplet, the first image is the real image, while the
other two images are different anonymized versions of the real image.

Abstract
The unprecedented increase in the usage of computer vision technology in society goes hand in hand with an increased concern in data privacy. In many real-world scenarios like people tracking or action recognition, it is important to be able to process the data while taking careful consideration in protecting people’s identity. We propose and develop CIAGAN, a model for image and video
anonymization based on conditional generative adversarial networks. Our model is able to remove the identifying
characteristics of faces and bodies while producing highquality images and videos that can be used for any computer
vision task, such as detection or tracking. Unlike previous methods, we have full control over the de-identification
(anonymization) procedure, ensuring both anonymization
as well as diversity. We compare our method to several
baselines and achieve state-of-the-art results. To facilitate
further research, we make available the code and the models at https://github.com/dvl-tum/ciagan.

“All human beings have three lives: public, private,
and secret.”
Gabriel Garcı́a Márquez, [24]
* Authors contributed equally.

1. Introduction
The ubiquitous usage of computer vision technology in
society implies the automatic processing of large-scale visual data containing, more often than not, personal data.
While we are eager to take advantage of technology for
house monitoring, video conferencing and surveillance, we
are not willing to do so by giving away our personal privacy.
In fact, data privacy is an increasing concern, and entities
such as the European Union have already passed laws such
as the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR)[1], to
guarantee data privacy. For computer vision researchers,
the creation of high-quality datasets which include people is becoming extremely challenging, as every person in
the dataset needs to consent for the usage of his or her
image data. Recently, a popular dataset for person reidentification, the Duke MTMC dataset [10], was taken offline for privacy reasons.
Our key observation is that many computer vision tasks
such as person detection, multiple people tracking, or action recognition, do not need to identify the people on the
videos, they just need to detect them. Classic anonymization techniques, such as face blurring, significantly alter the
image and consequently result in a large detection performance drop.
We propose a model to anonymize (or de-identify) images and videos by removing the identification characteristics of people, while still keeping necessary features to

5447

