BiDet: An Efficient Binarized Object Detector
Ziwei Wang1,2,3 , Ziyi Wu1 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
{wang-zw18, wuzy17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a binarized neural network
learning method called BiDet for efficient object detection. Conventional network binarization methods directly
quantize the weights and activations in one-stage or twostage detectors with constrained representational capacity,
so that the information redundancy in the networks causes
numerous false positives and degrades the performance significantly. On the contrary, our BiDet fully utilizes the representational capacity of the binary neural networks for object detection by redundancy removal, through which the
detection precision is enhanced with alleviated false positives. Specifically, we generalize the information bottleneck
(IB) principle to object detection, where the amount of information in the high-level feature maps is constrained and
the mutual information between the feature maps and object
detection is maximized. Meanwhile, we learn sparse object priors so that the posteriors are concentrated on informative detection prediction with false positive elimination.
Extensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC and COCO
datasets show that our method outperforms the state-of-theart binary neural networks by a sizable margin.1

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN) based object detectors [7, 10, 22, 24, 32] have achieved state-of-the-art performance due to the strong discriminative power and generalization ability. However, the CNN based detection methods require massive computation and storage resources to
achieve ideal performance, which limits their deployment
on mobile devices. Therefore, it is desirable to develop detectors with lightweight architectures and few parameters.
To reduce the complexity of deep neural networks,
∗ Corresponding author
1 Code: https://github.com/ZiweiWangTHU/BiDet.git

Figure 1. An example of the predicted objects with the binarized
SSD detector on PASCAL VOC. (a) and (b) demonstrate the detection results via Xnor-Net and the proposed BiDet, where the false
positives are significantly reduced in our method. (c) and (d) reveal the information plane dynamics for the training set and test set
respectively, where the horizontal axis means the mutual information between the high-level feature map and input and the vertical
axis represents the mutual information between the object and the
feature map. Compared with Xnor-Net, our method removes the
redundant information and fully utilizes the network capacity to
achieve higher performance. (best viewed in color).

several model compression methods have been proposed
including pruning [12, 27, 45], low-rank decomposition
[16, 20, 28], quantization [9, 19, 41], knowledge distillation [3, 40, 42], architecture design [29, 34, 44] and architecture search [37, 43]. Among these methods, network
quantization reduces the bitwidth of the network parameters
and activations for efficient inference. In the extreme cases,
binarizing weights and activations of neural networks decreases the storage and computation cost by 32× and 64×
respectively. However, deploying binary neural networks
with constrained representational capacity in object detection causes numerous false positives due to the information
redundancy in the networks.

2049

