A Stochastic Conditioning Scheme for Diverse Human Motion Prediction∗
Sadegh Aliakbarian†1,2,4 , Fatemeh Sadat Saleh†1,2 , Mathieu Salzmann3 , Lars Petersson1,4 , Stephen Gould1,2
1 Australian National University, 2 ACRV, 3 CVLab, EPFL, 4 Data61, CSIRO
{fname.lname}@anu.edu.au, methieu.salzmann@epfl.ch, lars.petersson@data61.csiro.au

https://mix-and-match.github.io/

Abstract
Human motion prediction, the task of predicting future
3D human poses given a sequence of observed ones, has
been mostly treated as a deterministic problem. However,
human motion is a stochastic process: Given an observed
sequence of poses, multiple future motions are plausible.
Existing approaches to modeling this stochasticity typically
combine a random noise vector with information about the
previous poses. This combination, however, is done in a
deterministic manner, which gives the network the flexibility to learn to ignore the random noise. Alternatively, in
this paper, we propose to stochastically combine the root
of variations with previous pose information, so as to force
the model to take the noise into account. We exploit this
idea for motion prediction by incorporating it into a recurrent encoder-decoder network with a conditional variational autoencoder block that learns to exploit the perturbations. Our experiments on two large-scale motion prediction datasets demonstrate that our model yields high-quality
pose sequences that are much more diverse than those from
state-of-the-art stochastic motion prediction techniques.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction aims to forecast the sequence
of future poses of a person given past observations of such
poses. To achieve this, existing methods typically rely on
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) that encode the person’s
motion [28, 14, 37, 22, 5, 31, 32]. While they predict reasonable motions, RNNs are deterministic models and thus
cannot account for the highly stochastic nature of human
motion; given the beginning of a sequence, multiple, diverse futures are plausible. To correctly model this, it is
therefore critical to develop algorithms that can learn the
multiple modes of human motion, even when presented with
only deterministic training samples.
∗ This research was supported by the Australian Government through
the Australian Research Council (ARC).
† Equal contribution.

Recently, several attempts have been made at modeling
the stochastic nature of human motion [40, 5, 37, 22, 26].
These methods rely on sampling a random vector that is
then combined with an encoding of the observed pose sequence. In essence, this combination is similar to the conditioning of generative networks; the resulting models aim
to generate an output from a random vector while taking
into account additional information about the content.
While standard conditioning strategies, i.e., concatenating the condition to the latent variable, may be effective for
many tasks, as in [41, 21, 11, 10, 4, 23], they are ill-suited
for motion prediction. The reason is the following: In other
tasks, the conditioning variable only provides auxiliary information about the output to produce, such as the fact that
a generated face should be smiling. By contrast, in motion
prediction, it typically contains the core signal to produce
the output, i.e., the information about the previous poses.
We empirically observed that, since the prediction model
is trained using deterministic samples (i.e., one condition
per sample), it can then simply learn to ignore the random
vector and still produce a meaningful output based on the
conditioning variable only. In other words, the model can
ignore the root of variations, and thus essentially become
deterministic. This problem was discussed in [6] in the context of unconditional text generation, and we identified it in
our own motion prediction experiments.
We introduce a simple yet effective approach to counteracting this loss of diversity and thus to generating truly
diverse future pose sequences. At the heart of our approach
lies the idea of Mix-and-Match perturbations: Instead of
combining a noise vector with the conditioning variables
in a deterministic manner, we randomly select and perturb a
subset of these variables. By randomly changing this subset
at every iteration, our strategy prevents training from identifying the root of variations and forces the model to take
it into account in the generation process. Consequently, as
supported by our experiments, our approach produces not
only high-quality predictions but also truly diverse ones.
In short, our contributions are (i) a novel way of imposing diversity into conditional VAEs, called Mix-and-Match

5223

