D3VO: Deep Depth, Deep Pose and Deep Uncertainty
for Monocular Visual Odometry
Nan Yang1,2

Lukas von Stumberg1,2 Rui Wang1,2 Daniel Cremers1,2
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Artisense

Abstract
We propose D3VO as a novel framework for monocular visual odometry that exploits deep networks on three
levels – deep depth, pose and uncertainty estimation. We
first propose a novel self-supervised monocular depth estimation network trained on stereo videos without any external supervision. In particular, it aligns the training image pairs into similar lighting condition with predictive
brightness transformation parameters. Besides, we model
the photometric uncertainties of pixels on the input images,
which improves the depth estimation accuracy and provides
a learned weighting function for the photometric residuals in direct (feature-less) visual odometry. Evaluation results show that the proposed network outperforms state-ofthe-art self-supervised depth estimation networks. D3VO
tightly incorporates the predicted depth, pose and uncertainty into a direct visual odometry method to boost both
the front-end tracking as well as the back-end non-linear
optimization. We evaluate D3VO in terms of monocular visual odometry on both the KITTI odometry benchmark and
the EuRoC MAV dataset. The results show that D3VO outperforms state-of-the-art traditional monocular VO methods by a large margin. It also achieves comparable results to state-of-the-art stereo/LiDAR odometry on KITTI
and to the state-of-the-art visual-inertial odometry on EuRoC MAV, while using only a single camera.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has swept most areas of computer vision
– not only high-level tasks like object classification, detection and segmentation [30, 39, 58], but also low-level ones
such as optical flow estimation [12, 65] and interest point
detection and description [11, 13, 79]. Yet, in the field of
Simultaneously Localization And Mapping (SLAM) or Visual Odometry (VO) which estimates the relative camera
poses from image sequences, traditional geometric-based
approaches [16, 17, 53] still dominate the field. While
monocular methods [16,52] have the advantage of low hardware cost and less calibration effort, they cannot achieve

Front-end
Tracking
Back-end
Non-linear opt.
EuRoC MAV V2_03_difficult

Figure 1: We propose D3VO – a novel monocular visual odometry (VO) framework which exploits deep neural networks on three
levels: Deep depth (D), Deep pose (Ttt−1 ) and Deep uncertainty
(Σ) estimation. D3VO integrates the three estimations tightly into
both the front-end tracking and the back-end non-linear optimization of a sparse direct odometry framework [16].

competitive performance compared to stereo [53, 74] or
visual-inertial odometry (VIO) [44, 54, 56, 72], due to the
scale drift [62, 77] and low robustness. Recently, there have
been many efforts to address this by leveraging deep neural networks [48, 68, 80, 83]. It has been shown that with
deep monocular depth estimation networks [26, 27, 43, 78],
the performance of monocular VO is boosted, since deep
networks are able to estimate depth maps with consistent
metric scale by learning a-priori knowledge from a large
amount of data [42].
In this way, however, deep neural networks are only
used to a limited degree. Recent advances of self- and unsupervised monocular depth estimation networks [26, 86]
show that the poses of the adjacent monocular frames can
be predicted together with the depth. Since the pose estimation from deep neural networks shows high robustness,
one question arises: Can the deep-predicted poses be employed to boost traditional VO? On the other hand, since
11281

