CycleISP: Real Image Restoration via Improved Data Synthesis
Syed Waqas Zamir1 Aditya Arora1 Salman Khan1 Munawar Hayat1
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1 Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3 Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
2
University of California, Merced 3 Google Research

Abstract
The availability of large-scale datasets has helped unleash the true potential of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, for the single-image denoising
problem, capturing a real dataset is an unacceptably expensive and cumbersome procedure. Consequently, image denoising algorithms are mostly developed and evaluated on synthetic data that is usually generated with a
widespread assumption of additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN). While the CNNs achieve impressive results on
these synthetic datasets, they do not perform well when applied on real camera images, as reported in recent benchmark datasets. This is mainly because the AWGN is not adequate for modeling the real camera noise which is signaldependent and heavily transformed by the camera imaging
pipeline. In this paper, we present a framework that models camera imaging pipeline in forward and reverse directions. It allows us to produce any number of realistic image pairs for denoising both in RAW and sRGB spaces. By
training a new image denoising network on realistic synthetic data, we achieve the state-of-the-art performance on
real camera benchmark datasets. The parameters in our
model are ∼5 times lesser than the previous best method
for RAW denoising. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
proposed framework generalizes beyond image denoising
problem e.g., for color matching in stereoscopic cinema.
The source code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/swz30/CycleISP.

1. Introduction
High-level computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection and segmentation have witnessed
significant progress due to deep CNNs [33]. The major
driving force behind the success of CNNs is the availability of large-scale datasets [17, 38], containing hundreds of
thousands of annotated images. However, for low-level vision problems (image denoising, super-resolution, deblurring, etc.), collecting even small datasets is extremely challenging and non-trivial. For instance, the typical procedure
to acquire noisy paired data is to take multiple noisy images

(a) Noisy Input
PSNR(RAW) / PSNR(sRGB)

(b) N3NET [45]
38.24 dB / 32.42 dB

(c) UPI [7]
(d) Ours
37.37 dB / 35.49 dB
40.44 dB / 36.16 dB
Figure 1: Denoising a real camera image from DND dataset
[44]. Our model is effective in removing real noise, especially the low-frequency chroma and defective pixel noise.
of the same scene and generate clean ground-truth image by
pixel-wise averaging. In practice, spatial pixels misalignment, color and brightness mismatch is inevitable due to
changes in lighting conditions and camera/object motion.
Moreover, this expensive and cumbersome exercise of acquiring image pairs needs to be repeated with different camera sensors, as they exhibit different noise characteristics.
Consequently, single image denoising is mostly per-

2696

