TetraTSDF: 3D human reconstruction from a single image with a tetrahedral
outer shell
Hayato Onizuka
Kyushu University

Zehra Hayırcı
Technical University of Munich

Diego Thomas
Kyushu University

mound028810@gmail.com

zehrahayirci@gmail.com

thomas@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Akihiro Sugimoto
National Institute of Informatics

Hideaki Uchiyama
Kyushu University

Rin-ichiro Taniguchi
Kyushu University

sugimoto@nii.ac.jp

uchiyama@limu.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

rin@kyudai.jp

ahedralize

Figure 1: We present a tetrahedral volumetric representation of the human body and a method called TetraTSDF that is able
to retrieve the detailed 3D shape of a person wearing loose clothes from a single 2D image.

Abstract
Recovering the 3D shape of a person from its 2D appearance is ill-posed due to ambiguities. Nevertheless, with
the help of convolutional neural networks (CNN) and prior
knowledge on the 3D human body, it is possible to overcome such ambiguities to recover detailed 3D shapes of human bodies from single images. Current solutions, however, fail to reconstruct all the details of a person wearing loose clothes. This is because of either (a) huge memory requirement that cannot be maintained even on modern
GPUs or (b) the compact 3D representation that cannot encode all the details. In this paper, we propose the tetrahedral outer shell volumetric truncated signed distance function (TetraTSDF) model for the human body, and its corresponding part connection network (PCN) for 3D human
body shape regression. Our proposed model is compact,
dense, accurate, and yet well suited for CNN-based regression task. Our proposed PCN allows us to learn the distribution of the TSDF in the tetrahedral volume from a single image in an end-to-end manner. Results show that our
proposed method allows to reconstruct detailed shapes of
humans wearing loose clothes from single RGB images.

1. Introduction
Detailed 3D shapes of the human body reveal personal
characteristics that cannot be captured with standard 2D
pictures. Such information is crucial for many applications
in the entertainment industry (3D video), business (virtual
try-on) or medical use (self-awareness or rehabilitation).
The first systems that built 3D models of the human body
were designed to work in controlled settings using laser
scanners, multi-view calibrated camera arrays or markers.
These systems were hard to set up, not affordable, and offering limited application areas.
In the last decade, consumer-grade depth cameras have
been successfully used to build 3D models of the human
body [45]. However, high quality depth cameras are still not
available to a large part of the consumers (most of smartphones are still not equipped with depth cameras). Moreover, consumer-grade depth cameras do not work well in
outdoor environments. As a consequence, methods that can
efficiently reconstruct detailed 3D human shapes in unconstrained environments are needed. In this work, we focus
on the task of detailed 3D human body reconstruction in a
single shot with a standard RGB camera.
In the literature, there are two strategies to generate a 3D

6011

