From Image Collections to Point Clouds
with Self-supervised Shape and Pose Networks
K L Navaneet1

1

Ansu Mathew1

Shashank Kashyap1

Varun Jampani3

R. Venkatesh Babu1

Indian Institute of Science

2

Wei-Chih Hung2

University of California, Merced

3

Google Research

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D models from 2D images is one of the
fundamental problems in computer vision. In this work,
we propose a deep learning technique for 3D object reconstruction from a single image. Contrary to recent works that
either use 3D supervision or multi-view supervision, we use
only single view images with no pose information during
training as well. This makes our approach more practical requiring only an image collection of an object category
and the corresponding silhouettes. We learn both 3D point
cloud reconstruction and pose estimation networks in a selfsupervised manner, making use of differentiable point cloud
renderer to train with 2D supervision. A key novelty of the
proposed technique is to impose 3D geometric reasoning
into predicted 3D point clouds by rotating them with randomly sampled poses and then enforcing cycle consistency
on both 3D reconstructions and poses. In addition, using
single-view supervision allows us to do test-time optimization on a given test image. Experiments on the synthetic
ShapeNet and real-world Pix3D datasets demonstrate that
our approach, despite using less supervision, can achieve
competitive performance compared to pose-supervised and
multi-view supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
3D object reconstruction is a long standing problem in
the field of computer vision. With the success of deep learning based approaches, the task of single image based 3D object reconstruction has received significant attention in the
recent years. The problem has several applications such as
view synthesis and grasping and manipulation of objects.
Early works [4, 2, 3] on single image based 3D reconstruction utilize full 3D supervision in the form of 3D voxels, meshes or point clouds. However, such approaches require large amounts of 3D data for training, which is hard

Figure 1. Single-image 3D Reconstructions. Input image and
corresponding projection from reconstructed 3D point clouds. We
reconstruct the 3D output from a single input image using a completely self-supervised approach.

and expensive to obtain. Several recent works [23, 21] have
focused on utilizing multi-view 2D supervision in the form
of color images and object silhouettes as an effective alternative training protocol. A key component in these techniques is the differentiable rendering module that enables
the use of 2D observations as supervision using reprojection consistency based losses. However, most of these approaches require multiple 2D view of the same 3D model
along with the associated camera pose information in the
training stage. This is a major limitation in applying these
techniques in a practical setting where such supervisory
data is difficult to obtain.
In this work, we set out to tackle a more challenging
problem of learning 3D object reconstructions from image
and corresponding silhouette collections. Given a collection
of images and corresponding object silhouettes belonging
to the same object category such as car, with just a single
view from each object instance and no ground truth camera
pose information, our goal is to learn 3D object reconstructions (Fig. 1). The proposed approach is practically useful
and enables us to make effective use of the large amounts
of 2D training data for learning 3D reconstructions. Since
it is possible to easily obtain object silhouettes in the absence of ground truth masks, here we make the reasonable
assumption that the image collection contains corresponding silhouettes. A key challenge in our training setting is to
simultaneously learn both camera pose estimation and 3D
11132

