Extremely Dense Point Correspondences using a Learned Feature Descriptor
Xingtong Liu1 , Yiping Zheng1 , Benjamin Killeen1 , Masaru Ishii2 , Gregory D. Hager1 , Russell H.
Taylor1 , and Mathias Unberath1
1

2

Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
{xingtongliu, unberath}@jhu.edu

Abstract
High-quality 3D reconstructions from endoscopy video
play an important role in many clinical applications, including surgical navigation where they enable direct videoCT registration. While many methods exist for general
multi-view 3D reconstruction, these methods often fail to
deliver satisfactory performance on endoscopic video. Part
of the reason is that local descriptors that establish pairwise point correspondences, and thus drive reconstruction,
struggle when confronted with the texture-scarce surface of
anatomy. Learning-based dense descriptors usually have
larger receptive fields enabling the encoding of global information, which can be used to disambiguate matches. In
this work, we present an effective self-supervised training
scheme and novel loss design for dense descriptor learning. In direct comparison to recent local and dense descriptors on an in-house sinus endoscopy dataset, we demonstrate that our proposed dense descriptor can generalize
to unseen patients and scopes, thereby largely improving
the performance of Structure from Motion (SfM) in terms
of model density and completeness. We also evaluate our
method on a public dense optical flow dataset and a smallscale SfM public dataset to further demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of our method. The source code is
available at https://github.com/lppllppl920/
DenseDescriptorLearning-Pytorch.

1. Introduction
Background. In computer vision, correspondence estimation aims to find a match between 2D points in image
space and corresponding 3D locations. Many potential applications rely on this fundamental task, such as Structure
from Motion (SfM), Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), image retrieval, and image-based localiza-

tion. In particular, SfM and SLAM have been shown to
be effective for endoscopy-based surgical navigation [20],
video-CT registration [15], and lesion localization [40].
These successes rely on the fact that SfM and SLAM estimate a sparse 3D structure of the observed scene as well
as the camera’s trajectory from unlabeled video, simultaneously.
The advantages of SLAM and SfM are complementary.
In applications that require real-time estimation, e.g. surgical navigation, SLAM provides a computationally efficient
framework for correspondence estimation. Robust camera
tracking requires a dense 3D reconstruction estimated from
previous frames, but computational constraints usually limit
SLAM to local optimization. This often leads to drifting
errors, especially when the trajectory loop is not evident.
On the other hand, SfM prioritizes high density and accuracy for the sparse 3D structure. This is due to the timeconsuming global optimization used in the bundle adjustment, which limits SfM to applications where offline estimation is acceptable.
In video-CT registration, a markerless approach relies on
correspondence estimation to provide a sparse reconstruction and the camera trajectory from the video. The reconstruction is then registered to the CT surface model with a
registration algorithm [32]. This requires SfM since it relies
on a dense and accurate 3D reconstruction. The accuracy of
the estimated camera trajectory is also crucial so that the
camera pose of each video frame aligns with the CT surface model. However, when estimating camera trajectory
from endoscopic video, typical SfM or SLAM pipeline fails
to produce a high-quality reconstruction or accurate camera trajectory. Recent work aims to mitigate this shortcoming through procedural changes in the video capture, which
we discuss below. In this work, we focus on developing a
more effective feature descriptor, which is used in the feature extraction and matching module of the pipeline, to substantially increase the density of extracted correspondences
14847

