Cross-Modal Cross-Domain Moment Alignment Network for Person Search
Ya Jing,1,3 Wei Wang,1,3∗Liang Wang,1,2,3 Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
ya.jing@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {wangwei, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Text-based person search has drawn increasing attention
due to its wide applications in video surveillance. However, most of the existing models depend heavily on paired
image-text data, which is very expensive to acquire. Moreover, they always face huge performance drop when directly
exploiting them to new domains. To overcome this problem, we make the first attempt to adapt the model to new
target domains in the absence of pairwise labels, which
combines the challenges from both cross-modal (text-based)
person search and cross-domain person search. Specially,
we propose a moment alignment network (MAN) to solve
the cross-modal cross-domain person search task in this paper. The idea is to learn three effective moment alignments
including domain alignment (DA), cross-modal alignment (CA) and exemplar alignment (EA), which together can
learn domain-invariant and semantic aligned cross-modal
representations to improve model generalization. Extensive
experiments are conducted on CUHK Person Description
dataset (CUHK-PEDES) and Richly Annotated Pedestrian
dataset (RAP). Experimental results show that our proposed
model achieves the state-of-the-art performances on five
transfer tasks.

1. Introduction
Person search is a fundamental task in video surveillance
and has gained great attention in recent years due to its wide
applications. Existing methods of person search mainly focus on image-based person search also called person reidentification (Person Re-ID) [36], which aims to predict
whether two images from different cameras belong to the
same person. Great successes have been achieved with the
development of deep neural networks [9].

Figure 1. Our proposed (d) cross-modal cross-domain text-based
person image search combines the challenges from both (b) crossdomain image-based person search and (c) cross-modal text-based
person image search.

However, most of the person Re-ID models are trained
in a supervised learning manner based on manually labeled
pairwise datasets, which are expensive or impossible to collect in practice. This limits the applications where only unlabeled data is available. A feasible method is to transfer the
learned models in labeled source domain to a new unlabeled
target domain, which is called cross-domain person Re-ID
[27] as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Nevertheless, due to the dataset
bias, it is still difficult to generalize the model trained on
labeled dataset to an unlabeled dataset. As a result, how
to relieve the domain shift becomes increasingly important.
To address this issue, several attempts have been proposed
recently. They aim to learn a discriminative representation
for target set with labeled source dataset and unlabeled target dataset. A common practice [27, 34] is to transform the
source image into target domain style and thus utilizes the
supervised learning.
Moreover, person Re-ID needs at least one image of

∗ Corresponding Author: Wei Wang

110678

