Improving Convolutional Networks with Self-Calibrated Convolutions
Jiang-Jiang Liu1∗

Qibin Hou2∗
Ming-Ming Cheng1
Changhu Wang3
1
2
3
CS, Nankai University
NUS
ByteDance AI Lab

Jiashi Feng2

https://mmcheng.net/scconv/

Abstract
Recent advances on CNNs are mostly devoted to designing more complex architectures to enhance their representation learning capacity. In this paper, we consider improving the basic convolutional feature transformation process
of CNNs without tuning the model architectures. To this
end, we present a novel self-calibrated convolution that explicitly expands fields-of-view of each convolutional layer
through internal communications and hence enriches the
output features. In particular, unlike the standard convolutions that fuse spatial and channel-wise information using
small kernels (e.g., 3 × 3), our self-calibrated convolution
adaptively builds long-range spatial and inter-channel dependencies around each spatial location through a novel
self-calibration operation. Thus, it can help CNNs generate
more discriminative representations by explicitly incorporating richer information. Our self-calibrated convolution
design is simple and generic, and can be easily applied to
augment standard convolutional layers without introducing
extra parameters and complexity. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that when applying our self-calibrated convolution into different backbones, the baseline models can be
significantly improved in a variety of vision tasks, including image recognition, object detection, instance segmentation, and keypoint detection, with no need to change network architectures. We hope this work could provide future
research with a promising way of designing novel convolutional feature transformation for improving convolutional
networks. Code is available on the project page.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks trained on large-scale image classification datasets (e.g., ImageNet [30]) are usually adopted
as backbones to extract strong representative features for
down-stream tasks, such as object detection [23, 29, 2, 8],
segmentation [45, 11], and human keypoint detection [11,
39]. A good classification network often has strong feature
∗ Authors contributed equally.

ResNet-50

ResNeXt-50

SE-ResNet-50

Ours

Figure 1. Visualizations of feature activation maps learned by different networks through Grad-CAM [31]. All the networks are
trained on ImageNet [30]. Our results are obtained from ResNet50 with the proposed self-calibrated convolution. From the activation maps, one can observe residual networks [12, 40] with
conventional (grouped) convolutions and even SE blocks [16] fail
to capture the whole discriminative regions, due to limited receptive fields of their convolution layers. In contrast, calibratedconvolutions help our model well capture the whole discriminative
regions.

transformation capability and therefore provides powerful
representations to benefit down-stream tasks [20, 10, 27].
Hence, it is highly desired to enhance the feature transformation capability of convolutional networks.
In the literature, an effective way to generate rich representations is using powerful hand-designed network architectures, such as residual networks (ResNets) [12] as
well as their diverse variants [40, 43, 34, 7] or designing networks based on AutoML techniques [47, 26]. Recently, some methods attempt to do so by incorporating
either attention mechanisms [38, 48, 16, 15] or non-local
blocks [37, 3] into mature networks to model the interdependencies among spatial locations or channels or both.
The common idea behind the above methods is focused on
adjusting the network architectures for producing rich fea-

10096

