Cross-domain Correspondence Learning for Exemplar-based Image Translation
Pan Zhang1 ∗, Bo Zhang2 , Dong Chen2 , Lu Yuan3 , Fang Wen2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Cloud+AI

1. Introduction
Conditional image synthesis aims to generate photorealistic images based on certain input data [18, 45, 52, 6].
We are interested in a specific form of conditional image
synthesis, which converts a semantic segmentation mask,
an edge map, and pose keypoints to a photo-realistic image,
given an exemplar image, as shown in Figure 1. We refer
to this form as exemplar-based image translation. It allows
more flexible control for multi-modal generation according
to a user-given exemplar.
Recent methods directly learn the mapping from a semantic segmentation mask to an exemplar image using neural networks [17, 38, 34, 44]. Most of these methods encode the style of the exemplar into a latent style vector, from
which the network synthesizes images with the desired style
similar to the examplar. However, the style code only characterizes the global style of the exemplar, regardless of spa∗ Author did this work during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

Exemplar

Input

Exemplar

Input
Input

We present a general framework for exemplar-based image translation, which synthesizes a photo-realistic image
from the input in a distinct domain (e.g., semantic segmentation mask, or edge map, or pose keypoints), given an exemplar image. The output has the style (e.g., color, texture)
in consistency with the semantically corresponding objects
in the exemplar. We propose to jointly learn the crossdomain correspondence and the image translation, where
both tasks facilitate each other and thus can be learned
with weak supervision. The images from distinct domains
are first aligned to an intermediate domain where dense
correspondence is established. Then, the network synthesizes images based on the appearance of semantically corresponding patches in the exemplar. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach in several image translation
tasks. Our method is superior to state-of-the-art methods
in terms of image quality significantly, with the image style
faithful to the exemplar with semantic consistency. Moreover, we show the utility of our method for several applications.

Exemplar

Abstract

Figure 1: Exemplar-based image synthesis. Given the exemplar images (1st row), our network translates the inputs,
in the form of segmentation mask, edge and pose, to photorealistic images (2nd row). Please refer to supplementary
material for more results.

tial relevant information. Thus, it causes some local style
“wash away” in the ultimate image.
To address this issue, the cross-domain correspondence
between the input and the exemplar has to be established
before image translation. As an extension of Image Analogies [14], Deep Analogy [27] attempts to find a dense
semantically-meaningful correspondence between the image pair. It leverages deep features of VGG pretrained on

5143

