Learning Weighted Submanifolds with Variational Autoencoders and
Riemannian Variational Autoencoders
Nina Miolane
Stanford University

Susan Holmes
Stanford University

nmiolane@stanford.edu

susan@stat.stanford.edu

Abstract

Manifold-valued data naturally arises in medical imaging. In cognitive neuroscience, for instance, brain connectomes base the analysis of coactivation patterns between different brain regions on the analysis of the correlations of their functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) time series – an object thus constrained by construction to belong to the manifold of symmetric positive definite matrices. One of the challenges that naturally arises
in these studies consists of finding a lower-dimensional
subspace for representing such manifold-valued and typically high-dimensional data. Traditional techniques, like
principal component analysis, are ill-adapted to tackle
non-Euclidean spaces and may fail to achieve a lowerdimensional representation of the data – thus potentially
pointing to the absence of lower-dimensional representation of the data. However, these techniques are restricted in
that: (i) they do not leverage the assumption that the connectomes belong on a pre-specified manifold, therefore discarding information; (ii) they can only fit a linear subspace
to the data. In this paper, we are interested in variants to
learn potentially highly curved submanifolds of manifoldvalued data. Motivated by the brain connectomes example,
we investigate a latent variable generative model, which has
the added benefit of providing us with uncertainty estimates
– a crucial quantity in the medical applications we are considering. While latent variable models have been proposed
to learn linear and nonlinear spaces for Euclidean data,
or geodesic subspaces for manifold data, no intrinsic latent
variable model exists to learn nongeodesic subspaces for
manifold data. This paper fills this gap and formulates a
Riemannian variational autoencoder with an intrinsic generative model of manifold-valued data. We evaluate its performances on synthetic and real datasets by introducing the
formalism of weighted Riemannian submanifolds.

1. Introduction
Representation learning aims to transform data x into
a lower-dimensional variable z designed to be more efficient for any downstream machine learning task, such as
exploratory analysis of clustering, among others. In this
paper, we focus on representation learning for manifoldvalued data that naturally arise in medical imaging. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data are often summarized into “brain connectomes”, that capture the
coactivation of brain regions of subjects performing a given
task (memorization, image recognition, or mixed gamble
task, for example). As correlation matrices, connectomes
belong to the cone of symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices. This cone can naturally be equipped with a Riemannian manifold structure, which has shown to improve performances on classification tasks [1]. Being able to learn
low-dimensional representations of connectomes within the
pre-specified SPD manifold is key to model the intrinsic variability across subjects, and tackle the question: do
brain connectomes from different subjects form a lowerdimensional subspace within the manifold of correlation
matrices? If so, each subject’s connectome x can be represented by a latent variable z of lower dimension. Anticipating potential downstream medical tasks that predict
behavioral variables (such as measures of cognitive, emotional, or sensory processes) from z, we seek a measure of
uncertainty associated with z. In other words, we are interested in a posterior in z given x.
While the literature for generative models capturing
lower-dimensional representations of Euclidean data is rich,
such methods are typically ill-suited to the analysis of
manifold-valued data. Can we yet conclude that lowerdimensional representations within these manifolds are not
achievable? The aforementioned techniques are indeed restricted in that: either (i) they do not leverage any geometric knowledge as to the known manifold to which the data,
such as the connectomes, belong; or (ii) they can only fit a
linear (or geodesic, i.e. the manifold equivalent of linear)
subspace to the data. In this paper, we focus on alternatives
114503

