Analyzing and Improving the Image Quality of StyleGAN
Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen
NVIDIA and Aalto University

Abstract
The style-based GAN architecture (StyleGAN) yields
state-of-the-art results in data-driven unconditional generative image modeling. We expose and analyze several of
its characteristic artifacts, and propose changes in both
model architecture and training methods to address them.
In particular, we redesign the generator normalization, revisit progressive growing, and regularize the generator to
encourage good conditioning in the mapping from latent
codes to images. In addition to improving image quality,
this path length regularizer yields the additional benefit that
the generator becomes significantly easier to invert. This
makes it possible to reliably attribute a generated image to
a particular network. We furthermore visualize how well
the generator utilizes its output resolution, and identify a
capacity problem, motivating us to train larger models for
additional quality improvements. Overall, our improved
model redefines the state of the art in unconditional image
modeling, both in terms of existing distribution quality metrics as well as perceived image quality.

1. Introduction
The resolution and quality of images produced by generative methods, especially generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [13], are improving rapidly [20, 26, 4]. The current
state-of-the-art method for high-resolution image synthesis
is StyleGAN [21], which has been shown to work reliably
on a variety of datasets. Our work focuses on fixing its characteristic artifacts and improving the result quality further.
The distinguishing feature of StyleGAN [21] is its unconventional generator architecture. Instead of feeding the
input latent code z ∈ Z only to the beginning of a the network, the mapping network f first transforms it to an intermediate latent code w ∈ W. Affine transforms then produce styles that control the layers of the synthesis network g
via adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) [18, 8, 11, 7].
Additionally, stochastic variation is facilitated by providing

Janne Hellsten
NVIDIA

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

additional random noise maps to the synthesis network. It
has been demonstrated [21, 33] that this design allows the
intermediate latent space W to be much less entangled than
the input latent space Z. In this paper, we focus all analysis solely on W, as it is the relevant latent space from the
synthesis network’s point of view.
Many observers have noticed characteristic artifacts in
images generated by StyleGAN [3]. We identify two causes
for these artifacts, and describe changes in architecture and
training methods that eliminate them. First, we investigate
the origin of common blob-like artifacts, and find that the
generator creates them to circumvent a design flaw in its architecture. In Section 2, we redesign the normalization used
in the generator, which removes the artifacts. Second, we
analyze artifacts related to progressive growing [20] that has
been highly successful in stabilizing high-resolution GAN
training. We propose an alternative design that achieves the
same goal — training starts by focusing on low-resolution
images and then progressively shifts focus to higher and
higher resolutions — without changing the network topology during training. This new design also allows us to reason about the effective resolution of the generated images,
which turns out to be lower than expected, motivating a capacity increase (Section 4).
Quantitative analysis of the quality of images produced
using generative methods continues to be a challenging
topic. Fréchet inception distance (FID) [17] measures differences in the density of two distributions in the highdimensional feature space of an InceptionV3 classifier [34].
Precision and Recall (P&R) [31, 22] provide additional visibility by explicitly quantifying the percentage of generated
images that are similar to training data and the percentage
of training data that can be generated, respectively. We use
these metrics to quantify the improvements.
Both FID and P&R are based on classifier networks that
have recently been shown to focus on textures rather than
shapes [10], and consequently, the metrics do not accurately
capture all aspects of image quality. We observe that the
perceptual path length (PPL) metric [21], originally introduced as a method for estimating the quality of latent space

8110

