Lighthouse: Predicting Lighting Volumes for Spatially-Coherent Illumination
Pratul P. Srinivasan*1
Ben Mildenhall*1
Matthew Tancik1
Jonathan T. Barron2
Richard Tucker2
Noah Snavely2
2
1
UC Berkeley, Google Research

Abstract
We present a deep learning solution for estimating the incident illumination at any 3D location within a scene from
an input narrow-baseline stereo image pair. Previous approaches for predicting global illumination from images either predict just a single illumination for the entire scene,
or separately estimate the illumination at each 3D location
without enforcing that the predictions are consistent with
the same 3D scene. Instead, we propose a deep learning
model that estimates a 3D volumetric RGBα model of a
scene, including content outside the observed field of view,
and then uses standard volume rendering to estimate the
incident illumination at any 3D location within that volume. Our model is trained without any ground truth 3D
data and only requires a held-out perspective view near the
input stereo pair and a spherical panorama taken within
each scene as supervision, as opposed to prior methods for
spatially-varying lighting estimation, which require ground
truth scene geometry for training. We demonstrate that
our method can predict consistent spatially-varying lighting that is convincing enough to plausibly relight and insert
highly specular virtual objects into real images.

1. Introduction
Rendering virtual objects into photographs of real scenes
is a common task in mixed reality and image editing. Convincingly inserting such objects requires estimating both the
geometry of the scene (so that inserted objects are correctly
occluded by real scene content) as well as the incident illumination at points on each object’s surface (so that inserted
objects appear to be lit by the surrounding environment).
The difficulty of this task is exacerbated by the fact that
incident illumination can vary significantly across different
locations within a scene, especially indoors, due to lights
close to the inserted objects, shadows cast by scene geometry, and global illumination effects from nearby scene con* Authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: Our method predicts environment map lighting at
any location in a 3D scene from a narrow-baseline stereo
pair of images. We use this to convincingly insert specular objects into real photographs with spatially-coherent
lighting that varies smoothly in 3D. Below, we isolate the
relit objects to better visualize our estimated illumination.
Notice how each inserted object contains different specular
highlights and reflected colors corresponding to its 3D location, such as the light reflected on the cow’s head and the
corner of the table visible on the teapot.

tent. Additionally, compositing large objects, multiple objects, or objects that move within the scene is even more
difficult as doing so requires estimating a spatially-varying
model of illumination that is spatially-coherent (we (ab)use
this term to mean that it varies smoothly as a function of
position in accordance with a plausible 3D scene).
Current state-of-the-art algorithms for estimating global
illumination either predict a single illumination for the entire scene [4, 13, 15, 21, 22, 32] or estimate spatiallyvarying illumination by separately predicting the lighting
at individual 3D locations within the scene [14, 26, 38].
The single-illumination approach can only be used to il-

8080

