Deep Facial Non-Rigid Multi-View Stereo
Ziqian Bai1 Zhaopeng Cui2 Jamal Ahmed Rahim1 Xiaoming Liu3 Ping Tan1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 ETH Zürich 3 Michigan State University
{ziqianb, jrahim, pingtan}@sfu.ca, zhpcui@gmail.com, liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
We present a method for 3D face reconstruction from
multi-view images with different expressions. We formulate
this problem from the perspective of non-rigid multi-view
stereo (NRMVS). Unlike previous learning-based methods,
which often regress the face shape directly, our method
optimizes the 3D face shape by explicitly enforcing multiview appearance consistency, which is known to be effective in recovering shape details according to conventional
multi-view stereo methods. Furthermore, by estimating face
shape through optimization based on multi-view consistency, our method can potentially have better generalization
to unseen data. However, this optimization is challenging
since each input image has a different expression. We facilitate it with a CNN network that learns to regularize the
non-rigid 3D face according to the input image and preliminary optimization results. Extensive experiments show
that our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance
on various datasets and generalizes well to in-the-wild data.

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction from images has been extensively studied in computer vision and graphics due to its
wide range of applications in face recognition, entertainment, and medical analysis. Multi-view approaches have
been one of the typical choices for high-end products of
face reconstruction. With the images captured under well
calibrated multi-view systems like camera arrays, faithful
3D geometry can be recovered with algorithms leveraging multi-view geometric constraints [5, 10]. However, this
class of methods heavily rely on synchronized multi-view
data which could be expensive, or sometimes even impossible, to acquire due to either the bulky equipment setup
or the static face assumption. This drawback severely limits the possible application realms, especially in daily entertainment and communication. To handle this limitation,
non-rigid multi-view approaches, i.e., Non-Rigid Structurefrom-Motion (NRSfM), are proposed to leverage multiview geometry constraints for reconstructing deformable

Inputs

Optimization

Figure 1: We present Deep Facial Non-Rigid Multi-View
Stereo (DFNRMVS) to recover high-quality 3D models
from multiple images of dynamic faces through multi-view
optimization. From left to right are input images, initial 3D
models, and 3D models after three-level optimization. Our
DFNRMVS can gradually improves 3D models.
subjects, e.g., faces with expression changes. However, the
majority of works in this category only deal with sparse feature points [15, 31, 65]. Recently, dense approaches have
been proposed [22, 33, 34], but usually contain complex
modeling of geometry and rarely utilize data-driven priors.
With recent progress on deep learning, many face reconstruction methods are proposed to directly learn the imageto-parameter or image-to-geometry mapping purely from
training data (i.e. regression), which makes their models
data hungry. As a result, they normally resort to synthetic
data [42], pre-computed 3DMM fitting [56, 64], or selfsupervised learning [25, 49], which harms either the generalization or the reconstruction accuracy.
In this paper, we introduce the Deep Facial Non-Rigid
Multi-View Stereo (DFNRMVS), which is the first end-toend trainable network learning non-rigid multi-view stereo
reconstruction for faces. This is achieved by first for-

5850

