GaitPart: Temporal Part-based Model for Gait Recognition
Chao Fan1,3 , Yunjie Peng2,3 , Chunshui Cao3 , Xu Liu3 , Saihui Hou,3
Jiannan Chi1∗, Yongzhen Huang3 , Qing Li1 , Zhiqiang He4,2
1
University of Science and Technology Beijing,
2
Beihang University, 3 WATRIX.AI, 4 Lenovo Ltd
s20180566@xs.ustb.edu.cn, YunjiePeng@buaa.edu.cn, {chunshui.cao, xu.liu, saihui.hou}@watrix.ai,
ustbjnc@ustb.edu.cn, hyz@watrix.ai, liqing@ies.ustb.edu.cn, hezq@lenovo.com

Abstract
Gait recognition, applied to identify individual walking
patterns in a long-distance, is one of the most promising
video-based biometric technologies. At present, most gait
recognition methods take the whole human body as a unit
to establish the spatio-temporal representations. However,
we have observed that different parts of human body possess evidently various visual appearances and movement
patterns during walking. In the latest literature, employing partial features for human body description has been
verified being beneficial to individual recognition. Taken
above insights together, we assume that each part of human
body needs its own spatio-temporal expression. Then, we
propose a novel part-based model GaitPart and get two aspects effect of boosting the performance: On the one hand,
Focal Convolution Layer, a new applying of convolution, is
presented to enhance the fine-grained learning of the partlevel spatial features. On the other hand, the Micro-motion
Capture Module (MCM) is proposed and there are several
parallel MCMs in the GaitPart corresponding to the predefined parts of the human body, respectively. It is worth
mentioning that the MCM is a novel way of temporal modeling for gait task, which focuses on the short-range temporal
features rather than the redundant long-range features for
cycle gait. Experiments on two of the most popular public
datasets, CASIA-B and OU-MVLP, richly exemplified that
our method meets a new state-of-the-art on multiple standard benchmarks. The source code will be available on
https://github.com/ChaoFan96/GaitPart.

1. Introduction
Gait is a kind of physical and behavioural biometric
characteristic that depicts the walking patterns of a person.
Compared with other biometric modalities, e.g., face, fin∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. (a): Different parts of human gait possess evidently different shapes and moving patterns during walking. (b): Overview
of the GaitPart, consisting of the Frame-level Part Feature Extractor(FPFE) and Micro-motion Capture Module(MCM).

gerprint and iris, it can be easily captured at a long-distance
and requires no explicit co-operation of interest-subjects.
Thus, gait recognition has enormous potential in crime investigation, access control and social security. As an identification task in vision, the essential goal of gait recognition is to learn the unique and invariant representations from the temporal changing characteristics about human
body shape. However, in real-world scenarios, variations like bag-carrying, coat-wearing and camera viewpoints
cause dramatic changes in gait appearance, which bring significant challenges to gait recognition.
To alleviate these issues, lots of deep-learning based
methods have provided promising solutions[30, 25, 5, 26,
18, 29, 21, 14]. Thomas et al.[25] applied 3D-CNN to extract the spatio-temporal information, trying to find a general descriptor for human gait. GaitNet[30] proposed an
Auto-Encoder framework to extract the gait-related features
from raw RGB images and then used LSTMs to model
the temporal changes of gait sequence. And GaitSet[5] assumed that the appearance of a silhouette has contained its

14225

