Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition using Meta-Learning
Bo Liu
UC, San Diego

Hao Kang
Wormpex AI Research

Haoxiang Li
Wormpex AI Research

Gang Hua
Wormpex AI Research

boliu@ucsd.edu

haokheseri@gmail.com

lhxustcer@gmail.com

ganghua@gmail.com

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego
nuno@ece.ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of open-set recognition is considered.
While previous approaches only consider this problem in
the context of large-scale classifier training, we seek a unified solution for this and the low-shot classification setting.
It is argued that the classic softmax classifier is a poor solution for open-set recognition, since it tends to overfit on the
training classes. Randomization is then proposed as a solution to this problem. This suggests the use of meta-learning
techniques, commonly used for few-shot classification, for
the solution of open-set recognition. A new oPen sEt mEta
LEaRning (PEELER) algorithm is then introduced. This
combines the random selection of a set of novel classes per
episode, a loss that maximizes the posterior entropy for examples of those classes, and a new metric learning formulation based on the Mahalanobis distance. Experimental
results show that PEELER achieves state of the art open set
recognition performance for both few-shot and large-scale
recognition. On CIFAR and miniImageNet, it achieves substantial gains in seen/unseen class detection AUROC for a
given seen-class classification accuracy.

1. Introduction
The introduction of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) has catalyzed large advances in computer vision.
Most of these advances can be traced back to advances on
object recognition, due to the introduction of large scale
datasets, such as ImageNet [2], containing many classes and
many examples per class. Many modern computer vision
architectures are entirely or partially based on recognition
networks. In the large scale setting, CNN-based classifiers
trained by cross-entropy loss and mini-batch SGD have excellent recognition performance, achieving state of the art
results on most recognition benchmarks.
However, variations of the recognition setting can lead

Typical
Recognition Paradigms

No. of Samples
per Training Class

Supports unseen
Class in Testing?

Closed-set [13]
Few-shot [25, 3, 33, 29]
Open-set [5, 1]
Few-Shot Open-set

Large
Small
Large
Small

No
No
Yes
Yes

Table 1. Comparison between different recognition tasks.

to substantial performance degradation. Well known examples include few-shot learning [25, 3, 33, 29], where only a
few training examples are available per class, domain adaptation [32], where a classifier trained on a source image domain (e.g. synthetic images) must be deployed to a target
domain (e.g. natural images) whose statistics differ from
those of the source, long tailed recognition [18], where the
number of examples per class is highly unbalanced, or problems with label noise [20, 30]. All these alternative recognition settings stress the robustness, or ability to generalize,
of the large-scale classifier .
More recently, there has been interest in endowing
CNNs with self-awareness capabilities. At the core, selfawareness implies that, like humans, CNNs should identify what they can do and refuse what they cannot. Several variants of this problem have been proposed, including
out-of-distribution detection [9], where the CNN rejects examples outside the training distribution (e.g. images from
other domains or adversarial attacks [11]), realistic classification [19], where it rejects examples that it deems too
hard to classify, or open-set recognition [1], where the examples to reject are from novel classes, unseen during training. While several techniques have been proposed, a popular approach is to force the CNN to produce high entropy
posterior distributions in the rejection regions. Rejections
can then be identified as examples that give rise to such distributions.
In this work, we consider open-set recognition. This has
been mostly addressed in the large-scale setting, using so18798

