Adaptive Interaction Modeling via Graph Operations Search
Haoxin Li1 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,3,5,∗, Yu Tao2,4 , Haifeng Hu1,∗, Jian-Huang Lai2
1
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
4
Accuvision Technology Co. Ltd.
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
lihaoxin05@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org, gytaoyu@hotmail.com
huhaif@mail.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Operation Candidates

Abstract
Interaction modeling is important for video action analysis. Recently, several works design specific structures to
model interactions in videos. However, their structures are
manually designed and non-adaptive, which require structures design efforts and more importantly could not model
interactions adaptively. In this paper, we automate the process of structures design to learn adaptive structures for
interaction modeling. We propose to search the network
structures with differentiable architecture search mechanism, which learns to construct adaptive structures for different videos to facilitate adaptive interaction modeling. To
this end, we first design the search space with several basic
graph operations that explicitly capture different relations
in videos. We experimentally demonstrate that our architecture search framework learns to construct adaptive interaction modeling structures, which provides more understanding about the relations between the structures and some interaction characteristics, and also releases the requirement
of structures design efforts. Additionally, we show that the
designed basic graph operations in the search space are
able to model different interactions in videos. The experiments on two interaction datasets show that our method
achieves competitive performance with state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Video classification is one of the basic research topics in computer vision. Existing video classification solutions can be mainly divided into two groups. The first
one is the two-stream network based methods [28, 33, 8],
which model appearance and motion features with RGB
and optical flow streams respectively; the second type is
∗ Corresponding author

Operation Search
N-input

concat

N-output

Turning
the camera
right while
filming
something

Computation Cell

N-input

concat

N-output

Computation Cell

Trying but
failing to
attach sth
to sth
because it
doesn't
stick

Figure 1. Illustration of our method. We search adaptive network
structures to model the interactions in different videos, in which
the candidate basic operations (dashed arrows) are selected (solid
arrows) to construct adaptive structures for different videos.

the 3D convolution neural networks (CNN) based methods
[29, 4, 32, 26, 31, 23], which model spatiotemporal features
with stacked 3D convolutions or the decomposed variants.
While these methods work well on scene-based action classification, most of them obtain unsatisfactory performance
on recognizing interactions, since they haven’t effectively
or explicitly modeled the relations.
To model the interactions in videos, some methods employ specific structures [40, 14, 16] to capture temporal relations. Others model the relations between entities. Nonlocal network [34] and GloRe [7] design networks with
self-attention and graph convolution to reason about the relations between semantic entities. CPNet [22] aggregates
features from potential correspondences for representation
learning. Space-time region graphs [35] are developed to
model the interactions between detected objects with graph

521

