Weakly-Supervised Action Localization by Generative Attention Modeling
Baifeng Shi1 * Qi Dai2
1
Peking University

Yadong Mu1 Jingdong Wang2
2
Microsoft Research Asia

{bfshi,myd}@pku.edu.cn, {qid,jingdw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization is a
problem of learning an action localization model with only
video-level action labeling available. The general framework largely relies on the classification activation, which
employs an attention model to identify the action-related
frames and then categorizes them into different classes.
Such method results in the action-context confusion issue:
context frames near action clips tend to be recognized as
action frames themselves, since they are closely related to
the specific classes. To solve the problem, in this paper we
propose to model the class-agnostic frame-wise probability
conditioned on the frame attention using conditional Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE). With the observation that the
context exhibits notable difference from the action at representation level, a probabilistic model, i.e., conditional VAE,
is learned to model the likelihood of each frame given the
attention. By maximizing the conditional probability with
respect to the attention, the action and non-action frames
are well separated. Experiments on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.2 demonstrate advantage of our method and effectiveness in handling action-context confusion problem.
Code is now available on GitHub1 .

1. Introduction
Action localization is one of the most challenging tasks
in video analytics and understanding [43, 42, 20, 37, 21].
The goal is to predict accurate start and end time stamps of
different human actions. Owing to its wide application (e.g.,
surveillance [47], video summarization [28], highlight detection [51]), action localization has drawn lots of attention
in the community. Thanks to the powerful convolutional
neural network (CNN) [18], performance achieved on this
task has gone through a phenomenal surge in the past few
years [42, 53, 6, 52, 5, 1, 23, 27]. Nevertheless, these fullysupervised methods require temporal annotations of action
* Work was done during internship at Microsoft.
1 https://github.com/bfshi/DGAM-Weakly-Supervised-Action-

Localization

Figure 1. An illustration of action-context confusion. The video
clip, showing a long jump process, consists of three stages of the
action (approaching, jumping, and landing) and two stages of context (preparing and finishing). (a) Ground truth of action localization. (b) Action-context confusion. The context frames, which are
highly related to the long jump category, are also selected.

intervals during training, which is extremely expensive and
time-consuming. Therefore, the task of weakly-supervised
action localization (WSAL) has been put forward, where
only video-level category labels are available.
To date in the literature, there are two main categories
of approaches in WSAL. The first type [24, 29, 34, 49]
generally builds a top-down pipeline, which learns a videolevel classifier and then obtains frame attention by checking
the produced temporal class activation map (TCAM) [60].
Note that a frame indicates a small snippet from which
appearance or motion feature could be extracted. On the
other hand, the second paradigm works in a bottom-up
way, i.e., temporal attention is directly predicted from raw
data [30, 31, 41, 55]. Then attention is optimized in the task
of video classification with video-level supervision. Frames
with high attention are thus treated as action part, otherwise
the background part.
Both kinds of methods largely rely on the video-level
classification model, which would lead to the intractable
action-context confusion [24] issue in the absence of framewise labels. Take the long jump in Figure 1 as an example,
the action has three stages, i.e., approaching, jumping, and
landing. In addition, the frames before and after the ac-

1009

