Revisiting Knowledge Distillation via Label Smoothing Regularization
Li Yuan1

Francis EH Tay1

Guilin Li2

Tao Wang1

Jiashi Feng1

1

National University of Singapore 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{ylustcnus, twangnh}@gmail.com, {mpetayeh,elefjia}@nus.edu.sg, guilinli2@huawei.com
Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) aims to distill the knowledge of a cumbersome teacher model into a lightweight student model. Its success is generally attributed to the privileged information on similarities among categories provided by the teacher model, and in this sense, only strong
teacher models are deployed to teach weaker students in
practice. In this work, we challenge this common belief
by following experimental observations: 1) beyond the acknowledgment that the teacher can improve the student, the
student can also enhance the teacher significantly by reversing the KD procedure; 2) a poorly-trained teacher with
much lower accuracy than the student can still improve the
latter significantly. To explain these observations, we provide a theoretical analysis of the relationships between KD
and label smoothing regularization. We prove that 1) KD
is a type of learned label smoothing regularization and 2)
label smoothing regularization provides a virtual teacher
model for KD. From these results, we argue that the success
of KD is not fully due to the similarity information between
categories from teachers, but also to the regularization of
soft targets, which is equally or even more important.
Based on these analyses, we further propose a novel
Teacher-free Knowledge Distillation (Tf-KD) framework,
where a student model learns from itself or manuallydesigned regularization distribution. The Tf-KD achieves
comparable performance with normal KD from a superior teacher, which is well applied when a stronger teacher
model is unavailable. Meanwhile, Tf-KD is generic and
can be directly deployed for training deep neural networks.
Without any extra computation cost, Tf-KD achieves up
to 0.65% improvement on ImageNet over well-established
baseline models, which is superior to label smoothing regularization.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) [7] aims to transfer knowledge from one neural network (teacher) to another (student).
Usually, the teacher model has a strong learning capacity

with higher performance, which teaches a lower-capacity
student model through providing “soft targets”. It is commonly believed that the soft targets of the teacher model can
transfer “dark knowledge” containing privileged information on similarity among different categories [7] to enhance
the student model.
In this work, we first examine such a common belief
through following exploratory experiments: 1) let student
models teach teacher models by transferring soft targets
of the students; (2) let poorly-trained teacher models with
worse performance teach students. Based on the common
belief, it is expected that the teacher model would not be
enhanced significantly via training from the students and
poorly-trained teachers would not enhance the students, as
the weak student and poorly-trained teacher models cannot provide reliable similarity information between categories. However, after extensive experiments on various
models and datasets, we observe contradictory results: the
weak student can improve the teacher and the poorly-trained
teacher can also enhance the student remarkably. Such
intriguing results motivate us to interpret KD as a regularization term, and we re-examine knowledge distillation
from the perspective of Label Smoothing Regularization
(LSR) [16] that regularizes model training by replacing the
one-hot labels with smoothed ones.
We then analyze theoretically the relationships between
KD and LSR. For LSR, by splitting the smoothed label into
two parts and examining the corresponding losses, we find
the first part is the ordinary cross-entropy for ground-truth
distribution (one-hot label) and outputs of model, and the
second part corresponds to a virtual teacher model which
provides a uniform distribution to teach the model. For
KD, by combining the teacher’s soft targets with the onehot ground-truth label, we find that KD is a learned LSR
where the smoothing distribution of KD is from a teacher
model but the smoothing distribution of LSR is manually
designed. In a nutshell, we find KD is a learned LSR and
LSR is an ad-hoc KD. Such relationships can explain the
above counterintuitive results—the soft targets from weak
student and poorly-trained teacher models can effectively

3903

