Towards Fairness in Visual Recognition: Effective Strategies for Bias Mitigation
Zeyu Wang, Klint Qinami, Ioannis Christos Karakozis, Kyle Genova,
Prem Nair, Kenji Hata, Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University
{zeyuwang, olgarus}@cs.princeton.edu
Abstract
Computer vision models learn to perform a task by capturing relevant statistics from training data. It has been
shown that models learn spurious age, gender, and race
correlations when trained for seemingly unrelated tasks like
activity recognition or image captioning. Various mitigation
techniques have been presented to prevent models from utilizing or learning such biases. However, there has been little
systematic comparison between these techniques. We design
a simple but surprisingly effective visual recognition benchmark for studying bias mitigation. Using this benchmark, we
provide a thorough analysis of a wide range of techniques.
We highlight the shortcomings of popular adversarial training approaches for bias mitigation, propose a simple but
similarly effective alternative to the inference-time Reducing Bias Amplification method of Zhao et al., and design
a domain-independent training technique that outperforms
all other methods. Finally, we validate our findings on the
attribute classification task in the CelebA dataset, where
attribute presence is known to be correlated with the gender
of people in the image, and demonstrate that the proposed
technique is effective at mitigating real-world gender bias.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models learn to perform a task by capturing relevant statistics from training data. These statistics
range from low-level information about color or composition
(zebras are black-and-white, chairs have legs) to contextual
or societal cues (basketball players often wear jerseys, programmers are often male). Capturing these statistical correlations is helpful for the task at hand: chairs without legs are
rare and programmers who are not male are rare, so capturing these dominant features will yield high accuracy on the
target task of recognizing chairs or programmers. However,
as computer vision systems are deployed at scale and in a
variety of settings, especially where the initial training data
and the final end task may be mismatched, it becomes increasingly important to both identify and develop strategies

for manipulating the information learned by the model.
Societal Context. To motivate the work of this paper, consider one such example of social bias propagation: AI
models that have learned to correlate activities with gender [4, 7, 52, 2]. Some real-world activities are more commonly performed by women and others by men. This realworld gender distribution skew becomes part of the data that
trains models to recognize or reason about these activities.1
Naturally, these models then learn discriminative cues which
include the gender of the actors. In fact, the gender correlation may even become amplified in the model, as Zhao et
al. [52] demonstrates. We refer the reader to e.g., [34] for a
deeper look at these issues and their impact.
Study Objectives and Contributions. In this work,
we set out to provide an in-depth look at this problem of training visual classifiers in the presence of
spurious correlations. We are inspired by prior work
on machine learning fairness [51, 52, 41, 1] and aim
to build a unified understanding of the proposed techniques. Code is available at https://github.com/
princetonvisualai/DomainBiasMitigation.
We begin by proposing a simple but surprisingly effective
benchmark for studying the effect of data bias on visual
recognition tasks. Classical literature on mitigating bias
generally operates on simpler (often linear) models [11, 50,
28], which are easier to understand and control; only recently
have researchers begun looking at mitigating bias in end-toend trained deep learning models [16, 2, 40, 18, 48, 25,
30, 36, 47, 17]. Our work helps bridge the gap, proposing
an avenue for exploring mitigating bias in Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) models within a simpler and easierto-analyze setting than with a fully-fledged black-box system.
By utilizing dataset augmentation to introduce controlled
biases, we provide simple and precise targets for model
evaluation (Sec. 3).
Using this benchmark, we demonstrate that the presence
1 Buolamwini and Gebru [6] note that collecting a more representative
training dataset should be the first step of the solution. That is true in
the cases they consider (where people with darker skin tones are dramatically and unreasonably undersampled in datasets) but may not be a viable
approach to cases where the datasets accurately reflect the real-world skew.

8919

