Learning Augmentation Network via Influence Functions
Donghoon Lee Hyunsin Park Trung Pham Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{iamdh, hs.park, trungpx, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Data augmentation can impact the generalization performance of an image classiﬁcation model in a signiﬁcant
way. However, it is currently conducted on the basis of
trial and error, and its impact on the generalization performance cannot be predicted during training. This paper
considers an influence function that predicts how generalization performance, in terms of validation loss, is affected
by a particular augmented training sample. The influence
function provides an approximation of the change in validation loss without actually comparing the performances
that include and exclude the sample in the training process. Based on this function, a differentiable augmentation
network is learned to augment an input training sample to
reduce validation loss. The augmented sample is fed into
the classiﬁcation network, and its influence is approximated
as a function of the parameters of the last fully-connected
layer of the classiﬁcation network. By backpropagating the
influence to the augmentation network, the augmentation
network parameters are learned. Experimental results on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet show that the proposed method provides better generalization performance
than conventional data augmentation methods do.

1. Introduction
In supervised learning, deep neural networks generally
require large amounts of labeled data for training. An insufﬁcient number of labeled data will lead to poor generalization performance due to overﬁtting. One simple method to
reduce overﬁtting and improve generalization performance
is to perform data augmentation, whereby each training
sample is transformed with a label-preserving transformation to create additional labeled data. Different augmentations can result in signiﬁcant differences in generalization
performances depending on the task [7, 11, 14, 49]; however, this has not yet been extensively explored. Even in a
well-studied image classiﬁcation task [15, 34, 46], training
data is often augmented in a manner similar to that performed in training AlexNet [21]. The composition of pre-

deﬁned transformations, such as rotation, translation, cropping, scaling, and color perturbation, is a popular choice;
however, choosing the transformations and determining the
strength of each transformation, e.g. rotation angle, that result in the best performance is often conducted empirically
through observations of validation loss [3, 33].
Most recently, strategies for composing the transformations through learning [6, 22, 28, 29, 35] rather than tuning
by trial and error have been studied. To learn such a strategy,
various learning criteria have been considered. Without considering a classiﬁcation model, Ratner et al. [29] and Sixt et
al. [35] adopted a strategy for augmenting realistic samples.
Given a classiﬁcation model, [22] and [28] consider antithetical strategies for augmenting samples that minimize
and maximize training loss, respectively. It is not yet fully
understood why these antithetical studies, which relate data
augmentation to training loss, are effective in improving
performance on test samples. Cubuk et al. [6] considered
small child models to compute validation loss for augmenting samples to improve generalization performance. Here,
learning requires a reinforcement learning framework with
the validation loss as a reward. This necessitates the classiﬁcation model to be learned from scratch for every update
of the augmentation model parameters, requiring thousands
of GPU hours for learning.
This paper proposes a data augmentation method that
links the impact of augmentation to the validation loss. To
predict impact, an inﬂuence function [5, 20] is incorporated
to compute the effect of a particular augmented training
sample on the validation loss. Without a leave-one-out retraining process, the inﬂuence function approximates the
change in validation loss due to the inclusion or exclusion of
the augmented training sample. A differentiable augmentation network is proposed to augment the sample based on its
predicted impact on the validation loss. The transformation
space of the proposed network encompasses compositions
of predeﬁned transformations. The inﬂuence function and
the differentiable augmentation model enable the gradient
of validation loss to ﬂow to the augmentation model.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy reviews some of the most relevant literature
10961

