Enhancing Intrinsic Adversarial Robustness via Feature Pyramid Decoder‡
Guanlin Li1,∗
1

Shuya Ding2,∗

Jun Luo2

Chang Liu2

Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Networks, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan)
2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University

leegl@sdas.org

{di0002ya,junluo,chang015}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Whereas adversarial training is employed as the main
defence strategy against specific adversarial samples, it has
limited generalization capability and incurs excessive time
complexity. In this paper, we propose an attack-agnostic
defence framework to enhance the intrinsic robustness of
neural networks, without jeopardizing the ability of generalizing clean samples. Our Feature Pyramid Decoder
(FPD) framework applies to all block-based convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). It implants denoising and image
restoration modules into a targeted CNN, and it also constraints the Lipschitz constant of the classification layer.
Moreover, we propose a two-phase strategy to train the
FPD-enhanced CNN, utilizing ǫ-neighbourhood noisy images with multi-task and self-supervised learning. Evaluated against a variety of white-box and black-box attacks,
we demonstrate that FPD-enhanced CNNs gain sufficient
robustness against general adversarial samples on MNIST,
SVHN and CALTECH. In addition, if we further conduct adversarial training, the FPD-enhanced CNNs perform better
than their non-enhanced versions.

1. Introduction
The ever-growing ability of deep learning has found numerous applications mainly in image classification, object
detection, and natural language processing [12, 17, 28].
While deep learning has brought great convenience to our
lives, its weakness is also catching researchers’ attention.
Recently, researchers have started to pay more attention to
investigating the weakness of neural networks, especially
in its application to image classification. Since the seminal
work by [26, 21], many follow-up works have demonstrated
a great variety of methods in generating adversarial sam∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† The author is also affiliated with Shandong Computer Science Center,
Shandong Academy of Sciences, School of Cyber Security, Qilu University of Technology, China
‡ https://github.com/GuanlinLee/FPD-for-Adversarial-Robustness

ples: though easily distinguishable by human eyes, they are
often misclassified by neural networks. More specifically,
most convolutional layers are very sensitive to perturbations
brought by adversarial samples (e.g., [6, 31]), resulting in
misclassifications. These so-called adversarial attacks may
adopt either white-box or black-box approaches, depending
on the knowledge of the target network, and they mostly use
gradient-based methods [10, 18, 27] or score-based methods [4] to generate adversarial samples.
To thwart these attacks, many defence methods have
been proposed. Most of them use adversarial training to
increase the network robustness, e.g., [1, 14]. However, as
training often targets a specific attack, the resulting defense
method can hardly be generalized, as hinted in [27]. In order to defend against various attacks, a large amount and
variety of adversarial samples are required to retrain the
classifier, leading to a high time-complexity. In the meantime, little attention has been given to the direct design of
robust frameworks in an attack-agnostic manner, except a
few touches on denoising [25, 29] and obfuscating gradients [11, 25] that aim to directly enhance a target network
in order to cope with any potential attacks.
To enhance the intrinsic robustness of neural networks,
we propose an attack-agnostic defence framework, applicable to enhance all types of block-based CNNs. We aim to
thwart both white-box and black-box attacks without crafting any specific adversarial attacks. Our Feature Pyramid
Decoder (FPD) framework implants a target CNN with both
denoising and image restoration modules to filter an input
image at multiple levels; it also deploys a Lipschitz Constant Constraint at the classification layer to limit the output
variation in the face of attack perturbation. In order to train
an FPD-enhanced CNN, we propose a two-phase strategy;
it utilizes ǫ-neighbourhood noisy images to drive multi-task
and self-supervised learning.
As shown in Figure 1, FPD employs a front denoising
module, an image restoration module, a middle denoising
layer, and a back denoising module. Both front and back
denoising modules consist of the original CNN blocks interleaved with inner denoising layers, and the inner denoising

800

