Self-Supervised Viewpoint Learning From Image Collections
Siva Karthik Mustikovela1,2∗ Varun Jampani1 Shalini De Mello1
Sifei Liu1 Umar Iqbal1 Carsten Rother2 Jan Kautz1
1
2
NVIDIA
Heidelberg University
{siva.mustikovela, carsten.rother}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de; varunjampani@gmail.com;
{shalinig, sifeil, uiqbal, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Training deep neural networks to estimate the viewpoint of objects requires large labeled training datasets.
However, manually labeling viewpoints is notoriously hard,
error-prone, and time-consuming. On the other hand, it is
relatively easy to mine many unlabelled images of an object category from the internet, e.g., of cars or faces. We
seek to answer the research question of whether such unlabeled collections of in-the-wild images can be successfully utilized to train viewpoint estimation networks for general object categories purely via self-supervision. Selfsupervision here refers to the fact that the only true supervisory signal that the network has is the input image itself.
We propose a novel learning framework which incorporates
an analysis-by-synthesis paradigm to reconstruct images
in a viewpoint aware manner with a generative network,
along with symmetry and adversarial constraints to successfully supervise our viewpoint estimation network. We
show that our approach performs competitively to fullysupervised approaches for several object categories like human faces, cars, buses, and trains. Our work opens up
further research in self-supervised viewpoint learning and
serves as a robust baseline for it. We open-source our code
at https://github.com/NVlabs/SSV .

1. Introduction
3D understanding of objects from 2D images is a fundamental computer vision problem. Object viewpoint (azimuth, elevation and tilt angles) estimation provides a pivotal link between 2D imagery and the corresponding 3D geometric understanding. In this work, we tackle the problem
of object viewpoint estimation from a single image. Given
its central role in 3D geometric understanding, viewpoint
estimation is useful in several vision tasks such as object
manipulation [66], 3D reconstruction [33], image synthesis [8] to name a few. Estimating viewpoint from a single
image is highly challenging due to the inherent ambiguity
of 3D understanding from a 2D image. Learning-based ap∗ Siva Karthik Mustikovela was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.

Figure 1. Self-supervised viewpoint learning. We learn a singleimage object viewpoint estimation network for each category (face
or car) using only a collection of images without ground truth.

proaches, e.g., [36, 16, 75, 38, 55, 62, 17, 68], using neural
networks that leverage a large amount of annotated training data, have demonstrated impressive viewpoint estimation accuracy. A key requirement for such approaches is the
availability of large-scale human annotated datasets, which
is very difficult to obtain. A standard way to annotate viewpoints is by manually finding and aligning a rough morphable 3D or CAD model to images [12, 77, 65], which is a
tedious and slow process. This makes it challenging to create large-scale datasets with viewpoint annotations. Most
existing works [16, 14, 55, 36, 77, 17] either rely on humanannotated viewpoints or augment real-world data with synthetic data. Some works [16] also leverage CAD models
during viewpoint inference.
In this work, we propose a self-supervised learning technique for viewpoint estimation of general objects that learns
from an object image collection without the need for any
viewpoint annotations (Figure 1). By image collection, we
mean a set of images containing objects of a category of
interest (say, faces or cars). Since viewpoint estimation assumes known object bounding boxes, we also assume that
the image collection consists of tightly bounded object im13971

