PV-RCNN: Point-Voxel Feature Set Abstraction for 3D Object Detection
Shaoshuai Shi1
Chaoxu Guo2,3
Li Jiang4
Zhe Wang2
Jianping Shi2
Xiaogang Wang1
Hongsheng Li1
1

Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
3
4
SenseTime Research
NLPR, CASIA
CSE, CUHK
3D Voxel

Abstract
z

We present a novel and high-performance 3D object detection framework, named PointVoxel-RCNN (PV-RCNN),
for accurate 3D object detection from point clouds. Our
proposed method deeply integrates both 3D voxel Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and PointNet-based set abstraction to learn more discriminative point cloud features.
It takes advantages of efficient learning and high-quality
proposals of the 3D voxel CNN and the flexible receptive
fields of the PointNet-based networks. Specifically, the proposed framework summarizes the 3D scene with a 3D voxel
CNN into a small set of keypoints via a novel voxel set abstraction module to save follow-up computations and also
to encode representative scene features. Given the highquality 3D proposals generated by the voxel CNN, the RoIgrid pooling is proposed to abstract proposal-specific features from the keypoints to the RoI-grid points via keypoint
set abstraction. Compared with conventional pooling operations, the RoI-grid feature points encode much richer
context information for accurately estimating object confidences and locations. Extensive experiments on both the
KITTI dataset and the Waymo Open dataset show that our
proposed PV-RCNN surpasses state-of-the-art 3D detection
methods with remarkable margins.

1. Introduction
3D object detection has been receiving increasing attention from both industry and academia thanks to its wide applications in various fields such as autonomous driving and
robotics. LiDAR sensors are widely adopted in autonomous
driving vehicles and robots for capturing 3D scene information as sparse and irregular point clouds, which provide vital
cues for 3D scene perception and understanding. In this paper, we propose to achieve high performance 3D object detection by designing novel point-voxel integrated networks
to learn better 3D features from irregular point clouds.
E-mail: {ssshi, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Grid Point
Keypoint

y
RoI

Refine

x
Raw points

Figure 1. Our proposed PV-RCNN framework deeply integrates
both the voxel-based and the PointNet-based networks via a twostep strategy including the voxel-to-keypoint 3D scene encoding
and the keypoint-to-grid RoI feature abstraction for improving the
performance of 3D object detection.

Most existing 3D detection methods could be classified
into two categories in terms of point cloud representations,
i.e., the grid-based methods and the point-based methods.
The grid-based methods generally transform the irregular
point clouds to regular representations such as 3D voxels
[29, 45, 37, 2, 28] or 2D bird-view maps [1, 12, 39, 18, 38,
13, 17, 41], which could be efficiently processed by 3D or
2D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to learn point
features for 3D detection. Powered by the pioneer work,
PointNet and its variants [25, 26], the point-based methods
[24, 27, 35, 40, 22] directly extract discriminative features
from raw point clouds for 3D detection. Generally, the gridbased methods are more computationally efficient but the
inevitable information loss degrades the fine-grained localization accuracy, while the point-based methods have higher
computation cost but could easily achieve larger receptive
field by the point set abstraction [26]. However, we show
that a unified framework could integrate the best of the two
types of methods, and surpass the prior state-of-the-art 3D
detection methods with remarkable margins.
We propose a novel 3D object detection framework, PVRCNN (Illustrated in Fig. 1), which boosts the 3D detection performance by incorporating the advantages from both
the Point-based and Voxel-based feature learning methods. The principle of PV-RCNN lies in the fact that the
voxel-based operation efficiently encodes multi-scale feature representations and can generate high-quality 3D proposals, while the PointNet-based set abstraction operation

10529

