Benchmarking the Robustness of Semantic Segmentation Models
Christoph Kamann and Carsten Rother
Visual Learning Lab
Heidelberg University (HCI/IWR)
http://vislearn.de

Abstract
When designing a semantic segmentation module for a
practical application, such as autonomous driving, it is crucial to understand the robustness of the module with respect
to a wide range of image corruptions. While there are recent robustness studies for full-image classification, we are
the first to present an exhaustive study for semantic segmentation, based on the state-of-the-art model DeepLabv3+. To
increase the realism of our study, we utilize almost 400,000
images generated from Cityscapes, PASCAL VOC 2012,
and ADE20K. Based on the benchmark study, we gain several new insights. Firstly, contrary to full-image classification, model robustness increases with model performance,
in most cases. Secondly, some architecture properties affect
robustness significantly, such as a Dense Prediction Cell,
which was designed to maximize performance on clean data
only.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNN) have set the state-of-the-art on a broad range of
computer vision tasks [49, 36, 71, 73, 52, 65, 11, 29, 35, 51].
The performance of DCNN models is generally measured
using benchmarks of publicly available datasets, which
often consist of clean and post-processed images [18, 24].
However, it has been shown that model performance is
prone to image corruptions [87, 75, 38, 27, 23, 28, 3], especially image noise decreases the performance significantly.
Image quality depends on environmental factors such as
illumination and weather conditions, ambient temperature,
and camera motion since they directly affect the optical and
electrical properties of a camera. Image quality is also affected by optical aberrations of the camera lenses, causing,
e.g., image blur. Thus, in safety-critical applications, such
as autonomous driving, models must be robust towards
such inherently present image corruptions [33, 47, 45].
In this work, we present an extensive evaluation of the
robustness of semantic segmentation models towards a
broad range of real-world image corruptions. Here, the
term robustness refers to training a model on clean data and

then validating it on corrupted data. We choose the task
of semantic image segmentation for two reasons. Firstly,
image segmentation is often applied in safety-critical applications, where robustness is essential. Secondly, a rigorous
evaluation for real-world image corruptions has, in recent
years, only been conducted for full-image classification
and object detection, e.g., most recently [27, 38, 58].
When conducting an evaluation of semantic segmentation models, there are, in general, different choices such
as: i) comparing different architectures, or ii) conducting a
detailed ablation study of a state-of-the-art architecture. In
contrast to [27, 38], which focused on aspect i), we perform
both options. We believe that an ablation study (option ii)
is important since knowledge about architectural choices
are likely helpful when designing a practical system, where
types of image corruptions are known beforehand. For example, [27] showed that ResNet-152 [36] is more robust to
image noise than GoogLeNet [73]. Is the latter architecture
more prone to noise due to missing skip-connections, shallower architecture, or other architectural design choices?
When the overarching goal is to develop robust DCNN
models, we believe that it is important to learn about the
robustness capabilities of architectural properties.
We conduct our study on three popular datasets:
Cityscapes [18], PASCAL VOC 2012 [24], and
ADE20K [85, 86]. To generate a wide-range of image corruptions, we utilize the image transformations
presented by Hendrycks et al. [38]. While they give a great
selection of image transformations, the level of realism
is rather lacking, in our view. Hence we augment their
image transformations by additional ones, in particular,
intensity-dependent camera noise, PSF blur, and geometric
distortions. In total, we employ 19 different image corruptions from the categories of blur, noise, weather, digital,
and geometric distortion. We are thus able to validate each
DCNN model on almost 400,000 images.
We use the state-of-the-art DeepLabv3+ architecture [14] with multiple network backbones as reference and
consider many ablations of it. Based on our evaluation, we
are able to conclude two main findings: 1) Contrary to the
task of full-image classification, we observe that the ro-

8828

