Scene Recomposition by Learning-based ICP
Hamid Izadinia
University of Washington

Steven M. Seitz
University of Washington

Figure 1. Given an RGBD sequence from a moving camera, we produce a 3D CAD recomposition of the scene. While a fused reconstruction (top) contains holes and noisy geometry, our recomposition (bottom) models the scene as a set of high quality 3D shapes from CAD
databases.

Abstract
By moving a depth sensor around a room, we compute
a 3D CAD model of the environment, capturing the room
shape and contents such as chairs, desks, sofas, and tables.
Rather than reconstructing geometry, we match, place, and
align each object in the scene to thousands of CAD models
of objects. In addition to the fully automatic system, the key
technical contribution is a novel approach for aligning CAD
models to 3D scans, based on deep reinforcement learning.
This approach, which we call Learning-based ICP, outperforms prior ICP methods in the literature, by learning the
best points to match and conditioning on object viewpoint.
LICP learns to align using only synthetic data and does not
require ground truth annotation of object pose or keypoint
pair matching in real scene scans. While LICP is trained
on synthetic data and without 3D real scene annotations, it
outperforms both learned local deep feature matching and
geometric based alignment methods in real scenes. The proposed method is evaluated on real scenes datasets of SceneNN [23] and ScanNet [14] as well as synthetic scenes of
SUNCG [56]. High quality results are demonstrated on a
range of real world scenes, with robustness to clutter, viewpoint, and occlusion.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction is a fundamental challenge of
computer vision. Most reconstruction techniques focus on
estimating surface geometry, in the form of meshes, point-

clouds, voxels, or other low-level representations. Suppose
that you had access to a database of 3D models of every object in the world; then you could generate a scene model by
identifying which objects are in which locations and placing them there. We call this variant of the reconstruction
problem scene recomposition. While previously such an
approach was not feasible at scale, the advent of large CAD
repositories like ShapeNet [10] begins to make scene recomposition tractable for real-world scenes.
Scene recomposition has a number of advantages over
scene reconstruction. First, whereas reconstruction methods often generate holes and capture only visible surfaces,
recomposition yields more complete models, including
back-facing and hidden geometry (see Figure. 1). Second,
CAD models are clean, segmented, and hand-optimized,
and thus better suited for applications like games, VR,
robotics, etc. And third, recomposed models can be easily edited by moving objects around, replacing objects, and
often come with semantic labels and annotated parts.
Recomposition is not a new idea, dating back to the first
“blocks world” methods from the 1960s [44], with a modelbased approach to more recent examples of SLAM++ [51]
and IM2CAD [25]. We introduce the first fully automatic
3D scene recomposition that takes an RGBD sequence as
input and produces a model of the scene composed of bestmatched CAD models from thousands of 3D CAD models.
In addition, we propose a novel learning-based ICP technique for aligning CAD models to scanned geometry.

930

