BBN: Bilateral-Branch Network with Cumulative Learning
for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Boyan Zhou1
Quan Cui1,2
Xiu-Shen Wei1∗
Zhao-Min Chen1,3
1
2
3
Megvii Technology
Waseda University
Nanjing University

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the advent of research on deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), the performance of image classiﬁcation
has witnessed incredible progress. The success is undoubt∗ X.-S. Wei is the corresponding author (weixs.gm@gmail.com). Q. Cui

and Z.-M. Chen’s contribution was made when they were interns in Megvii
Research Nanjing, Megvii Technology, China. This research was supported
by National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800).

Number of images

Our work focuses on tackling the challenging but natural visual recognition task of long-tailed data distribution
(i.e., a few classes occupy most of the data, while most
classes have rarely few samples). In the literature, class
re-balancing strategies (e.g., re-weighting and re-sampling)
are the prominent and effective methods proposed to alleviate the extreme imbalance for dealing with long-tailed
problems. In this paper, we ﬁrstly discover that these rebalancing methods achieving satisfactory recognition accuracy owe to that they could signiﬁcantly promote the classiﬁer learning of deep networks. However, at the same time,
they will unexpectedly damage the representative ability of
the learned deep features to some extent. Therefore, we
propose a uniﬁed Bilateral-Branch Network (BBN) to take
care of both representation learning and classiﬁer learning
simultaneously, where each branch does perform its own
duty separately. In particular, our BBN model is further
equipped with a novel cumulative learning strategy, which
is designed to ﬁrst learn the universal patterns and then
pay attention to the tail data gradually. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets, including the large-scale
iNaturalist ones, justify that the proposed BBN can significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore,
validation experiments can demonstrate both our preliminary discovery and effectiveness of tailored designs in BBN
for long-tailed problems. Our method won the ﬁrst place
in the iNaturalist 2019 large scale species classiﬁcation
competition, and our code is open-source and available at
https://github.com/Megvii-Nanjing/BBN .

Head class

Tail class
Head
Tail
Class index

Feature space
Head class

Feature space
Head class

Tail class
Before re-balancing

Tail class
After re-balancing

Figure 1. Real-world large-scale datasets often display the phenomenon of long-tailed distributions. The extreme imbalance
causes tremendous challenges on the classiﬁcation accuracy, especially for the tail classes. Class re-balancing strategies can yield
better classiﬁcation accuracy for long-tailed problems. In this paper,
we reveal that the mechanism of these strategies is to signiﬁcantly
promote classiﬁer learning but will unexpectedly damage the representative ability of the learned deep features to some extent. As
conceptually demonstrated, after re-balancing, the decision boundary (i.e., black solid arc) tends to accurately classify the tail data
(i.e., red squares). However, the intra-class distribution of each
class becomes more separable. Quantitative results are presented
in Figure 2, and more analyses can be found in the supplementary
materials.

edly inseparable to available and high-quality large-scale
datasets, e.g., ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 [24], MS COCO [18]
and Places Database [37], etc. In contrast with these visual
recognition datasets exhibiting roughly uniform distributions
of class labels, real-world datasets always have skewed distributions with a long tail [15, 26], i.e., a few classes (a.k.a.
head class) occupy most of the data, while most classes
(a.k.a. tail class) have rarely few samples, cf. Figure 1.
Moreover, more and more long-tailed datasets reﬂecting
the realistic challenges are constructed and released by the
computer vision community in very recent years, e.g., iNaturalist [6], LVIS [10] and RPC [29]. When dealing with

9719

