ClusterVO: Clustering Moving Instances and Estimating Visual Odometry
for Self and Surroundings

1

Jiahui Huang1 Sheng Yang2 Tai-Jiang Mu1 Shi-Min Hu1∗
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
2
Alibaba Inc., China
huang-jh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, shengyang93fs@gmail.com
taijiang@tsinghua.edu.cn, shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present ClusterVO, a stereo Visual Odometry which
simultaneously clusters and estimates the motion of both
ego and surrounding rigid clusters/objects. Unlike previous
solutions relying on batch input or imposing priors on scene
structure or dynamic object models, ClusterVO is online,
general and thus can be used in various scenarios including
indoor scene understanding and autonomous driving. At the
core of our system lies a multi-level probabilistic association mechanism and a heterogeneous Conditional Random
Field (CRF) clustering approach combining semantic, spatial and motion information to jointly infer cluster segmentations online for every frame. The poses of camera and dynamic objects are instantly solved through a sliding-window
optimization. Our system is evaluated on Oxford Multimotion and KITTI dataset both quantitatively and qualitatively,
reaching comparable results to state-of-the-art solutions on
both odometry and dynamic trajectory recovery.

1. Introduction
Understanding surrounding dynamic objects is an important step beyond ego-motion estimation in the current visual
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) community for the frontier requirements of advanced Augmented
Reality (AR) or autonomous things navigation: In typical
use cases of Dynamic AR, these dynamics need to be explicitly tracked to enable interactions of virtual object with
moving instances in the real world. In outdoor autonomous
driving scenes, a car should not only accurately localize itself but also reliably sense other moving cars to avoid possible collisions.
Despite the above need from emerging applications to
perceive scene motions, most classical SLAM systems [4,
19, 20, 28] merely regard dynamics as outliers during
∗ corresponding author.

Stereo Input with
Dynamic Objects

Indoor Recording

On-board Video
Stream

Static Map + Moving Objects
Applications
Recovery

Cluster
VO

Dynamic AR

Autonomous
Driving

Figure 1. Our proposed system ClusterVO can simultaneously recover the camera ego-motion as well as cluster trajectories.

pose estimation. Recently, advances in vision and robotics
have demonstrated us with new possibilities of developing
motion-aware Dynamic SLAM systems by coupling various different vision techniques like detection and tracking [5, 32, 36]. Nevertheless, currently these systems are
often tailored for special use cases: For indoor scenes where
dense RGB-D data are available, geometric features including convexity or structure regularities are used to assist segmentation [6, 34, 35, 38, 46]. For outdoor scenes, object
priors like car sizes or road planar structure are exploited to
constrain the solution spaces [2, 24, 26, 48]. These different
assumptions render existing algorithms hardly applicable to
general dynamic scenarios. Contrarily, ClusterSLAM [15]
incorporates no scene prior, but it acts as a backend instead
of a full system whose performance relies heavily on the
landmark tracking and association quality.
To bridge the above gap in current Dynamic SLAM solutions in the literature, we propose ClusterVO, a stereo visual odometry system for dynamic scenes, which simultaneously optimizes the poses of camera and multiple moving
objects, regarded as clusters of point landmarks, in a unified
manner, achieving a competitive frame-rate with promising tracking and segmentation ability as listed in Table 1.
Because no geometric or shape priors on the scene or dy12168

