Auto-Encoding Twin-Bottleneck Hashing
Yuming Shen∗ 1 , Jie Qin∗† 1 , Jiaxin Chen∗1 , Mengyang Yu 1 ,
Li Liu 1 , Fan Zhu 1 , Fumin Shen 2 , and Ling Shao 1
1

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
ymcidence@gmail.com

Abstract

Scopes Solved by Back-Propagation

∗

Conventional unsupervised hashing methods usually
take advantage of similarity graphs, which are either precomputed in the high-dimensional space or obtained from
random anchor points. On the one hand, existing methods uncouple the procedures of hash function learning and
graph construction. On the other hand, graphs empirically built upon original data could introduce biased prior
knowledge of data relevance, leading to sub-optimal retrieval performance. In this paper, we tackle the above
problems by proposing an efficient and adaptive codedriven graph, which is updated by decoding in the context of an auto-encoder. Specifically, we introduce into
our framework twin bottlenecks (i.e., latent variables) that
exchange crucial information collaboratively. One bottleneck (i.e., binary codes) conveys the high-level intrinsic
data structure captured by the code-driven graph to the
other (i.e., continuous variables for low-level detail information), which in turn propagates the updated network
feedback for the encoder to learn more discriminative binary codes. The auto-encoding learning objective literally rewards the code-driven graph to learn an optimal encoder. Moreover, the proposed model can be simply optimized by gradient descent without violating the binary
constraints. Experiments on benchmarked datasets clearly
show the superiority of our framework over the state-ofthe-art hashing methods. Our source code can be found
at https://github.com/ymcidence/TBH.

1. Introduction
Approximate Nearest Neighbour (ANN) search has attracted ever-increasing attention in the era of big data.
Thanks to the extremely low costs for computing Hamming
distances, binary coding/hashing has been appreciated as
∗ Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Decoder

Graph Convolution

Similarity Graph
(Pre-Computed)

00 11 10 01
0 1 0 1

00 11 10 01
0 1 0 1

Encoder

Encoder
(a)

(b)

Binary Bottleneck

Similarity Graph
(Code Driven)

00 11 10 01
0 1 0 1

Encoder

Decoder
0.1
0.4 0.3
1.6 0.3
0.1
0.10.4
0.40.3
0.31.6
1.60.3
0.3

∗

Continuous Bottleneck

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of the differences between (a) graph-based
hashing, (b) unsupervised generative auto-encoding hashing, and
(c) the proposed model (TBH).

an efficient solution to ANN search. Similar to other feature learning schemes, hashing techniques can be typically
subdivided into supervised and unsupervised ones. Supervised hashing [11, 23, 25, 39, 45, 48], which highly depends on labels, is not always preferable since large-scale
data annotations are unaffordable. Conversely, unsupervised hashing [12, 16, 15, 20, 33, 47, 46], provides a costeffective solution for more practical applications. To exploit data similarities, existing unsupervised hashing methods [29, 30, 43, 35, 41] have extensively employed graphbased paradigms. Nevertheless, existing methods usually
suffer from the ‘static graph’ problem. More concretely,
they often adopt explicitly pre-computed graphs, introducing biased prior knowledge of data relevance. Besides,
graphs cannot be adaptively updated to better model the
data structure. The interaction between hash function learning and graph construction can be hardly established. The
‘static graph’ problem greatly hinders the effectiveness of
graph-based unsupervised hashing mechanisms.
In this work, we tackle the above long-standing chal-

2818

