G3 AN: Disentangling Appearance and Motion for Video Generation
Yaohui Wang1,2 Piotr Bilinski3 Francois Bremond1,2 Antitza Dantcheva1,2
1
Inria 2 Université Côte d’Azur 3 University of Warsaw
{yaohui.wang, francois.bremond, antitza.dantcheva}@inria.fr

Abstract
Creating realistic human videos entails the challenge
of being able to simultaneously generate both appearance,
as well as motion. To tackle this challenge, we introduce
G3 AN, a novel spatio-temporal generative model, which
seeks to capture the distribution of high dimensional video
data and to model appearance and motion in disentangled
manner. The latter is achieved by decomposing appearance and motion in a three-stream Generator, where the
main stream aims to model spatio-temporal consistency,
whereas the two auxiliary streams augment the main stream
with multi-scale appearance and motion features, respectively. An extensive quantitative and qualitative analysis
shows that our model systematically and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the facial expression
datasets MUG and UvA-NEMO, as well as the Weizmann
and UCF101 datasets on human action. Additional analysis on the learned latent representations confirms the successful decomposition of appearance and motion. Source
code and pre-trained models are publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] have witnessed increasing attention due to their ability to model
complex data distributions, which allows them to generate
realistic images [5, 17, 18, 21, 24, 25, 41, 44], as well as to
translate images [2, 15, 29, 32]. While realistic video generation is the natural sequel, it is substantially more challenging w.r.t. complexity and computation, associated to the
simultaneous modeling of appearance, as well as motion.
Specifically, in inferring and modeling the distribution
of human videos, generative models face three main challenges: (a) generating uncertain motion, (b) retaining of
human appearance throughout the generated video, as well
as (c) modeling spatio-temporal consistency. Such challenges have been alleviated by conditioning the generation
on potent priors such as input images [42], human keypoints [7] and optical flows [23]. This relates to learning
to sample from conditional distributions, assuming access

bilinski@mimuw.edu.pl

to the marginal distributions instead of learning joint distributions [27].
Deviating from such approaches, in this work we focus
on the highly intricate problem of video generation without
prior knowledge w.r.t. either appearance or motion. Specifically, based on noise variables, we generate an appearance,
e.g. human face and body, which we concurrently animate,
by a facial expression or human action.
G3 AN, our new generative model, is streamlined to learn
a disentangled representation of the video generative factors appearance and motion, allowing for manipulation of
both. A disentangled representation has been defined as
one, where single latent units are sensitive to changes in
single generative factors, while being relatively invariant to
changes in other factors [4]. In this context, our G3 AN is
endowed with a three-stream Generator-architecture, where
the main stream encodes spatio-temporal video representation, augmented by two auxiliary streams, representing the
independent generative factors appearance and motion. A
self-attention mechanism targeted towards high level feature maps ensures satisfactory video quality.
G3 AN is hence able to generate realistic videos (tackling
challenges (a) and (c)) by following a training distribution
and without additional input, as well as is able to manipulate the appearance and motion disjointly, while placing
emphasis on preserving appearance (challenge (b)).
In summary, our main technical contributions include
the following.
• A novel generative model, G3 AN, which seeks to learn
disentangled representations of the generative factors
appearance and motion from human video data. The
representations allow for individual manipulation of
both factors.
• A novel three-stream generator, which takes into account the learning of individual appearance features
(spatial stream), motion features (temporal stream)
and smoothing generated videos (main stream) at the
same time.
• A novel factorized spatio-temporal self-attention (FSA), which is considered as the first self-attention module applied to video generation, in order to model
global spatio-temporal representations and improve
the quality of generated videos.

1 https://wyhsirius.github.io/G3AN/

5264

