Revisiting the Sibling Head in Object Detector
Guanglu Song1 Yu Liu2∗ Xiaogang Wang2
1
SenseTime X-Lab
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
1
songguanglu@sensetime.com, 2 {yuliu, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
The “shared head for classification and localization”
(sibling head), firstly denominated in Fast RCNN [9], has
been leading the fashion of the object detection community in the past five years. This paper provides the observation that the spatial misalignment between the two object functions in the sibling head can considerably hurt the
training process, but this misalignment can be resolved by
a very simple operator called task-aware spatial disentanglement (TSD). Considering the classification and regression, TSD decouples them from the spatial dimension by
generating two disentangled proposals for them, which are
estimated by the shared proposal. This is inspired by the
natural insight that for one instance, the features in some
salient area may have rich information for classification
while these around the boundary may be good at bounding
box regression. Surprisingly, this simple design can boost
all backbones and models on both MS COCO and Google
OpenImage consistently by ∼3% mAP. Further, we propose
a progressive constraint to enlarge the performance margin between the disentangled and the shared proposals, and
gain ∼1% more mAP. We show the TSD breaks through the
upper bound of nowadays single-model detector by a large
margin (mAP 49.4 with ResNet-101, 51.2 with SENet154),
and is the core model of our 1st place solution on the
Google OpenImage Challenge 2019.

1. Introduction
Since the breakthrough of object detection performance
has been achieved by seminal R-CNN families [10, 9, 30]
and powerful FPN [21], the subsequent performance enhancement of this task seems to be hindered by some concealed bottlenecks. Even the advanced algorithms bolstered by AutoML [8, 38] have been delved, the performance gain is still limited to an easily accessible improvement range. As the most obvious distinction from the
∗ Corresponding author

Classification

Localization

Figure 1. Illustration of the task spatial misalignment. The first
column is the sensitive location for classification and the second
column is the sensitive location for localization. The third column
is the 3D visualization of the sensitivity distribution.

generic object classification task, the specialized sibling
head for both classification and localization comes into focus and is widely used in most of advanced detectors including single stage family [25, 33, 12], two-stage family [5, 18, 40, 26, 19] and anchor free family [17]. Considering the two different tasks share almost the same parameters, a few works become conscious about the conflict
between the two object functions in the sibling head and try
to find a trade-off way.
IoU-Net [15] is the first to reveal this problem. They
find the feature which generates a good classification score
always predicts a coarse bounding box. To handle this problem, they first introduce an extra head to predict the IoU as
the localization confidence, and then aggregate the localization confidence and the classification confidence together to
be the final classification score. This approach does reduce
the misalignment problem but in a compromise manner –
the essential philosophy behind it is relatively raising the
confidence score of a tight bounding box and reduce the
score of a bad one. The misalignment still exists in each
spatial point. Along with this direction, Double-Head RCNN [35] is proposed to disentangle the sibling head into

11563

