Pattern-Structure Diffusion for Multi-Task Learning
Ling Zhou, Zhen Cui∗, Chunyan Xu, Zhenyu Zhang, Chaoqun Wang, Tong Zhang, Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Inspired by the observation that pattern structures highfrequently recur within intra-task also across tasks, we propose a pattern-structure diffusion (PSD) framework to mine
and propagate task-specific and task-across pattern structures in the task-level space for joint depth estimation, segmentation and surface normal prediction. To represent local pattern structures, we model them as small-scale
graphlets1 , and propagate them in two different ways, i.e.,
intra-task and inter-task PSD. For the former, to overcome
the limit of the locality of pattern structures, we use the
high-order recursive aggregation on neighbors to multiplicatively increase the spread scope, so that long-distance
patterns are propagated in the intra-task space. In the intertask PSD, we mutually transfer the counterpart structures
corresponding to the same spatial position into the task itself based on the matching degree of paired pattern structures therein. Finally, the intra-task and inter-task pattern
structures are jointly diffused among the task-level patterns,
and encapsulated into an end-to-end PSD network to boost
the performance of multi-task learning. Extensive experiments on two widely-used benchmarks demonstrate that our
proposed PSD is more effective and also achieves the stateof-the-art or competitive results.

1. Introduction
Dense pixel prediction tasks, e.g., depth estimation, segmentation and surface normal prediction, are fundamental
yet challenging in computer vision due to the important applications to intelligent robotic [42], automatic drive [6],
etc. Currently, numerous deep learning based methods have
obtained great success in each of three tasks. However, the
single-task models focus more on the learning of robust regression, but rarely consider the interactions between tasks.
As the pixel-level tasks in scene understanding, actually,
these three tasks have some common characteristics that can
∗ Corresponding author: zhen.cui@njust.edu.cn
1 Graphlets are small connected subgraphs of a large graph

Segmentation

Intra-task PSD

RGB image

Inter-task PSD

Surface Normal

Depth

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. For multi-task learning, we specifically design intra-task and inter-task patternstructure diffusion (PSD) to mine and propagate useful pattern structures within/across tasks. Inter-task PSD bridges two tasks to mutually transfer pattern structures for each other through derived correlations, while intra-task PSD propagates within-task patterns through high-order diffusion on
graphlets.
share with each other.
Recently joint-task learning methods [29, 55, 8, 38, 53]
have sprung up and shown a promising direction to boost
the performance through cross-task interactions. Most of
them devote to feature fusion (e.g., concatenation) or model
sharing (e.g., common network parameters) by following
the conventional fusion lines. Due to unintentional integration, these ”black-box” methods cannot concern/know
what concrete information is transmitted/interacted between multi-tasks. Ultimately, what information could be
available to bridge different tasks has not yet been well revealed and utilized in the study of multi-task pixel prediction.
An observation [58] is that local patch patterns highfrequently recur within the same image, as well as different14514

