Generative-discriminative Feature Representations for Open-set Recognition
Pramuditha Perera∗
Johns Hopkins University

Vlad I. Morariu
Adobe Research

Rajiv Jain
Adobe Research

Varun Manjunatha
Adobe Research

pperera3@jhu.edu

morariu@adobe.com

rajijain@adobe.com

vmanjuna@adobe.com

Curtis Wigington
Adobe Research

Vicente Ordonez
University of Virginia

Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University

wigingto@adobe.com

vicente@virginia.edu

vpatel36@jhu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of open-set recognition, where
the goal is to determine if a given sample belongs to one
of the classes used for training a model (known classes).
The main challenge in open-set recognition is to disentangle
open-set samples that produce high class activations from
known-set samples. We propose two techniques to force
class activations of open-set samples to be low. First, we
train a generative model for all known classes and then
augment the input with the representation obtained from the
generative model to learn a classifier. This network learns
to associate high classification probabilities both when the
image content is from the correct class as well as when
the input and the reconstructed image are consistent with
each other. Second, we use self-supervision to force the
network to learn more informative features when assigning class scores to improve separation of classes from each
other and from open-set samples. We evaluate the performance of the proposed method with recent open-set recognition works across three datasets, where we obtain stateof-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Supervised classification systems are trained with the
knowledge of a finite set of labeled training examples.
When training data comes from k distinct known classes,
a deep network classifier simultaneously learns a descriptive feature space and a decision rule that segments the
feature space into k non-overlapping regions as shown in
Figure 1(a). When an object outside the known class set
(known as a novel object or an open-set object) is introduced to the network, the network will still associate it with
one of the known k classes (Figure 1(b)). The goal of open∗ This work was completed while the author was working as an intern

at Adobe Research.

Figure 1. (a) Given a set of known classes, a classifier defines a
positive half space for each class by only considering class separation. (b) An open-set object could project either near a decision boundary (samples B and C) or deep into the positive half
space (samples A and D) of a given class. The latter is harder
to detect when the class activation scores are considered. (c) We
learn a classifier which takes into account more factors than just
class separation. First, we use self-supervision to make the feature
space more descriptive to force open-set samples to separate better
from known classes. Second, we augment the feature space with
a generative representation. The disparity between input images
and their representations are taken into consideration when the decision boundaries are defined. When open-set samples produce
high disparity, better open-set sample detection is obtained.

set detection1 is to identify whether a given object instance
belongs to the known class set or not. Once identified, openset samples can be either discarded to prevent wrong association or used to improve the classification system [2], [23].
A straightforward solution to the stated problem is to
threshold the probability of the most probable class produced by the network [12]. CNNs are trained with the objective of maximizing the probability of the correct class
over the training data. Therefore, if the training process
generalizes well enough, query samples from known classes
1 The terms open-set detection and multiple-class novelty detection have
been used interchangeably in the literature. We make no distinction between these two terms in this paper.

111814

