DeepFLASH: An Efficient Network for Learning-based
Medical Image Registration
Jian Wang
University of Virginia

Miaomiao Zhang
University of Virginia

jw4hv@virginia.edu

mz8rr@virginia.edu

Abstract
This paper presents DeepFLASH, a novel network with
efficient training and inference for learning-based medical
image registration. In contrast to existing approaches that
learn spatial transformations from training data in the high
dimensional imaging space, we develop a new registration
network entirely in a low dimensional bandlimited space.
This dramatically reduces the computational cost and memory footprint of an expensive training and inference. To
achieve this goal, we first introduce complex-valued operations and representations of neural architectures that provide key components for learning-based registration models. We then construct an explicit loss function of transformation fields fully characterized in a bandlimited space
with much fewer parameterizations. Experimental results
show that our method is significantly faster than the stateof-the-art deep learning based image registration methods,
while producing equally accurate alignment. We demonstrate our algorithm in two different applications of image
registration: 2D synthetic data and 3D real brain magnetic resonance (MR) images. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jw4hv/deepflash.

1. Introduction
Image registration has been widely used in medical image analysis, for instance, atlas-based image segmentation [2, 16], anatomical shape analysis [20, 33], and motion correction in dynamic imaging [18]. The problem of
deformable image registration is typically formulated as an
optimization, seeking for a nonlinear and dense (voxelwise)
spatial transformation between images. In many applications, it is desirable that such transformations be diffeomorphisms, i.e., differentiable, bijective mappings with differentiable inverses. In this paper, we focus on diffeomorphic
image registration highlighting with a set of critical features: (i) it captures large deformations that often occur in
brain shape variations, lung motions, or fetal movements;

(ii) the topology of objects in the image remain intact; and
(iii) no non-differentiable artifacts, such as creases or sharp
corners, are introduced. However, achieving an optimal solution of diffeomorphic image registration, especially for
large-scale or high-resolution images (e.g., a 3D brain MRI
scan with the size of 2563 ), is computationally intensive and
time-consuming.
Attempts at speeding up diffeomorphic image registration have been made in recent works by improving numerical approximation schemes. For example, Ashburner and
Friston [3] employ a Gauss-Newton method to accelerate
the convergence of large deformation diffeomorphic metric
mapping (LDDMM) algorithm [8]. Zhang et al. propose a
low dimensional approximation of diffeomorphic transformations, resulting in fast computation of the gradients for
iterative optimization [32, 27]. While these methods have
led to substantial reductions in running time, such gradientbased optimization still takes minutes to finish. Instead of
minimizing a complex registration energy function [8, 31],
an alternative approach has leveraged deep learning techniques to improve registration speed by building prediction
models of transformation parameters. Such algorithms typically adopt convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn
a mapping between pairwise images and associated spatial
transformations in training dataset [28, 21, 7, 10, 9]. Registration of new testing images is then achieved rapidly by
evaluating the learned mapping on given volumes. While
the aforementioned deep learning approaches are able to
fast predict the deformation parameters in testing, the training process is extremely slow and memory intensive due to
the high dimensionality of deformation parameters in imaging space. In addition, enforcing the smoothness constraints
of transformations when large deformation occurs is challenging in neural networks.
To address this issue, we propose a novel learning-based
registration framework DeepFLASH in a low dimensional
bandlimited space, where the diffeomorphic transformations are fully characterized with much fewer dimensions.
Our work is inspired by a recent registration algorithm
FLASH (Fourier-approximated Lie Algebras for Shoot-

4444

