Hyperbolic Image Embeddings
Valentin Khrulkov1,4 * Leyla Mirvakhabova1 * Evgeniya Ustinova1
Ivan Oseledets1,2 Victor Lempitsky1,3
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow1
Institute of Numerical Mathematics of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow2
Samsung AI Center, Moscow3
Yandex, Moscow4
{valentin.khrulkov,leyla.mirvakhabova,evgeniya.ustinova,i.oseledets,lempitsky}@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Computer vision tasks such as image classification, image retrieval, and few-shot learning are currently dominated by Euclidean and spherical embeddings so that the
final decisions about class belongings or the degree of similarity are made using linear hyperplanes, Euclidean distances, or spherical geodesic distances (cosine similarity).
In this work, we demonstrate that in many practical scenarios, hyperbolic embeddings provide a better alternative.

1. Introduction
Learned high-dimensional embeddings are ubiquitous in
modern computer vision. Learning aims to group together
semantically-similar images and to separate semanticallydifferent images. When the learning process is successful, simple classifiers can be used to assign an image to
classes, and simple distance measures can be used to assess
the similarity between images or image fragments. The operations at the end of deep networks imply a certain type
of geometry of the embedding spaces. For example, image
classification networks [19, 22] use linear operators (matrix multiplication) to map embeddings in the penultimate
layer to class logits. The class boundaries in the embedding space are thus piecewise-linear, and pairs of classes
are separated by Euclidean hyperplanes. The embeddings
learned by the model in the penultimate layer, therefore, live
in the Euclidean space. The same can be said about systems
where Euclidean distances are used to perform image retrieval [31, 44, 58], face recognition [33, 57] or one-shot
learning [43].
Alternatively, some few-shot learning [53], face recognition [41], and person re-identification methods [52, 59]
* Equal contribution

Figure 1: An example of two–dimensional Poincaré embeddings computed by a hyperbolic neural network trained on
MNIST, and evaluated additionally on Omniglot. Ambiguous and unclear images from MNIST, as well as most of
the images from Omniglot, are embedded near the center,
while samples with clear class labels (or characters from
Omniglot similar to one of the digits) lie near the boundary.
*For inference, Omniglot was normalized to have the same
background color as MNIST. Omniglot images are marked
with black crosses, MNIST images with colored dots.
learn spherical embeddings, so that sphere projection operator is applied at the end of a network that computes
the embeddings. Cosine similarity (closely associated with
16418

