Density-Aware Feature Embedding for Face Clustering
Senhui Guo1∗ Jing Xu1∗ Dapeng Chen1 † Chao Zhang2 Xiaogang Wang3
1
SenseTime Group Limited 2 Samsung Research China - Beijing(SRC-B)

3

Rui Zhao1
CUHK

Abstract
Clustering has many applications in research and industry. However, traditional clustering methods, such as
K-means, DBSCAN and HAC, impose oversimplifying assumptions and thus are not well-suited to face clustering.
To adapt to the distribution of realistic problems, a natural
approach is to use Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs)
to enhance features for clustering. However, GCNs can only
utilize local information, which ignores the overall characteristics of the clusters. In this paper, we propose a DensityAware Feature Embedding Network (DA-Net) for the task
of face clustering, which utilizes both local and non-local
information, to learn a robust feature embedding. Specifically, DA-Net uses GCNs to aggregate features locally,
and then incorporates non-local information using a density chain, which is a chain of faces from low density to
high density. This density chain exploits the non-uniform
distribution of face images in the dataset. Then, an LSTM
takes the density chain as input to generate the final feature
embedding. Once this embedding is generated, traditional
clustering methods, such as density-based clustering, can
be used to obtain the final clustering results. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of the proposed feature
embedding method, which can achieve state-of-the-art performance on public benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the advances in face detection and recognition, face images can be conveniently collected from the
internet or surveillance cameras and further be represented
by robust feature vectors. In this situation, there arises a
requirement to analyze the face features automatically, and
clustering is a practical tool with a wide range of applications. Previously developed non-deep clustering methods
use certain global hyper-parameters to determine clustering
behavior. For example, DBSCAN relies on a threshold to
determine if two nodes should belong to the same cluster,
hierarchical clustering methods also employ some criteria
to decide when the cluster splitting or merging should be
∗ Co-first authors

guosenhui@sensetime.com, xjintw@hotmail.com
chendapeng@sensetime.com

† Corresponding authors

original feature distribution a b

building graph

c d

establishing chains

ﬁnal feature distribution

Figure 1. Distribution of face images using Density-Aware Feature Embedding. Circles denote face images of one cluster. Triangles denote face images of another cluster. By establishing density
chain from low-density faces to high-density faces, our DA-Net
aims to capture relevant information from long-range neighbors
for obtaining better feature embedding.

stopped. However, these methods do not perform well on
face image datasets with complex distributions, because the
variation of the boundary condition of each person’s image
distribution makes it impossible to cluster face images well
enough at the same time. Therefore, a method that can learn
to deal with each cluster individually is required. Existing
deep learning-based methods for face clustering mainly focus on classifying inter-sample relationships. For example,
the approach in [23, 28] learns to recognize the pair-wise relationship of whether they should belong together, and the
approach in [27] learns to classify whether several samples
belong to the same cluster.
Existing non-deep learning and deep learning approaches use visual features from the feature extraction
module directly, which introduces a number of issues.
Specifically, as the images of one person can be very differ-

6698

