Learning to Structure an Image with Few Colors
Yunzhong Hou Liang Zheng Stephen Gould
Australian National University
{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Color and structure are the two pillars that construct an
image. Usually, the structure is well expressed through a
rich spectrum of colors, allowing objects in an image to be
recognized by neural networks. However, under extreme
limitations of color space, the structure tends to vanish,
and thus a neural network might fail to understand the image. Interested in exploring this interplay between color
and structure, we study the scientific problem of identifying and preserving the most informative image structures
while constraining the color space to just a few bits, such
that the resulting image can be recognized with possibly
high accuracy. To this end, we propose a color quantization network, ColorCNN, which learns to structure the
images from the classification loss in an end-to-end manner. Given a color space size, ColorCNN quantizes colors in the original image by generating a color index map
and an RGB color palette. Then, this color-quantized image is fed to a pre-trained task network to evaluate its performance. In our experiment, with only a 1-bit color space
(i.e., two colors), the proposed network achieves 82.1% top1 accuracy on the CIFAR10 dataset, outperforming traditional color quantization methods by a large margin. For
applications, when encoded with PNG, the proposed color
quantization shows superiority over other image compression methods in the extremely low bit-rate regime. The
code is available at https://github.com/hou-yz/
color_distillation.

1. Introduction
Color and structure are two important aspects of a natural
image. The structure is viewed as a combination of shapes,
textures, etc, and is closely related to colors. Particularly,
the structure is well presented only when there exists a sufficient set of colors. In this paper, we are interested in how
structure can be best presented under color constraints.
In literature, a closely related line of works is color quantization. Color quantization investigates how to preserve
visual similarity in a restricted color space [17, 29]. This

(a) Original

(b) 4-bit

(c) 2-bit

(d) 1-bit

Figure 1: Color quantized images (top row) and class activation maps [50] with softmax probabilities for the ground
truth classes (bottom row) in decreasing color space sizes.
In “Original” (a), colors are described by 24 bits. In (b), (c)
and (d), fewer bits are used. We use MedianCut [17] as the
quantization method. When the color space is reduced, the
focus of neural network deviates from the informative parts
in (a) (correctly recognized (green)), resulting in recognition failures (red) in (b), (c), and (d).
problem is human-centered, as it usually focuses on the visual quality for human viewing. Particularly, most existing
methods are designed under a relatively large color space,
e.g., 8-bit, so that quantized images are still visually similar
to the original images. In smaller color spaces, e.g., 2-bit or
1-bit, color quantization remains an open question.
Natural images usually contain rich colors and structures. When the color space is limited, their connection will
compromise the structure. For example, in the first row of
Fig. 1, structures vanish as the color space reduces. Moreover, we argue that the neural network trained on original
natural images might be ineffective in recognizing quantized images with few colors. In fact, quantized colors and
compromised structures drift the attention of the neural network, which might result in recognition failures. For example, in the second row of Fig. 1, a neural network trained
on original images finds the head and body most critical for
recognizing the dog. When the color space is reduced gradually, the neural network first fails to attend to the head, and
then the body, thus leading to recognition failures.
110116

