Camouflaged Object Detection
Deng-Ping Fan1,2 , Ge-Peng Ji3 , Guolei Sun4 , Ming-Ming Cheng2 , Jianbing Shen1,∗, Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 2 College of CS, Nankai University, China
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China 4 ETH Zurich, Switzerland
http://dpfan.net/Camouflage/

Figure 1: Examples from our COD10K dataset. Camouflaged objects are concealed in these images. Can you find them?
Best viewed in color and zoomed-in. Answers are presented in the supplementary material.

Abstract
We present a comprehensive study on a new task named
camouflaged object detection (COD), which aims to identify objects that are “seamlessly” embedded in their surroundings. The high intrinsic similarities between the target
object and the background make COD far more challenging than the traditional object detection task. To address
this issue, we elaborately collect a novel dataset, called
COD10K, which comprises 10,000 images covering camouflaged objects in various natural scenes, over 78 object
categories. All the images are densely annotated with category, bounding-box, object-/instance-level, and mattinglevel labels. This dataset could serve as a catalyst for progressing many vision tasks, e.g., localization, segmentation,
and alpha-matting, etc. In addition, we develop a simple
but effective framework for COD, termed Search Identification Network (SINet). Without any bells and whistles,
SINet outperforms various state-of-the-art object detection
baselines on all datasets tested, making it a robust, general framework that can help facilitate future research in
COD. Finally, we conduct a large-scale COD study, evaluating 13 cutting-edge models, providing some interesting
findings, and showing several potential applications. Our
research offers the community an opportunity to explore
more in this new field. The code will be available at: https://github.com/DengPingFan/SINet/

1. Introduction
Can you find the concealed object(s) in each image of
Fig. 1? Biologists call this background matching camou* Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbingcg@gmail.com).

(a) Image

(b) Generic
(c) Salient (d) Camouflaged
object
object
object
Figure 2: Given an input image (a), we present the ground-truth
for (b) panoptic segmentation [30] (which detects generic objects [39,44] including stuff and things), (c) salient instance/object detection [16, 33, 61, 76] (which detects objects that grasp human attention), and (d) the proposed camouflaged object detection task,
where the goal is to detect objects that have a similar pattern (e.g.,
edge, texture, or color) to the natural habitat. In this case, the
boundaries of the two butterflies are blended with the bananas,
making them difficult to identify.

flage [9], where an animal attempts to adapt their body’s
coloring to match “perfectly” with the surroundings in order to avoid recognition [48]. Sensory ecologists [57] have
found that this camouflage strategy works by deceiving the
visual perceptual system of the observer. Thus, addressing
camouflaged object detection (COD) requires a significant amount of visual perception [60] knowledge. As shown
in Fig. 2, the high intrinsic similarities between the target
object and the background make COD far more challenging
than the traditional salient object detection [1, 5, 17, 25, 62–
66, 68] or generic object detection [4, 79].
In addition to its scientific value, COD is also beneficial
for applications in the fields of computer vision (for searchand-rescue work, or rare species discovery), medical image
segmentation (e.g., polyp segmentation [14], lung infection
segmentation [18, 67]), agriculture (e.g., locust detection to
prevent invasion), and art (e.g., for photo-realistic blending [21], or recreational art [6]).
Currently, camouflaged object detection is not well-

2777

