Correspondence Networks with Adaptive Neighbourhood Consensus
Shuda Li1∗

Kai Han2∗

Theo W. Costain1

Henry Howard-Jenkins1

Victor Prisacariu1

1

Active Vision Lab & 2 Visual Geometry Group
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{shuda, khan, costain, henryhj, victor}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the task of establishing dense visual correspondences between images containing objects of
the same category. This is a challenging task due to large
intra-class variations and a lack of dense pixel level annotations. We propose a convolutional neural network architecture, called adaptive neighbourhood consensus network
(ANC-Net), that can be trained end-to-end with sparse keypoint annotations, to handle this challenge. At the core of
ANC-Net is our proposed non-isotropic 4D convolution kernel, which forms the building block for the adaptive neighbourhood consensus module for robust matching. We also
introduce a simple and efficient multi-scale self-similarity
module in ANC-Net to make the learned feature robust to
intra-class variations. Furthermore, we propose a novel
orthogonal loss that can enforce the one-to-one matching
constraint. We thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness of our
method on various benchmarks, where it substantially outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Establishing visual correspondences has long been a fundamental problem in computer vision. It has seen variety
of applications in areas such as 3D reconstruction [1, 33],
image editing [6], scene understanding [24], and object detection [4].
Earlier works mainly focused on estimating correspondences for images of the same scene or object (i.e. instancelevel correspondences) using hand-crafted features such
as SIFT [26] or HOG [3]. Recently, finding correspondences for different instances from the same category (i.e.
semantic correspondences) has attracted more and more
attention[2, 9, 32, 10, 27]. In this paper, we focus on the
problem of establishing dense correspondences for a pair
of images depicting different instances from the same cate∗ indicates equal contribution

gory. This task is extremely challenging due to large intraclass variation in properties such as colour, scale, pose, and
illumination. Further, it is unreasonably expensive, if not
impossible, to provide dense annotations for such image
pairs.
To deal with the challenges mentioned above, we introduce a convolutional neural network (CNN), called
Adaptive Neighbourhood Consensus Network (ANC-Net),
which can produce reliable semantic correspondences without requiring dense human annotations. ANC-Net takes a
pair of images as input and predicts a 4D correlation map,
containing the matching scores for all possible matches between the two images. The most likely matches can then
be retrieved by finding the matches giving the maximum
matching scores.
ANC-Net consists of a CNN feature extractor, a multiscale self-similarity module, and an adaptive neighbourhood consensus module. At the core of ANC-Net is
our proposed non-isotropic 4D convolution, which incorporates an adaptive neighbourhood consensus constraint
for robust matching, and our proposed multi-scale selfsimilarity module, which aggregates multiple self-similarity
features, which are insensitive to intra-class appearance
variation[17].
CNN features have been very popular for the task of
correspondence estimation due to their promising performance, and most state-of-the-art methods are based on
CNN features [32, 27, 10, 17, 2]. Like other methods,
ANC-Net also extracts features with a pre-trained CNN.
However, instead of directly using the CNN features to calculate matching scores, we introduce the multi-scale selfsimilarity. Self-similarity has been introduced in existing
methods [10, 17]. Unlike other methods that either use
self-similarity as an extra feature alongside raw CNN features [10], or use computationally expensive irregular selfsimilarity patterns [17], our self-similarity features are both
computationally cheap to obtain, and do not need combining with raw CNN features, whist still capturing the complex self-similarity patterns.
110196

