GLU-Net: Global-Local Universal Network for
Dense Flow and Correspondences
Prune Truong

Martin Danelljan

Radu Timofte

Computer Vision Lab, D-ITET, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{prune.truong, martin.danelljan, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Establishing dense correspondences between a pair of
images is an important and general problem, covering geometric matching, optical flow and semantic correspondences. While these applications share fundamental challenges, such as large displacements, pixel-accuracy, and
appearance changes, they are currently addressed with specialized network architectures, designed for only one particular task. This severely limits the generalization capabilities of such networks to new scenarios, where e.g. robustness to larger displacements or higher accuracy is required.
In this work, we propose a universal network architecture that is directly applicable to all the aforementioned
dense correspondence problems. We achieve both high accuracy and robustness to large displacements by investigating the combined use of global and local correlation
layers. We further propose an adaptive resolution strategy, allowing our network to operate on virtually any input
image resolution. The proposed GLU-Net achieves stateof-the-art performance for geometric and semantic matching as well as optical flow, when using the same network
and weights. Code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/PruneTruong/GLU-Net.

1. Introduction
Finding pixel-to-pixel correspondences between images
continues to be a fundamental problem in Computer Vision [14, 18]. This is due to its many important applications, including visual localization [48, 53], 3Dreconstruction [1], structure-from-motion [47], image manipulation [16, 35], action recognition [50] and autonomous
driving [27]. Due to the astonishing performance achieved
by the recent developments in deep learning, end-to-end
trainable Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are now
applied for this task in all the aforementioned domains.
The general problem of estimating correspondences between pairs of images can be divided into several differ-

Figure 1. Our GLU-Net estimates dense correspondences between
a source (left) and a target (right) image. The estimated correspondences are here used to warp (center) the source image. The
warped result (center) accurately matches the target image (right).
The same network and weights are applied for Geometric matching, Semantic matching and Optical flow tasks.

ent tasks, depending on the origin of the images. In the
geometric matching task [18], the images constitute different views of the same scene, taken by a single or multiple
cameras. The images may be taken from radically different
viewpoints, leading to large displacements and appearance
transformations between the frames. On the other hand, optical flow [4, 20] aims to estimate accurate pixel-wise displacements between two consecutive frames of a sequence
or video. In the semantic matching problem [17, 35] (also
referred as semantic flow), the task is instead to find semantically meaningful correspondences between different
instances of the same scene category or object, such as ‘car’
or ‘horse’. Current methods generally address one of these
tasks, using specialized architectures that generalize poorly
to related correspondence problems. In this work, we therefore set out to design a universal architecture that jointly
addresses all aforementioned tasks.
One key architectural aspect shared by a variety of cor-

6258

