Cascaded Refinement Network for Point Cloud Completion
Xiaogang Wang
Marcelo H Ang Jr
Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore
xiaogangw@u.nus.edu {mpeangh,gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg

Input
Input

Abstract
Point clouds are often sparse and incomplete. Existing shape completion methods are incapable of generating details of objects or learning the complex point distributions. To this end, we propose a cascaded refinement
network together with a coarse-to-fine strategy to synthesize the detailed object shapes. Considering the local details of partial input with the global shape information together, we can preserve the existing details in the incomplete point set and generate the missing parts with high fidelity. We also design a patch discriminator that guarantees every local area has the same pattern with the ground
truth to learn the complicated point distribution. Quantitative and qualitative experiments on different datasets show
that our method achieves superior results compared to existing state-of-the-art approaches on the 3D point cloud
completion task. Our source code is available at https:
// github.com/ xiaogangw/ cascaded-point-completion.git.

1. Introduction
Despite the significant progress on image generation and
translation [41, 16], synthesizing and generating 3D point
clouds remains as a very challenging task due to the sparseness, incompleteness and irregularity of the points. More
specifically, the inabilities of learning accurate point features and various point distributions make it difficult to obtain a complete and dense object shape. In this work, we
focus on the point cloud completion [52, 36] task, which
completes missing parts of the occluded object. 3D shape
completion has wide applications such as robotic navigation [7, 26], scene understanding [17, 5] and augmented reality [2, 44].
Existing methods [52, 36, 3, 6, 22, 34] have shown
promising results on shape completion for different inputs:
distance fields, meshes, voxel grids and point clouds. Voxel
representations are a direct generalization of pixels to the
3D case. However, generating 3D shape with voxel format
suffers from memory inefficiency, hence it is difficult to obtain high-resolution results. Although data-driven methods

Output
PCN

TopNet

Input
Ours

GT

Figure 1. Our method can generate complete point clouds with
finer details compared to existing state-of-the-art methods.

on mesh representations [38, 12, 42] are able to generate
complicated surfaces, they are limited to the fixed vertex
connection patterns. As a result, it is difficult to change
the topology during the training process. In contrast, it is
easy to add new points for point clouds and several studies have shown promising results. The pioneer work [52]
proposes an encoder-decoder based pipeline on both the
synthetic dataset ShapeNet [4] and the real scene dataset
KITTI [9]. A following work TopNet [36] proposes a hierarchical rooted tree structure decoder to generate object
shapes. Even though they have achieved impressive performances on shape completion, they are both unable to
generate the detailed geometric structure of 3D objects and
produce unsatisfactory coarse object outputs. Several approaches [24, 28, 25] propose to learn 3D structures in a
function space, and they achieve impressive results for various input formats. However, these methods require postprocessing to refine the outputs.
We propose to synthesize the dense and complete objects
shapes in a cascaded refinement manner, and jointly optimize the reconstruction loss and an adversarial loss endto-end. Our framework is designed to keep the object details in the partial inputs, and to produce realistic reconstructions of the missing parts. Figure 1 shows an example between our method and existing approaches [52, 36].
Although the legs of a chair are clearly present in the input, existing works are incapable of keeping this structural
details in the outputs. On the contrary, our approach successfully captures this fine-grained details. To this end, we
make a skip connection between the incomplete points and
coarse outputs. However, simple concatenation between inputs and our coarse outputs give rise to unevenly distributed
points. Consequently, we design an iterative refinement de-

790

Output

