EPOS: Estimating 6D Pose of Objects with Symmetries
Tomáš Hodaň1

Dániel Baráth1,2

Jiřı́ Matas1

1

2

Visual Recognition Group, Czech Technical University in Prague
Machine Perception Research Laboratory, MTA SZTAKI, Budapest

Abstract
We present a new method for estimating the 6D pose of
rigid objects with available 3D models from a single RGB
input image. The method is applicable to a broad range of
objects, including challenging ones with global or partial
symmetries. An object is represented by compact surface
fragments which allow handling symmetries in a systematic
manner. Correspondences between densely sampled pixels
and the fragments are predicted using an encoder-decoder
network. At each pixel, the network predicts: (i) the probability of each object’s presence, (ii) the probability of the
fragments given the object’s presence, and (iii) the precise
3D location on each fragment. A data-dependent number of
corresponding 3D locations is selected per pixel, and poses
of possibly multiple object instances are estimated using a
robust and efficient variant of the PnP-RANSAC algorithm.
In the BOP Challenge 2019, the method outperforms all
RGB and most RGB-D and D methods on the T-LESS and
LM-O datasets. On the YCB-V dataset, it is superior to all
competitors, with a large margin over the second-best RGB
method. Source code is at: cmp.felk.cvut.cz/epos.

1. Introduction
Model-based estimation of 6D pose, i.e. the 3D translation and 3D rotation, of rigid objects from a single image is a classical computer vision problem, with the first
methods dating back to the work of Roberts from 1963 [54].
A common approach to the problem is to establish a set of
2D-3D correspondences between the input image and the
object model and robustly estimate the pose by the PnPRANSAC algorithm [14, 36]. Traditional methods [9] establish the correspondences using local image features, such
as SIFT [41], and have demonstrated robustness against occlusion and clutter in the case of objects with distinct and
non-repeatable shape or texture. Recent methods, which
are mostly based on convolutional neural networks, produce
dense correspondences [4, 48, 69] or predict 2D image locations of pre-selected 3D keypoints [52, 61, 50].

Figure 1. A 2D image location corresponds to a single 3D location on the object model in the case of distinct object parts (left),
but to multiple 3D locations in the case of global or partial object
symmetries (right). Representing an object by surface fragments
allows predicting possibly multiple correspondences per pixel.

Establishing 2D-3D correspondences is challenging for
objects with global or partial symmetries [44] in shape or
texture. The visible part of such objects, which is determined by self-occlusions and occlusions by other objects,
may have multiple fits to the object model. Consequently,
the corresponding 2D and 3D locations form a many-tomany relationship, i.e. a 2D image location may correspond
to multiple 3D locations on the model surface (Fig. 1), and
vice versa. This degrades the performance of methods assuming a one-to-one relationship. Additionally, methods relying on local image features have a poor performance on
texture-less objects, because the feature detectors often fail
to provide a sufficient number of reliable locations and the
descriptors are no longer discriminative enough [62, 28].
This work proposes a method for estimating 6D pose of
possibly multiple instances of possibly multiple rigid objects with available 3D models from a single RGB input
image. The method is applicable to a broad range of objects
– besides those with distinct and non-repeatable shape or

11703

