Temporally Distributed Networks for Fast Video Semantic Segmentation
Ping Hu1 , Fabian Caba Heilbron2 , Oliver Wang2 , Zhe Lin2 , Stan Sclaroff1 , Federico Perazzi2
1
Boston University 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
We present TDNet, a temporally distributed network
designed for fast and accurate video semantic segmentation. We observe that features extracted from a certain
high-level layer of a deep CNN can be approximated by
composing features extracted from several shallower subnetworks. Leveraging the inherent temporal continuity in
videos, we distribute these sub-networks over sequential
frames. Therefore, at each time step, we only need to perform a lightweight computation to extract a sub-features
group from a single sub-network. The full features used for
segmentation are then recomposed by the application of a
novel attention propagation module that compensates for
geometry deformation between frames. A grouped knowledge distillation loss is also introduced to further improve
the representation power at both full and sub-feature levels. Experiments on Cityscapes, CamVid, and NYUD-v2
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with significantly faster speed and lower latency.

1. Introduction
Video semantic segmentation aims to assign pixel-wise
semantic labels to video frames. As an important task for
visual understanding, it has attracted more and more attention from the research community [19, 27, 34, 39]. The recent successes in dense labeling tasks [4, 20, 25, 28, 50, 54,
56, 59] have revealed that strong feature representations are
critical for accurate segmentation results. However, computing strong features typically require deep networks with
high computation cost, thus making it challenging for realworld applications like self-driving cars, robot sensing, and
augmented-reality, which require both high accuracy and
low latency.
The most straightforward strategy for video semantic
segmentation is to apply a deep image segmentation model
to each frame independently, but this strategy does not
leverage temporal information provided in the video dynamic scenes. One solution, is to apply the same model to
all frames and add additional layers on top to model temporal context to extract better features [10, 19, 23, 34]. How-

NetWarp

TD2 -PSP50

PSPNet101

TD4 -PSP18

TD2 -Bise34

BiseNet101

LVS-LL2

TD4 -Bise18
LadderNet
GUNet
ICNet

PEARL
ACCEL

GRFP(5)
DFF
ClockNet

(ms/f)

Figure 1. Performance on Cityscapes. Our proposed TDNet variants (denoted as and ) linked to their corresponding deep image
segmentation backbones (denoted as ) with similar number of
parameters. Compared with video semantic segmentation methods NetWarp [10], PEARL [19], ACCEL [18], LVS-LLS [27],
GRFP [34], ClockNet [39], DFF [58], and real-time segmentation
models LadderNet [21], GUNet [32], and ICNet [55], our TDNet
achieves a better balance of accuracy and speed.

ever, such methods do not help improve efficiency as all
features must be recomputed at each frame. To reduce redundant computation, a reasonable approach is to apply a
strong image segmentation model only at keyframes, and
reuse the high-level feature for other frames [18, 27, 31, 58].
However, the spatial misalignment of other frames with respect to the keyframes is challenging to compensate for and
often leads to decreased accuracy comparing to the baseline
image segmentation models as reported in [18, 27, 31, 58].
Additionally, these methods have different computational
loads between keyframes and non-keyframes, which results
in high maximum latency and unbalanced occupation of
computation resources that may decrease system efficiency.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel deep
learning model for high-accuracy and low-latency semantic video segmentation named Temporally Distributed Network (TDNet). Our model is inspired by Group Convolution [17, 22], which shows that extracting features with separated filter groups not only allows for model parallelization, but also helps learn better representations. Given a
18818

