PhysGAN: Generating Physical-World-Resilient Adversarial Examples
for Autonomous Driving
Zelun Kong† , Junfeng Guo† , Ang Li‡∗, and Cong Liu†
†
The University of Texas at Dallas
‡
The University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Although Deep neural networks (DNNs) are being pervasively used in vision-based autonomous driving systems,
they are found vulnerable to adversarial attacks where
small-magnitude perturbations into the inputs during test
time cause dramatic changes to the outputs. While most
of the recent attack methods target at digital-world adversarial scenarios, it is unclear how they perform in the
physical world, and more importantly, the generated perturbations under such methods would cover a whole driving scene including those fixed background imagery such
as the sky, making them inapplicable to physical world
implementation. We present PhysGAN, which generates
physical-world-resilient adversarial examples for misleading autonomous driving systems in a continuous manner.
We show the effectiveness and robustness of PhysGAN via
extensive digital- and real-world evaluations. We compare
PhysGAN with a set of state-of-the-art baseline methods,
which further demonstrate the robustness and efficacy of
our approach. We also show that PhysGAN outperforms
state-of-the-art baseline methods. To the best of our knowledge, PhysGAN is probably the first technique of generating
realistic and physical-world-resilient adversarial examples
for attacking common autonomous driving scenarios.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) have established
the fundamentals of vision-based autonomous driving systems, they are still vulnerable to adversarial attacks and exhibit erroneous fatal behaviors. Recent works on adversarial
machine learning research have shown that DNNs are rather
vulnerable to intentional adversarial inputs with perturbations focusing on classification problems [4, 12, 19, 22, 25].
To address the safety issues in autonomous driving systems, techniques were proposed to automatically generate
adversarial examples, which add small-magnitude pertur∗ Now at DeepMind

Figure 1: Illustration of an adversarial roadside advertising sign
(top-right) visually indistinguishable from the original sign (topleft) and its deployment in the physical world (bottom).

bations to inputs to evaluate the robustness of DNN-based
autonomous driving systems [12, 8, 27].
However, these techniques mostly focus on generating
digital adversarial examples, e.g., changing image pixels,
which can never happen in real world [12]. They may not be
applicable to realistic driving scenarios, as the perturbations
generated under such techniques would cover the whole
scene including fixed background imagery such as the sky.
Very recently, a few works took the first step in studying physical-world attacking/testing of static physical objects [2, 17], human objects [24, 7], traffic signs [23, 18, 8].
Although they are shown effective under the targeted scenarios and certain assumptions, they focus on studying a
static physical-world scene (e.g., a single snapshot of a stop
sign [8, 23]), which prevent themselves to be applied in
practice as real-world driving is a continuous process where
dynamically changes are encountered (e.g., viewing angles
and distances). Moreover, their generated adversarial examples are visually unrealistic (e.g., driver-noticeable black
and white stickers pasted onto a stop sign which is easily
noticeable for attack purposes [8]). Most of these methods
also have a focus on classification models different from
our studied steering model which is a regression model.
Also note that directly extending the existing digital per114254

