One-shot Adversarial Attacks on Visual Tracking with Dual Attention
Xuesong Chen* 1
Xiyu Yan* 2
Feng Zheng† 3
Yong Jiang2, 4
Shu-Tao Xia2, 4
Yong Zhao1
Rongrong Ji 4, 5
1
2
Peking University, School of ECE
Tsinghua University
3
Southern University of Science and Technology
4
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
Xiamen University
cedarchen@pku.edu.cn, yanqy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhengf@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Almost all adversarial attacks in computer vision are
aimed at pre-known object categories, which could be offline trained for generating perturbations. But as for visual
object tracking, the tracked target categories are normally
unknown in advance. However, the tracking algorithms also
have potential risks of being attacked, which could be maliciously used to fool the surveillance systems. Meanwhile, it
is still a challenging task that adversarial attacks on tracking since it has the free-model tracked target. Therefore,
to help draw more attention to the potential risks, we study
adversarial attacks on tracking algorithms. In this paper,
we propose a novel one-shot adversarial attack method to
generate adversarial examples for free-model single object tracking, where merely adding slight perturbations on
the target patch in the initial frame causes state-of-the-art
trackers to lose the target in subsequent frames. Specifically, the optimization objective of the proposed attack consists of two components and leverages the dual attention
mechanisms. The first component adopts a targeted attack
strategy by optimizing the batch confidence loss with confidence attention while the second one applies a general perturbation strategy by optimizing the feature loss with channel attention. Experimental results show that our approach
can significantly lower the accuracy of the most advanced
Siamese network-based trackers on three benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) plays a significant role
in practical security applications such as intelligent surveillance systems. Recent years have witnessed many breakthroughs in visual object tracking algorithms [2, 25, 5, 17,
* Equal contributions. This work is done when Xuesong Chen and Xiyu
Yan visited to Feng Zheng Lab in SUSTech.
† Corresponding author.

#Frame 1

#Frame 50

…

Original

Original

Original

Original

…

…

Attacked

#Frame 150

…

…

…

Perturbed

#Frame 100

Attacked

Attacked

Figure 1. We only perturb slightly the target patch in the initial
frame of a video, resulting in tracking failure in subsequent frames.
First line: the original video frames are successfully tracked. Second line: attacking the target only in the initial frame could paralyze the tracker. The green boxes represent the ground truth, and
the red boxes represent the tracking result of the tracker.

28, 16] brought by the progress of deep learning. For example, the SiamRPN++ tracker [16] based on Siamese network
has reached 91% precision on the OTB100 benchmark [30].
However, whether the deep learning-based object tracking
algorithms are as powerful as they seem is a question to
worth pondering.
Adversarial attacks on deep learning models in computer
vision have attracted increasing interest in the past years [1].
There are many adversarial attacks against deep networks
successfully fooling image classifiers and object detectors.
For example, Szegedy et al. demonstrated that putting small
perturbations in images that remain (almost) imperceptible
to the human visual system could fool deep learning models into misclassification [24]. Most recently, [26] created a
small adversarial patch that is used as a cloaking device to
hide persons from a person detector. Commonly, almost all
these attacks are not aimed at free-models (i.e. arbitrary target) but the pre-known categories. Actually, adding adversarial perturbations on the free-model target patch in a cer-

10176

