M-LVC: Multiple Frames Prediction for Learned Video Compression
Jianping Lin Dong Liu∗ Houqiang Li Feng Wu
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
ljp105@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dongeliu,lihq,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end learned video compression
scheme for low-latency scenarios. Previous methods are
limited in using the previous one frame as reference. Our
method introduces the usage of the previous multiple frames
as references. In our scheme, the motion vector (MV) field is
calculated between the current frame and the previous one.
With multiple reference frames and associated multiple MV
fields, our designed network can generate more accurate
prediction of the current frame, yielding less residual. Multiple reference frames also help generate MV prediction,
which reduces the coding cost of MV field. We use two deep
auto-encoders to compress the residual and the MV, respectively. To compensate for the compression error of the autoencoders, we further design a MV refinement network and a
residual refinement network, taking use of the multiple reference frames as well. All the modules in our scheme are
jointly optimized through a single rate-distortion loss function. We use a step-by-step training strategy to optimize the
entire scheme. Experimental results show that the proposed
method outperforms the existing learned video compression
methods for low-latency mode. Our method also performs
better than H.265 in both PSNR and MS-SSIM. Our code
and models are publicly available.

1. Introduction
Video contributes to 75% of all Internet traffic in 2017,
and the percent is expected to reach 82% by 2022 [6]. Compressing video into a smaller size is an urgent requirement
to reduce the transmission cost. Currently, Internet video is
usually compressed into H.264 [29] or H.265 format [21].
New video coding standards like H.266 and AV1 are upcoming. While new standards promise an improvement in
∗ This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2018YFA0701603, and by the Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grants 61931014 and 61772483. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/JianpingLin/
M-LVC_CVPR2020. (Corresponding author: Dong Liu.)

compression ratio, such improvement is accompanied with
multiplied encoding complexity. Indeed, all the standards
in use or in the way coming follow the same framework,
that is motion-compensated prediction, block-based transform, and handcrafted entropy coding. The framework has
been inherited for over three decades, and the development
within the framework is gradually saturated.
Recently, a series of studies try to build brand-new video
compression schemes on top of trained deep networks.
These studies can be divided into two classes according to
their targeted scenarios. As for the first class, Wu et al. proposed a recurrent neural network (RNN) based approach for
interpolation-based video compression [30], where the motion information is achieved by the traditional block-based
motion estimation and is compressed by an image compression method. Later on, Djelouah et al. also proposed a
method for interpolation-based video compression, where
the interpolation model combines motion information compression and image synthesis, and the same auto-encoder is
used for image and residual [7]. Interpolation-based compression uses the previous and the subsequent frames as
references to compress the current frame, which is valid in
random-access scenarios like playback. However, it is less
applicable for low-latency scenarios like live transmission.
The second class of studies target low-latency case
and restrict the network to use merely temporally previous frames as references. For example, Lu et al. proposed DVC, an end-to-end deep video compression model
that jointly learns motion estimation, motion compression,
motion compensation, and residual compression functions
[14]. In this model, only one previous frame is used for
motion compensation, which may not fully exploit the temporal correlation in video frames. Rippel et al. proposed
another video compression model, which maintains a latent
state to memorize the information of the previous frames
[18]. Due to the presence of the latent state, the model is
difficult to train and sensitive to transmission error.
In this paper, we are interested in low-latency scenarios and propose an end-to-end learned video compression
scheme. Our key idea is to use the previous multiple frames

3546

