Single Image Reflection Removal with Physically-Based Training Images
Soomin Kim
Yuchi Huo
Sung-Eui Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Recently, deep learning-based single image reflection
separation methods have been exploited widely. To benefit
the learning approach, a large number of training imagepairs (i.e., with and without reflections) were synthesized in
various ways, yet they are away from a physically-based direction. In this paper, physically based rendering is used
for faithfully synthesizing the required training images, and
a corresponding network structure and loss term are proposed. We utilize existing RGBD/RGB images to estimate
meshes, then physically simulate the light transportation
between meshes, glass, and lens with path tracing to synthesize training data, which successfully reproduce the spatially variant anisotropic visual effect of glass reflection.
For guiding the separation better, we additionally consider
a module, backtrack network (BT -net) for backtracking the
reflections, which removes complicated ghosting, attenuation, blurred and defocused effect of glass/lens. This enables obtaining a priori information before having the distortion. The proposed method considering additional a priori information with physically simulated training data is
validated with various real reflection images and shows visually pleasant and numerical advantages compared with
state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
When taking a photo through a glass or a window, the
front scene that is transmitted through the glass can be seen,
but sometimes the reflection from the back scene is captured
as well. These inevitable reflections and dim transmission
can be annoying for some cases, for example, a case of
taking a photo of a skyscraper from an indoor room. As
a result, removing the reflections from the input images can
help us to generate better images and various computer vision techniques to work robustly.
Physically, an image I with those reflections is a sum of
the glass reflected back scene, R̃, and the glass transmitted
front scene, T̃ , as I(x, y) = T̃ (x, y) + R̃(x, y). Single image reflection removal problem is ill-posed, without using
additional assumptions or priors.

Real reflection

Front scene

Our rendered

PSNR: 25.732, SSIM: 0.856

Zhang synthesized

PSNR:19.532, SSIM: 0.786

CEIL synthesized

PSNR:16.154, SSIM: 0.739

Wen synthesized

PSNR:22.085, SSIM: 0.827

Figure 1: Comparison between existing reflection synthesizing
methods and our physically-based rendering method. The real reflection image is captured by a camera behind a glass. Our method
can produce spatially variant visual effects that are most similar
to the real-world reflection image. For example, the near bottle
is blurred and the far bottle is focused in the transmission scene.
Also, the reflection level of some back scene objects is properly
considered. In contrast, previous methods assume the glass transmitted front scene is all clear, and the reflected back scene is spatially invariantly blurred, introducing biased information to the
dataset. Sec. 6.1 has more details.

Previous methods utilize multiple images of reflection
with different conditions for obtaining some priors [1, 23,
14, 20]. Especially, motion cue prior is widely used for
separating the reflections from multi-images [8, 33, 9]. Although multiple-image reflection separation methods show
reasonable results, it is not easy for users to capture constrained images as suggested in the prior approaches.
For single image reflection removal, natural image priors [16, 17, 18] or smoothness priors [19, 30] are used
for formulating objective functions. Recent approaches
started to utilize deep neural networks for removing the
reflections on a single image. While training deep neural networks relies on a faithful dataset, most up-to-date
methods synthesize datasets in an image space through a
weighted addition between the front scene and the back
scene [7, 36, 29, 34, 31], due to the difficulty of the phys-

5164

