Deep Residual Flow for Out of Distribution Detection
Ev Zisselman
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion

Aviv Tamar
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion

ev zis@campus.technion.ac.il

avivt@technion.ac.il

Abstract
The effective application of neural networks in the realworld relies on proficiently detecting out-of-distribution examples. Contemporary methods seek to model the distribution of feature activations in the training data for adequately distinguishing abnormalities, and the state-of-theart method uses Gaussian distribution models. In this work,
we present a novel approach that improves upon the stateof-the-art by leveraging an expressive density model based
on normalizing flows. We introduce the residual flow, a
novel flow architecture that learns the residual distribution
from a base Gaussian distribution. Our model is general,
and can be applied to any data that is approximately Gaussian. For out of distribution detection in image datasets,
our approach provides a principled improvement over the
state-of-the-art. Specifically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in ResNet and DenseNet architectures
trained on various image datasets. For example, on a
ResNet trained on CIFAR-100 and evaluated on detection
of out-of-distribution samples from the ImageNet dataset,
holding the true positive rate (TPR) at 95%, we improve the
true negative rate (TNR) from 56.7% (current state-of-theart) to 77.5% (ours).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful models that
achieve high performance in various tasks in computer vision [26], speech and audio recognition [21], and language processing [7]. Leading DNN architectures are
known to generalize well and achieve impressive performance when evaluated on samples drawn from the distribution observed at the training phase [7, 19, 22, 26, 37]. However, DNNs tend to behave unexpectedly when encountering input taken from an unfamiliar distribution. In such instances, an out-of-distribution (OOD) input causes the majority of models to mispredict, often with high confidence
[18, 27, 29, 31, 40]. This behaviour poses a severe concern about the reliability of predictions made by DNNs and

hinders their applicability to real-world scenarios [1].
Contemporary work aimed at predicting classification
uncertainty adopt an approach of constructing a confidence
score based on characteristics of the feature space of trained
neural networks. In [20], Hendrycks and Gimpel propose
a baseline method, which taps into features of the penultimate layer and uses the soft-max score as the confidence
score. Their method is further improved by Liang et al.
[28], who incorporate the soft-max score with temperature
scaling, alongside input pre-processing that emphasizes the
score difference between in- and out-of-distribution samples. The current state-of-the-art is the method of Lee et
al. [27], which models the feature distribution in different
layers of a trained network by a Gaussian distribution under
the LDA assumption (i.e., different mean but same covariance for different classes), and forms a confidence score for
each layer based on the posterior distribution of the LDA
model, averaged over different layers. Lee’s method shows
superior performance compared with previous methods; in
some cases surpassing by a large margin [27].
Building on the observation that a Gaussian model of
network activations is an effective confidence measure, in
this work we ask: can we improve OOD detection performance by using more expressive distributions of network activations? In particular, there is no reason to expect
that features in mid-layers of the network follow an exact
Gaussian distribution, and we expect that a more expressive
model should capture their distribution more accurately.
We present a new approach for OOD detection and propose a more expressive density function, based on deep
normalizing flow, for modeling the distribution of the feature space of trained neural networks. As a prelude, we
posit that training a linear flow on the feature space of neural networks is equal to fitting a Gaussian distribution, as
proposed in [27]. Then, we leverage this property to propose a novel flow architecture that adds a non-linear residual to the linear flow to produce a more expressive mapping. The residual flow model is of independent interest, and should be effective for any data that is approximately Gaussian distributed. For out-of-distribution de-

13994

