Learning for Video Compression with Hierarchical Quality
and Recurrent Enhancement
Ren Yang

Fabian Mentzer

Luc Van Gool

Radu Timofte

ren.yang@vision.ee.ethz.ch

mentzerf@vision.ee.ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

timofter@vision.ee.ethz.ch

ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract

32

In this paper, we propose a Hierarchical Learned Video
Compression (HLVC) method with three hierarchical quality layers and a recurrent enhancement network. The frames
in the ﬁrst layer are compressed by an image compression
method with the highest quality. Using these frames as
references, we propose the Bi-Directional Deep Compression (BDDC) network to compress the second layer with
relatively high quality. Then, the third layer frames are
compressed with the lowest quality, by the proposed Single
Motion Deep Compression (SMDC) network, which adopts
a single motion map to estimate the motions of multiple
frames, thus saving bits for motion information. In our
deep decoder, we develop the Weighted Recurrent Quality Enhancement (WRQE) network, which takes both compressed frames and the bit stream as inputs. In the recurrent cell of WRQE, the memory and update signal are
weighted by quality features to reasonably leverage multiframe information for enhancement. In our HLVC approach, the hierarchical quality beneﬁts the coding efﬁciency, since the high quality information facilitates the
compression and enhancement of low quality frames at encoder and decoder sides, respectively. Finally, the experiments validate that our HLVC approach advances the stateof-the-art of deep video compression methods, and outperforms the “Low-Delay P (LDP) very fast” mode of x265 in
terms of both PSNR and MS-SSIM. The project page is at
https://github.com/RenYang-home/HLVC.

31

1. Introduction
In recent years, video streaming over the Internet has
become more and more popular. According to the Cisco
Forecast [10], video generates 70% to 80% trafﬁc of mobile data. The proportion of high resolution video is also
rapidly increasing. To be able to more efﬁciently transmit
high quality videos over the bandwidth-limited Internet, it
is necessary to improve the performance of video compres-

Our whole framework
(with enhancement)
Our hierarchical quality

PSNR (dB)

Bit-rate

bpp
1.0

0.5

30

0

1

2

3

4

5

Layer 3

6

7

8

9

10
Frame

0

Layer 2
Layer 1

Figure 1. The hierarchical layers and the rate-distortion performance in each layer of our HLVC approach. We use the ﬁrst Group
Of Picture (GOP) in the sequence BlowingBubbles as an example.

sion. During the past decades, plenty of video compression
standards were proposed, such as H.264 [37], H.265 [28],
etc. However, these traditional codecs are handcrafted and
cannot be optimized in an end-to-end manner.
Recent studies in learned image compression, e.g., [2, 3],
show the great potential of deep learning for improving the
rate-distortion performance. It is therefore not surprising
to see increasing interest in compressing video with Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) [8, 38, 9, 22, 13]. For example,
Lu et al. [22] proposed using optical ﬂow for motion compensation and applying auto-encoders to compress the ﬂow
and residual. Then, Habibian et al. [13] proposed a 3D autoencoder for video compression with an autoregressive prior.
In these methods, the models are trained with one loss function and applied on all frames. As such, they fail to generate
hierarchical quality layers, in which high quality frames are
beneﬁcial for the compression and the post-processing of
other frames.
This paper proposes a Hierarchical Learned Video Compression (HLVC) method with three hierarchical quality
layers and a recurrent enhancement network. As illustrated
in Figure 1, the frames in layers 1, 2 and 3 are compressed

6628

