Projection & Probability-Driven Black-Box Attack
Jie Li1 , Rongrong Ji1∗, Hong Liu1 , Jianzhuang Liu2 , Bineng Zhong3 , Cheng Deng4 , Qi Tian2
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University,
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 3 Huaqiao University 4 Xidian University
lijie.32@outlook.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com,
bnzhong@hqu.edu.cn, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com,

Abstract
Generating adversarial examples in a black-box setting
retains a significant challenge with vast practical application prospects. In particular, existing black-box attacks suffer from the need for excessive queries, as it is non-trivial
to find an appropriate direction to optimize in the highdimensional space. In this paper, we propose Projection &
Probability-driven Black-box Attack (PPBA) to tackle this
problem by reducing the solution space and providing better optimization. For reducing the solution space, we first
model the adversarial perturbation optimization problem
as a process of recovering frequency-sparse perturbations
with compressed sensing, under the setting that random
noise in the low-frequency space is more likely to be adversarial. We then propose a simple method to construct
a low-frequency constrained sensing matrix, which works
as a plug-and-play projection matrix to reduce the dimensionality. Such a sensing matrix is shown to be flexible
enough to be integrated into existing methods like NES and
BanditsT D . For better optimization, we perform a random
walk with a probability-driven strategy, which utilizes all
queries over the whole progress to make full use of the sensing matrix for a less query budget. Extensive experiments
show that our method requires at most 24% fewer queries
with a higher attack success rate compared with state-ofthe-art approaches. Finally, the attack method is evaluated
on the real-world online service, i.e., Google Cloud Vision
API, which further demonstrates our practical potentials. 1

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) have proven their
dominant performance on a wide range of computer vision
∗ Corresponding author.
1 The code for reproducing our work is available at https://
github.com/theFool32/PPBA

tasks, they are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [24, 38, 40]. In such a scenario, the imperceptible
perturbations added to input samples can mislead the output
of DNNs, which has raised serious security concerns in the
literature [7, 15, 33].
Adversarial attacks can be generally categorized into the
white-box attack and black-box attack. In white-box attacks,
the adversary has the full knowledge of the victim model including network architecture and parameters, and can efficiently achieve an almost 100% attack success rate within a
few iterations guided by the gradient descent [8, 16, 29, 31].
However, white-box attacks are less practical for commercial systems like Google Cloud Vision API, where the
model is inaccessible.
To this end, the black-box attacks, including transferbased attacks and query-based attacks, are more practical where the adversary is only able to craft model inputs and obtain corresponding outputs. Transfer-based attacks [13, 25, 32] adopt the adversarial perturbation crafted
from a surrogate white-box model and transfer it to the
black-box victim model. They require less time consumption, but suffer from low attack performance, since the target model may be very different from the surrogate. To
achieve a high attack success rate, recent works [9, 10]
queried iteratively to estimate the gradients and then perform the white-box attacks, or approach the decision boundary first and then wander along it. Due to the highdimensional input space, it is hard to find a feasible direction to optimize, which results in numerous queries and a
high cost of time and money. Some extra efforts have been
put on reducing the dimension of solution space, like utilizing latent variable space of autoencoder [39] or adopting
low-resolution images [21]. Essentially, these methods reduce the solution space from the perspective of the spatial
domain, and the reduction of dimension is limited since images with quite low-resolution will be unserviceable, which
makes these methods still inefficient.
In this paper, we propose Projection & Probabilitydriven Black-box Attack (PPBA) towards achieving a high

362

