FBNetV2: Differentiable Neural Architecture Search
for Spatial and Channel Dimensions
Alvin Wan1∗, Xiaoliang Dai2 , Peizhao Zhang2 , Zijian He2 , Yuandong Tian2 , Saining Xie2 , Bichen Wu2 ,
Matthew Yu2 , Tao Xu2 , Kan Chen2 , Peter Vajda2 , Joseph E. Gonzalez1
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Facebook Inc.
{alvinwan,jegonzal}@berkeley.edu
{xiaoliangdai,stzpz,zijian,yuandong,s9xie,bichen,mattcyu,xutao,kanchen18,vadjap}@fb.com

DNAS

Abstract
Differentiable Neural Architecture Search (DNAS) has
demonstrated great success in designing state-of-the-art, efficient neural networks. However, DARTS-based DNAS’s
search space is small when compared to other search
methods’, since all candidate network layers must be explicitly instantiated in memory. To address this bottleneck, we propose a memory and computationally efficient
DNAS variant: DMaskingNAS. This algorithm expands the
search space by up to 1014 × over conventional DNAS,
supporting searches over spatial and channel dimensions
that are otherwise prohibitively expensive: input resolution and number of filters. We propose a masking mechanism for feature map reuse, so that memory and computational costs stay nearly constant as the search space
expands. Furthermore, we employ effective shape propagation to maximize per-FLOP or per-parameter accuracy. The searched FBNetV2s yield state-of-the-art performance when compared with all previous architectures.
With up to 421× less search cost, DMaskingNAS finds models with 0.9% higher accuracy, 15% fewer FLOPs than
MobileNetV3-Small; and with similar accuracy but 20%
fewer FLOPs than Efficient-B0. Furthermore, our FBNetV2
outperforms MobileNetV3 by 2.6% in accuracy, with equivalent model size. FBNetV2 models are open-sourced at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/mobile-vision.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have led to significant progress
in many research areas and applications, such as computer
vision and autonomous driving. Despite this, designing
an efficient network for resource-constrained settings remains a challenging problem. Initial directions involved
∗ Work done while interning at Facebook.

DNAS

no channel search

with all possible channels

...

...

dimension mismatch

Ours

Pruning

with all possible channels

Exploring one channel option at a time

...

training

f(

...

)f(

) ... f (

)

pruning

Figure 1: DNAS: Adding all possible numbers of filters
to DNAS (top-right) increases computational and memory
costs drastically, exacerbating DNAS’s memory bottleneck
on search space size. Pruning: Channel pruning (bottomleft) is limited to training one architecture at a time. Ours:
With our weight-sharing approximation, DNAS can explore
all possible number of filters simultaneously with negligible
memory and computation overhead. See Fig. 2 for details.
compressing existing networks [7] or building small networks [23, 26]. However, the design space can easily
contain more than 1018 candidate architectures [33, 27],
making manual design choices sub-optimal and difficult to
scale. In lieu of manual tuning, recent work uses neural architecture search (NAS) to design networks automatically.
112965

