Image Based Virtual Try-on Network from Unpaired Data
Assaf Neuberger

Eran Borenstein Bar Hilleli
Amazon Lab126

Eduard Oks

Sharon Alpert

{neuberg,eran,barh,oksed,alperts}@amazon.com

Query image

Abstract

Reference garments

Result

This paper presents a new image-based virtual try-on
approach (Outfit-VITON) that helps visualize how a composition of clothing items selected from various reference
images form a cohesive outfit on a person in a query image.
Our algorithm has two distinctive properties. First, it is inexpensive, as it simply requires a large set of single (noncorresponding) images (both real and catalog) of people
wearing various garments without explicit 3D information.
The training phase requires only single images, eliminating
the need for manually creating image pairs, where one image shows a person wearing a particular garment and the
other shows the same catalog garment alone. Secondly, it
can synthesize images of multiple garments composed into
a single, coherent outfit; and it enables control of the type
of garments rendered in the final outfit. Once trained, our
approach can then synthesize a cohesive outfit from multiple images of clothed human models, while fitting the outfit
to the body shape and pose of the query person. An online
optimization step takes care of fine details such as intricate
textures and logos. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations
on an image dataset containing large shape and style variations demonstrate superior accuracy compared to existing state-of-the-art methods, especially when dealing with
highly detailed garments.

1. Introduction
In the US, the share of online apparel sales as a proportion of total apparel and accessories sales is increasing at a
faster pace than any other e-commerce sector. Online apparel shopping offers the convenience of shopping from the
comfort of ones home, a large selection of items to choose
from, and access to the very latest products. However, online shopping does not enable physical try-on, thereby limiting customer understanding of how a garment will actually look on them. This critical limitation encouraged the
development of virtual fitting rooms, where images of a
customer wearing selected garments are generated synthetically to help compare and choose the most desired look.

Figure 1: Our O-VITON algorithm is built to synthesize images
that show how a person in a query image is expected to look
with garments selected from multiple reference images. The proposed method generates natural looking boundaries between the
garments and is able to fill-in missing garments and body parts.

1.1. 3D methods
Conventional approaches for synthesizing realistic images of people wearing garments rely on detailed 3D models built from either depth cameras [28] or multiple 2D images [3]. 3D models enable realistic clothing simulation
under geometric and physical constraints, as well as precise
15184

