Progressive Relation Learning for Group Activity Recognition
Guyue Hu1,3∗
Bo Cui1,3
Yuan He1,3
Shan Yu1,2,3
1
Brainnetome Center, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{guyue.hu, bo.cui, yuan.he, shan.yu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Input Activity

Abstract

Group activity recognition, which refers to discern the
activities involving a large number of interactive individuals, has attracted growing interests in the communities of
computer vision [9, 32, 31, 36, 22]. Unlike conventional
video action recognition that only concentrates on the spatiotemporal dynamics of one or two persons, group activity recognition further requires understanding the grouprelevant interactions among many individuals.
∗ Corresponding Author

Distilled Features

Reward

1. Introduction

Semantic Relation Graph

FD Agent

Action

Group activities usually involve spatiotemporal dynamics among many interactive individuals, while only a few
participants at several key frames essentially define the activity. Therefore, effectively modeling the group-relevant
and suppressing the irrelevant actions (and interactions)
are vital for group activity recognition. In this paper, we
propose a novel method based on deep reinforcement learning to progressively refine the low-level features and highlevel relations of group activities. Firstly, we construct a
semantic relation graph (SRG) to explicitly model the relations among persons. Then, two agents adopting policy
according to two Markov decision processes are applied
to progressively refine the SRG. Specifically, one featuredistilling (FD) agent in the discrete action space refines
the low-level spatiotemporal features by distilling the most
informative frames. Another relation-gating (RG) agent
in continuous action space adjusts the high-level semantic graph to pay more attention to group-relevant relations.
The SRG, FD agent, and RG agent are optimized alternately
to mutually boost the performance of each other. Extensive
experiments on two widely used benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed approach.

Individual Features

t

Refined Graph
RG Agent
“Moving”
Action
Reward

Figure 1: The overview of proposed method. A featuredistilling (FD) agent progressively selects the most informative frames of the low-level spatiotemporal individual features. A relation-gating (RG) agent further progressively
refines the high-level semantic relation graph (SRG) to discover group-relevant relations.

In the past a few years, a series of approaches combine
the hand-crafted feature with probability graph [7, 17, 26].
Recently, the LSTM, strucural RNNs and message passing
neural network (MPNN) are also applied to model the interactions among persons, subgroups and groups [22, 32, 4].
The interaction relations in these methods are implicitly
contained in the ordered RNNs or the passing messages of
MPNN. Moreover, not all the existing relations are relevant
to the group activity and the pairwise relations may contain many edges that are coupled from spurious noise, such
as cluttered background, inaccurate human detection, and
interaction between outlier persons (e.g., the “Waiting” per-

980

