3D Packing for Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Vitor Guizilini

Rares, Ambrus, Sudeep Pillai Allan Raventos
Toyota Research Institute (TRI)

Adrien Gaidon

first.lastname@tri.global

Abstract
Although cameras are ubiquitous, robotic platforms typically rely on active sensors like LiDAR for direct 3D perception. In this work, we propose a novel self-supervised
monocular depth estimation method combining geometry
with a new deep network, PackNet, learned only from unlabeled monocular videos. Our architecture leverages novel
symmetrical packing and unpacking blocks to jointly learn
to compress and decompress detail-preserving representations using 3D convolutions. Although self-supervised, our
method outperforms other self, semi, and fully supervised
methods on the KITTI benchmark. The 3D inductive bias in
PackNet enables it to scale with input resolution and number of parameters without overfitting, generalizing better on
out-of-domain data such as the NuScenes dataset. Furthermore, it does not require large-scale supervised pretraining
on ImageNet and can run in real-time. Finally, we release
DDAD (Dense Depth for Automated Driving), a new urban
driving dataset with more challenging and accurate depth
evaluation, thanks to longer-range and denser ground-truth
depth generated from high-density LiDARs mounted on a
fleet of self-driving cars operating world-wide.†

1. Introduction
Accurate depth estimation is a key prerequisite in many
robotics tasks, including perception, navigation, and planning. Depth from monocular camera configurations can
provide useful cues for a wide array of tasks [23, 30, 34,
36], producing dense depth maps that could complement
or eventually replace expensive range sensors. However,
learning monocular depth via direct supervision requires
ground-truth information from additional sensors and precise cross-calibration. Self-supervised methods do not suffer from these limitations, as they use geometrical constraints on image sequences as the sole source of supervision. In this work, we address the problem of jointly estimating scene structure and camera motion across RGB image sequences using a self-supervised deep network.
While recent works in self-supervised monocular depth
† Video:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b62iDkLgGSI
https://github.com/TRI-ML/DDAD
† Code: https://github.com/TRI-ML/packnet-sfm
† Dataset:

Figure 1: Example metrically accurate PackNet prediction (map and textured point cloud) on our DDAD dataset.
estimation have mostly focused on engineering the loss
function [5, 33, 47, 53], we show that performance critically depends on the model architecture, in line with the
observations of [27] for other self-supervised tasks. Going
beyond image classification models like ResNet [20], our
main contribution is a new convolutional network architecture, called PackNet, for high-resolution self-supervised
monocular depth estimation. We propose new packing and
unpacking blocks that jointly leverage 3D convolutions to
learn representations that maximally propagate dense appearance and geometric information while still being able
to run in real time. Our second contribution is a novel
loss that can optionally leverage the camera’s velocity when
available (e.g., from cars, robots, mobile phones) to solve
the inherent scale ambiguity in monocular vision. Our
third contribution is a new dataset: Dense Depth for Automated Driving (DDAD). It leverages diverse logs from a
fleet of well-calibrated self-driving cars equipped with cameras and high-accuracy long-range LiDARs. Compared to
existing benchmarks, DDAD enables much more accurate
depth evaluation at range, which is key for high resolution
monocular depth estimation methods (cf. Figure 1).
12485

