Improving One-shot NAS by Suppressing the Posterior Fading
Xiang Li∗
Brown University

Chen Lin∗, Chuming Li, Ming Sun, Wei Wu, Junjie Yan
SenseTime Group Limited

xiang li 1@brown.edu

{linchen,lichuming,sunming1,wuwei,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Wanli Ouyang
The University of Sydney
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has demonstrated
much success in automatically designing effective neural
network architectures. To improve the efficiency of NAS,
previous approaches adopt weight sharing method to force
all models share the same set of weights. However, it has
been observed that a model performing better with shared
weights does not necessarily perform better when trained
alone. In this paper, we analyse existing weight sharing
one-shot NAS approaches from a Bayesian point of view
and identify the Posterior Fading problem, which compromises the effectiveness of shared weights. To alleviate
this problem, we present a novel approach to guide the
parameter posterior towards its true distribution. Moreover, a hard latency constraint is introduced during the
search so that the desired latency can be achieved. The
resulted method, namely Posterior Convergent NAS (PCNAS), achieves state-of-the-art performance under standard GPU latency constraint on ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Neural network design requires extensive experiments
by human experts. In recent years, there has been a growing
interest in developing algorithmic NAS solutions to automate the manual process of architecture design [39, 16, 18].
Despite remarkable results [21, 38], early works on NAS
[28, 12] are limited to searching only using proxy or subsampled dataset due to the exorbitant computational cost.
To overcome this difficulty, [3, 27] attempted to improve
search efficiency via sharing weights across models. These
approaches utilize an over-parameterized network (supergraph) containing every single model, which can be further
divided into two categories.
∗ Equal Contribution

The first category is continuous relaxation method [23,
6], which keeps a set of so called architecture parameters
to represent the model, and updates these parameters alternatively with supergraph weights. The resulting model is
obtained using the architecture parameters at convergence.
The continuous relaxation method suffers from the rich-getricher problem [1], which means that a better-performed
model at the early stage would be trained more frequently
(or have larger learning rates). This introduces bias and instability to the search process.
The other category is referred to as one-shot method
[5, 13, 3, 9], which divides the NAS procedure into a training stage and a searching stage. In the training stage, the supergraph is optimized along with either dropping out each
operator with certain probability or sampling uniformly
among candidate architectures. In the search stage, a search
algorithm is applied to find the architecture with the highest
validation accuracy with shared weights. The one-shot approach ensures the fairness among all models by sampling
architecture or dropping out operator uniformly. However,
as identified in [1, 9, 3], the problem of one-shot method
is that the validation accuracy of the model with shared
weights is not predictive to its true performance.
In this paper, we formulate NAS as a Bayesian model selection problem [8]. This formulation is especially helpful
in understanding the one-shot approaches in a theoretical
way, which in turn provides us a guidance to fundamentally
addressing one of the major issues of one-shot approaches.
Specially, we show that shared weights are actually a maximum likelihood estimation of a proxy distribution to the
true parameter distribution. Most importantly, we identify
the common issue of weight sharing, which we call Posterior Fading, i.e., as the number of models in the supergraph
increases, the KL-divergence between true parameter posterior and proxy posterior also increases.
To alleviate the Posterior Fading problem, we proposed
a practical approach to guide the convergence of the proxy

13836

