High-Resolution Daytime Translation Without Domain Labels
I. Anokhin1∗, P. Solovev1∗, D. Korzhenkov1∗, A. Kharlamov1∗,
T. Khakhulin1,3 , A. Silvestrov1 , S. Nikolenko2,1 , V. Lempitsky1,3 , G. Sterkin1
1

2

Samsung AI Center, Moscow
National Research University Higher School of Economics, St.-Petersburg
3
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow

Figure 1: Daytime translation results. Left – original images, right – translated and enhanced images (one style per column).

Abstract
Modeling daytime changes in high resolution photographs, e.g., re-rendering the same scene under different illuminations typical for day, night, or dawn, is
a challenging image manipulation task.
We present
the high-resolution daytime translation (HiDT) model for
this task. HiDT combines a generative image-to-image
model and a new upsampling scheme that allows to apply image translation at high resolution. The model
demonstrates competitive results in terms of both commonly used GAN metrics and human evaluation. Importantly, this good performance comes as a result of
training on a dataset of still landscape images with no
daytime labels available. Our results are available at
https://saic-mdal.github.io/HiDT/ .

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider the task of generating daytime
timelapse videos and pose it as an image-to-image translation problem. Recent image-to-image translation methods
have successfully handled the task of conversion between
two predefined paired domains [8, 30, 16, 7] as well as between multiple domains [2, 14, 13, 17]. Given the success
of these methods, using image-to-image translation methods to generate daytime changes is a natural idea.
Image-to-image translation approaches require domain
labels at training as well as at inference time. The recent
FUNIT model [17] relaxes this constraint partially. Thus,
to extract the style at inference time, it uses several images
from the target domain as guidance for translation (known
as the few-shot setting). The domain annotations are however still needed during training.
In our task, domains correspond to different times of

∗ Equal contribution.

17488

