Unified Dynamic Convolutional Network for Super-Resolution with
Variational Degradations
Yu-Syuan Xu

Shou-Yao Roy Tseng
Yu Tseng
Hsien-Kai Kuo
MediaTek Inc., Hsinchu, Taiwan

Yi-Min Tsai

{Yu-Syuan.Xu, Roy.Tseng, Ulia.Tseng, Hsienkai.Kuo, Yi-Min.Tsai}@mediatek.com

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable results on Single Image SuperResolution (SISR). Despite considering only a single degradation, recent studies also include multiple degrading effects to better reflect real-world cases. However, most of
the works assume a fixed combination of degrading effects,
or even train an individual network for different combinations. Instead, a more practical approach is to train
a single network for wide-ranging and variational degradations. To fulfill this requirement, this paper proposes a
unified network to accommodate the variations from interimage (cross-image variations) and intra-image (spatial
variations). Different from the existing works, we incorporate dynamic convolution which is a far more flexible alternative to handle different variations. In SISR with nonblind setting, our Unified Dynamic Convolutional Network
for Variational Degradations (UDVD) is evaluated on both
synthetic and real images with an extensive set of variations. The qualitative results demonstrate the effectiveness
of UDVD over various existing works. Extensive experiments show that our UDVD achieves favorable or comparable performance on both synthetic and real images.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) has posed a great
challenge of image quality in the recent advance of computer vision. The goal of SISR is to reconstruct a HighResolution (HR) image from a Low-Resolution (LR) image.
This inverse property makes it a highly ill-posed problem.
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] have been widely adopted to
solve SISR problem, and achieve significant success. Nevertheless, most of the methods assume a single fixed combination of degrading effects, e.g., blurring and bicubicly
downsampling. Such assumption limits their capability to
handle practical cases with multiple degradations.
Several CNN base methods [15, 17, 18, 19, 20] are proposed in the context of SISR with multiple degradations.
These methods address this problem with very diverse settings and formulations. Shocher et al. [15] train a small
image-specific network to deal with different degradations

ε=1.6, σ=0

ε=0.2,σ=0

ε=1.6, σ=10 ε=0.2, σ=10
Input Image

LR

RCAN ZSSR UDVD
[14]
[15] (Ours)

HR

Figure 1. The SISR problem with variational degradations. Image
“castle (102061)” in BSD100 [16] with scale factor 2 is used. The
HR image applies Gaussian blur with variant kernel width ε, bicubicly downsampling and white Gaussian noise with variant level σ
to generate LR image.

for a certain image. In this approach, an individual network
has to be trained whenever there is variation of degradations, e.g., different degrading effects across images. To
address the problem of variational degradations, Zhang et
al. [17] propose SRMD and train a single network to handle multiple variations, including blur and noise. Note that
the types of degrading effect are predefined, which is also
known as non-blind setting. To the best of our knowledge,
SFTMD [18] is one of the most recent works for blind setting, which proposes Spatial Feature Transform (SFT) and
Iterative Kernel Correction (IKC) to deal with a limited set
of blind degradations. Following the most related work,
SRMD [17], this paper adopts the same setting and formulation in which a single unified network is trained for variational degradations.
To handle variations of degrading effects, a unified network is expected to accommodate two types of variations,
cross-image variations (inter-image) and spatial variations
(intra-image). Fig. 1 illustrates an example of the problem
of variational degradations in SISR. In Fig. 1, different degrading effects are applied to different regions of a benchmarking image in BSD100 [16]. Compare to the methods trained with a fixed degradation setting, RCAN [14]
and ZSSR [15], the proposed method achieves similar quality (red patches) while effectively adapt to other variations
(green, purple and blue patches in Fig. 1). On the other
hand, in RCAN [14] and ZSSR [15], unsatisfying quality

12496

