3D Human Mesh Regression with Dense Correspondence
Wang Zeng1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Ping Luo3 , Wentao Liu4 , and Xiaogang Wang1,4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Sydney 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 SenseTime Research
{zengwang@link, xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, pluo@cs.hku.hk,
liuwentao@sensetime.com

Abstract

Prior state-of-the-arts

Global
feature vector

Estimating 3D mesh of the human body from a single
2D image is an important task with many applications such
as augmented reality and Human-Robot interaction. However, prior works reconstructed 3D mesh from global image feature extracted by using convolutional neural network
(CNN), where the dense correspondences between the mesh
surface and the image pixels are missing, leading to suboptimal solution. This paper proposes a model-free 3D human mesh estimation framework, named DecoMR, which
explicitly establishes the dense correspondence between the
mesh and the local image features in the UV space (i.e.
a 2D space used for texture mapping of 3D mesh). DecoMR first predicts pixel-to-surface dense correspondence
map (i.e., IUV image), with which we transfer local features from the image space to the UV space. Then the
transferred local image features are processed in the UV
space to regress a location map, which is well aligned
with transferred features. Finally we reconstruct 3D human mesh from the regressed location map with a predefined mapping function. We also observe that the existing discontinuous UV map are unfriendly to the learning
of network. Therefore, we propose a novel UV map that
maintains most of the neighboring relations on the original mesh surface. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed local feature alignment and continuous UV map outperforms existing 3D mesh based methods on multiple public benchmarks. Code will be made available at https:
//github.com/zengwang430521/DecoMR.

1. Introduction
Estimation of the full human body pose and shape
from a monocular image is a fundamental task for various applications such as human action recognition [12, 35],
VR/AR [11] and video editing [10]. It is challenging mostly
due to the inherent depth ambiguity and the difficulty to

SMPL based methods
or
Graph-CNN
CMR

SPIN

IUV image UV map

Local
feature maps

UV transfer

Transferred
feature

Location map

Ours

Figure 1. Prior methods (e.g., SPIN [20] and CMR [21]) usually reconstruct 3D meshes of human body from the global image feature vector extracted by neural networks, where the dense
correspondences between the mesh surface and the image pixels
are missing, leading to suboptimal results (top). Our DecoMR
framework explicitly establishes such correspondence in the feature space with the aid of a novel continuous UV map, which results in better results in mesh details (bottom).

obtain the ground-truth 3D human body data. There are
several popular representations for 3D objects in literature, e.g., point clouds, 3D voxels and 3D meshes. Because of its compatibility with existing computer graphic
engines and the efficiency to represent object surface in
details with reasonable storage, 3D mesh representation
has been widely adopted for 3D human body reconstruction [18, 4, 20, 8, 27, 38, 11, 26, 25, 37, 21, 39].
However, unlike 3D voxel representation, the dense correspondence between the template human mesh surface and
the image pixels is missing, while this dense correspondence between the input and the output has been proven
crucial for various tasks [24, 39]. Due to this limitation, most existing 3D mesh based methods, either modelbased [18, 26, 25, 20] or model-free [21], have to ignore
the correspondence between the mesh representation and
pixel representation. And they have to estimate the human
meshes based on either global image feature [18, 21, 20], or
hierarchical projection and refinement [39], which is time
consuming and sensitive to initial estimation.
To utilize the 3D mesh representation without losing

7054

