Single Image Reflection Removal through Cascaded Reﬁnement
Chao Li1,∗
1

Yixiao Yang1,∗ Kun He1,† Stephen Lin2

John E. Hopcroft3

School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2

Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Computer Science Department, Cornell University
brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
We address the problem of removing undesirable reflections from a single image captured through a glass surface,
which is an ill-posed, challenging but practically important
problem for photo enhancement. Inspired by iterative structure reduction for hidden community detection in social networks, we propose an Iterative Boost Convolutional LSTM
Network (IBCLN) that enables cascaded prediction for reflection removal. IBCLN is a cascaded network that iteratively reﬁnes the estimates of transmission and reflection
layers in a manner that they can boost the prediction quality
to each other, and information across steps of the cascade is
transferred using an LSTM. The intuition is that the transmission is the strong, dominant structure while the reflection is the weak, hidden structure. They are complementary
to each other in a single image and thus a better estimate
and reduction on one side from the original image leads to a
more accurate estimate on the other side. To facilitate training over multiple cascade steps, we employ LSTM to address the vanishing gradient problem, and propose residual
reconstruction loss as further training guidance. Besides,
we create a dataset of real-world images with reflection and
ground-truth transmission layers to mitigate the problem of
insufﬁcient data. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed method can effectively remove reflections
in real and synthetic images compared with state-of-the-art
reflection removal methods.

1. Introduction
Undesirable reﬂections from glass occur frequently in
real-world photos. It not only signiﬁcantly degrades the
image quality, but also affects the performance of downstream computer vision tasks like object detection and semantic segmentation. As the reﬂection removal problem
is ill-posed, early works primarily tackle it with multi∗ The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

ple input images [24, 19, 16, 32, 6, 23, 5, 7]. More recently, researchers attempt to address the more common
and practically signiﬁcant scenario of a single input image [14, 15, 16, 17, 28, 22, 1, 25].
For single-image reﬂection removal (SIRR), researchers
have observed that some handcrafted priors may help for
distinguishing the transmission layer from the reﬂection
layer in a single image. But these priors often do not generalize well to different types of reﬂections and scenes owing
to disparate imaging conditions. In recent years, researchers
apply data-driven learning to replace handcrafted priors via
deep convolutional neural networks. With abundant labeled
data, a network can be trained to perform effectively over
a broad range of scenes. However, learning-based singleimage methods still have much room for improvement due
to complications such as limited training data, disparate
imaging conditions, varying scene content, limited physical
understanding of this problem, and the performance limitation of various models.
In this work, inspired by the iterative structure reduction approach for hidden community detection in social networks [8, 9], we introduce a cascaded neural network model
for transmission and reﬂection decomposition. Figure 1 illustrates the cascade results in our model, where the transmission and reﬂection are progressively reﬁned during the
iterations. To the best of our knowledge, previous works
on reﬂection removal did not utilize a cascaded reﬁnement
approach. Though some methods such as BDN [33] obtain
predictions over a sequence of a few sub-networks, they do
not iteratively reﬁne the estimates, but rather they conduct a
short alternating optimization, e.g., by estimating the reﬂection from the input image and the initial transmission layer,
and then estimating the transmission from the input image
and the estimated reﬂection layer.
For a cascade model on SIRR, a simple approach is to
employ one network to generate a predicted transmission
that serves as the auxiliary information of the next network,
and continue such process with subsequent networks to iteratively improve the prediction quality. With a long cascade, however, the training becomes difﬁcult due to the

3565

