MCEN: Bridging Cross-Modal Gap between Cooking Recipes and Dish Images
with Latent Variable Model
Han Fu†‡ Rui Wu† Chenghao Liu§ Jianling Sun†‡
†
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
‡
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, China
§
Singapore Management University, Singapore
∗

{11821003, tactic, sunjl}@zju.edu.cn, twinsken@gmail.com

Abstract
Nowadays, driven by the increasing concern on diet and
health, food computing has attracted enormous attention
from both industry and research community. One of the
most popular research topics in this domain is Food Retrieval, due to its profound influence on health-oriented applications. In this paper, we focus on the task of cross-modal
retrieval between food images and cooking recipes. We
present Modality-Consistent Embedding Network (MCEN)
that learns modality-invariant representations by projecting
images and texts to the same embedding space. To capture
the latent alignments between modalities, we incorporate
stochastic latent variables to explicitly exploit the interactions between textual and visual features. Importantly, our
method learns the cross-modal alignments during training
but computes embeddings of different modalities independently at inference time for the sake of efficiency. Extensive experimental results clearly demonstrate that the proposed MCEN outperforms all existing approaches on the
benchmark Recipe1M dataset and requires less computational cost.

1. Introduction
Food is the paramount necessity of human life. As the
saying goes, we are what we eat, food not only provides
energy for life activities, but also plays a significant role
in affecting human identity, social formation, history, and
culture inheritance [19]. In our daily life, food is intricately linked to people’s convention, lifestyle, health and
social activities. Nowadays, with the development of Internet and mobile applications, sharing recipes and food images on social platforms has become a widespread trend
[43]. Due to the massive amounts of data resource online,
∗ Corresponding author: Jianling Sun.

Ingredients: 3 pounds
salmon
steak,
2
spoons butter, 1/3 cup
chopped..

Ingredients: 3 pounds
salmon
steak,
2
spoons butter, 1/3 cup
chopped..

Instructions: In a
large skillet , heat the
butter and saute the
onions, …

Instructions: In a
large skillet , heat the
butter and saute the
onions, …

RNN

CNN

RNN

CNN
Cross-Modal
Consistency

Image Embedding

Recipe Embedding

Image Embedding

Recipe Embedding

Retrieval Loss

Retrieval Loss

(a) Prior Work

(b) Our Work

Figure 1. A comparison between prior work (a) and the proposed MCEN (b). We learn modality-consistent embeddings by
capturing the interactions between images and recipes via latent
variables. The dotted lines represents that the joint information is
only used during training. At inference time, the embeddings are
computed independently.

food computing has become a popular field, inciting numerous machine learning tasks such as ingredient recognition
[38, 23], food image retrieval [54] and recipe recommendation [53, 49]. Among the research topics, Image-to-Recipe
learning (im2recipe) is one of the most important problems
due to its profound influence on health-oriented applications [40]. For instance, food-health analysis applications
are required to predict detailed nutrition contents and calorie information from food images, and a recipe-retrieval
system is a necessary solution on this scenario.
Im2recipe is a challenging task since it involves highly
variant foods images and expatiatory textual recipes. A typical recipe consists of a list of ingredients and cooking instructions which may not directly align with the appearance
of the corresponding food image. Typically, recent efforts
have formulated im2recipe as a cross-modal retrieval problem [48, 37, 6, 62], to align matching recipe-image pairs in a
shared latent space with retrieval learning approaches. Concretely, prior work builds two independent networks to encode textual recipes (ingredients and cooking instructions)

14570

