Bodies at Rest: 3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation
from a Pressure Image using Synthetic Data
Henry M. Clever1 , Zackory Erickson1 , Ariel Kapusta1 , Greg Turk1 , C. Karen Liu2 , and Charles C. Kemp1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2 Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

{henryclever, zackory, akapusta}@gatech.edu, turk@cc.gatech.edu, karenliu@cs.stanford.edu, charlie.kemp@bme.gatech.edu

Figure 1. Left: The PressurePose dataset has 206K 3D human poses and shapes with pressure images generated by physics
simulations that drop articulated rigid body models and soft body models on a soft body model of a bed and pressure sensing
mat. Right: PressureNet is a deep learning model trained on synthetic data that performs well on real data: pressure image
input with gender (in), 3D human mesh output (out), RGB image for reference (ref).

Abstract
People spend a substantial part of their lives at rest in
bed. 3D human pose and shape estimation for this activity would have numerous beneficial applications, yet lineof-sight perception is complicated by occlusion from bedding. Pressure sensing mats are a promising alternative, but
training data is challenging to collect at scale. We describe
a physics-based method that simulates human bodies at rest
in a bed with a pressure sensing mat, and present PressurePose, a synthetic dataset with 206K pressure images with
3D human poses and shapes. We also present PressureNet,
a deep learning model that estimates human pose and shape
given a pressure image and gender. PressureNet incorporates a pressure map reconstruction (PMR) network that
models pressure image generation to promote consistency
between estimated 3D body models and pressure image input. In our evaluations, PressureNet performed well with
real data from participants in diverse poses, even though it
had only been trained with synthetic data. When we ablated
the PMR network, performance dropped substantially.

1. Introduction
Humans spend a large part of their lives resting. While
resting, humans select poses that can be sustained with little
physical exertion. Our primary insight is that human bodies
at rest can be modeled sufficiently well to generate synthetic

data for machine learning. The lack of physical exertion
and absence of motion makes this class of human activities
amenable to relatively simple biomechanical models similar
to the ragdoll models used in video games [35].
We apply this insight to the problem of using a pressure
image to estimate the 3D human pose and shape of a person resting in bed. This capability would be useful for a
variety of healthcare applications such as bed sore management [17], tomographic patient imaging [18], sleep studies
[9], patient monitoring [10], and assistive robotics [13]. To
this end, we present the PressurePose dataset, a large-scale
synthetic dataset consisting of 3D human body poses and
shapes with pressure images (Fig. 1, left). We also present
PressureNet, a deep learning model that estimates 3D human body pose and shape from a low-resolution pressure
image (Fig. 1, right).
Prior work on the problem of human pose estimation
from pressure images [9, 13, 18, 22, 29] has primarily used
real data that is challenging to collect. Our PressurePose
dataset has an unprecedented diversity of body shapes, joint
angles, and postures with more thorough and precise annotations than previous datasets (Table 2). While recent prior
work has estimated 3D human pose from pressure images,
[9, 13], to the best of our knowledge PressureNet is the first
system to also estimate 3D body shape.
Our synthetic data generation method first generates diverse samples from an 85 dimensional human pose and

6215

