Towards Discriminability and Diversity:
Batch Nuclear-norm Maximization under Label Insufficient Situations
Shuhao Cui1,2

Shuhui Wang1∗ Junbao Zhuo1,2

Liang Li1

Qingming Huang1,2,3

Qi Tian4

1

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 4 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{cuishuhao18s, wangshuhui, liang.li}@ict.ac.cn, junbao.zhuo@vipl.ict.ac.cn,
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
The learning of the deep networks largely relies on the
data with human-annotated labels. In some label insufficient situations, the performance degrades on the decision
boundary with high data density. A common solution is to
directly minimize the Shannon Entropy, but the side effect
caused by entropy minimization, i.e., reduction of the prediction diversity, is mostly ignored. To address this issue,
we reinvestigate the structure of classification output matrix of a randomly selected data batch. We find by theoretical analysis that the prediction discriminability and
diversity could be separately measured by the Frobeniusnorm and rank of the batch output matrix. Besides, the
nuclear-norm is an upperbound of the Frobenius-norm, and
a convex approximation of the matrix rank. Accordingly,
to improve both discriminability and diversity, we propose
Batch Nuclear-norm Maximization (BNM) on the output
matrix. BNM could boost the learning under typical label insufficient learning scenarios, such as semi-supervised
learning, domain adaptation and open domain recognition.
On these tasks, extensive experimental results show that
BNM outperforms competitors and works well with existing well-known methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/cuishuhao/BNM .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved large success in
most computer vision applications. Despite the success already achieved, deep models in visual learning tasks largely
rely on vast amounts of labeled data, where the labeling process is both time-consuming and expensive. Without sufficient amount of labeled training data, as a common conse∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of problem. Beyond the discriminability, we
also focus on the minority category with few samples bounded in
the dotted frame at the bottom left part. The influence of minority category tends to be reduced in direct entropy minimization,
resulting in the degradation of the category prediction diversity.

quence, spurious predictions will be made even with a subtle departure from the training samples. Actually, in most
applications, there exists large discrepancy between training data and real-world testing data. The discrepancy could
lead to annoying ambiguous predictions, especially under
label insufficient situations. In this paper, we focus on enhancing the model learning capability by reducing the ambiguous predictions.
When deep models are applied to unlabeled examples,
the prediction discriminability is always low, due to the
large data density near the decision boundary. To reduce the
large data density, most methods resort to classical Shannon Entropy theory [41]. In semi-supervised learning, the
prediction entropy for unlabeled examples is directly minimized by [13], and further combined with Virtual Adversarial Training [30] for better results. In domain adaptation, the entropy minimization is also utilized in [27, 47]
to strengthen the discriminability on the unlabeled domain.
Meanwhile, from another aspect, to encourage the prediction diversity, methods in [42, 55] utilize a balance con-

3941

