Learned Image Compression with Discretized Gaussian Mixture Likelihoods and
Attention Modules
Zhengxue Cheng1 , Heming Sun2,3 , Masaru Takeuchi2 , Jiro Katto1
1
2

Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan

Waseda Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Tokyo, Japan 3 JST, PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan
{zxcheng@asagi., hemingsun@aoni., masaru-t@aoni., katto@}waseda.jp

Abstract
Image compression is a fundamental research field and
many well-known compression standards have been developed for many decades. Recently, learned compression
methods exhibit a fast development trend with promising results. However, there is still a performance gap between
learned compression algorithms and reigning compression
standards, especially in terms of widely used PSNR metric. In this paper, we explore the remaining redundancy
of recent learned compression algorithms. We have found
accurate entropy models for rate estimation largely affect
the optimization of network parameters and thus affect the
rate-distortion performance. Therefore, in this paper, we
propose to use discretized Gaussian Mixture Likelihoods to
parameterize the distributions of latent codes, which can
achieve a more accurate and flexible entropy model. Besides, we take advantage of recent attention modules and
incorporate them into network architecture to enhance the
performance. Experimental results demonstrate our proposed method achieves a state-of-the-art performance compared to existing learned compression methods on both Kodak and high-resolution datasets. To our knowledge our approach is the first work to achieve comparable performance
with latest compression standard Versatile Video Coding
(VVC) regarding PSNR. More importantly, our approach
generates more visually pleasant results when optimized by
MS-SSIM.

1. Introduction
Image compression is an important and fundamental research topic in the field of signal processing for many
decades to achieve efficient image transmission and storage.
Classical image compression standards include JPEG [1],
JPEG2000 [2], HEVC/H.265 [3] and ongoing Versatile
Video Coding (VVC) [4] which will be the next generation
compression standard expected by the end of 2020. Typically they rely on hand-crafted creativity to present module-

Figure 1: Visualization of reconstructed images Kodim04
from Kodak dataset with approximately 0.1 bpp.

based encoder/decoder (codec) block diagrams. They use
fixed transform matrix, intra prediction, quantization, context adaptive arithmetic coders and various de-blocking or
loop filters to reduce spatial redundancy to improve the coding efficiency. The standardization of a conventional codec
has historically spanned several years. Along with the fast
development of new image formats and the proliferation
of high-resolution mobile devices, existing image compression standards are not expected to be an optimal and general
solutions for all kinds of image contents.
Various approaches has been investigated for end-to-end
image compression. Recently, the notable approaches are
context-adaptive entropy models for learned image compression [19, 20, 21] to achieve superior performance among all the learned codecs. The work [19] proposed a
hyperprior to add additional bits to model the entropy model. The work [20] jointly combine an autoregressive mask
convolution and the hyperprior. The work [21] proposed a
quite similar idea by considering two types of contexts, bitconsuming contexts (that is, hyperprior) and bit-free contexts (that is, autoregressive model) to realize a context17939

