PFRL: Pose-Free Reinforcement Learning for 6D Pose Estimation
Jianzhun Shao Yuhang Jiang Gu Wang Zhigang Li Xiangyang Ji
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
{sjz18,jiangyh19,wangg16,lzg15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
6D pose estimation from a single RGB image is a challenging and vital task in computer vision. The current mainstream deep model methods resort to 2D images annotated
with real-world ground-truth 6D object poses, whose collection is fairly cumbersome and expensive, even unavailable in many cases. In this work, to get rid of the burden of 6D annotations, we formulate the 6D pose refinement as a Markov Decision Process and impose on the reinforcement learning approach with only 2D image annotations as weakly-supervised 6D pose information, via a delicate reward definition and a composite reinforced optimization method for efficient and effective policy training. Experiments on LINEMOD and T-LESS datasets demonstrate
that our Pose-Free approach is able to achieve state-of-theart performance compared with the methods without using
real-world ground-truth 6D pose labels.

1. Introduction
6D pose estimation aims to localize the 3D location and
the 3D orientation of the object from a single image. It plays
a crucial role in real-world applications including robot manipulation [5, 43], augmented reality [21] and self-driving
cars [4, 19]. For instance, when a robot tries to grab an object, it is a prerequisite to accurately estimate the 6D object
poses from the image captured by the equipped camera.
This problem was traditionally regarded as a geometric
problem and can be solved with Perspective-n-Point (PnP)
[14] algorithms by matching features between the 2D image
and the 3D object model. Since rich textures are indispensable for feature matching, they cannot effectively handle
the texture-less cases. With the rise of deep learning, considerable learning-based approaches are proposed for various perception cases (e.g., RGB-only, RGB-D) and have
greatly promoted the evolvement of this field. Some people
[24, 29, 25] followed the conventional way to build the 2D3D correspondences and subsequently solve the pose via

Figure 1. The sketch of Pose-Free Reinforcement Learning
(PFRL). We formulate the pose refining procedure as a sequential decision-making process and exploit a composite reinforced
optimization approach to tackle it. We calculate the reward using the similarity measurement of mask information to avoid the
annotations of pose labels.

PnP. Others [12, 38] instead trained the deep model in an
end-to-end manner to directly derive the pose from the image. Compared with traditional ones, these approaches can
achieve remarkable performance even in challenging situations such as texture-less, clutter, occlusion, etc. A common way to further improve the pose accuracy is pose refinement. DeepIM [15] is able to predict the 6D pose difference between the current estimation and the ground-truth
by comparing the rendered object with the observed one in
2D space. A similar idea is also explored by [20, 40].
Real-world pose annotations are essential for current approaches to achieve excellent performance. Unfortunately,
acquisition of the 2D images annotated with real-world
ground-truth 6D object poses is fairly cumbersome and expensive compared with that in 2D space (e.g. instance 2D
mask), which greatly restricts the popularization of these
approaches. Alternatively, some researchers [12, 33, 40]
turned to getting rid of this problem by training on synthetic
data only. However, the domain gap is prone to degrade
pose estimation performance in real-world cases.
In this work, we focus on 6D pose estimation from RGB
images only without requiring real-world pose annotations
111454

