Maintaining Discrimination and Fairness in Class Incremental Learning
Bowen Zhao†,‡ Xi Xiao†,‡ Guojun Gan∗ Bin Zhang‡ Shutao Xia†,‡
†
Tsinghua University ‡ Peng Cheng Laboratory ∗ University of Connecticut
zbw18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xiaox,xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
bin.zhang@pcl.ac.cn, guojun.gan@uconn.edu

Legend:

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been applied in class
incremental learning, which aims to solve common realworld problems of learning new classes continually. One
drawback of standard DNNs is that they are prone to catastrophic forgetting. Knowledge distillation (KD) is a commonly used technique to alleviate this problem. In this paper, we demonstrate it can indeed help the model to output more discriminative results within old classes. However, it cannot alleviate the problem that the model tends
to classify objects into new classes, causing the positive effect of KD to be hidden and limited. We observed that an
important factor causing catastrophic forgetting is that the
weights in the last fully connected (FC) layer are highly
biased in class incremental learning. In this paper, we propose a simple and effective solution motivated by the aforementioned observations to address catastrophic forgetting.
Firstly, we utilize KD to maintain the discrimination within
old classes. Then, to further maintain the fairness between
old classes and new classes, we propose Weight Aligning
(WA) that corrects the biased weights in the FC layer after
normal training process. Unlike previous work, WA does
not require any extra parameters or a validation set in advance, as it utilizes the information provided by the biased
weights themselves. The proposed method is evaluated on
ImageNet-1000, ImageNet-100, and CIFAR-100 under various settings. Experimental results show that the proposed
method can effectively alleviate catastrophic forgetting and
significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
have shown remarkable performance in various applications, even surpassing human performance on some tasks
[10, 11, 16]. The standard DNNs are typically trained on a
prepared dataset, where the number of categories is fixed in
advance. However, in many real-world applications, it is often required to learn new classes gradually from streaming

for new classes

for old classes

old
data

CNN

feature layers

W FC layer
output nodes cat
new
data

fish
CNN
W

cat fish lion dog

old
model

new
model

output probabilities
of the test samples

test

Figure 1: A vanilla method for class incremental learning.
data, which is called class incremental learning.
In order to achieve this goal, a common method is to
fine tune the old model on new data by setting the number
of output nodes to be that of current classes (including old
and new classes) as shown in Figure 1. However, this naive
method suffers from a serious problem known as catastrophic forgetting [7, 22]. As can be seen from Figure 1,
the old data’s output probabilities corresponding to the old
classes (which are highlighted in red boxes) are relatively
low. Thus, the new model trained by the vanilla method
generally predicts objects as new classes [26, 33, 39].
To alleviate catastrophic forgetting, many studies have
been done [28]. EWC [18], SI [35], and MAS [1] attempt
to solve this problem with a parameter control strategy.
Knowledge distillation (KD) [12] is another strategy, which
has also been widely used in this field [5, 20, 40]. Besides,
some other studies [23, 26, 29, 34] follow a rehearsal strategy by using a small amount of real or generated old data
in the training process. In class incremental learning tasks,
the new model is trained without access to the old data, even
with the rehearsal strategy, the training set in an incremental
step is seriously imbalanced between old classes and new
classes. Thus, there are also some studies that deal with
catastrophic forgetting from this perspective [13, 33].
In this paper, we demonstrate that knowledge distillation, the commonly used technique in this field, can in-

13208

