Single-shot Monocular RGB-D Imaging using Uneven Double Refraction
Andreas Meuleman1∗
1

Seung-Hwan Baek1∗ †

Felix Heide2
2

KAIST

Min H. Kim1

Princeton University

Abstract
Linear polarizer

Cameras that capture color and depth information have
become an essential imaging modality for applications in
robotics, autonomous driving, virtual, and augmented reality. Existing RGB-D cameras rely on multiple sensors or active illumination with specialized sensors. In this work, we
propose a method for monocular single-shot RGB-D imaging. Instead of learning depth from single-image depth cues,
we revisit double-refraction imaging using a birefractive
medium, measuring depth as the displacement of differently
refracted images superimposed in a single capture. However, existing double-refraction methods are orders of magnitudes too slow to be used in real-time applications, e.g.,
in robotics, and provide only inaccurate depth due to correspondence ambiguity in double reflection. We resolve this
ambiguity optically by leveraging the orthogonality of the
two linearly polarized rays in double refraction – introducing uneven double refraction by adding a linear polarizer
to the birefractive medium. Doing so makes it possible to
develop a real-time method for reconstructing sparse depth
and color simultaneously in real-time. We validate the proposed method, both synthetically and experimentally, and
demonstrate 3D object detection and photographic applications.

1. Introduction
RGB-D cameras that simultaneously acquire color and
depth information have emerged as a critical imaging
modality for applications in computer vision and graphics,
including autonomous driving, robotics, photography, and
mixed reality. However, broadly adopted RGB-D cameras
either rely on multiple cameras [18] or combine a conventional camera with a separate depth sensor. These latter
typically rely on an active illumination module that modulates light either spatially [23, 14, 11] or temporally [15],
such as a time-of-flight (TOF) camera. Existing approaches
to monocular RGB-D imaging, i.e., using only a single
camera, aim to recover depth-from-defocus [28, 17], depthfrom-focus [5], and depth-from-refraction [20, 4, 7, 1]. Although all of these methods rely only on a conventional
∗: Equal contribution. †: Now at Princeton University

Calcite crystal
(a) Our prototype

800

(b) Restored color image

600
480
(c) Estimated depth map

400
[mm]

Input

Restored

Figure 1. (a) Our prototype, consisting of a linear polarizer and
a calcite crystal in front of a conventional camera. (b) and (c)
estimated depth map and restored color image from the input. Our
algorithm provides both sparse depth and clear RGB image within
34 ms. Refer to the supplemental material for real-time demo.

camera with small footprint and cost, they require multiple
shots to obtain depth, which prohibits their use in dynamic
real-world scenes.
The ultimate goal of monocular RGB-D imaging is to
obtain color and depth simultaneously from a single shot.
Plenoptic imaging, i.e., light-field imaging, approaches this
problem by combining the objective lens with a micro-lens
array in front of the sensor to capture multi-perspective
sub-images of a scene. Unfortunately, this angular resolution comes at the cost of a loss in spatial resolution, and
the depth range is fundamentally limited by the short baseline [19]. Alternative approaches relying on pixel arrays
that alternately see half of the aperture [30, 8], thereby capturing subsampled stereo views, suffer from a narrow baseline at the long distances that TOF RGB-D cameras excel at.
To tackle all of the above limitations, instead of separating angular measurements, we superpose them by revisiting
depth-from-double-refraction, while lifting existing ambiguity and runtime restrictions of double-refraction methods.
Baek et al. [1] use a birefringent medium in front of the
camera lens, such as a calcite crystal, to overlap two shifted
images that encode depth via their local disparity. However,
the intensities of these two images are identical. This fundamental ambiguity of searching stereo correspondences in
double refraction images results in very low computational

2465

