CONSAC: Robust Multi-Model Fitting by Conditional Sample Consensus
Florian Kluger1 , Eric Brachmann2 , Hanno Ackermann1 , Carsten Rother2 , Michael Ying Yang3 , Bodo Rosenhahn1
1

Leibniz University Hannover, 2 Heidelberg University, 3 University of Twente

Abstract
We present a robust estimator for fitting multiple parametric models of the same form to noisy measurements. Applications include finding multiple vanishing points in manmade scenes, fitting planes to architectural imagery, or estimating multiple rigid motions within the same sequence. In
contrast to previous works, which resorted to hand-crafted
search strategies for multiple model detection, we learn the
search strategy from data. A neural network conditioned
on previously detected models guides a RANSAC estimator to different subsets of all measurements, thereby finding
model instances one after another. We train our method supervised as well as self-supervised. For supervised training
of the search strategy, we contribute a new dataset for vanishing point estimation. Leveraging this dataset, the proposed algorithm is superior with respect to other robust estimators as well as to designated vanishing point estimation
algorithms. For self-supervised learning of the search, we
evaluate the proposed algorithm on multi-homography estimation and demonstrate an accuracy that is superior to
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Describing 3D scenes by low-dimensional parametric
models, oftentimes building upon simplifying assumptions,
has become fundamental to reconstructing and understanding the world around us. Examples include: i) fitting 3Dplanes to an architectural scene, which relates to finding
multiple homographies in two views; ii) tracking rigid objects in two consecutive images, which relates to fitting
multiple fundamental matrices; iii) identifying the dominant directions in a man-made environment, which relates
to finding multiple vanishing points. Once such parametric models are discovered from images, they can ultimately
be used in a multitude of applications and high-level vision
tasks. Examples include the automatic creation of 3D models [1, 22, 41, 53], autonomous navigation [34, 40, 20, 26]
or augmented reality [10, 11, 2, 38].
Model-fitting has generally been realised as a two-step
procedure. Firstly, an error-prone, low-level process to ex-

Figure 1: CONSAC applications: line fitting (top), vanishing point estimation (middle) and homography estimation
(bottom) for multiple instances. Colour hues in column two
and three indicate different instances, brightness in column
two varies by sampling weight.
tract data points which shall adhere to a model is executed.
For example, one could match 2D feature points between
pairs of images as a basis for homography estimation [21],
in order to determine the 3D plane where the 3D points live
on. Secondly, a robust estimator that fits model parameters
to inlier data points is used, while at the same time identifying erroneous data points as so-called outliers [19]. Some
outliers can be efficiently removed by pre-processing, e.g.
based on the descriptor distances in feature matching [29].
While the case of fitting a single parametric model to
data has received considerable attention in the literature, we
focus on the scenario of fitting multiple models of the same
form to data. This is of high practical relevance, as motivated in the example above. There, multiple 3D planes
represented by multiple homographies are fitted. However,
when multiple models are present in the data, estimation
becomes more challenging. Inliers of one model constitute
outliers of all other models. Naturally, outlier filters fail in
removing such pseudo-outliers.

4634

