Defending Against Model Stealing Attacks with Adaptive Misinformation
Sanjay Kariyappa
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta GA, USA

Moinuddin K Qureshi
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta GA, USA

sanjaykariyappa@gatech.edu

moin@gatech.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are susceptible to model
stealing attacks, which allows a data-limited adversary with
no knowledge of the training dataset to clone the functionality of a target model, just by using black-box query access. Such attacks are typically carried out by querying
the target model using inputs that are synthetically generated or sampled from a surrogate dataset to construct a labeled dataset. The adversary can use this labeled dataset
to train a clone model, which achieves a classification accuracy comparable to that of the target model. We propose
“Adaptive Misinformation” to defend against such model
stealing attacks. We identify that all existing model stealing attacks invariably query the target model with Out-OfDistribution (OOD) inputs. By selectively sending incorrect
predictions for OOD queries, our defense substantially degrades the accuracy of the attacker’s clone model (by up to
40%), while minimally impacting the accuracy (< 0.5%)
for benign users. Compared to existing defenses, our defense has a significantly better security vs accuracy tradeoff and incurs minimal computational overhead.

1. Introduction
The ability of Deep Learning models to solve several
challenging classification problems in fields like computer
vision and natural language processing has proliferated the
use of these models in various products and services such as
smart cameras, intelligent voice assistants and self-driving
cars. In addition, several companies now employ deep
learning models to offer classification as a service to end
users who may not have the resources to train their own
models. In most of these cases, while the model parameters
and the architecture are kept hidden from the end-user, the
user is allowed to interact with the model to obtain the classification outputs for the user’s inputs. The confidentiality
of these models is important as the models can be misused
in various ways in the hands of an adversary. For instance,
an adversary can use the stolen model to offer a compet-

(a)

Dog-breed Classiﬁer

(b)

Labeled Dataset

Clone-Model

Figure 1. Model Stealing Attack: (a) An adversary queries the target model (dog-breed classifier) using synthetic/surrogate data (cat
images) and constructs a labeled dataset using the predictions of
the model (b) The labeled dataset can then be used to train a clonemodel that replicates the functionality of the target model.

ing service which can be detrimental to business. Furthermore, stolen models can be used to craft adversarial examples [20, 5, 17, 22], creating vulnerability for safety-critical
applications such as malware detection and can even leak
information about the data used to train the model, causing
privacy issues [4, 19]. These issues create a need to protect
the confidentiality of machine learning models.
Unfortunately, recent attacks [15, 17] have shown that
it is possible for an adversary to carry out model stealing
attacks and train a clone model that achieves a classification accuracy that is remarkably close to the accuracy of the
target model (up to 0.99⇥). Moreover, these attacks can
be performed even when the adversary is constrained in the
following ways:
1. The adversary only has black-box query access to the
model i.e. the attacker can query the model with any input
and observe the output probabilities.
2. The adversary is data-limited and does not have access to a large number of inputs representative of the training data of the target model.
Attacks that work under these constraints rely on one of
two methods for generating the data necessary for querying the target model: (a) Synthetic Data: [9, 17] produce
synthetic data from a small set of in-distribution seed ex1770

