Network Adjustment: Channel Search Guided by FLOPs Utilization Ratio
Zhengsu Chen1 , Jianwei Niu1 , Lingxi Xie2 , Xuefeng Liu1 , Longhui Wei3 , Qi Tian4
1
Beihang University, 2 Johns Hopkins University, 3 Peking University, 4 Xidian University
danczs@buaa.edu.cn, niujianwei@buaa.edu.cn, 198808xc@gmail.com,
liu xuefeng@buaa.edu.cn, longhuiwei@pku.edu.cn, wywqtian@gmail.com

Abstract
Automatic designing computationally efficient neural
networks has received much attention in recent years. Existing approaches either utilize network pruning or leverage the network architecture search methods. This paper presents a new framework named network adjustment,
which considers network accuracy as a function of FLOPs,
so that under each network configuration, one can estimate
the FLOPs utilization ratio (FUR) for each layer and use it
to determine whether to increase or decrease the number of
channels on the layer. Note that FUR, like the gradient of
a non-linear function, is accurate only in a small neighborhood of the current network. Hence, we design an iterative
mechanism so that the initial network undergoes a number
of steps, each of which has a small ‘adjusting rate’ to control the changes to the network. The computational overhead of the entire search process is reasonable, i.e., comparable to that of re-training the final model from scratch.
Experiments on standard image classification datasets and
a wide range of base networks demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, which consistently outperforms the
pruning counterpart. The code is available at https:
//github.com/danczs/NetworkAdjustment.

1. Introduction
In the deep learning era [24], as researchers designed
more and more complicated neural networks [23, 35, 14,
19, 50] for various computer vision problems [8, 30], it becomes increasingly important to find efficient architectures
that are friendly to real-world applications. The computational overhead of a deep neural network is closely related to its width, i.e., the number of channels on each
layer of it. Beyond manually designed networks which have
fixed configurations of width [14, 35, 38], researchers have
also explored the direction of automatically determining the
numbers of channels. Representative methods include network pruning [25, 28, 21] and channel search [40, 1], both
of which obtained success in improving the computational

efficiency (accuracy with respect to overhead) of the network. However, both of these two approaches have some
limitations. Network pruning methods usually start with a
wide network and try to reduce the channel number of each
layer. These methods are mostly not sensitive to specific
efficiency criteria (e.g., FLOPs) so that the computational
resource is not always assigned to the places that need it
most. On the other hand, the main drawbacks of the network search techniques are the computational complexity
and search strategy which limit the search space and increase the search cost.
In this paper, we propose a novel pipeline named network adjustment which starts with a pre-trained network,
and simultaneously adds channels to some layers and subtracts channels from some others, with the criterion of the
utilization ratio of resources at each layer. Network adjustment stands out from existing approaches in two aspects.
First, we can estimate the state of each individual convolutional layer and optimize the channel numbers simultaneously. Therefore, our method is very efficient for channel
search. Second, we search the channel configuration with
an efficiency-aware strategy, by which we can find computationally efficient networks. The top-level design of our
approach is an iterative process, in which each iteration involves training the given network, computing the utilization
ratio on each layer, and adjusting the channel numbers accordingly. The computational overhead of the entire process
is often comparable to that of training the initial network
from scratch, yet we can observe gradual improvements of
computational efficiency throughout iterations.
As a particular example, we aim to optimize the FLOPs
(floating point operations) of deep networks, and calculate
the FLOPs utilization ratio (FUR) for this purpose. FUR
is defined on each layer of a network, measuring the accuracy gain that can be obtained by increasing unit FLOPs on
that layer. To compute it, we assume that network accuracy
is a function of FLOPs and that FUR, like the gradient of
a non-linear function, can be estimated with an acceptable
error in a small neighborhood of each state. To mimic a
small amount of FLOPs change, we propose a randomized

10658

