Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation with Cross-Consistency Training
Yassine Ouali
Céline Hudelot
Myriam Tami
Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, MICS, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
{yassine.ouali,celine.hudelot,myriam.tami}@centralesupelec.fr

Abstract

Labeled Example

Main
Decoder

Encoder

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the wide adoption of deep supervised learning within the computer vision community, significant strides were made across various visual tasks yielding impressive results. However, training deep learning
models requires a large amount of labeled data which acquisition is often costly and time consuming. In semantic
segmentation, given how expensive and laborious the acquisition of pixel-level labels is, with a cost that is 15 times
and 60 times larger than that of region-level and image-level
labels respectively [33], the need for data efficient semantic
segmentation methods is even more evident.

Supervised Loss
Main
Decoder

Unlabeled Example

Encoder
Perturbations

In this paper, we present a novel cross-consistency
based semi-supervised approach for semantic segmentation. Consistency training has proven to be a powerful semisupervised learning framework for leveraging unlabeled
data under the cluster assumption, in which the decision
boundary should lie in low density regions. In this work,
we first observe that for semantic segmentation, the low
density regions are more apparent within the hidden representations than within the inputs. We thus propose crossconsistency training, where an invariance of the predictions
is enforced over different perturbations applied to the outputs of the encoder. Concretely, a shared encoder and a
main decoder are trained in a supervised manner using
the available labeled examples. To leverage the unlabeled
examples, we enforce a consistency between the main decoder predictions and those of the auxiliary decoders, taking as inputs different perturbed versions of the encoder’s
output, and consequently, improving the encoder’s representations. The proposed method is simple and can easily be extended to use additional training signal, such as
image-level labels or pixel-level labels across different domains. We perform an ablation study to tease apart the effectiveness of each component, and conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that our method achieves stateof-the-art results in several datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/yassouali/CCT

Aux.
Decoder 1
Unsupervivsed
Loss
Aux.
Decoder K

Figure 1. The proposed Cross-Consistency training (CCT). For
the labeled examples, the encoder and the main decoder are trained
in a supervised manner. For the unlabeled examples, a consistency
between the main decoder’s predictions and those of the auxiliary
decoders is enforced, over different types of perturbations applied
to the inputs of the auxiliary decoders. Best viewed in color.

As a result, a growing attention is drown on deep SemiSupervised learning (SSL) to take advantage of a large
amount of unlabeled data and limit the need for labeled examples. The current dominant SSL methods in deep learning are consistency training [43, 29, 50, 36], pseudo labeling [30], entropy minimization [17] and bootstrapping [42].
Some newly introduced techniques are based on generative
modeling [28, 49].
However, the recent progress in SSL was confined to
classification tasks, and its application in semantic segmentation is still limited. Dominant approaches [22, 53, 52, 31]
focus on weakly-supervised learning which principle is to
generate pseudo pixel-level labels by leveraging the weak
labels, that can then be used, together with the limited
strongly labeled examples, to train a segmentation network
in a supervised manner. Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) were also adapted for SSL setting [49, 23] by extending the generic GAN framework to pixel-level predictions. The discriminator is then jointly trained with an adversarial loss and a supervised loss over the labeled examples.

12674

