Weakly Supervised Discriminative Feature Learning with State Information
for Person Identification
Hong-Xing Yu1 and Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3 *
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
xKoven@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of identity-discriminative visual
feature is appealing in real-world tasks where manual labelling is costly. However, the images of an identity can be
visually discrepant when images are taken under different
states, e.g. different camera views and poses. This visual
discrepancy leads to great difﬁculty in unsupervised discriminative learning. Fortunately, in real-world tasks we could
often know the states without human annotation, e.g. we can
easily have the camera view labels in person re-identiﬁcation
and facial pose labels in face recognition. In this work we
propose utilizing the state information as weak supervision
to address the visual discrepancy caused by different states.
We formulate a simple pseudo label model and utilize the
state information in an attempt to reﬁne the assigned pseudo
labels by the weakly supervised decision boundary rectiﬁcation and weakly supervised feature drift regularization. We
evaluate our model on unsupervised person re-identiﬁcation
and pose-invariant face recognition. Despite the simplicity
of our method, it could outperform the state-of-the-art results
on Duke-reID, MultiPIE and CFP datasets with a standard
ResNet-50 backbone. We also ﬁnd our model could perform comparably with the standard supervised ﬁne-tuning
results on the three datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/KovenYu/state-information.

1. Introduction
While deep discriminative feature learning has shown
great success in many vision tasks, it depends highly on
the manually labelled large-scale visual data. This limits its
scalability to real-world tasks where the labelling is costly
and tedious, e.g. person re-identiﬁcation [76, 53] and unconstrained pose-invariant face recognition [73]. Thus, learning
identity-discriminative features without manual labels has
drawn increasing attention due to its promise to address the
scalability problem [65, 18, 67, 66, 61].
* Corresponding author

Extrinsicinformationin
PersonreͲidentification:
whichcameraview?

Extrinsicinformationin
PoseͲinvariantfacerecognition:
whichpose?

Camera
view1

Frontal

Camera
view2

Profile

Figure 1. Examples of the state information. A pair of images in
each column are of the same individual (We do not assume to know
any pairing; this ﬁgure is only for demonstrating that different
states induce visual discrepancy. We only assume to know the
camera/pose label of each image but not the pairing).

However, the images of an identity can be drastically
different when they are taken under different states such as
different poses and camera views. For example, we observe
great visual discrepancy in the images of the same pedestrian
under different camera views in a surveillance scenario (See
Figure 1). Such visual discrepancy caused by the different
states induces great difﬁculty in unsupervised discriminative
learning. Fortunately, in real-world discriminative tasks, we
can often have some state information without human annotation effort. For instance, in person re-identiﬁcation, it is
straightforward to know from which camera view an unlabeled image is taken [65, 67, 66, 12], and in face recognition
the pose and facial expression can be estimated by off-theshelf estimators [68, 48] (See Figure 1). We aim to exploit
the state information as weak supervision to address the
visual discrepancy in unsupervised discriminative learning.
We refer to our task as the weakly supervised discriminative
feature learning.
In this work, we propose a novel pseudo label model
for weakly supervised discriminative feature learning. We
assign every unlabeled image example to a surrogate class
(i.e. artiﬁcially created pseudo class) which is expected to
represent an unknown identity in the unlabelled training set,

5528

