Hierarchical Scene Coordinate Classification and Regression
for Visual Localization
Xiaotian Li1

Shuzhe Wang1 Yi Zhao1 Jakob Verbeek2 * Juho Kannala1
1
Aalto University 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Visual localization is critical to many applications in
computer vision and robotics. To address single-image RGB
localization, state-of-the-art feature-based methods match
local descriptors between a query image and a pre-built 3D
model. Recently, deep neural networks have been exploited
to regress the mapping between raw pixels and 3D coordinates in the scene, and thus the matching is implicitly performed by the forward pass through the network. However,
in a large and ambiguous environment, learning such a regression task directly can be difficult for a single network.
In this work, we present a new hierarchical scene coordinate network to predict pixel scene coordinates in a coarseto-fine manner from a single RGB image. The network consists of a series of output layers, each of them conditioned
on the previous ones. The final output layer predicts the
3D coordinates and the others produce progressively finer
discrete location labels. The proposed method outperforms
the baseline regression-only network and allows us to train
compact models which scale robustly to large environments.
It sets a new state-of-the-art for single-image RGB localization performance on the 7-Scenes, 12-Scenes, Cambridge
Landmarks datasets, and three combined scenes. Moreover, for large-scale outdoor localization on the Aachen
Day-Night dataset, we present a hybrid approach which
outperforms existing scene coordinate regression methods,
and reduces significantly the performance gap w.r.t. explicit
feature matching methods.1

1. Introduction
Visual localization aims at estimating precise six degreeof-freedom (6-DoF) camera pose with respect to a known
environment. It is a fundamental component of many intelligent autonomous systems and applications in computer vision and robotics, e.g., augmented reality, autonomous driving, or camera-based indoor localization for personal as* Work done while JV was at INRIA.
1 Code and materials available at

github.io/hscnet.

https://aaltovision.

sistants. Commonly used visual localization methods rely
on matching local visual descriptors [42, 43]. Correspondences are typically established between 2D interest points
in the query and 3D points in the pre-built structure-frommotion model [48, 49] with nearest neighbor search, and the
6-DoF camera pose of the query can then be computed from
the correspondences.
Instead of explicitly establishing 2D-3D correspondences via matching descriptors, scene coordinate regression methods directly regress 3D scene coordinates from an
image [3, 5, 8, 50]. In this way, correspondences between
2D points in the image and 3D points in the scene can be
obtained densely without feature detection and description,
and explicit matching. In addition, no descriptor database
is required at test time since the model weights encode
the scene representation implicitly. It was experimentally
shown that recent CNN-based scene coordinate regression
methods achieve better localization performance on smallscale datasets compared to the state-of-the-art feature-based
methods [5]. The high accuracy and the compact representation of a dense scene model make scene coordinate regression approach an interesting alternative to the classic
feature-based approach.
However, most existing scene coordinate regression
methods can only be adopted on small-scale scenes. Typically, scene coordinate regression networks are designed to
have a limited receptive field [3, 5], i.e. only a small local
image patch is considered for each scene coordinate prediction. This allows the network to generalize well from
limited training data, since local patch appearance is more
stable w.r.t. viewpoint change. On the other hand, a limited receptive field size can lead to ambiguous patterns in
the scene, especially in large-scale environments, caused by
visual similarity between local image patches. Due to these
ambiguities, it is harder for the network to accurately model
the regression problem, resulting in inferior performance at
test time. Using larger receptive field sizes, up to the full
image, to regress the coordinates can mitigate the issues
caused by ambiguities. This, however, has been shown to
be prone to overfitting the larger input patterns in the case
of limited training data, even if data augmentation alleviates

11983

