Hierarchical Clustering with Hard-batch Triplet Loss for Person
Re-identification
Kaiwei Zeng1 , Munan Ning2 , Yaohua Wang3∗, Yang Guo4∗
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha,China
1

zengkaiwei1997@gmail.com, 2 munanning@gmail.com, 3 nudtyh@gmail.com, 4 guoyang@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
For clustering-guided fully unsupervised person reidentification (re-ID) methods, the quality of pseudo labels generated by clustering directly decides the model
performance. In order to improve the quality of pseudo
labels in existing methods, we propose the HCT method
which combines Hierarchical Clustering with hard-batch
Triplet loss. The key idea of HCT is to make full use of
the similarity among samples in the target dataset through
hierarchical clustering, reduce the influence of hard examples through hard-batch triplet loss, so as to generate
high quality pseudo labels and improve model performance.
Specifically, (1) we use hierarchical clustering to generate pseudo labels, (2) we use PK sampling in each iteration to generate a new dataset for training, (3) we conduct
training with hard-batch triplet loss and evaluate model
performance in each iteration. We evaluate our model
on Market-1501 and DukeMTMC-reID. Results show that
HCT achieves 56.4% mAP on Market-1501 and 50.7% mAP
on DukeMTMC-reID which surpasses state-of-the-arts a lot
in fully unsupervised re-ID and even better than most unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods which use
the labeled source dataset. Code will be released soon on
https://github.com/zengkaiwei/HCT

6WHS
&OXVWHU 

0HUJH

6WHS
&OXVWHU 

6WHS
&OXVWHU 

0HUJH

6WHS
&OXVWHU 

0HUJH

Figure 1. Hierarchical clustering. Each circle represents a sample, and the step represents the current merging stage. We use a
bottom-up method to merge clusters step by step according to the
distance between clusters in the current step.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) is mainly used to match
pictures of the same person that appears in different cameras, which is usually used as an auxiliary method of face
recognition to identify pedestrian information. Currently,
re-ID has been widely used in the field of security and has
been the focus of academic research. With the development
of convolutional neural networks (CNN), supervised re-ID
[9, 11, 21, 25, 30, 2, 31, 23] has achieved excellent performance. However, due to the data deviation in different
∗ Corresponding author

datasets, the performance of the model trained on the source
domain will significantly decline when it is directly transferred to the target domain. Besides, supervised learning
requires a large amount of manually annotated data, which
is costly in real life. Therefore, supervised re-ID is difficult
to meet the requirement of practical application and people
tend to focus on unsupervised re-ID.
Recently, people pay more attention on unsupervised reID and achieve good progress. Some works focus on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). UDA usually needs
manually annotated source data and unlabeled target data.

13657

