VecRoad: Point-based Iterative Graph Exploration for Road Graphs Extraction
Yong-Qiang Tan

Shang-Hua Gao
Xuan-Yi Li
Ming-Ming Cheng
TKLNDST, College of CS, Nankai University

Bo Ren

https://mmcheng.net/vecroad/

Abstract
Extracting road graphs from aerial images automatically
is more efﬁcient and costs less than from ﬁeld acquisition.
This can be done by a post-processing step that vectorizes
road segmentation predicted by CNN, but imperfect predictions will result in road graphs with low connectivity. On the
other hand, iterative next move exploration could construct
road graphs with better road connectivity, but often focuses
on local information and does not provide precise alignment
with the real road. To enhance the road connectivity while
maintaining the precise alignment between the graph and
real road, we propose a point-based iterative graph exploration scheme with segmentation-cues guidance and flexible steps. In our approach, we represent the location of
the next move as a ‘point’ that uniﬁes the representation of
multiple constraints such as the direction and step size in
each moving step. Information cues such as road segmentation and road junctions are jointly detected and utilized to
guide the next move and achieve better alignment of roads.
We demonstrate that our proposed method has a considerable improvement over state-of-the-art road graph extraction methods in terms of F-measure and road connectivity
metrics on common datasets.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Shifted road junctions due to the ﬁxed moving step
size. (b) Moving with our proposed ﬂexible step size. (c) Misalignment between graphs and roads without segmentation guidance. (d) Segmentation-cues guided next move prediction generates graph with precise alignment.

1. Introduction
Road graph, the vectorized representation of road maps,
allows real-world applications such as shortest-path searching for navigation. Conventionally, reliable road graphs
are generated by expensive and time-consuming ﬁeld acquisition and manual labeling. In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20, 1, 26] are adopted to
automatically construct high-precision and wide-coverage
road graph from aerial images with less human workload.
The most common approaches [16, 2] use post-processing
methods, e.g. morphological operation [31] and hard-coded
rules [16, 7], to extract the road graph from skeletonized
CNN-predicted road segmentation. However, the obtained
graph is highly affected by the quality of segmentation,

where an intermittent segmentation often leads to a graph
with low connectivity. To enforce the road connectivity,
recently proposed methods [1, 26] construct road graphs
through iterative next move exploration. In their methods,
by predicting the next move in a local patch and connecting it to the current road graph, the complete road graph is
generated iteratively. However, iterative next move exploration purely focuses on local information while estimating
the next move, which can result in misalignment between
graphs and real roads. As revealed in Fig. 1(c), even the
graph is explored in a roughly correct direction, a part of
the predicted graph is outside the real road map due to their
localized next move ﬁnding strategy. Also, as shown in

8910

