Uncertainty-aware Score Distribution Learning for Action Quality Assessment
Yansong Tang1,2,3,∗, Zanlin Ni1,∗ , Jiahuan Zhou5 , Danyang Zhang1 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3 , Ying Wu5 , Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
5
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Northwestern University
{tys15,nzl17,zhang-dy16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;jiahuanzhou2013@u.northwestern.edu;
{lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn;yingwu@eecs.northwestern.edu

Abstract
Assessing action quality from videos has attracted growing attention in recent years. Most existing approaches usually tackle this problem based on regression algorithms,
which ignore the intrinsic ambiguity in the score labels
caused by multiple judges or their subjective appraisals. To
address this issue, we propose an uncertainty-aware score
distribution learning (USDL) approach for action quality
assessment (AQA). Specifically, we regard an action as an
instance associated with a score distribution, which describes the probability of different evaluated scores. Moreover, under the circumstance where fine-grained score labels are available (e.g., difficulty degree of an action or
multiple scores from different judges), we further devise a
multi-path uncertainty-aware score distributions learning
(MUSDL) method to explore the disentangled components
of a score. We conduct experiments on three AQA datasets
containing various Olympic actions and surgical activities,
where our approaches set new state-of-the-arts under the
Spearman’s Rank Correlation.1

1. Introduction
Action quality assessment (AQA), aiming to evaluate
how well a specific action is performed, has become an
emerging and attractive research topic in computer vision
community because of its potential value for various realwide applications such as sport video analysis [1,18,19,22],
health care [5, 40, 43] and many others [3, 4, 42, 44]. Compared with the conventional action recognition problem [2,
6, 23, 26, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35] focusing on correctly classifying the action sequences from different categories, AQA is
∗ indicates equal contribution, the corresponding author is Jiwen Lu.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/nzl-thu/MUSDL

Figure 1. We study the problem of action quality assessment in this
paper. The bottom row shows an diving action in Olympic game,
in which the final score is calculated based on multiple judges and
the difficulty degree as 100.70 = (9.0 + 9.0 + 8.5) × 3.8. In order
to address the uncertainty during the assessment process, we utilize a Gaussian distribution to model the final score (top left) and
multiple Gaussian distributions to model the scores from different
judges (top right). All figures are best viewed in color.

a more challenging task as it requires to deal with the videos
from the same category with poor intra-class discriminant.
Over the past few years, there have been numbers of
methods proposed for AQA [12,13,17,18,21,22]. However,
most of them simply regard AQA as a regression problem
in order to directly predict the action scores. And unfortunately, their performances are indeed limited. The root
of such a limitation is that this kind of treatment disregards of the underlying ambiguity of the action score labels, which is one of the key issues for AQA. Such ambiguity is caused by how the action labels are generated

9839

