Rethinking Zero-shot Video Classification:
End-to-end Training for Realistic Applications
Biagio Brattoli∗
Heidelberg University

Joseph Tighe
Amazon

Fedor Zhdanov
Amazon

biagio.brattoli@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

tighe@amazon.com

fedor@amazon.com

Pietro Perona
Amazon

Krzysztof Chalupka
Amazon

perona@caltech.edu

chalupkk@amazon.com

Abstract
Trained on large datasets, deep learning (DL) can accurately classify videos into hundreds of diverse classes.
However, video data is expensive to annotate. Zero-shot
learning (ZSL) proposes one solution to this problem. ZSL
trains a model once, and generalizes to new tasks whose
classes are not present in the training dataset. We propose the first end-to-end algorithm for ZSL in video classification. Our training procedure builds on insights from
recent video classification literature and uses a trainable
3D CNN to learn the visual features. This is in contrast
to previous video ZSL methods, which use pretrained feature extractors. We also extend the current benchmarking
paradigm: Previous techniques aim to make the test task
unknown at training time but fall short of this goal. We
encourage domain shift across training and test data and
disallow tailoring a ZSL model to a specific test dataset.
We outperform the state-of-the-art by a wide margin. Our
code, evaluation procedure and model weights are available at github.com/bbrattoli/ZeroShotVideoClassification.

1. Introduction
Training image and video classification algorithms requires large training datasets [21, 27, 51, 52, 53]. With
no task-specific training data available one may still attempt to train a model using related information and transfer the learned knowledge to classify previously unseen
categories. This approach is called zero-shot learning
(ZSL) [29, 34] and it is quite successful in the image domain [41, 42, 44, 45, 47, 56].
We focus on ZSL for video action recognition, where
data sourcing and annotation is particularly expensive.
∗ Work done during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1: (Top) Our model is state-of-the-art (error computed on the UCF test dataset.) (Bottom) Our e2e model
is simple but powerful. URL [64], Action2Vec [18] and
TARN [4] are state-of-the-art approaches. Gray blocks represent modules fixed during training. Colors (blue, red, orange, yellow) indicate modules trained in separate stages.

Since the set of possible human actions is huge, action
recognition is a great ZSL testbed. Trained on large-scale
academic datasets [11, 17, 24, 25, 28, 50], supervised 3D
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) proved successful in
this domain [12, 51, 52]. How well modern deep networks
can recognize human actions in the ZSL setting is, however,
an open question.
To our knowledge, all current ZSL methods for video

4613

