Deep Active Learning for Biased Datasets via Fisher Kernel Self-Supervision
Denis Gudovskiy
Panasonic β AI Lab

Alec Hodgkinson
Panasonic β AI Lab

denis.gudovskiy@us.panasonic.com

alec.hodgkinson@us.panasonic.com

Takuya Yamaguchi
Panasonic AI Solutions Center

Sotaro Tsukizawa
Panasonic AI Solutions Center

yamaguchi.takuya2015@jp.panasonic.com

tsukizawa.sotaro@jp.panasonic.com

latent space

Abstract
Active learning (AL) aims to minimize labeling efforts
for data-demanding deep neural networks (DNNs) by selecting the most representative data points for annotation.
However, currently used methods are ill-equipped to deal
with biased data. The main motivation of this paper is to
consider a realistic setting for pool-based semi-supervised
AL, where the unlabeled collection of train data is biased. We theoretically derive an optimal acquisition function for AL in this setting. It can be formulated as distribution shift minimization between unlabeled train data and
weakly-labeled validation dataset. To implement such acquisition function, we propose a low-complexity method for
feature density matching using self-supervised Fisher kernel
(FK) as well as several novel pseudo-label estimators. Our
FK-based method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
MNIST, SVHN, and ImageNet classification while requiring
only 1/10th of processing. The conducted experiments show
at least 40% drop in labeling efforts for the biased classimbalanced data compared to existing methods1 .

1. Introduction
Active learning (AL) algorithms aim to minimize the
number of expensive labels for supervised training of deep
neural networks (DNNs) by selecting a subset of relevant
examples from a large unlabeled collection of data [20] as
sketched in Figure 2. The subset is annotated by an oracle
in semi-supervised setting and added to the training dataset
in a single pool or, more often, in an iterative fashion. The
goal is to maximize prediction accuracy while minimizing
the pool size and number of iterations.
The existing AL methods assume that distribution of collected train examples is somewhat similar to test cases and,
1 Our code is available at github.com/gudovskiy/al-fk-self-supervision

Train data

Test data

classifier

Figure 1. Problem statement for AL with biased data: distribution
of unlabeled train data is not aligned with the test data. As a result,
prior methods select examples from another distribution and the
learned classifier f (x, θ) misses on underrepresented instances.

hence, relevant data points can be found only by accessing
train data. This assumption rarely holds for the unlabeled
data where very rare examples have to be identified as illustrated in Figure 1. The classifier learned on train data selected by the existing AL methods can have high error rate
on underrepresented instances. For example, distribution of
digits ”1” prevails over rare digits ”9” in train data and, as
a result, test digits ”9” are misclassified. Moreover, consider an autonomous vehicle only trained to perform well
in the most frequent conditions rather than in a rare critical
situations such as car crashes. To overcome this limitation,
we propose a new acquisition function for AL. It is based on
distribution matching between the validation dataset and the
AL-selected training data. Validation dataset in such setting
covers important cases from the long-tail of distribution that
can be continuously identified and added after field trials.
We achieve distribution matching by pooling multi-scale
low-dimensional discriminative features from the task classifier model. Our key contribution is the usage of Fisher
kernel (FK) to find the most important examples with the
improved pseudo-label estimators using several novel metrics. Finally, we incorporate recent unsupervised pretraining method [8] to speed up representation learning by the
task model. Our framework is well-suited for large-scale
data because its complexity is only a single forward and

9041

