Generating Accurate Pseudo-labels in Semi-Supervised Learning and Avoiding
Overconfident Predictions via Hermite Polynomial Activations ∗
Vishnu Suresh Lokhande

Songwong Tasneeyapant

Abhay Venkatesh

lokhande@cs.wisc.edu

tasneeyapant@wisc.edu

abhay.venkatesh@gmail.com

Sathya N. Ravi

Vikas Singh

sathya@uic.edu

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Rectified Linear Units (ReLUs) are among the most
widely used activation function in a broad variety of tasks in
vision. Recent theoretical results suggest that despite their
excellent practical performance, in various cases, a substitution with basis expansions (e.g., polynomials) can yield
significant benefits from both the optimization and generalization perspective. Unfortunately, the existing results remain limited to networks with a couple of layers, and the
practical viability of these results is not yet known. Motivated by some of these results, we explore the use of Hermite
polynomial expansions as a substitute for ReLUs in deep
networks. While our experiments with supervised learning
do not provide a clear verdict, we find that this strategy offers considerable benefits in semi-supervised learning (SSL)
/ transductive learning settings. We carefully develop this
idea and show how the use of Hermite polynomials based
activations can yield improvements in pseudo-label accuracies and sizable financial savings (due to concurrent runtime benefits). Further, we show via theoretical analysis,
that the networks (with Hermite activations) offer robustness to noise and other attractive mathematical properties.

1. Introduction
Analyzing the optimization or the loss landscape of deep
neural networks has emerged as a promising means to understand the behavior and properties of various neural network architectures [4]. One reason is that insights into how
the loss function behaves geometrically is closely tied to
the types of optimization schemes that may be needed [29],
why specific ideas work whereas others do not [23], and
how or whether the corresponding model may generalize to
unseen data [30]. Notice that we must leverage such “alter∗ Please direct correspondence to Lokhande, Ravi, Singh.

native” strategies as a window into these models’ behavior
because in deep learning, most models of interest are highly
non-linear and non-convex. As a result, one finds that extending mature ideas, which work well for analysis in classical settings (e.g., linear models), is quite a bit harder for
most deep architectures of interest.
Why study activation functions? While there are many
ways we may study the optimization landscape of deep
models, a productive line of recent results [6] proposes analyzing the landscape (i.e., the behavior of the loss as a function of the network parameters) via the activation functions
of the neural network. This makes a lot of sense because the
activation function is one critical place where we introduce
non-linearity into the network, and their omission significantly simplifies any analysis. Activation functions greatly
influence the functional space which a neural network can
represent [14], often the first step in a more formal study of
the model’s behavior. For example, universal finite-sample
expressivity of certain architectures has been shown by fixing the activations to be ReLU functions [9]. In other words,
if we use ReLU as activations, such an architecture can be
shown to represent any function if the model has more parameters than the sample size. The scope of such work is not
just theoretical – for instance, the above results were used to
derive a much simpler architecture consisting of only residual convolutional layers and ReLU activations. Further, the
estimation scheme needed was also much simpler and required no batch normalization, dropout, or max pooling. In
summary, the choice of activations enabled understanding
the loss landscape and enabled simplifications.
More on activations functions and loss landscape.
The authors in [28] showed that conditions that prevent
presence of spurious valleys on the loss landscape can be
identified, via the use of smooth activations. Independently,
[25] demonstrated that the use of quadratic activation functions enables efficient localization of global minima in certain classes of deep models. Closely related to smooth and
quadratic activations, the use of polynomial non-linearity as
111435

