Knowledge as Priors: Cross-Modal Knowledge Generalization
for Datasets without Superior Knowledge
Long Zhao1

Xi Peng2 Yuxiao Chen1
1
Rutgers University

Mubbasir Kapadia1 Dimitris N. Metaxas1
University of Delaware

2

{lz311,yc984,mk1353,dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu, xipeng@udel.edu

Abstract
Cross-modal knowledge distillation deals with transferring knowledge from a model trained with superior modalities (Teacher) to another model trained with weak modalities (Student). Existing approaches require paired training examples exist in both modalities. However, accessing
the data from superior modalities may not always be feasible. For example, in the case of 3D hand pose estimation,
depth maps, point clouds, or stereo images usually capture
better hand structures than RGB images, but most of them
are expensive to be collected. In this paper, we propose a
novel scheme to train the Student in a Target dataset where
the Teacher is unavailable. Our key idea is to generalize
the distilled cross-modal knowledge learned from a Source
dataset, which contains paired examples from both modalities, to the Target dataset by modeling knowledge as priors
on parameters of the Student. We name our method “CrossModal Knowledge Generalization” and demonstrate that
our scheme results in competitive performance for 3D hand
pose estimation on standard benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Leveraging multi-modal knowledge to boost the performance of classic computer vision problems, such as classification [28, 35, 49], object detection [14, 39, 50] and gesture recognition [1, 7, 40, 44, 53, 57, 58], has emerged as a
promising research field in recent years. Current paradigms
for transferring knowledge across modalities involve aligning feature representations from multiple modalities of data
during training, and then improving the performance of
a unimodal system during testing with the aligned feature representations. Several different schemes for learning
these feature representations have been proposed over the
years [1, 40, 48, 49], and all of these rely on the availability
of paired training samples from different modalities.
Recently, Gupta et al. [14] have introduced Cross-Modal
Knowledge Distillation (CMKD) which is a generic yet effi-

Dataset (Source)

Modality 1

Dataset (Target)

Teacher
(Pre-trained)

Teacher
(Unavailable)

𝐱"
Paired
Samples

Knowledge

𝐱
Modality 2

Meta
Learning

Priors

𝐱
Student

(a) Knowledge Distillation

Modality 2

Student

(b) Knowledge Generalization

Figure 1. Cross-modal knowledge generalization. (a) Existing approaches distill cross-modal knowledge from the teacher to student in a source dataset. (b) We propose knowledge generalization
which transfers learned knowledge in the source to a target dataset
where the superior knowledge, i.e., the teacher, is unavailable.

cient scheme among these. They transfer knowledge across
different modalities by a Teacher-Student scheme [16, 41,
54]. Generally, teacher networks deliver excellent performance since they are trained on modalities with superior
knowledge. However, data of these modalities may be limited or expensive to be collected. On the other hand, a student network is trained using a weak modality and thereby
often results in lower performance. The goal of knowledge
distillation is to transfer superior knowledge from teachers
to the student by aligning their intermediate feature representations. For simplicity, in this paper, we consider a form
of cross-modal knowledge distillation problems in datasets
where only two modalities, i.e., one teacher and one student,
are involved as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
The question we ask in this work is, what is the analogue
of this paradigm for datasets which do not have modalities with superior knowledge? As a motivating exam16528

