DeepDeform: Learning Non-rigid RGB-D Reconstruction
with Semi-supervised Data
Aljaž Božič1
1

Michael Zollhöfer2

Technical University of Munich

2

Christian Theobalt3

Stanford University

3

Matthias Nießner1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Figure 1: We propose a semi-supervised strategy combining self-supervision with sparse annotations to build a large-scale
RGB-D dataset of non-rigidly deforming scenes (400 scenes, 390,000 frames, 5,533 densely aligned frame pairs). With this
data, we propose a new method for non-rigid matching, which we integrate into a non-rigid reconstruction approach.

Abstract
Applying data-driven approaches to non-rigid 3D reconstruction has been difficult, which we believe can be attributed to the lack of a large-scale training corpus. Unfortunately, this method fails for important cases such as
highly non-rigid deformations. We first address this problem of lack of data by introducing a novel semi-supervised
strategy to obtain dense inter-frame correspondences from
a sparse set of annotations. This way, we obtain a large
dataset of 400 scenes, over 390,000 RGB-D frames, and
5,533 densely aligned frame pairs; in addition, we provide a test set along with several metrics for evaluation.
Based on this corpus, we introduce a data-driven nonrigid feature matching approach, which we integrate into an
optimization-based reconstruction pipeline. Here, we propose a new neural network that operates on RGB-D frames,
while maintaining robustness under large non-rigid deformations and producing accurate predictions. Our approach
significantly outperforms existing non-rigid reconstruction
methods that do not use learned data terms, as well as
learning-based approaches that only use self-supervision.

Data / Benchmark: https://github.com/AljazBozic/DeepDeform

1. Introduction
Non-rigid 3D reconstruction, i.e., the dense, space-time
coherent capture of non-rigidly deforming surfaces in full
temporal correspondence, is key towards obtaining 3D abstractions of the moving real world. The wide availability of
commodity RGB-D sensors, such as the Microsoft Kinect
or Intel Realsense, has led to tremendous progress on static
scene reconstruction methods. However, robust and highquality reconstruction of non-rigidly moving scenes with
one depth camera is still challenging. Applications for realtime non-rigid reconstruction range from augmented (AR)
and virtual reality (VR) up to building realistic 3D holograms for fully immersive teleconferencing systems. The
seminal DynamicFusion [28] approach was the first to show
dynamic non-rigid reconstruction in real-time. Extensions
primarily differ in the used energy formulation. Some methods use hand-crafted data terms based on dense geometry [28, 36, 37], dense color and geometry [14, 47], and
sparse feature constraints [17]. Other approaches leverage
multi-camera RGB-D setups [9, 8] for higher robustness.
However, there are very few reconstruction methods that
use learning-based data terms for general real-world scenes
rather than specific scenarios [48], and that are trained to
be robust under real-world appearance variation and diffi17002

