An Internal Covariate Shift Bounding Algorithm for Deep Neural Networks by
Unitizing Layers’ Outputs
You Huang
Fuzhou University

Yuanlong Yu∗
Fuzhou University

youhuang0607@gmail.com

yu.yuanlong@fzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) techniques have been proposed to reduce the so-called Internal Covariate Shift (ICS)
by attempting to keep the distributions of layer outputs unchanged. Experiments have shown their effectiveness on
training deep neural networks. However, since only the first
two moments are controlled in these BN techniques, it seems
that a weak constraint is imposed on layer distributions and
furthermore whether such constraint can reduce ICS is unknown. Thus this paper proposes a measure for ICS by using the Earth Mover (EM) distance and then derives the
upper and lower bounds for the measure to provide a theoretical analysis of BN. The upper bound has shown that BN
techniques can control ICS only for the outputs with low
dimensions and small noise whereas their control is not effective in other cases. This paper also proves that such control is just a bounding of ICS rather than a reduction of ICS.
Meanwhile, the analysis shows that the high-order moments
and noise, which BN cannot control, have great impact on
the lower bound. Based on such analysis, this paper furthermore proposes an algorithm that unitizes the outputs
with an adjustable parameter to further bound ICS in order to cope with the problems of BN. The upper bound for
the proposed unitization is noise-free and only dominated
by the parameter. Thus, the parameter can be trained to
tune the bound and further to control ICS. Besides, the unitization is embedded into the framework of BN to reduce the
information loss. The experiments show that this proposed
algorithm outperforms existing BN techniques on CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) show good performance
in image recognition [18], speech recognition [13] and other
fields [23, 32] in recent years. However, how to train DNNs
is still a fundamental problem which is more complicated
∗ Corresponding author.

than training shallow networks because of deep architectures. It was commonly thought that stacking more layers
suffers from the problem of vanishing or exploding gradients [7], but there are some problems of training with unclear definitions. A problem called Internal Covariate Shift
(ICS) [15] may hinder the convergence of training DNNs.
ICS is derived from Covariate Shift (CS) that is caused
by using data from two different distributions to respectively train and test a model, generally in the supervised
learning process [28]. However, ICS mainly exists in the
feed-forward networks. Considering the lth layer of a network with L layers, a stack of following L − l layers forms
a local network fl+1:L , whose input is the output of the lth
layer. Thus, the distribution of the input is affected by all the
former l layers’ weights. In detail, the objective function of
fl+1:L is defined as
(t)

L(Θl+1:L ; pl , py ) = Ex∼p(t) ,y∼py (·|x) [h(x, y; Θl+1:L )],
l
(1)
(t)
where pl is the distribution of the lth layer’s outputs at the
tth iteration; py is the conditional distribution of the ground
truth at the last layer given x; Θl+1:L is the weights of
fl+1:L ; h(x, y; Θl+1:L ) is the loss for a sample pair (x, y).
We use Back Propagation algorithm to train networks.
(t+1)
However, the objective function L(Θl+1:L ; pl
, py ) at
the (t + 1)-th iteration would be different from the previous
(t)
(t+1)
one as the distribution changes from pl to pl
. So using
(t)
the gradients obtained from L(Θl+1:L ; pl , py ) to update
(t+1)
Θl+1:L might not reduce L(Θl+1:L ; pl
, py ) due to the
(t)
(t+1)
divergence between pl and pl
. Furthermore, the divergence will become much larger with increase of the number
of network layers.
The technique called Batch Normalization (BN) [15] has
been proposed to reduce ICS by attempting to make the distributions remain unchanged. In practice, BN normalizes
the outputs to control the first two moments, i.e., mean and
variance, and uses two adjustable parameters to recover the
information lost in normalizing outputs. Empirical results
have shown that BN can speed up network training and also

8465

