Multimodal Categorization of Crisis Events in Social Media
Mahdi Abavisani∗
Dataminr Inc., New York, NY
mabavisani@dataminr.com

Liwei Wu∗
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA
liwu@ucdavis.edu

Shengli Hu
Dataminr Inc., New York, NY

Joel Tetreault
Dataminr Inc., New York, NY

Alejandro Jaimes
Dataminr Inc., New York, NY

shu@dataminr.com

jtetreault@dataminr.com

ajaimes@dataminr.com

Abstract
Recent developments in image classification and natural
language processing, coupled with the rapid growth in social media usage, have enabled fundamental advances in
detecting breaking events around the world in real-time.
Emergency response is one such area that stands to gain
from these advances. By processing billions of texts and
images a minute, events can be automatically detected to
enable emergency response workers to better assess rapidly
evolving situations and deploy resources accordingly. To
date, most event detection techniques in this area have focused on image-only or text-only approaches, limiting detection performance and impacting the quality of information delivered to crisis response teams. In this paper, we
present a new multimodal fusion method that leverages both
images and texts as input. In particular, we introduce a
cross-attention module that can filter uninformative and
misleading components from weak modalities on a sample by sample basis. In addition, we employ a multimodal
graph-based approach to stochastically transition between
embeddings of different multimodal pairs during training
to better regularize the learning process as well as dealing with limited training data by constructing new matched
pairs from different samples. We show that our method outperforms the unimodal approaches and strong multimodal
baselines by a large margin on three crisis-related tasks.

1. Introduction
Each second, billions of images and texts that capture a
wide range of events happening around us are uploaded to
∗ Equal contribution, with ordering decided by Python. Research work

was done while authors were interning at Dataminr Inc.

Figure 1. A Crisis-related Image-text Pair from Social Media

social media platforms from all over the world. At the same
time, the fields of Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) are rapidly advancing [25, 23, 15]
and are being deployed at scale. With large-scale visual
recognition and textual understanding available as fundamental tools, it is now possible to identify and classify
events across the world in real-time. This is possible, to
some extent, in images and text separately, and in limited
cases, using a combination. A major difficulty in crisis
events,1 in particular, is that as events surface and evolve,
users post fragmented, sometimes conflicting information
in the form of image-text pairs. This makes the automatic
identification of notable events significantly more challenging.
1 An event that is going (or is expected) to lead to an unstable and dangerous situation affecting an individual, group, community, or whole society (from Wikipedia); typically requiring an emergency response.

114679

