Video to Events:
Recycling Video Datasets for Event Cameras
Daniel Gehrig∗

Mathias Gehrig∗
Javier Hidalgo-Carrió
Davide Scaramuzza
Dept. Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and
Dept. of Neuroinformatics, Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich

Abstract
Event cameras are novel sensors that output brightness
changes in the form of a stream of asynchronous “events”
instead of intensity frames. They offer significant advantages with respect to conventional cameras: high dynamic
range (HDR), high temporal resolution, and no motion blur.
Recently, novel learning approaches operating on event
data have achieved impressive results. Yet, these methods
require a large amount of event data for training, which is
hardly available due the novelty of event sensors in computer vision research. In this paper, we present a method
that addresses these needs by converting any existing video
dataset recorded with conventional cameras to synthetic
event data. This unlocks the use of a virtually unlimited
number of existing video datasets for training networks designed for real event data. We evaluate our method on two
relevant vision tasks, i.e., object recognition and semantic
segmentation, and show that models trained on synthetic
events have several benefits: (i) they generalize well to real
event data, even in scenarios where standard-camera images are blurry or overexposed, by inheriting the outstanding properties of event cameras; (ii) they can be used for
fine-tuning on real data to improve over state-of-the-art for
both classification and semantic segmentation.

Multimedia Material
This project’s code is available at
https://github.com/uzh-rpg/rpg_vid2e.
Additionally, qualitative results are available in this video:
https://youtu.be/uX6XknBGg0w

1. Introduction
Event cameras, such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor [22]
(DVS), are novel sensors that work radically differently
from conventional cameras. Instead of capturing intensity

Figure 1. Our method converts any large scale, high quality video
dataset, to a synthetic event camera dataset. This unlocks the
great wealth of existing video datasets for event cameras, enabling
new and exciting applications, and addressing the shortage of high
quality event camera datasets. Networks trained on these synthetic
events generalize surprisingly well to real events. By leveraging
the high dynamic range and lack of motion blur of event cameras
these networks can generalize to situations where standard video
frames over exposed or blurred. Best viewed in color.

images at a fixed rate, they measure changes of intensity
asynchronously at the time they occur. This results in a
stream of events, which encode the time, location, and polarity (sign) of brightness changes.
Event cameras possess outstanding properties when
compared to conventional cameras. They have a very high
dynamic range (140 dB versus 60 dB), do not suffer from
motion blur, and provide measurements with a latency on
the order of microseconds. Thus, they are a viable alternative, or complementary sensor, in conditions that are challenging for standard cameras, such as high-speed and highdynamic-range (HDR) scenarios [19, 36, 42, 33].1 However, because the output of event cameras is asynchronous,
existing computer vision algorithms developed for standard
cameras cannot be directly applied to these data but need to
be specifically tailored to leverage event data (for a survey
on event cameras and the field of event-based vision, we
1 https://youtu.be/0hDGFFJQfmA

∗ Equal contribution

3586

