Self-Learning Video Rain Streak Removal: When Cyclic Consistency
Meets Temporal Correspondence
Wenhan Yang1 , Robby T. Tan2,4 , Shiqi Wang1 , Jiaying Liu3∗
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 National University of Singapore
3
Peking University 4 Yale-NUS College

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of rain streaks removal in video by developing a self-learned rain streak removal method, which does not require any clean groundtruth images in the training process. The method is inspired
by fact that the adjacent frames are highly correlated and
can be regarded as different versions of identical scene, and
rain streaks are randomly distributed along the temporal
dimension. With this in mind, we construct a two-stage
Self-Learned Deraining Network (SLDNet) to remove rain
streaks based on both temporal correlation and consistency.
In the first stage, SLDNet utilizes the temporal correlations
and learns to predict the clean version of the current frame
based on its adjacent rain video frames. In the second stage,
SLDNet enforces the temporal consistency among different
frames. It takes both the current rain frame and adjacent
rain video frames to recover the structural details. The first
stage is responsible for reconstructing main structures, and
the second stage is responsible for extracting structural details. We build our network architecture with two sub-tasks,
i.e. motion estimation and rain region detection, and optimize them jointly. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method, offering better results both
quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Rain is a common bad weather condition that introduces
a series of visibility degradation in captured videos and images. The presence of rain not only leads to poor visual
quality but also impairs existing computer vision systems
that assume clean video frames as input. Rain streaks are
∗ Corresponding author. Email: liujiaying@pku.edu.cn. This work is
partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No.61772043, in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
under contract No.L182002, in part by the National Key R&D Program of
China under Grand No.2018AAA0102700, and in part by the Hong Kong
ITF UICP under Grant 9440203. Robby T. Tan’s research in this work is
supported by MOE2019-T2-1-130.

(a) Rain Frame

(b) FastDeRain [22]

(c) MS-CSC [28]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Visual results of different deraining methods on a real
rain video frame with large motions. Compared to MS-CSC [28]
and FastDeRain [22], our self-learned method does not have artifacts and is more effective in removing rain streaks. Note that,
SpacCNN is a fully-supervised method, while ours is self-learned,
which does not require any clean ground-truth videos in the training phase.

the most common type of rain degradation. They can partially occlude a background scene, change image appearance, make the scene blurred, etc. Besides rain streaks, rain
also generates a veiling effect (visually similar to fog) and
raindrops that are attached to a lens or windscreen. In our
paper, we focus on rain streaks removal. Our method learns
from rain videos themselves, without requiring any groundtruth clean videos in the training process.
A few existing methods [24, 20, 38, 34] focus on separating rain-free background images (clean images) and rain
streaks based on spatial redundancies and detail texture appearances. Several mathematical models extract discriminative features to set part these two layers, e.g. the frequency domain representation [24], sparse representation [34],
Gaussian mixture models [29] and deep networks [47, 14].
Beyond only exploiting spatial redundancies, videobased methods [1, 2, 3, 9, 12, 15, 17, 18, 53] further utilize
temporal correlations and contexts to address the problem.
The earliest methods [17, 15, 18] leverage the physical and
photometric properties, i.e. the directional and chromatic
11720

