Predicting Sharp and Accurate Occlusion Boundaries in
Monocular Depth Estimation Using Displacement Fields
Michaël Ramamonjisoa∗
Yuming Du∗
Vincent Lepetit
LIGM, IMAGINE, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée France
{first.lastname}@enpc.fr https://michaelramamonjisoa.github.io/projects/DisplacementFields

Abstract
Current methods for depth map prediction from monocular images tend to predict smooth, poorly localized contours for the occlusion boundaries in the input image. This
is unfortunate as occlusion boundaries are important cues
to recognize objects, and as we show, may lead to a way
to discover new objects from scene reconstruction. To improve predicted depth maps, recent methods rely on various forms of filtering or predict an additive residual depth
map to refine a first estimate. We instead learn to predict, given a depth map predicted by some reconstruction
method, a 2D displacement field able to re-sample pixels
around the occlusion boundaries into sharper reconstructions. Our method can be applied to the output of any depth
estimation method and is fully differentiable, enabling endto-end training. For evaluation, we manually annotated the
occlusion boundaries in all the images in the test split of
popular NYUv2-Depth dataset. We show that our approach
improves the localization of occlusion boundaries for all
state-of-the-art monocular depth estimation methods that
we could evaluate ([32, 10, 6, 28]), without degrading the
depth accuracy for the rest of the images.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation (MDE) aims at predicting a
depth map from a single input image. It attracts many interests, as it can be useful for many computer vision tasks and
applications, such as scene understanding, robotic grasping,
augmented reality, etc. Recently, many methods have been
proposed to solve this problem using Deep Learning approaches, either relying on supervised learning [7, 6, 32, 10]
or on self-learning [15, 55, 44], and these methods already
often obtain very impressive results.
∗ Authors with equal contribution.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Input image overlaid with our occlusion boundary (OB) manual annotation from NYUv2-OC++ in green, (b)
Ground truth depth from NYUv2-Depth, (c) Predicted depth using [45], (d) Refined depth using our pixel displacement method.

However, as demonstrated in Fig. 1, despite the recent
advances, the occlusion boundaries in the predicted depth
maps remain poorly reconstructed. These occlusion boundaries correspond to depth discontinuities happening along
the silhouettes of objects [50, 30]. Accurate reconstruction
of these contours is thus highly desirable, for example for
handling partial occlusions between real and virtual objects
in Augmented Reality applications or more fundamentally,
for object understanding, as we show in Fig. 2. We believe
that this direction is particularly important: Depth prediction generalizes well to unseen objects and even to unseen
object categories, and being able to reconstruct well the occlusion boundaries could be a promising line of research for
unsupervised object discovery.
In this work, we introduce a simple method to overcome
smooth occlusion boundaries. Our method improves their
sharpness as well as their localization in the images. It relies
on a differentiable module that takes an initial depth map
provided by some depth prediction method, and re-sample
it to obtain more accurate occlusion boundaries. Optionally, it can also take the color image as additional input for
guidance information and obtain even better contour local114648

