StructEdit: Learning Structural Shape Variations
Kaichun Mo∗1 Paul Guerrero∗2 Li Yi3 Hao Su4 Peter Wonka5 Niloy J. Mitra2,6 Leonidas Guibas1,7
1

Stanford University 2 Adobe Research 3 Google Research 4 UC San Diego
5
KAUST 6 University College London 7 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Learning to encode differences in the geometry and (topological) structure of the shapes of ordinary objects is key
to generating semantically plausible variations of a given
shape, transferring edits from one shape to another, and
many other applications in 3D content creation. The common approach of encoding shapes as points in a highdimensional latent feature space suggests treating shape
differences as vectors in that space. Instead, we treat shape
differences as primary objects in their own right and propose
to encode them in their own latent space. In a setting where
the shapes themselves are encoded in terms of fine-grained
part hierarchies, we demonstrate that a separate encoding
of shape deltas or differences provides a principled way to
deal with inhomogeneities in the shape space due to different combinatorial part structures, while also allowing for
compactness in the representation, as well as edit abstraction and transfer. Our approach is based on a conditional
variational autoencoder for encoding and decoding shape
deltas, conditioned on a source shape. We demonstrate the
effectiveness and robustness of our approach in multiple
shape modification and generation tasks, and provide comparison and ablation studies on the PartNet dataset, one of
the largest publicly available 3D datasets.

1. Introduction
The shapes of 3D objects exhibit remarkable diversity,
both in their compositional structure in terms of parts, as
well as in the geometries of the parts themselves. Yet humans are remarkably skilled at imagining meaningful shape
variations even from isolated object instances. For example,
having seen a new chair, we can easily imagine its natural
variations with a different height back, a wider seat, with
or without armrests, or with a different base. In this paper,
we investigate how to learn such shape variations directly
from 3D data. Specifically, given a shape collection, we are
interested in two sub-problems: first, for any given shape,
∗ : indicates equal contributions.

source shape

StructEdit infers main edit modes

source edit
StructEdit transfers analogous edits
Figure 1. Edit generation and transfer with StructEdit. We
present StructEdit, a method that learns a distribution of shape
differences between structured objects that can be used to generate
a large variety of edits (first row); and accurately transfer edits
between different objects and across different modalities (second
row). Edits can be both geometric and topological.

we want to discover the main modes of edits, which can
be inferred directly from the shape collection; and second,
given an example edit on one shape, we want to transfer the
edit to another shape in the collection, as a form of analogybased edit transfer. This ability is useful in multiple settings,
including the design of individual 3D models, the consistent
modification of 3D model families, and the fitting of CAD
models to noisy and incomplete 3D scans.
There are several challenges in capturing the space of
shape variations. First, individual shapes can have different
representations as images, point clouds, or surface meshes;
second, one needs a unified setting for representing both
continuous deformations as well as structural changes (e.g.,
the addition or removal of parts); third, shape edits are not
directly expressed but are only implicitly contained in shape
collections; and finally, learning a space of structural variations that is applicable to more than a single shape amounts
to learning mappings between different shape edit distributions, since different shapes have different types and numbers
of parts (e.g., tables with/without leg bars).
In much of the extant literature on 3D machine learning,

8859

