GrappaNet: Combining Parallel Imaging with Deep Learning for Multi-Coil
MRI Reconstruction
Anuroop Sriram1
1

Jure Zbontar1
Aaron Defazio1

Tullie Murrell1
C. Lawrence Zitnick1
Daniel K. Sodickson 2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) acquisition is an inherently slow process which has spurred the development
of two different acceleration methods: acquiring multiple
correlated samples simultaneously (parallel imaging) and
acquiring fewer samples than necessary for traditional signal processing methods (compressed sensing). Both methods
provide complementary approaches to accelerating MRI acquisition.
In this paper, we present a novel method to integrate
traditional parallel imaging methods into deep neural networks that is able to generate high quality reconstructions
even for high acceleration factors. The proposed method,
called GrappaNet, performs progressive reconstruction by
first mapping the reconstruction problem to a simpler one
that can be solved by a traditional parallel imaging methods
using a neural network, followed by an application of a parallel imaging method, and finally fine-tuning the output with
another neural network. The entire network can be trained
end-to-end. We present experimental results on the recently
released fastMRI dataset [20] and show that GrappaNet
can generate higher quality reconstructions than competing
methods for both 4× and 8× acceleration.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is the leading diagnostic modality for a wide range of disorders including musculoskeletal, neurological, and oncological diseases. However, the physics of the MRI data acquisition process make it
inherently slower than alternate modalities like CT or X-Ray.
As a consequence, increasing the speed of MRI acquisition
has been a major ongoing research goal for decades.
Parallel Imaging (PI) is one of the most important and
successful developments in reducing MRI scan time [3, 12].
The technique requires the use of multiple physical receiver
coils to simultaneously record different views of the object
being imaged. Parallel imaging is the default option for

2

NYU School of Medicine

many scan protocols and it is supported by almost all modern
clinical MRI scanners.
Another approach to accelerating MR imaging is the use
of Compressed Sensing (CS), which can speed up MRI acquisition by acquiring fewer samples than required by traditional signal processing methods. To overcome aliasing
artifacts introduced by violating the Shannon-Nyquist sampling theorem, CS methods incorporate additional a priori
knowledge about the images. Recently, the use of learned
image priors through the use of deep learning have rapidly
gained in popularity [4, 15, 18, 21]. These approaches have
shown a significant improvement in image reconstruction
quality, particularly for non-parallel MRIs.
In this paper, we show that a novel combination of classical parallel imaging techniques with deep neural networks
can achieve higher acceleration factors than using either approach alone. Utilizing parallel imaging in deep learning
approaches to reconstruction is challenging. The relation
between the captured views changes for each scan and is
dependent on the configuration of the detectors with respect
to the object being imaged.
To address this challenge we introduce GrappaNet, a
new neural network architecture that incorporates parallel
imaging. GrappaNet contains a GRAPPA layer that learns a
scan-specific reconstruction function to combine the views
captured during parallel imaging. To allow the network
to fully utilize all the information captured during parallel
imaging, the reconstruction is performed jointly across all
the complex-valued views captured during the parallel imaging process. Unlike many previous approaches [4], the views
are not combined until the final layer to produce the output
reconstruction. The model uses a progressive refinement approach in both k-space (frequency domain) and image space
to both aid in the optimization and to take advantage of the
complementary properties of the two spaces. Most previous
approaches typically focus on either reconstructing in image
space [4] or k-space [6]. We evaluate the performance of our
method on the recently released fastMRI [20] dataset.
First, we present a brief introduction to parallel MR imaging and review some deep learning methods for parallel MRI

14315

