Few-Shot Object Detection with Attention-RPN and Multi-Relation Detector
Qi Fan∗
HKUST

Wei Zhuo∗
Tencent

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai
Tencent

qfanaa@cse.ust.hk

wei.zhuowx@gmail.com

cktang@cse.ust.hk

yuwingtai@tencent.com

Abstract
Conventional methods for object detection typically require a substantial amount of training data and preparing
such high-quality training data is very labor-intensive. In
this paper, we propose a novel few-shot object detection
network that aims at detecting objects of unseen categories
with only a few annotated examples. Central to our method
are our Attention-RPN, Multi-Relation Detector and Contrastive Training strategy, which exploit the similarity between the few shot support set and query set to detect novel
objects while suppressing false detection in the background.
To train our network, we contribute a new dataset that contains 1000 categories of various objects with high-quality
annotations. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the
ﬁrst datasets speciﬁcally designed for few-shot object detection. Once our few-shot network is trained, it can detect
objects of unseen categories without further training or ﬁnetuning. Our method is general and has a wide range of potential applications. We produce a new state-of-the-art performance on different datasets in the few-shot setting. The
dataset link is https://github.com/fanq15/Few-Shot-ObjectDetection-Dataset.

1. Introduction
Existing object detection methods typically rely heavily on a huge amount of annotated data and require long
training time. This has motivated the recent development of
few-shot object detection. Few-shot learning is challenging
given large variance of illumination, shape, texture, etc, in
real-world objects. While signiﬁcant research and progress
have been made [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], all of these methods
focus on image classiﬁcation rarely tapping into the problem of few-shot object detection, most probably because
transferring from few-shot classiﬁcation to few-shot object
detection is a non-trivial task.
Central to object detection given only a few shots is
how to localize an unseen object in a cluttered background,
which in hindsight is a general problem of object localiza∗ Both authors contributed equally.

This research is supported in part by Tencent and the Research Grant
Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 1620818.

Figure 1. Given different objects as supports (top corners above),
our approach can detect all objects in the same categories in the
given query image.

tion from a few annotated examples in novel categories. Potential bounding boxes can easily miss unseen objects, or
else many false detections in the background can be produced. We believe this is caused by the inappropriate low
scores of good bounding boxes output from a region proposal network (RPN) making a novel object hard to be detected. This makes the few-shot object detection intrinsically different from few-shot classiﬁcation. Recent works
for few-shot object detection [9, 10, 11, 12] on the other
hand all require ﬁne-tuning and thus cannot be directly applied on novel categories.
In this paper, we address the problem of few-shot object
detection: given a few support images of novel target object,
our goal is to detect all foreground objects in the test set that
belong to the target object category, as shown in Fig. 1. To
this end, we propose two main contributions:
First, we propose a general few-shot object detection
model that can be applied to detect novel objects without retraining and ﬁne-tuning. With our carefully designed contrastive training strategy, attention module on RPN and detector, our method exploits matching relationship between
object pairs in a weight-shared network at multiple network stages. This enables our model to perform online
detection on objects of novel categories requiring no ﬁnetraining or further network adaptation. Experiments show
that our model can beneﬁt from the attention module at the
early stage where the proposal quality is signiﬁcantly enhanced, and from the multi-relation detector module at the

4013

