Correlating Edge, Pose with Parsing
Ziwei Zhang1 , Chi Su2∗ , Liang Zheng3 , Xiaodong Xie1
1
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
Kingsoft Cloud, 3 Australian National University
{ziwei.zh,donxie}@pku.edu.cn, suchi@kingsoft.com, liang.zheng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
According to existing studies, human body edge and pose
are two beneficial factors to human parsing. The effectiveness of each of the high-level features (edge and pose) is
confirmed through the concatenation of their features with
the parsing features. Driven by the insights, this paper studies how human semantic boundaries and keypoint locations
can jointly improve human parsing. Compared with the existing practice of feature concatenation, we find that uncovering the correlation among the three factors is a superior
way of leveraging the pivotal contextual cues provided by
edges and poses. To capture such correlations, we propose
a Correlation Parsing Machine (CorrPM) employing a heterogeneous non-local block to discover the spatial affinity
among feature maps from the edge, pose and parsing. The
proposed CorrPM allows us to report new state-of-the-art
accuracy on three human parsing datasets. Importantly,
comparative studies confirm the advantages of feature correlation over the concatenation.

Figure 1. Illustration of parsing errors and our motivation. (a)
Given images. (b) Results of parsing baseline [4]. (c) Fusion
of parsing and human body edge features. (d) Fusion of parsing
and the human keypoint features. (e) Results of our method. (f)
Groundtruth. From (b), we observe parsing errors happen due to
boundary ambiguity (white box) and body structure inconsistency
(red box), respectively. The fusion of boundary features (c) or
keypoint features (d) may mitigate one of the two errors. The two
types of errors are obviously mitigated in (e) because we take the
advantage of both boundary and keypoints by learning their correlation with parsing. By comparison, the proposed strategy is
superior to concatenation or post processing as commonly done.

1. Introduction
This paper studies human parsing, aiming to partition a
human image into semantic regions including body parts
and clothes. This problem is challenging due to the complicated textures and styles of clothes, the deformable human body, the scale diversity of different categories, etc.
As such, directly applying general semantic segmentation
methods to human parsing may lead to unsatisfying results,
which are reflected in two aspects. First, the boundaries between adjacent parts may be inaccurately located. The system might get confused with pixels along the boundaries,
especially when the neighboring parts have similar appearance. Second, semantics of segmented parts may be inconsistent with human body structure, if we don not consider
the affinity among different parts. This leads to mislabeling
*Corresponding Author.
Code is available at: https://github.com/ziwei-zh/CorrPM.

or missing predictions when context clues are not obvious.
Edge detection and pose estimation can potentially address the above two problems. For the first problem, i.e.,
boundary confusions, human body edge detection is beneficial to distinguish two adjacent categories [3, 33]. For
the second problem, i.e., semantics inconsistency, pose estimation provides keypoints to enforce the parsing results
to be semantically consistent with human body structure
[38, 28, 34]. Therefore, current research [3, 33, 37, 29]
identifies human edge and pose as complementary cues
to improve parsing performance. As shown in Fig. 1(b),
when directly using generic segmentation methods for human parsing, some pixels of upper clothes are predicted as
pants: the network incorrectly locates the edges between the
two categories. Moreover, due to the lack of human semantic constraints, the left and right arms, left and right shoes
are incorrectly identified. In Fig. 1(c), after adding edge

8900

