Light Field Spatial Super-resolution via Deep Combinatorial Geometry
Embedding and Structural Consistency Regularization

1

Jing Jin1∗, Junhui Hou1 †, Jie Chen2 , Sam Kwong1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Hong Kong Baptist University

jingjin25-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {jh.hou,cssamk}@cityu.edu.hk, chenjie@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Light field (LF) images acquired by hand-held devices
usually suffer from low spatial resolution as the limited
sampling resources have to be shared with the angular dimension. LF spatial super-resolution (SR) thus becomes an
indispensable part of the LF camera processing pipeline.
The high-dimensionality characteristic and complex geometrical structure of LF images make the problem more
challenging than traditional single-image SR. The performance of existing methods is still limited as they fail to
thoroughly explore the coherence among LF views and are
insufficient in accurately preserving the parallax structure
of the scene. In this paper, we propose a novel learningbased LF spatial SR framework, in which each view of an
LF image is first individually super-resolved by exploring
the complementary information among views with combinatorial geometry embedding. For accurate preservation
of the parallax structure among the reconstructed views, a
regularization network trained over a structure-aware loss
function is subsequently appended to enforce correct parallax relationships over the intermediate estimation. Our
proposed approach is evaluated over datasets with a large
number of testing images including both synthetic and realworld scenes. Experimental results demonstrate the advantage of our approach over state-of-the-art methods, i.e., our
method not only improves the average PSNR by more than
1.0 dB but also preserves more accurate parallax details, at
a lower computational cost.

1. Introduction
4D light field (LF) images differ from conventional 2D
images as they record not only intensities but also directions
of light rays [38]. The rich information enables a wide range
∗ This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Research Grants
Council under grants 9048123 and 9042820, and in part by the Basic Research General Program of Shenzhen Municipality under grants
JCYJ20190808183003968.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparisons of the running time (in second) and reconstruction quality (PSNR/SSIM) of different methods. The running
time is the time for super-resolving an LF image of spatial resolution 94 × 135 and angular resolution 7 × 7 with the scale factor
equal to 4. The PSNR/SSIM value refers to the average over 57
LF images in Stanford Lytro Archive (Occlusions) dataset.

of applications, such as 3D reconstruction [15, 39, 27, 40],
refocusing [9], and virtual reality [13, 36]. LF images can
be conveniently captured with commercial micro-lens based
cameras [1, 2] by encoding the 4D LF into a 2D photo detector. However, due to the limited resolution of the sensor,
recorded LF images always suffer from low spatial resolution. Therefore, LF spatial super-resolution (SR) is highly
necessary for further applications.
Some traditional methods for LF spatial SR have been
proposed [31, 23, 20]. Due to the high dimensionality of LF data, the reconstruction quality of these methods is quite limited. Recently, some learning-based methods [34, 28, 37] have been proposed to address the problem of 4D LF spatial SR via data-driven training. Although
these methods have improved both performance and efficiency, there are two problems unsolved yet. That is, the
complementary information within all views is not fully utilized, and the structural consistency of the reconstruction is
not well preserved (see more analyses in Sec. 3).
In this paper, we propose a learning-based method for
12260

