A Novel Recurrent Encoder-Decoder Structure for Large-Scale Multi-view
Stereo Reconstruction from An Open Aerial Dataset
Jin Liu and Shunping Ji∗
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University
{liujinwhu, jishunping}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
A great deal of research has demonstrated recently
that multi-view stereo (MVS) matching can be solved
with deep learning methods. However, these efforts were
focused on close-range objects and only a very few of the
deep learning-based methods were specifically designed
for large-scale 3D urban reconstruction due to the lack
of multi-view aerial image benchmarks. In this paper,
we present a synthetic aerial dataset, called the WHU
dataset, we created for MVS tasks, which, to our knowledge,
is the first large-scale multi-view aerial dataset. It was
generated from a highly accurate 3D digital surface model
produced from thousands of real aerial images with precise
camera parameters. We also introduce in this paper
a novel network, called RED-Net, for wide-range depth
inference, which we developed from a recurrent encoderdecoder structure to regularize cost maps across depths and
a 2D fully convolutional network as framework. RED-Net’s
low memory requirements and high performance make
it suitable for large-scale and highly accurate 3D Earth
surface reconstruction. Our experiments confirmed that not
only did our method exceed the current state-of-the-art MVS
methods by more than 50% mean absolute error (MAE) with
less memory and computational cost, but its efficiency as
well. It outperformed one of the best commercial software
programs based on conventional methods, improving their
efficiency 16 times over. Moreover, we proved that our REDNet model pre-trained on the synthetic WHU dataset can
be efficiently transferred to very different multi-view aerial
image datasets without any fine-tuning. Dataset and code
are available at http://gpcv.whu.edu.cn/data.

1. Introduction
Large-scale and highly accurate 3D reconstruction of the
Earth’s surface, including cities, is mainly realized from
dense matching of multi-view aerial images implemented
∗ Corresponding author

and dominated by commercial software such as Pix4D [24],
Smart3D [8], and SURE [27], all of which were developed
from conventional methods [33, 3, 13]. Recent attempts
at multi-view stereo (MVS) matching with deep learning
methods are found in the literature [14, 16, 36, 37,
15]. While these deep learning approaches can produce
satisfactory results on close-range object reconstruction,
they have two critical limitations when applied to Earth
surface reconstruction from multi-view aerial images. The
first limitation is the lack of aerial dataset benchmarks,
which makes it difficult to train, discover, and improve the
appropriate networks through between-method comparison.
In addition, most of the existing MVS datasets are images
of laboratory, and models trained on them cannot be
satisfactorily transferred to a bird’s eye view of a terrestrial
scene. The second limitation of these methods is their high
GPU memory demand in recent MVS networks [36, 15,
25, 34], which makes them less suitable for large-scale and
high-resolution scene reconstruction. The state-of-the-art
R-MVSNet method [37] has achieved depth inference with
unlimited depth-wise resolution, however, the resolution
quality of its results is not high as the output depth map
is down-sampled four times.
In this paper, we present a synthetic aerial dataset we
created for large-scale MVS matching and Earth surface
reconstruction. Each image in the dataset was simulated
from a complete and accurate 3D urban scene produced
from a real multi-view aerial image collection with software
and careful manual editing. The dataset includes thousands
of simulated images covering an area of 6.7 × 2.2 km2 ,
along with the ground truth depth and camera parameters
for multi-view images, as well as disparity maps for
rectified epipolar images. Due to the large size of the aerial
images (5376 × 5376 pixels), there are subsets provided
consisting of cropped sub-blocks that can be used directly
for training CNN models on a single GPU. Note that the
simulated camera parameters are unbiased and the provided
ground truths are absolutely complete even in occluded
regions, which ensures the accuracy and reliability of the
dataset for detailed 3D reconstruction.

6050

