STEFANN: Scene Text Editor using Font Adaptive Neural Network
Prasun Roy1∗, Saumik Bhattacharya2∗, Subhankar Ghosh1∗, and Umapada Pal1
1
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India
2
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
https://prasunroy.github.io/stefann

Abstract
Textual information in a captured scene plays an important role in scene interpretation and decision making.
Though there exist methods that can successfully detect and
interpret complex text regions present in a scene, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no significant prior work that
aims to modify the textual information in an image. The
ability to edit text directly on images has several advantages including error correction, text restoration and image
reusability. In this paper, we propose a method to modify
text in an image at character-level. We approach the problem in two stages. At first, the unobserved character (target) is generated from an observed character (source) being modified. We propose two different neural network architectures – (a) FANnet to achieve structural consistency
with source font and (b) Colornet to preserve source color.
Next, we replace the source character with the generated
character maintaining both geometric and visual consistency with neighboring characters. Our method works as
a unified platform for modifying text in images. We present
the effectiveness of our method on COCO-Text and ICDAR
datasets both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Text is widely present in different design and scene images. It contains important contextual information for the
readers. However, if any alteration is required in the text
present in an image, it becomes extremely difficult for several reasons. For instance, a limited number of observed
characters makes it difficult to generate unobserved characters with sufficient visual consistency. Also, different natural conditions, like brightness, contrast, shadow, perspective
distortion, complex background, etc., make it harder to replace a character directly in an image. The main motivation
of this work is to design an algorithm for editing textual information present in images in a convenient way similar to
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Examples of text editing using STEFANN: (a) Original
images from ICDAR dataset; (b) Edited images. It can be observed that STEFANN can edit multiple characters in a word (top
row) as well as an entire word (bottom row) in a text region.

the conventional text editors.
Earlier, researchers have proposed font synthesis algorithms based on different geometrical features of fonts
[6, 24, 27]. These geometrical models neither generalize the
wide variety of available fonts nor can be applied directly
to an image for character synthesis. Later, researchers have
addressed the problem of generating unobserved characters
of a particular font from some defined or random set of observations using deep learning algorithms [4, 7, 31]. With
the emergence of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
models, the problem of character synthesis has also been
addressed using GAN-based algorithms [2, 19]. Though
GAN-based font synthesis could be used to estimate the target character, several challenges make the direct implementation of font synthesis for scene images difficult. Firstly,
most of the GAN-based font synthesis models require an
explicit recognition of the source character. As recognition
of text in scene images is itself a challenging problem, it is
preferable if the target characters can be generated without

13228

