Adaptive Subspaces for Few-Shot Learning
Christian Simon†,§ Piotr Koniusz†,§ Richard Nock†,‡,§ Mehrtash Harandi♣,§
†
The Australian National University, ♣ Monash University,
‡
The University of Sydney, § Data61-CSIRO
first.last@{anu.edu.au,monash.edu,data61.csiro.au}

Abstract

56

Object recognition requires a generalization capability
to avoid overfitting, especially when the samples are extremely few. Generalization from limited samples, usually
studied under the umbrella of meta-learning, equips learning techniques with the ability to adapt quickly in dynamical
environments and proves to be an essential aspect of lifelong
learning. In this paper, we provide a framework for few-shot
learning by introducing dynamic classifiers that are constructed from few samples. A subspace method is exploited
as the central block of a dynamic classifier. We will empirically show that such modelling leads to robustness against
perturbations (e.g., outliers) and yields competitive results
on the task of supervised and semi-supervised few-shot classification. We also develop a discriminative form which can
boost the accuracy even further. Our code is available at
https://github.com/chrysts/dsn_fewshot.

1. Introduction
Various studies show that many deep learning techniques
in computer vision, speech recognition and natural language
understanding, to name but a few, will fail to produce reliable models that generalize well if limited annotations are
available. Apart from the labor associated with annotating
data, precise annotation can become ill-posed in some cases.
One prime example of such a difficulty is object detection labeling which requires annotating bounding boxes of objects
as explained in [1]. In some other cases, labeling process
may require expert knowledge (e.g. sign language recognition [2]).
In contrast to the current trend in deep learning, humans
can learn new objects from only a few examples. This in turn
provides humans with lifelong learning abilities. Inspired
by such learning abilities, several approaches are developed
to study learning from limited samples [3–12]. This type
of learning, known as Few-Shot Learning (FSL), has been
tackled by a diverse set of ideas, from embedding learning [4,

Accuracy (%)

53

54.15

Prototype

52.7
51.37

Subspace

49.95

50
47.15

47

45.42

44
40.5

41
38.4

38
35
2

3

4

5

Number of Shot

Figure 1: The accuracy of prototype and subspace classifiers evaluated with few (2-5) images. The feature extractor
is ResNet-34 trained on the ImageNet. A prototype is an
average pooling of few images within the same class and a
subspace is the class specific basis vectors. The prototypes
and subspaces are constructed directly from the generated
features without additional learnable parameters.

13, 14], to adaptation techniques [7, 8] and even generative
models [3, 15].
In this work, we first formulate FSL as a two-stage learning paradigm, namely, 1. learning a universal feature extractor followed by 2. learning to generate a classifier dynamically from limited data. We will demonstrate that many
state-of-the-art FSL techniques fit nicely into such a learning
paradigm. Furthermore, we will show that viewing the FSL
as the above paradigm will be beneficial and provide us with
tools to formalize FSL.
Once we establish the two-stage learning paradigm, we
will turn our attention to how one can reliably generate a
classifier from limited data. Aside from limited annotation,
we will show that a requirement in many challenging FSL
problems is to learn the classifier from high-dimensional data.
This ultimately boils down to learning a symmetric function1
1 A symmetric function is a function that has the same value given the
arguments regardless of their order.

14136

