Footprints and Free Space from a Single Color Image
Jamie Watson1

Michael Firman1
Aron Monszpart1
Gabriel J. Brostow1,2
1
2
Niantic
UCL
www.github.com/nianticlabs/footprints

Abstract
(a) Input:
Single RGB
image

Understanding the shape of a scene from a single color
image is a formidable computer vision task. However, most
methods aim to predict the geometry of surfaces that are
visible to the camera, which is of limited use when planning paths for robots or augmented reality agents. Such
agents can only move when grounded on a traversable surface, which we define as the set of classes which humans
can also walk over, such as grass, footpaths and pavement.
Models which predict beyond the line of sight often parameterize the scene with voxels or meshes, which can be expensive to use in machine learning frameworks.
We introduce a model to predict the geometry of both visible and occluded traversable surfaces, given a single RGB
image as input. We learn from stereo video sequences, using
camera poses, per-frame depth and semantic segmentation
to form training data, which is used to supervise an imageto-image network. We train models from the KITTI driving
dataset, the indoor Matterport dataset, and from our own
casually captured stereo footage. We find that a surprisingly low bar for spatial coverage of training scenes is required. We validate our algorithm against a range of strong
baselines, and include an assessment of our predictions for
a path-planning task.

1. Introduction
Computerized agents, for example a street cleaning robot
or an augmented reality character, need to know how to explore both the visible and the hidden, unseen world. For
AR agents, all paths must be planned and executed without camera egomotion, so no new areas of the real scene
are revealed as the character moves. This makes typical
approaches for path planning in unknown [65, 74] and dynamic environments less effective.
We introduce Footprints, a model for estimating both the
visible and hidden traversable geometry given just a single color image (Figure 1). This enables an agent to know
where they can walk or roll, beyond the immediately visible
surfaces. Importantly, we model not just the surfaces’ over-

Existing technology

Our footprints predictions

(b) Visible ground pixels
segmentation

(c) Footprints
freespace
(d) Objectand
footprints
mask estimation

(d) Depth prediction

(e) Hidden ground geometry

(f) Path planning without
footprints

(g) Path planning with
footprints

Figure 1. Footprints overview: Given a single color image (a),
existing methods can estimate the segmentation of which visible
pixels can be traversed by a human or virtual character (b) and
the depth to each pixel (d). We introduce Footprints, a method
to estimate the extent (c) and geometry (e) that includes hidden
walkable surfaces. Our predictions can be used, for example, to
plan paths through the world. Here we plan a path from A →
B → C → D using the ground predictions, with the A* algorithm
[26]. The baseline path (f) takes an unrealistic route sticking only
to visible ground surface. Our hidden geometry predictions enable
a realistic path behind objects to be found (g).

all shapes and geometry [21, 22], but also where moving
and static objects in the scene preclude walking. We refer
to these occupied regions of otherwise traversable surfaces

11

