Nonparametric Object and Parts Modeling with Lie Group Dynamics
David S. Hayden, Jason Pacheco, John W. Fisher III
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139
{dshayden, pachecoj, fisher}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Articulated motion analysis often utilizes strong prior
knowledge such as a known or trained parts model for
humans. Yet, the world contains a variety of articulating
objects–mammals, insects, mechanized structures–where
the number and configuration of parts for a particular object is unknown in advance. Here, we relax such strong
assumptions via an unsupervised, Bayesian nonparametric
parts model that infers an unknown number of parts with
motions coupled by a body dynamic and parameterized by
SE(D), the Lie group of rigid transformations. We derive
an inference procedure that utilizes short observation sequences (image, depth, point cloud or mesh) of an object in
motion without need for markers or learned body models.
Efficient Gibbs decompositions for inference over distributions on SE(D) demonstrate robust part decompositions of
moving objects under both 3D and 2D observation models.
The inferred representation permits novel analysis, such as
object segmentation by relative part motion, and transfers
to new observations of the same object type.

1. Introduction
The world is full of moving objects comprised of articulating parts. Despite the wide range and complexity of such
objects, humans have a remarkable ability to accurately discern both the number of articulating parts and their relation
to the whole with few observations. We are interested in developing reasoning methods and algorithms that mimic this
ability. While one might consider supervised methods that
rely on large amounts of labeled training data about every
conceivable object, articulated motion and view, the task of
data collection seems daunting and unnecessary.
Consequently, we develop a generative model that infers
an object decomposition solely from brief observations of
the object in motion. Specifically, we propose a parts-based
representation that leverages Bayesian nonparametric dynamical models while eschewing strong assumptions about

Figure 1. The number, rotation, translation, and shape of an object’s parts are learned from a small number of observations of that
object in motion. Motion of the body and parts is parameterized
by the Lie group of rigid transformations in 3D or 2D. Supported
data sources include sequences of meshes / point clouds (A, human), depth data (B, marmoset), and 2D images (C, hand, spider).

the number or configuration of parts. The model simultaneously infers a dynamic body frame, the number of parts, and
their motion relative to the body frame. Diverse inputs are
supported–2D image sequences, 2.5D depth sequences and
3D point cloud or mesh sequences–without need for restrictive assumptions about target appearance or the existence of
specially-placed markers or sensors.
Objects and parts are assumed to rotate and translate
smoothly in space, leading to a natural parameterization in
SE(D), the Lie group of rigid transformations. By representing statistics of motion in the Lie algebra se(D), we
derive closed-form Gibbs updates on translation dynamics,
and an efficient sampler for rotation dynamics.
Contributions. We specify a novel Bayesian nonparametric model that is well-suited to the properties of articulated objects in motion (part persistence, rigid transformation dynamics, unknown number of parts). We demonstrate
a novel decomposition of inferring translations and rotations in posterior distributions on SE(D) with concentrated
Gaussian [35] priors. We validate our methods on 2D and
3D sequences containing different object types. We show
that the parts in one data sequence transfer to other data
sequences of the same object type (but different instance).
Finally, we present novel analysis of the motion of different
17426

