Enhanced Transport Distance for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Mengxue Li, Yi-Ming Zhai, You-Wei Luo, Peng-Fei Ge, Chuan-Xian Ren∗
School of Mathematics, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
limx36@mail3.sysu.edu.cn, {zhaiym3, luoyw28, gepengf}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, rchuanx@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a representative problem in transfer learning, which aims to improve
the classiﬁcation performance on an unlabeled target domain by exploiting discriminant information from a labeled
source domain. The optimal transport model has been used
for UDA in the perspective of distribution matching. However, the transport distance cannot reflect the discriminant
information from either domain knowledge or category prior. In this work, we propose an enhanced transport distance
(ETD) for UDA. This method builds an attention-aware
transport distance, which can be viewed as the predictionfeedback of the iteratively learned classiﬁer, to measure
the domain discrepancy. Further, the Kantorovich potential variable is re-parameterized by deep neural networks to
learn the distribution in the latent space. The entropy-based
regularization is developed to explore the intrinsic structure
of the target domain. The proposed method is optimized alternately in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments
are conducted on four benchmark datasets to demonstrate
the SOTA performance of ETD.

1. Introduction
Sufﬁcient labeled data play an important role in training discriminative and interpretable models which have
wide applications in pattern recognition and machine learning [24, 28]. However, not all tasks have plenty of labeled
data for model training, and the collection of annotated data
is very expensive and time-consuming. Fortunately, due to
the explosive growth of information, the big data era provides us sufﬁcient training data from multiple sources and
scenarios, by which we can extract discriminative features
and exploratory data structure. However, there exist large
distribution gaps and domain shifts between different domains due to many factors (e.g., postures, locations and
views) [5, 12]. Applying the model trained on the existing labeled source domain to the unlabeled domain directly
∗ Corresponding Author.

9U[XIK9GSVRKY

:GXMKZ9GSVRKY

*KIOYOUT(U[TJGX_

3OYIRGYYOLOKJ9GSVRKY

(KLUXK'JGVZGZOUT

'LZKX'JGVZGZOUT

Figure 1. The primary goal of UDA is to generalize the welltrained classiﬁer on the source domain to the unlabeled target domain. Direct application of the learned classiﬁer suffered from the
“domain shift” problem, as shown in the left case. UDA methods match the features of different domains, and then reduce the
misclassiﬁcation rate, as shown in the right case.

will result in a signiﬁcant performance degradation.
In unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), the target domain data are unlabeled. As shown in Figure 1, UDA methods solve tasks in the target domain by exploiting the information from the labeled source domain. Those methods
attempt to establish the association between different domains, and then learn a shared and domain-invariant feature
space [7, 17, 30].
Optimal transport (OT) distance [32, 33], known as the
Earth Mover’s distance, is a classic metric that plays a fundamental role in the probability simplex. Compared with
Kullback-Leibler or Jensen-Shannon divergence [8], OT
distance is the unique one that needs to be parameterized.
Though the support sets of two distributions do not overlap with each other, the OT distance can still measure the
relation between the distributions [1].
It is worth noting that the OT model [32] has received
wide attention in domain adaptation. It aims to learn the
transformation between domains with theoretical guarantees [5, 23]. The optimal transport distance is used to learn
an optimal transport plan, which plays an important role in
mapping the data from the source domain to the target domain [29], so that the classiﬁer trained on the source domain
generalizes well in the target domain. Recently, Bhushan et

13936

