Large-Scale Object Detection in the Wild
from Imbalanced Multi-Labels
Junran Peng∗1,2,3 , Xingyuan Bu∗2 , Ming Sun2 , Zhaoxiang Zhang†1,3 , Tieniu Tan1,3 , and Junjie Yan2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SenseTime Group Limited
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA

Abstract
Training with more data has always been the most stable
and effective way of improving performance in deep learning era. As the largest object detection dataset so far, Open
Images brings great opportunities and challenges for object
detection in general and sophisticated scenarios. However,
owing to its semi-automatic collecting and labeling pipeline
to deal with the huge data scale, Open Images dataset suffers from label-related problems that objects may explicitly
or implicitly have multiple labels and the label distribution
is extremely imbalanced. In this work, we quantitatively analyze these label problems and provide a simple but effective solution. We design a concurrent softmax to handle the
multi-label problems in object detection and propose a softsampling methods with hybrid training scheduler to deal
with the label imbalance. Overall, our method yields a dramatic improvement of 3.34 points, leading to the best single
model with 60.90 mAP on the public object detection test
set of Open Images. And our ensembling result achieves
67.17 mAP, which is 4.29 points higher than the best result
of Open Images public test 2018.

1. Introduction
Data is playing a primary and decisive role in deep learning. With the advent of ImageNet dataset [8], deep neural
network [15] becomes well exploited for the first time, and
an unimaginable number of works in deep learning sprung
up. Some recent works [24, 39] also prove that larger
quantities of data with labels of low quality(like hashtags)
could surpass the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. Throughout the history of deep learning, it could be
∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.(zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn)

easily learned that the development of an area is closely related to the data.
In the past years, great progresses have also been
achieved in the field of object detection. Some generic object detection datasets with annotations of high quality like
Pascal VOC [9] and MS COCO [21] greatly boost the development of object detection, giving birth to plenty of amazing methods [29, 28, 22, 20]. However, these datasets are
quite small in today’s view, and begin to limit the advancement of object detection area to some degree. Attempts
are frequently made to focus on atomic problems on these
datasets instead of exploring object detection in harder scenarios.
Recently, Open Images dataset is published in terms of
1.7 million images with 12.4 million boxes annotated of 500
categories. This unseals the limits of data-hungry methods
and may stimulate research to bring object detection to more
general and sophisticated situations. However, accurately
annotating data of such scale is labor intensive that manual
labeling is almost infeasible. The annotating procedure of
Open Images dataset is completed with strong assistance of
deep learning that candidate labels are generated by models
and verified by humans. This inevitably weakens the quality of labels because of the uncertainty of models and the
knowledge limitation of human individuals, which leads to
several major problems.
Objects in Open Image dataset may explicitly or implicitly have multiple labels, which differs from the traditional
object detection. The object classes in Open Images form
a hierarchy that most objects may hold a leaf label and all
the corresponding parent labels. However, due to the annotation quality, there are cases that objects are only labeled
as parent classes and leaf classes are absent. Apart from hierarchical labels, objects in Open Images dataset may also
hold several leaf classes like car and toy. Another annoying
case is that objects of similar classes are frequently anno4904
9709

