Attention-based Context Aware Reasoning for Situation Recognition
Thilini Cooray, Ngai-Man Cheung∗ , Wei Lu
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
thilini cooray@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {ngaiman cheung, luwei}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Situation Recognition (SR) is a fine-grained action
recognition task where the model is expected to not only
predict the salient action of the image, but also predict values of all associated semantic roles of the action. Predicting semantic roles is very challenging: a vast variety of
possibilities can be the match for a semantic role. Existing work has focused on dependency modelling architectures to solve this issue. Inspired by the success achieved
by query-based visual reasoning (e.g., Visual Question Answering), we propose to address semantic role prediction as
a query-based visual reasoning problem. However, existing
query-based reasoning methods have not considered handling of inter-dependent queries which is a unique requirement of semantic role prediction in SR. Therefore, to the best
of our knowledge, we propose the first set of methods to address inter-dependent queries in query-based visual reasoning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed method which achieves outstanding performance on Situation Recognition task. Furthermore, leveraging query inter-dependency, our methods improve upon
a state-of-the-art method that answers queries separately.
Our code: https://github.com/thilinicooray/context-awarereasoning-for-sr

1. Introduction
Visual reasoning is the process of analyzing visual information in order to achieve a final conclusion. There are
a variety of visual reasoning tasks being researched in the
computer vision domain beginning with the basic building
blocks of object [14, 24, 22, 8] and action [4, 23, 25] classification. Scene Graph Generation [11, 17, 28] was introduced in order to expand the visual reasoning capabilities
of computer vision models beyond mere object and action
classification and brought visual reasoning to the next level
by combining all the predicted visual relations in an image
and constructing a knowledge graph out of it.
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Situation recognition (SR) [30]: Two different situations
for the same action (verb). The SR task is to predict the action
(verb) and the values of all the associated semantic roles.

However, these relations in scene graphs were captured
in a triplet (subject-predicate-object) manner which limits
the expressibility when it comes to describe actions, as the
objects participate in an action expand beyond subject and
object elements. In order to address this limitation, Yatskar
et al. [30] introduced Situation Recognition (SR). In SR, the
model is expected to not only predict the salient action of
the image, but also predict all the objects that participate in
the action. Relationships between individual objects and the
action are indicated by a concept called semantic roles. A
situation is a structure which comprises of an action along
with its semantic roles making this a structured prediction
task.
Figure 1 shows two instances of action “Brushing” in
the imSitu dataset [30], the prime dataset for SR. Semantic roles of “Brushing” are agent (person who is brushing),
target (entity or object the agent is brushing), tool (the tool
being used for brushing), substance (any substance being
used for brushing). Note that place is also a semantic role
for brushing, but we omit it in this example for clarity as it
is not significant here. Also note that different actions may
have different semantic roles. For example, action “eating”
14736

