Video Instance Segmentation Tracking with a Modified VAE Architecture
Chung-Ching Lin
IBM Research AI

Ying Hung
Rutgers University

Rogerio Feris
IBM Research AI

Linglin He
Rutgers University

cclin@us.ibm.com

yhung@stat.rutgers.edu

rsferis@us.ibm.com

lhe@stat.rutgers.edu

Figure 1: Our model classifies, localizes, segments, and tracks all instances of predefined object classes with consistent assigned identities.

Abstract

We propose a modified variational autoencoder (VAE)
architecture built on top of Mask R-CNN for instance-level
video segmentation and tracking. The method builds a
shared encoder and three parallel decoders, yielding three
disjoint branches for predictions of future frames, object detection boxes, and instance segmentation masks. To effectively solve multiple learning tasks, we introduce a Gaussian Process model to enhance the statistical representation
of VAE by relaxing the prior strong independent and identically distributed (iid) assumption of conventional VAEs and
allowing potential correlations among extracted latent variables. The network learns embedded spatial interdependence and motion continuity in video data and creates a
representation that is effective to produce high-quality segmentation masks and track multiple instances in diverse and
unstructured videos. Evaluation on a variety of recently introduced datasets shows that our model outperforms previous methods and achieves the new best in class performance.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been great progress in the area
of automatic video understanding. Classic video tasks are
centered around understanding what objects are doing and
their actions. This paper considers an emerging video understanding task: Video Instance Segmentation Tracking
(VIST), which aims to classify, localize, segment, and track
all instances of object classes throughout a video and yield
pixel-wise object labels [59, 66]. This task provides a more
natural understanding of the video scenes and is more desirable for applications that require detailed pixel-level information, such as autonomous driving and video editing.
The VIST task is different from traditional video object
tracking and video object segmentation. Video object tracking [1, 4, 35, 54, 63, 65, 68] uses bounding boxes to identify the target objects and to estimate their positions in the
subsequent frames. Yet, in many scenarios with heavy occlusions, simple rectangular bounding boxes fail to properly
represent objects. The VIST task produces binary segmentation masks and pixel-level tracking results. Furthermore,
if objects are occluded, or out of the scene for a couple of
frames before reappearing, the instance identities are maintained. Traditional video object segmentation can coarsely
113147

