Shoestring: Graph-Based Semi-Supervised Classification with Severely Limited
Labeled Data
Wanyu Lin, Zhaolin Gao, Baochun Li
University of Toronto
{wanyu.lin, zhaolin.gao}@mail.utoronto.ca bli@ece.toronto.edu

Abstract
Graph-based semi-supervised learning has been shown
to be one of the most effective classification approaches, as
it can exploit connectivity patterns between labeled and unlabeled samples to improve learning performance. However, we show that existing techniques perform poorly when
labeled data are severely limited. To address the problem of semi-supervised learning in the presence of severely
limited labeled samples, we propose a new framework,
called Shoestring1 , that incorporates metric learning into
the paradigm of graph-based semi-supervised learning. In
particular, our base model consists of a graph embedding
network, followed by a metric learning network that learns
a semantic metric space to represent the semantic similarity between the sparsely labeled and large numbers of unlabeled samples. Then the classification can be performed by
clustering the unlabeled samples according to the learned
semantic space. We empirically demonstrate Shoestring’s
superiority over many baselines, including graph convolutional networks, label propagation and their recent labelefficient variations (IGCN and GLP). We show that our
framework achieves state-of-the-art performance for node
classification in the low-data regime. In addition, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on image
classification tasks in the few-shot learning regime, with
significant gains on miniImageNet (2.57% ∼ 3.59%) and
tieredImageNet (1.05% ∼ 2.70%).

1. Introduction
The availability of large quantities of labeled samples has
made it possible for deep learning to achieve remarkable
performance breakthroughs in speech recognition, natural
language processing, and computer vision [6, 18]. How1 Code will be made publicly available.

This research was supported in part by the NSERC Discovery Research Program.

ever, the reliance on large amounts of labeled samples increases the burden of data collection, making it difficult to
apply deep learning to the low-data regime where labeled
samples are extremely rare and are difficult to collect.
With semi-supervised learning (SSL), small amounts of
labeled samples are used with a relatively large number of
unlabeled samples for classification. Among existing semisupervised learning models, graph-based methods, such as
graph convolutional networks and label propagation, have
been demonstrated as one of the most effective approaches
for semi-supervised classification, as they are capable of exploiting the connectivity patterns between labeled and unlabeled samples to improve classification performance. Given
their advantages, in previous work on few-shot image classification, quick knowledge from a few samples is acquired
by considering relationships between instances and representing the data into a graph [4, 7, 8, 13].
Yet, even with such graph-based semi-supervised learning, model learning performance degrades quickly with a
diminishing number of labeled samples per class [11]. The
performance degradation can be explained as follows. In
general, labels work as “anchors,” and are used to force
the learning models to fit these labeled samples with certain confidence, so that the information extracted from them
can be reliably propagated to unlabeled samples. However, when the labeled samples are severely limited, there
is a good chance they will exhibit a large testing error even
though their training error is small—i.e., overfitting these
limited labeled data. Taking graph convolutional networks
as an example, they indeed lead to state-of-the-art accuracies on node classification tasks with two convolutional layers in the presence of a sufficient amount of labeled samples. However, when only a few labeled samples are given,
it would not be able to effectively propagate the labels to
the entire data graph [11].
Nevertheless, humans are exceptional learners capable
of generalizing their learned knowledge to novel concepts,
and capable of learning from very few examples. In this
paper, we aim to tackle the problem of graph-based semisupervised learning where labeled data are severely limited.

4174

