Geometry and Learning Co-supported Normal Estimation for Unstructured
Point Cloud
Haoran Zhou1,2∗ Honghua Chen1∗ Yidan Feng1,2 Qiong Wang3
Jing Qin4 Haoran Xie5 Fu Lee Wang6 Mingqiang Wei1,2† Jun Wang1†
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology 4 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Lingnan University 6 The Open University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a normal estimation method
for unstructured point cloud. We observe that geometric estimators commonly focus more on feature preservation but
are hard to tune parameters and sensitive to noise, while
learning-based approaches pursue an overall normal estimation accuracy but cannot well handle challenging regions such as surface edges. This paper presents a novel
normal estimation method, under the co-support of geometric estimator and deep learning. To lowering the learning
difficulty, we first propose to compute a suboptimal initial
normal at each point by searching for a best fitting patch.
Based on the computed normal field, we design a normalbased height map network (NH-Net) to fine-tune the suboptimal normals. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate the clear improvements of our results over both
traditional methods and learning-based methods, in terms
of estimation accuracy and feature recovery.

1. Introduction
Various kinds of 3D laser scanners and depth cameras have emerged in recent decades, making point clouds
move into the focus of many practical applications, such
as robotic grasping [20], 3D reconstruction [11], and autonomous driving [24]. Commonly, the scanned point
clouds only contain points’ spatial location information associated with the noise, incompleteness and sampling irregularity, while lacking local surface geometry properties, like
point normals. Quality normals can facilitate a huge amount
of downstream tasks, for example, point cloud consolidation [10], surface reconstruction [13], and model segmentation [8]. Hence, estimating normals is an inevitable and
∗ Co-first authors
† Co-corresponding authors (mqwei/wjun@nuaa.edu.cn)

crucial task for unstructured point cloud.
The problem of normal estimation has been extensively
researched, yet not well-solved. We can roughly divide existing normal estimation techniques into two categories: traditional methods and learning-based methods. Traditional
ones usually utilize several elaborately-designed regularities to preserve/recover sharp features, while learning-based
methods pursue to learn a general mapping from noisy
inputs to ground truths. However, no existing algorithm
can serve as a normal estimation panacea: 1) Traditional
methods always heavily rely on parameters tuning, like the
neighborhood scale for plane fitting [31, 32]; 2) Learningbased techniques, either using the convolutional neural networks (CNN) architecture [6, 4], or the PointNet architecture [15, 33], are both limited by the ability of feature representation. It is, therefore, hard to learn a straightforward
mapping from severely degraded inputs to the ground-truth
normals, especially in sharp feature regions.
Motivated by these challenges, in this work, we propose a two-stage normal estimation method for unstructured 3D point clouds. The key idea of our approach is
to solve the ill-posed normal estimation problem via two
sub-steps: 1) computing a suboptimal intermediate normal
field with features as well-preserved as possible, by a geometric estimator; 2) formulating the final normal recovery procedure as a regression function that maps the intermediate normal results to their ground truths. In detail,
for lowering the difficulty of normal learning in challenging regions, we present a multi-scale fitting patch selection
(MFPS) scheme to help estimate a suboptimal normal field,
which contributes more on the feature preservation. Since
in some challenging regions, where parameters are hard to
be tuned, the initial normals are still imperfect, we then design a normal-based height map network (NH-Net), which
utilizes both the above estimated normals and the local surface information to obtain the final optimal normals. We

13238

