FineGym: A Hierarchical Video Dataset for Fine-grained Action Understanding

Dian Shao

Yue Zhao

Bo Dai

Dahua Lin

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{sd017, zy317, bdai, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

…

…

…

…

…
Actions

Events

Uneven Bars

vault

More Fine-grained

…

Balance Beam

Balance Beam

…

Floor Exercise

…

…
Sub-actions

Sets

Beam-turns
Tree
Reasoning

Elements

3 turn in tuck stand

Leap-Jump-Hop
Tree
Reasoning

BB-flight-handspring
Tree
Reasoning

Wolf jump--hip angle at 45, knees together

Flic-flac with step-out

Figure 1: An overview of the FineGym dataset. We provide coarse-to-fine annotations both temporally and semantically.
There are three levels of categorical labels. The temporal dimension (represented by the two bars) is also divided into two
levels, i.e., actions and sub-actions. Sub-actions could be described generally using set categories or precisely using element
categories. Ground-truth element categories of sub-action instances are obtained via manually constructed decision-trees.

Abstract
On public benchmarks, current action recognition techniques have achieved great success. However, when used
in real-world applications, e.g. sport analysis, which requires the capability of parsing an activity into phases and
differentiating between subtly different actions, their performances remain far from being satisfactory. To take action
recognition to a new level, we develop FineGym1 , a new
dataset built on top of gymnastic videos. Compared to existing action recognition datasets, FineGym is distinguished
in richness, quality, and diversity. In particular, it provides
temporal annotations at both action and sub-action levels
with a three-level semantic hierarchy. For example, a “balance beam” event will be annotated as a sequence of elementary sub-actions derived from five sets: “leap-jumphop”, “beam-turns”, “flight-salto”, “flight-handspring”,
and “dismount”, where the sub-action in each set will be
further annotated with finely defined class labels. This new
1 Dataset and codes can be found at https://sdolivia.github.
io/FineGym/

level of granularity presents significant challenges for action recognition, e.g. how to parse the temporal structures
from a coherent action, and how to distinguish between subtly different action classes. We systematically investigate
representative methods on this dataset and obtain a number
of interesting findings. We hope this dataset could advance
research towards action understanding.

1. Introduction
The remarkable progress in action recognition [39, 42,
40, 25, 37, 49], particularly the development of many new
recognition models, e.g. TSN [44], TRN [55], and I3D [3],
have been largely driven by large-scale benchmarks, such as
ActivityNet [11] and Kinetics [23]. On these benchmarks,
latest techniques have obtained very high accuracies.
Even so, we found that existing techniques and the
datasets that underpin their development are subject to an
important limitation, namely, they focus on coarse-grained
action categories, e.g. “hockey” vs. “gymnastics”. To dif-

2616

