What You See is What You Get: Exploiting Visibility for 3D Object Detection
Peiyun Hu1 , Jason Ziglar2 , David Held1 , Deva Ramanan1,2
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Argo AI
peiyunh@cs.cmu.edu, jziglar@argo.ai, dheld@andrew.cmu.edu, deva@cs.cmu.edu

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: What is a good representation for 3D sensor data? We visualize a bird’s-eye-view LiDAR scene and highlight two
regions that may contain an object. Many contemporary deep networks process 3D point clouds, making it hard to distinguish
the two regions (left). But depth sensors provide more than 3D points - they provide estimates of freespace in between the
sensor and the measured 3D point. We visualize freespace by raycasting (right), where green is free and white is unknown.
In this paper, we introduce deep 3D networks that leverage freespace to significantly improve 3D object detection accuracy.

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D sensing have created unique
challenges for computer vision. One fundamental challenge
is finding a good representation for 3D sensor data. Most
popular representations (such as PointNet) are proposed in
the context of processing truly 3D data (e.g. points sampled
from mesh models), ignoring the fact that 3D sensored data
such as a LiDAR sweep is in fact 2.5D. We argue that representing 2.5D data as collections of (x, y, z) points fundamentally destroys hidden information about freespace.
In this paper, we demonstrate such knowledge can be efficiently recovered through 3D raycasting and readily incorporated into batch-based gradient learning. We describe a
simple approach to augmenting voxel-based networks with
visibility: we add a voxelized visibility map as an additional input stream. In addition, we show that visibility
can be combined with two crucial modifications common
to state-of-the-art 3D detectors: synthetic data augmentation of virtual objects and temporal aggregation of LiDAR

sweeps over multiple time frames. On the NuScenes 3D detection benchmark, we show that, by adding an additional
stream for visibility input, we can significantly improve the
overall detection accuracy of a state-of-the-art 3D detector.

1. Introduction
What is a good representation for processing 3D sensor data? While this is a fundamental challenge in machine vision dating back to stereoscopic processing, it has
recently been explored in the context of deep neural processing of 3D sensors such as LiDARs. Various representations have been proposed, including graphical meshes [2],
point clouds [19], voxel grids [31], and range images [17],
to name a few.
Visibility: We revisit this question by pointing out that
3D sensored data, is infact, not fully 3D! Instantaneous
depth measurements captured from a stereo pair, structured
111001

