Category-Level Articulated Object Pose Estimation
Xiaolong Li1∗ He Wang2∗ Li Yi3 Leonidas Guibas 2 A. Lynn Abbott 1 Shuran Song4
1
Virginia Tech 2 Stanford University 3 Google Research 4 Columbia University
articulated-pose.github.io
Input:

Output:

3D Point Cloud from
a Single Depth Image

Part Pose
Segmentation
Part Amodal
Bounding Boxes

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of category-level pose
estimation for articulated objects from a single depth image.
We present a novel category-level approach that correctly
accommodates object instances previously unseen during
training. We introduce Articulation-aware Normalized
Coordinate Space Hierarchy (ANCSH) – a canonical
representation for different articulated objects in a given
category. As the key to achieve intra-category generalization, the representation constructs a canonical object
space as well as a set of canonical part spaces. The
canonical object space normalizes the object orientation,
scales and articulations (e.g. joint parameters and states)
while each canonical part space further normalizes its part
pose and scale. We develop a deep network based on
PointNet++ that predicts ANCSH from a single depth point
cloud, including part segmentation, normalized coordinates, and joint parameters in the canonical object space.
By leveraging the canonicalized joints, we demonstrate: 1)
improved performance in part pose and scale estimations
using the induced kinematic constraints from joints; 2) high
accuracy for joint parameter estimation in camera space.

1. Introduction
Our environment is populated with articulated objects,
ranging from furniture such as cabinets and ovens to small
tabletop objects such as laptops and eyeglasses. Effectively
interacting with these objects requires a detailed understanding of their articulation states and part-level poses.
Such understanding is beyond the scope of typical 6D pose
estimation algorithms, which have been designed for rigid
objects [31, 25, 24, 28]. Algorithms that do consider object
articulations [13, 14, 12, 16] often require the exact object
CAD model and the associated joint parameters at test time,
preventing them from generalizing to new object instances.
In this paper, we adopt a learning-based approach
to perform category-level pose estimation for articulated
objects. Specifically, we consider the task of estimating perpart 6D poses and 3D scales, joint parameters (i.e. type,
position, axis orientation), and joint states (i.e. joint angle)
* indicates equal contributions.

`

θ

Joint Parameters
Joint State

Generalization to Different Object Instances

Figure 1. Category-level articulated object pose estimation.
Given a depth point cloud of a novel articulated object from a
known category, our algorithm estimates: part attributes, including
part segmentation, poses, scales and amodal bounding boxes; joint
attributes, including joint parameters and joint states.

of a novel articulated object instance in a known category
from a single depth image. Here object instances from one
category will share a known kinematic chain composing of
a fixed number of rigid parts connected by certain types
of joints. We are particularly interested in the two most
common joint types, revolute joints that cause 1D rotational
motion (e.g., door hinges), and prismatic joints that allow
1D translational movement (e.g., drawers in a cabinet). An
overview is shown in Figure 1. To achieve this goal, several
major challenges need to be addressed:
First, to handle novel articulated objects without
knowing exact 3D CAD models, we need to find a
shared representation for different instances within a given
category. The representation needs to accommodate the
large variations in part geometry, joint parameters, joint
states, and self-occlusion patterns. More importantly, for
learning on such diverse data, the representation needs to
facilitate intra-category generalization.
Second, in contrast to a rigid object, an articulated object
is composed of multiple rigid parts leading to a higher
degree of freedom in its pose. Moreover, the parts are
connected and constrained by certain joints and hence their

3706

