Data Uncertainty Learning in Face Recognition
Jie Chang1 , Zhonghao Lan2 , Changmao Cheng1 , Yichen Wei1
1
Megvii Inc. 2 University of Science and Technology of China
{changjie, lanzhonghao, chengchangmao, weiyicheng}@megvii.com

point estimation

Abstract
Modeling data uncertainty is important for noisy images, but seldom explored for face recognition. The pioneer
work [35] considers uncertainty by modeling each face image embedding as a Gaussian distribution. It is quite effective. However, it uses fixed feature (mean of the Gaussian)
from an existing model. It only estimates the variance and
relies on an ad-hoc and costly metric. Thus, it is not easy to
use. It is unclear how uncertainty affects feature learning.
This work applies data uncertainty learning to face
recognition, such that the feature (mean) and uncertainty
(variance) are learnt simultaneously, for the first time. Two
learning methods are proposed. They are easy to use and
outperform existing deterministic methods as well as [35]
on challenging unconstrained scenarios. We also provide
insightful analysis on how incorporating uncertainty estimation helps reducing the adverse effects of noisy samples
and affects the feature learning.

1. Introduction
Data uncertainty1 captures the “noise” inherent in the
data. Modeling such uncertainty is important for computer
vision application [22], e.g., face recognition, because noise
widely exists in images.
Most face recognition methods represent each face
image as a deterministic point embedding in the latent
space [7, 27, 41, 42, 33]. Usually, high-quality images of
the same ID are clustered. However, it is difficult to estimate an accurate point embedding for noisy face images,
which are usually out of the cluster and have larger uncertainty in the embedding space. This is exemplified in Fig 1
(a). The positive example is far from its class and close to a
noisy negative example, causing a mismatch.
Probabilistic face embeddings (PFE) [35] is the first
work to consider data uncertainty in face recognition. For
each sample, it estimates a Gaussian distribution, instead of
1 Uncertainty could be characterised into two main categories. Another
type is model uncertainty.

distributional estimation
Our

PFE

positive
negative

learnable 𝜎

un-learnable 𝜇

(a)

both 𝜇 and 𝜎 are learnable

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Deterministic model gives point embedding without considering the data uncertainty; (b) probabilistic model gives distributional estimation parameterised with estimated mean and estimated variance. PFE
leverages the pre-trained point embedding as the mean µ, only learn the
uncertainty σ for each sample; (c) our method simultaneously learn σ as
well as µ, leading to better intra-class compactness and inter-class separability for µ in the latent space. Different classes are marked as blue or red.
Best viewed in color.

a fixed point, in the latent space. Specifically, given a pretrained FR model, the mean of the Gaussian for each sample is fixed as the embedding produced by the FR model. An
extra branch is appended to the FR model and trained to estimate the variance. The training is driven by a new similarity metric, mutual likelihood score or MLS, which measures
the “likelihood” between two Gaussian distributions. It is
shown that PFE estimates small variance for high-quality
samples but large variance for noisy ones. Together with
the MLS metric, PFE can reduce the mismatches on noisy
samples. This is illustrated in Fig 1, (b). While being effective, PFE is limited in that it does not learn the embedded
feature (mean) but only the uncertainty. As a result, it is
unclear how uncertainty affects feature learning. Also, the
conventional similarity metric such as cosine distance cannot be used. The more complex MLS metric is in demand,
which takes more runtime and memory.
For the first time, this work applies data uncertainty
learning (DUL) to face recognition such that feature (mean)
and uncertainty (variance) are learnt simultaneously. As
illustrated in Fig 1 (c), this improves the features such that
the instances in the same class are more compact and the instances in different classes are more separated. In this case,
the learned feature is directly usable for conventional similarity metric. MLS metric is no longer necessary.
Specifically, we propose two learning methods. The first
15710

