Flow Contrastive Estimation of Energy-Based Models
Ruiqi Gao1 , Erik Nijkamp1 , Diederik P. Kingma2 , Zhen Xu2 , Andrew M. Dai2 , Ying Nian Wu1
1
UCLA, 2 Google
{ruiqigao, enijkamp}@ucla.edu, {durk, zhenxu, adai}@google.com, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper studies a training method to jointly estimate
an energy-based model and a flow-based model, in which
the two models are iteratively updated based on a shared
adversarial value function. This joint training method has
the following traits. (1) The update of the energy-based
model is based on noise contrastive estimation, with the
flow model serving as a strong noise distribution. (2)
The update of the flow model approximately minimizes the
Jensen-Shannon divergence between the flow model and the
data distribution. (3) Unlike generative adversarial networks (GAN) which estimates an implicit probability distribution defined by a generator model, our method estimates
two explicit probabilistic distributions on the data. Using
the proposed method we demonstrate a significant improvement on the synthesis quality of the flow model, and show
the effectiveness of unsupervised feature learning by the
learned energy-based model. Furthermore, the proposed
training method can be easily adapted to semi-supervised
learning. We achieve competitive results to the state-of-theart semi-supervised learning methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, flow-based models (henceforth simply called
flow models) have gained popularity as a type of deep generative model [7, 8, 32, 17, 3, 37, 68, 10] and for use in
variational inference [34, 59, 33].
Flow models have two properties that set them apart
from other types of deep generative models: (1) they allow for efficient evaluation of the density function, and (2)
they allow for efficient sampling from the model. Efficient
evaluation of the log-density allows flow models to be directly optimized towards the log-likelihood objective, unlike variational autoencoders (VAEs) [34, 60], which are
optimized towards a bound on the log-likelihood, and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [15]. Auto-regressive
models [19, 56, 62], on the other hand, are (in principle)
inefficient to sample from, since synthesis requires computation that is proportional to the dimensionality of the data.

These properties of efficient density evaluation and efficient sampling are typically viewed as advantageous. However, they have a potential downside: these properties also
acts as assumptions on the true data distribution that they are
trying to model. By choosing a flow model, one is making
the assumption that the true data distribution is one that is
in principle simple to sample from, and is computationally
efficient to normalize. In addition, flow models assume that
the data is generated by a finite sequence of invertible functions. If these assumptions do not hold, flow-based models
can result in a poor fit.
On the other end of the spectrum of deep generative
models lies the family of energy-based models (EBMs)
[42, 54, 29, 77, 73, 13, 38, 55, 9, 11, 16, 18, 6]. Energybased models define an unnormalized density that is the exponential of the negative energy function. The energy function is directly defined as a (learned) scalar function of the
input, and is often parameterized by a neural network, such
as a convolutional network [41, 36]. Evaluation of the density function for a given data point involves calculating a
normalizing constant, which requires an intractable integral.
Sampling from EBMs is expensive and requires approximation as well, such as computationally expensive Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. EBMs, therefore,
do not make any of the two assumptions above: they do not
assume that the density of data is easily normalized, and
they do not assume efficient synthesis. Moreover, they do
not constrain the data distribution by invertible functions.
Contrasting an EBM with a flow model, the former is on
the side of representation where different layers represent
features of different complexities, whereas the latter is on
the side of learned computation, where each layer, or each
transformation, is like a step in the computation. The EBM
is like an objective function or a target distribution whereas
the flow model is like a finite step iterative algorithm or a
learned sampler. Borrowing language from reinforcement
learning [11], the flow model is like an actor whereas the
EBM is like a critic or an evaluator. The EBM can be simpler and more flexible in form than the flow model which
is highly constrained, and thus the EBM may capture the
modes of the data distribution more accurately than the flow
17518

