ContourNet: Taking a Further Step toward Accurate Arbitrary-shaped Scene
Text Detection
Yuxin Wang, Hongtao Xie∗, Zhengjun Zha, Mengting Xing, Zilong Fu and Yongdong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China
{wangyx58,metingx,JeromeF}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{htxie,zhazj,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene text detection has witnessed rapid development in
recent years. However, there still exists two main challenges: 1) many methods suffer from false positives in their
text representations; 2) the large scale variance of scene
texts makes it hard for network to learn samples. In this
paper, we propose the ContourNet, which effectively handles these two problems taking a further step toward accurate arbitrary-shaped text detection. At first, a scaleinsensitive Adaptive Region Proposal Network (AdaptiveRPN) is proposed to generate text proposals by only focusing on the Intersection over Union (IoU) values between
predicted and ground-truth bounding boxes. Then a novel Local Orthogonal Texture-aware Module (LOTM) models the local texture information of proposal features in two orthogonal directions and represents text region with a
set of contour points. Considering that the strong unidirectional or weakly orthogonal activation is usually caused
by the monotonous texture characteristic of false-positive
patterns (e.g. streaks.), our method effectively suppresses
these false positives by only outputting predictions with high
response value in both orthogonal directions. This gives
more accurate description of text regions. Extensive experiments on three challenging datasets (Total-Text, CTW1500
and ICDAR2015) verify that our method achieves the stateof-the-art performance. Code is available at https://
github.com/wangyuxin87/ContourNet.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection is a task to detect text regions in the
complex background and label them with bounding boxes. Accurate detection result benefits a wide scope of realworld applications and is the fundamental step for end-toend text recognition [36, 5, 39, 24].
Benefiting from the development of deep learning, recent methods have achieved significant improvement in
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between jointly modeling the texture information in arbitrary orientations and respectively modeling texture information in two orthogonal directions. We visualize the
heatmap of predicted contour points. NMS is implemented to each
heatmap for better visualization. FPs can effectively be suppressed
by considering the response in two orthogonal directions simultaneously.

scene text detection task. Meanwhile, the research focus
has shifted from horizontal texts [48, 14] to multi-oriented
texts [25, 49] and more challenging arbitrary-shaped texts
[34, 35] (e.g. curved texts). However, due to the specific properties of scene text such as large variance in color,
texture, scale, etc., there are still two challenges to be addressed in arbitrary-shaped scene text detection.
The first challenge is false positives (FPs), which is not
received enough attention in recent researches [38] and is
regarded as one of the key bottlenecks for more accurate
arbitrary-shaped scene text detection in this paper. Recent
CNN-based methods jointly model the texture information
in arbitrary orientations by using k × k convolutional kernel
[46, 43]. However, this operation is sensitive to some specific cases containing similar texture characteristics to text
regions, and tends to perform identically high response to
these cases (see in top of Fig.1). SPCNET [38] attributes
this problem to the lack of context information clues and inaccurate classification scores, thus a text context module is
proposed to compensate global semantic feature and bounding boxes are further rectified by the segmentation map. Li-

11753

