Shape correspondence using anisotropic Chebyshev spectral CNNs
Qinsong Li1 , Shengjun Liu∗1,3 , Ling Hu∗2 , Xinru Liu1
1
Institute of Engineering Modeling and Scientific Computing, Central South University
2
School of Mathematics and Computational Science, Hunan First Normal University
3
State Key Laboratory of High Performance Manufacturing Complex, Central South University

Abstract
Establishing correspondence between shapes is a very
important and active research topic in many domains. Due
to the powerful ability of deep learning on geometric data,
lots of attractive results have been achieved by convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In this paper, we propose a novel architecture for shape correspondence, termed
Anisotropic Chebyshev spectral CNNs (ACSCNNs), based
on a new extension of the manifold convolution operator.
The extended convolution operators aggregate the local features of signals by a set of oriented kernels around each
point, which allows to much more comprehensively capture
the intrinsic signal information. Rather than using fixed oriented kernels in the spatial domain in previous CNNs, in
our framework, the kernels are learned by spectral filtering,
based on the eigen-decompositions of multiple Anisotropic
Laplace-Beltrami Operators. To reduce the computational
complexity, we employ an explicit expansion of the Chebyshev polynomial basis to represent the spectral filters whose
expansion coefficients are trainable. Through the benchmark experiments of shape correspondence, our architecture is demonstrated to be efficient and be able to provide
better than the state-of-the-art results in several datasets
even if using constant functions as inputs.

1. Introduction
Establishing correspondence between shapes is a fundamental problem in geometry processing, computer graphics
and vision, referring to a wide variety of applications such
as texture mapping, animation, etc.
In the past few years, many methods have been proposed
for shape correspondence, mainly including minimumdistortion based methods [13, 49], embedding methods
[30, 22], soft correspondence [33, 45] and functional mapping based methods [36, 39, 32].
Compared to the above handcrafted methods, recently,
∗ Corresponding authors: shjliu.cg@gmail.com; 18246514@qq.com

deep learning methods seem to be able to achieve more
appealing success. Inspired by the remarkable success of
applying Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in image recognition tasks, a few approaches have been proposed
to extend convolution to geometry processing and graphics
communities. Most achievements obtained by deep learning methods over the last years heavily rely on properties of
the convolution operation in convolutional neural networks.
First attempts among them still focus on treating geometric data as Euclidean structures, like [38] used CNNs to be
applied to range images obtained from multiple views of
3D objects, [51] used a view-based representation to find
correspondence between nonrigid shapes and [52] proposed
volumetric CNNs to rasterize the volumetric representation
of 3D shapes. However, such Euclidean representations
may lose significant information of 3D shapes and are not
intrinsic, suffering the disadvantage of huge training sets
and computational complexity when addressing deformed
shapes. Therefore, a set of methods brought together under the term geometric deep learning [11] emerged, aiming
to define convolution operations for deep neural networks
that can directly process non-Euclidean input data such as
graphs and manifolds.
Existing works in geometric deep learning can be
broadly categorized into two different subsets: spatial filtering and spectral filtering. The former spatial filtering performs convolution in local Euclidean neighborhoods w.r.t.
local positional relations between points, represented for
example as polar or Cartesian coordinates [29, 34, 19].
However, constructing such local coordinates sometimes
may be considerable time consuming (e.g. polar coordinates need to compute geodesic distances between point
pairs) or heavily depend on shape representations. The latter subset, spectral filtering [12, 17, 23], based on spectral graph theory [14], provides a well-defined localization
operator on graphs or manifolds via convolutions implemented in the spectral domain [43], analogously to Fourier
domain filtering of traditional signals, where eigenvalues of
a graph’s Laplacian are acted as frequencies of signals defined on graphs.

14658

