BidNet: Binocular Image Dehazing without Explicit Disparity Estimation
Yanwei Pang1 , Jing Nie1 , Jin Xie1 , Jungong Han2∗, Xuelong Li3
1
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology,
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
2
University of Warwick, UK 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
1 {pyw,jingnie,jinxie}@tju.edu.cn, 2 jungong.han@warwick.ac.uk, 3 li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Heavy haze results in severe image degradation and thus
hampers the performance of visual perception, object detection, etc. On the assumption that dehazed binocular images
are superior to the hazy ones for stereo vision tasks such
as 3D object detection and according to the fact that image
haze is a function of depth, this paper proposes a Binocular image dehazing Network (BidNet) aiming at dehazing
both the left and right images of binocular images within
the deep learning framework. Existing binocular dehazing
methods rely on simultaneously dehazing and estimating
disparity, whereas BidNet does not need to explicitly perform time-consuming and well-known challenging disparity
estimation. Note that a small error in disparity gives rise to
a large variation in depth and in estimation of haze-free image. The relationship and correlation between binocular
images are explored and encoded by the proposed Stereo
Transformation Module (STM). Jointly dehazing binocular image pairs is mutually beneficial, which is better than
only dehazing left images. We extend the Foggy Cityscapes
dataset to a Stereo Foggy Cityscapes dataset with binocular
foggy image pairs. Experimental results demonstrate that
BidNet significantly outperforms state-of-the-art dehazing
methods in both subjective and objective assessments.

1. Introduction
Haze is an important factor for degrading image quality
and decreasing the performance of computer vision tasks
such as object detection [23, 25, 2, 14] and semantic image
segmentation [24, 19, 43]. Therefore, image dehazing plays
an important role in developing effective computer vision
systems. In the dehazing literature [20, 22], the hazing process is usually modeled as an atmosphere scattering model,
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)),
∗ Corresponding author

(1)

Figure 1. Sample image dehazing results using the proposed BibNet. Top-left: Input left foggy image. Bottom-left: Input right
foggy image. Top-right: Dehazed left image. Bottom-right: Dehazed right image.

where I(x) denotes the intensity of pixel x in the hazy image, J(x) is the clear image, t(x) represents the transmission map, and A denotes the global atmospheric light intensity; moreover, there is t(x) = e−βd(x) with β and d(x)
being the atmosphere scattering parameter and the distance
between the camera and the scene, respectively.
According to Eq. 1, image haze is a function of depth.
The correlation of the binocular images could help predict
the depth [41], which demonstrates binocular images are
beneficial for the dehazing task. To overcome the binocular image degradation caused by haze, directly and separately applying single image dehazing methods [29] on left
foggy image and right foggy image could not obtain satisfying results, especially for heavy haze, because this kind
of methods make no use of the correlation of the binocular
images. It is expected that binocular image dehazing will
facilitate image-based 3D applications, such as 3D object
detection [13, 27].
Existing binocular image dehazing methods [34, 21] rely
on simultaneously performing dehazing and disparity estimation. These methods are insightful for developing new
binocular image dehazing methods. Nevertheless, this kind
of methods has three drawbacks: (1) It is well known that
for a given small error in disparity, the error in depth increases with disparity [40]. Because it is required for image

5931

