Local-Global Video-Text Interactions for Temporal Grounding
Jonghwan Mun1,2
Minsu Cho1
Bohyung Han2
1
Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Korea
2
Computer Vision Lab., ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
1

{jonghwan.mun,mscho}@postech.ac.kr 2 bhhan@snu.ac.kr

time

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of text-to-video temporal grounding, which aims to identify the time interval in
a video semantically relevant to a text query. We tackle this
problem using a novel regression-based model that learns
to extract a collection of mid-level features for semantic
phrases in a text query, which corresponds to important semantic entities described in the query (e.g., actors, objects,
and actions), and reflect bi-modal interactions between the
linguistic features of the query and the visual features of
the video in multiple levels. The proposed method effectively predicts the target time interval by exploiting contextual information from local to global during bi-modal interactions. Through in-depth ablation studies, we find out that
incorporating both local and global context in video and
text interactions is crucial to the accurate grounding. Our
experiment shows that the proposed method outperforms the
state of the arts on Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions
datasets by large margins, 7.44% and 4.61% points at Recall@tIoU=0.5 metric, respectively.

1. Introduction
As the amount of videos in the internet grows explosively, understanding and analyzing video contents (e.g., action classification [3, 7, 28] and detection [18, 22, 26, 27,
31, 34, 36, 38]) becomes increasingly important. Furthermore, with the recent advances of deep learning on top of
large-scale datasets [2, 16, 17, 23], research on video content understanding is moving towards multi-modal problems (e.g., video question answering [17, 23], video captioning [16, 24]) involving text, speech, and sound.
This paper addresses the problem of text-to-video temporal grounding, which aims to localize the time interval in
a video corresponding to the expression in a text query. Our
main idea is to extract multiple semantic phrases from the
text query and align them with the video using local and
global interactions between linguistic and visual features.
We define the semantic phrase as a sequence of words that

Query: the woman mixed all ingredients, put it in a pan and put it in the oven

(a) An example of text-to-video temporal grounding

Proposal Generation

Proposal Selection by Matching

(b) Conventional approach
[0.2, 0.7]
Segment-level
Modality Fusion

Local Context
Modeling

Global Context
Modeling

Regression

(c) Our approach
Video Segments

Query

Proposal

Semantic Phrases

Figure 1. Video-to-text temporal grounding. (a) An example
where the target time interval (red box) consists of multiple parts
related to semantic phrases in a text query. (b) Scan-and-localize
framework that localizes the target time interval by comparing individual proposals with the whole semantics of the query. (c) Our
method that regresses the target time interval with the bi-modal
interactions in three levels between video segments and semantic
phrases identified from a query.

may describe a semantic entity such as an actor, an object,
an action, a place, etc. Fig. 1(a) shows an example of temporal grounding, where a text query consists of multiple semantic phrases corresponding to actors (i.e., ‘the woman’)
and actions (i.e., ‘mixed all ingredients’, ‘put it in a pan’,
‘put it in the oven’). This example indicates that a text query
can be effectively grounded onto a video by identifying relevant semantic phrases from the query and properly aligning
them with corresponding parts of the video.
Leveraging such semantic phrases of a text query, however, has never been explored in temporal grounding. Most
existing methods [1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 20, 32, 37] tackle the problem typically in the scan-and-localize framework, which in
a nutshell compares a query with all candidate proposals of
time intervals and selects the one with the highest matching

10810

