BlendMask: Top-Down Meets Bottom-Up for Instance Segmentation
Hao Chen1∗, Kunyang Sun2,1∗, Zhi Tian1 , Chunhua Shen1 , Yongming Huang2 , Youliang Yan3
1
The University of Adelaide, Australia 2 Southeast University, China 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{hao.chen01, zhi.tian, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au {sunky, huangym}@seu.edu.cn yanyouliang@huawei.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation is one of the fundamental vision
tasks. Recently, fully convolutional instance segmentation methods have drawn much attention as they are often
simpler and more efficient than two-stage approaches like
Mask R-CNN. To date, almost all such approaches fall behind the two-stage Mask R-CNN method in mask precision
when models have similar computation complexity, leaving
great room for improvement. In this work, we achieve improved mask prediction by effectively combining instancelevel information with semantic information with lowerlevel fine-granularity. Our main contribution is a blender
module which draws inspiration from both top-down and
bottom-up instance segmentation approaches. The proposed BlendMask can effectively predict dense per-pixel
position-sensitive instance features with very few channels,
and learn attention maps for each instance with merely one
convolution layer, thus being fast in inference. BlendMask
can be easily incorporate with the state-of-the-art one-stage
detection frameworks and outperforms Mask R-CNN under the same training schedule while being faster. A lightweight version of BlendMask achieves 36.0 mAP at 27 FPS
evaluated on a single 1080Ti. Because of its simplicity and
efficacy, we hope that our BlendMask could serve as a simple yet strong baseline for a wide range of instance-wise
prediction tasks.

1. Introduction
The top performing object detectors and segmenters often follow a two-stage paradigm. They consist of a fully
convolutional network, region proposal network (RPN), to
perform dense prediction of the most likely regions of interest (RoIs). A set of light-weight networks, a.k.a. heads,
are applied to re-align the features of RoIs and generate predictions [22]. The quality and speed for mask generation is
strongly tied to the structure of the mask heads. In addition,
∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when K. Sun was visiting
The University of Adelaide. Correspondence should be addressed to C.
Shen and Y. Huang.

Bases

,

,

,

,

,

,

Attns

Masks

Figure 1: Blending process. We illustrate an example of the learned bases
and attentions. Four bases and attention maps are shown in different colors.
The first row are the bases, and the second row are the attentions. Here ⊗
represents element-wise product and ⊕ is element-wise sum. Each basis
multiplies its attention and then is summed to get the final mask.

it is difficult for independent heads to share features with
related tasks such as semantic segmentation which causes
trouble for network architecture optimization.
Recent advances in one-stage object detection prove that
one-stage methods such as FCOS can outperform their twostage counterparts in accuracy [23]. Enabling such onestage detection frameworks to perform dense instance segmentation is highly desirable as 1) models consisting of
only conventional operations are simpler and easier for
cross-platform deployment; 2) a unified framework provides convenience and flexibility for multi-task network architecture optimization.
Dense instance segmenters can date back to DeepMask [21], a top-down approach which generates dense instance masks with a sliding window. The representation of
mask is encoded into a one-dimensional vector at each spatial location. Albeit being simple in structure, it has several
obstacles in training that prevent it from achieving superior performance: 1) local-coherence between features and
masks is lost; 2) the feature representation is redundant because a mask is repeatedly encoded at each foreground feature; 3) position information is degraded after downsampling with strided convolutions.
The first issue was studied by Dai et al. [8], who attempt
to retain local-coherence by keeping multiple positionsensitive maps. This idea has been explored to its limits by

8573

