Improved Few-Shot Visual Classification
Peyman Bateni1 , Raghav Goyal1,3 , Vaden Masrani1 , Frank Wood1,2,4 , Leonid Sigal1,3,4
1
University of British Columbia, 2 MILA, 3 Vector Institute, 4 CIFAR AI Chair
{pbateni, rgoyal14, vadmas, fwood, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Few-shot learning is a fundamental task in computer vision that carries the promise of alleviating the need for exhaustively labeled data. Most few-shot learning approaches
to date have focused on progressively more complex neural
feature extractors and classifier adaptation strategies, and
the refinement of the task definition itself. In this paper, we
explore the hypothesis that a simple class-covariance-based
distance metric, namely the Mahalanobis distance, adopted
into a state of the art few-shot learning approach (CNAPS
[30]) can, in and of itself, lead to a significant performance
improvement. We also discover that it is possible to learn
adaptive feature extractors that allow useful estimation of
the high dimensional feature covariances required by this
metric from surprisingly few samples. The result of our
work is a new “Simple CNAPS” architecture which has up
to 9.2% fewer trainable parameters than CNAPS and performs up to 6.1% better than state of the art on the standard
few-shot image classification benchmark dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep learning successes have led to major computer vision advances [11, 13, 37]. However, most methods behind
these successes have to operate in fully-supervised, high
data availability regimes. This limits the applicability of
these methods, effectively excluding domains where data
is fundamentally scarce or impossible to label en masse.
This inspired the field of few-shot learning [42, 43] which
aims to computationally mimic human reasoning and learning from limited data.
The goal of few-shot learning is to automatically adapt
models such that they work well on instances from classes
not seen at training time, given only a few labelled examples for each new class. In this paper, we focus on few-shot
image classification where the ultimate aim is to develop a
classification methodology that automatically adapts to new
classification tasks at test time, and particularly in the case
where only a very small number of labelled “support” images are available per class.

(a) Squared Euclidean Distance

(b) Squared Mahalanobis Distance

Figure 1: Class-covariance metric: Two-dimensional illustration of the embedded support image features output by
a task-adapted feature extractor (points), per-class embedding means (inset icons), explicit (left) and implied class
decision boundaries (right), and test query instance (gray
point and inset icon) for two classifiers: standard L22 -based
(left) and ours, class-covariance-based (Mahalanobis distance, right). An advantage of using a class-covariancebased metric during classification is that taking into account the distribution in feature space of each class can result in improved non-linear classifier decision boundaries.
What cannot explicitly appear in this figure, but we wish
to convey here regardless, is that the task-adaptation mechanism used to produce these embeddings is trained endto-end from the Mahalanobis-distance-based classification
loss. This means that, in effect, the task-adaptation feature
extraction mechanism learns to produce embeddings that result in informative task-adapted covariance estimates.
Few-shot learning approaches typically take one of two
forms: 1) nearest neighbor approaches and their variants,
including matching networks [40], which effectively apply nearest-neighbor or weighted nearest neighbor classification on the samples themselves, either in a feature
[15, 16, 34] or a semantic space [5]; or 2) embedding methods that effectively distill all of the examples to a single prototype per class, where a prototype may be learned [9, 30]
or implicitly derived from the samples [36] (e.g. mean embedding). The prototypes are often defined in feature or
semantic space (e.g. word2vec [44]). Most research in this
domain has focused on learning non-linear mappings, often expressed as neural nets, from images to the embed114493

