ACNe: Attentive Context Normalization
for Robust Permutation-Equivariant Learning
Weiwei Sun1 Wei Jiang1
1
University of Victoria

Eduard Trulls2 Andrea Tagliasacchi3 Kwang Moo Yi1
Google Research, Zurich 3 Google Research, Toronto

2

{weiweisun, jiangwei, kyi}@uvic.ca

Abstract
Many problems in computer vision require dealing
with sparse, unordered data in the form of point clouds.
Permutation-equivariant networks have become a popular
solution – they operate on individual data points with simple
perceptrons and extract contextual information with global
pooling. This can be achieved with a simple normalization
of the feature maps, a global operation that is unaffected
by the order. In this paper, we propose Attentive Context
Normalization (ACN), a simple yet effective technique to
build permutation-equivariant networks robust to outliers.
Specifically, we show how to normalize the feature maps
with weights that are estimated within the network, excluding outliers from this normalization. We use this mechanism to leverage two types of attention: local and global
– by combining them, our method is able to find the essential data points in high-dimensional space to solve a given
task. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that
our approach, which we call Attentive Context Networks
(ACNe), provides a significant leap in performance compared to the state-of-the-art on camera pose estimation, robust fitting, and point cloud classification under noise and
outliers. Source code: https://github.com/vcg-uvic/acne.

1. Introduction
Several problems in computer vision require processing
sparse, unordered collections of vectors P = {pn 2 RD },
commonly called clouds. Examples include pixel locations
(D=2), point clouds from depth sensors (D=3), and sparse
correspondences across a pair of images (D=4). The latter includes wide-baseline stereo, one of the fundamental
problems in computer vision. It lies at the core of Structurefrom-Motion (SfM), which, in turn, is the building block
of applications such as 3D reconstruction [1], image-based
rendering [43] and time-lapse smoothing [28].
Wide-baseline stereo has been traditionally solved by
extracting small collections of discrete keypoints [31] and

{trulls, taglia}@google.com

finding correspondences among them with robust estimators [16], a reliable approach used for well over two decades.
This has changed over the past few years, with the arrival of
deep learning and an abundance of new dense [57, 47, 60]
and sparse [55, 12, 39, 59, 27] methods. Here, we focus on
sparse methods, which have seen many recent developments
made possible by the introduction of PointNets [36, 37] –
neural networks that rely on multi-layer perceptrons and
global pooling to process unordered data in a permutationequivariant manner – something which is not feasible with
neither convolutional nor fully-connected layers.
Networks of this type – hereafter referred to as
permutation-equivariant networks – have pioneered the application of deep learning to point clouds. The original
PointNet relied on the concatenation of point-wise (contextagnostic) and global (point-agnostic) features to achieve
permutation equivariance. Yi et al. [55] proposed Context
Normalization (CN) as a simple, yet effective alternative to
global feature pooling: all it requires is a non-parametric
normalization of the feature maps to zero mean and unit
variance. Contrary to other normalization techniques utilized by neural networks [22, 2, 46, 51], whose primary
objective is to improve convergence, context normalization
is used to generate contextual information while preserving
permutation equivariance. Despite its simplicity, it proved
more effective than the PointNet approach on wide-baseline
stereo, contributing to a relative increase in pose estimation
accuracy of 50 100%; see [55, Fig. 5].
Note that CN normalizes the feature maps according to
first- (mean) and second- (variance) order moments. Interestingly, these two quantities can be expressed as the solution
of a least-squares problem:
X
µ̂ = argmin
kpn µk22
(1)
µ

σ̂ = argmin
σ

n

X

kpn

µ̂k22

2

σ 2 2

(2)

n

However, it is well known that least-squares optimization
is not robust to outliers [6, Sec. 3], a problem that also
afflicts CN. We illustrate this limitation in Fig. 1, where
111286

