AOWS: Adaptive and optimal network width search with latency constraints
Maxim Berman∗1
1

Leonid Pishchulin2

Ning Xu2

Matthew B. Blaschko1

Gérard Medioni2

Center for Processing Speech and Images, Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven
2
Amazon Go

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) approaches aim at automatically finding novel CNN architectures that fit computational constraints while maintaining a good performance
on the target platform. We introduce a novel efficient oneshot NAS approach to optimally search for channel numbers,
given latency constraints on a specific hardware. We first
show that we can use a black-box approach to estimate a realistic latency model for a specific inference platform, without
the need for low-level access to the inference computation.
Then, we design a pairwise MRF to score any channel configuration and use dynamic programming to efficiently decode
the best performing configuration, yielding an optimal solution for the network width search. Finally, we propose an
adaptive channel configuration sampling scheme to gradually specialize the training phase to the target computational
constraints. Experiments on ImageNet classification show
that our approach can find networks fitting the resource
constraints on different target platforms while improving
accuracy over the state-of-the-art efficient networks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks define the state of the art in computer
vision for a wide variety of tasks. Increasingly sophisticated
deep learning-based vision algorithms are being deployed
on various target platforms, but they must be adapted to
the platform-dependent latency/memory requirements and
different hardware profiles. This motivates the need for taskaware neural architecture search (NAS) methods [1, 35, 25].
Multiple NAS approaches have been proposed in the literature and successfully applied to image recognition [3, 23,
22, 12, 28, 36] and language modeling tasks [35]. Despite
their impressive performance, many of these approaches
are prohibitively expensive, requiring the training of thousands of architectures in order to find a best performing
model [35, 23, 36, 12, 19]. Some methods therefore try to
∗ Work done during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1: Overview of OWS applied to a 3-layer neural
network. Top: slimmable network; bottom: MRF for optimal
selection of channel numbers c1 and c2 .
dramatically reduce compute overhead by summarizing the
entire search space using a single over-parametrized neural network [22, 28]. AutoSlim [31] nests the entire search
space (varying channel numbers) in a single slimmable network architecture [33, 32], trained to operate at different
channel number configurations at test time.
In this work, we build on the concept of slimmable networks and propose a novel adaptive optimal width search
(AOWS) for efficiently searching neural network channel
configurations. We make several key contributions. First,
we introduce a simple black-box latency modeling method
that allows to estimate a realistic latency model for a specific
hardware and inference modality, without the need for lowlevel access to the inference computation. Second, we design
an optimal width search (OWS) strategy, using dynamic programming to efficiently decode the best performing channel
configuration in a pairwise Markov random field (MRF).
We empirically show that considering the entire channel
configuration search space results into better NAS solutions
compared to a greedy iterative trimming procedure [31].
Third, we propose an adaptive channel configuration sampling scheme. This approach gradually specializes the NAS
proxy to our specific target at training-time, leading to an
improved accuracy-latency trade-off in practice. Finally, we
extensively evaluate AOWS on the ImageNet classification
task for 3 target platforms and show significant accuracy
improvements over state-of-the-art efficient networks.
111217

