Learning to Have an Ear for Face Super-Resolution
Givi Meishvili Simon Jenni Paolo Favaro
University of Bern, Switzerland
{givi.meishvili, simon.jenni, paolo.favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract
We propose a novel method to use both audio and a lowresolution image to perform extreme face super-resolution
(a 16× increase of the input size). When the resolution of
the input image is very low (e.g., 8 × 8 pixels), the loss of
information is so dire that important details of the original identity have been lost and audio can aid the recovery
of a plausible high-resolution image. In fact, audio carries information about facial attributes, such as gender and
age. To combine the aural and visual modalities, we propose a method to first build the latent representations of a
face from the lone audio track and then from the lone lowresolution image. We then train a network to fuse these two
representations. We show experimentally that audio can
assist in recovering attributes such as the gender, the age
and the identity, and thus improve the correctness of the
high-resolution image reconstruction process. Our procedure does not make use of human annotation and thus can
be easily trained with existing video datasets. Moreover,
we show that our model builds a factorized representation
of images and audio as it allows one to mix low-resolution
images and audio from different videos and to generate realistic faces with semantically meaningful combinations.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution is the task of recovering details
of an image that has been captured with a limited resolution.
Typically, the resolution of the input image is increased by
a scaling factor of 4× to 8×. In the more extreme case,
where the scaling factor is 16× or above, the loss of detail
can be so considerable that important semantic information
is lost. This is the case, for example, of images of faces
at an 8 × 8 pixels resolution, where information about the
original identity of the person is no longer discernible. The
information still available in such a low-resolution image is
perhaps the viewpoint and colors of the face and the background. While it is possible to hallucinate plausible highresolution images from such limited information, useful attributes such as the identity or even just the gender or the

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 1: Audio helps image super-resolution. (a) and
(b) are the ground-truth and 16× downsampled images respectively; (c) results of the SotA super-resolution method
of Huang et al. [22]; (d) our super-resolution from only the
low-res image; (e) audio only super-resolution; (f) fusion of
both the low-res image and audio. In these cases all methods fail to restore the correct gender without audio.
age might be incorrect (see Fig. 1 (a)-(d)).
If the low-resolution image of a face is extracted from a
video, we could also have access to the audio of that person.
Despite the very different nature of aural and visual signals,
they both capture some shared attributes of a person and,
in particular, her identity. In fact, when we hear the voice
of an iconic actor we can often picture his or her face in
our mind. [32] recently showed that such capability can be
learned by a machine as well. The possibility to recover
a full identity is typically limited to a set of known people
(e.g., celebrities). Nonetheless, even when the identity of
a person is completely new, her voice indicates important
facial attributes such as gender, age, and ethnicity. If such
information is not present in the visual data (e.g., with a
low-resolution image), audio could be a benefit to image
processing and, in particular, image super-resolution (see
Fig. 1 (e)-(f)). For example, in videos where the identity of
a speaker is hidden via pixelation, as shown in Fig. 2, audio
could be used to recover a more plausible face than from the
lone low-resolution image.
Therefore, we propose to build a model for face superresolution by exploiting both a low-resolution image and its
audio. To the best of our knowledge, this has never been
explored before. A natural way to solve this task is to build
a multimodal network with two encoding networks, one for

1364

