Detection in Crowded Scenes: One Proposal, Multiple Predictions
Xuangeng Chu1* Anlin Zheng2* Xiangyu Zhang2*†
1
Peking University 2 MEGVII Technology

Jian Sun2

xg chu@pku.edu.cn, {zhenganlin, zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
We propose a simple yet effective proposal-based object
detector, aiming at detecting highly-overlapped instances in
crowded scenes. The key of our approach is to let each proposal predict a set of correlated instances rather than a single one in previous proposal-based frameworks. Equipped
with new techniques such as EMD Loss and Set NMS, our
detector can effectively handle the difficulty of detecting
highly overlapped objects. On a FPN-Res50 baseline, our
detector can obtain 4.9% AP gains on challenging CrowdHuman dataset and 1.0% MR−2 improvements on CityPersons dataset, without bells and whistles. Moreover, on less
crowed datasets like COCO, our approach can still achieve
moderate improvement, suggesting the proposed method is
robust to crowdedness.

(a) Baseline

1. Introduction
Proposal-based framework has been widely used in modern object detection systems [29, 11, 12, 20, 21, 24, 14, 4,
5, 2, 13, 28, 34, 33], both for one-stage [24, 28, 21, 10] and
two/multi-stage [29, 20, 4, 5, 13, 2] methods. The paradigm
in general has a two-step pipeline: first, generating overcomplete object proposals in handcraft (e.g. predefined anchors [28, 24, 21]) or learnable (e.g. RPNs [29, 20, 13])
manner; then, predicting a single instance corresponding to
each proposal box with a confidence score and a refined location. To remove duplicate predictions, methods such as
Non-maximum Suppression (NMS) are usually required for
post-processing.
Although proposal-based approaches have achieved
state-of-the-art performances [13, 2, 20, 21] in popular
datasets such as COCO [22] and PASCAL VOC [8], it is still
* Equal contribution. The work is done when Xuangeng Chu was an
intern in MEGVII Technology.
† Corresponding author.
This work is supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFC0831700) and Beijing Academy of
Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Human detection in crowds. (a) Results predicted by
FPN [20] baseline. The dashed boxes indicate the missed detections (suppressed by NMS mistakenly). (b) Results of our method
applied to FPN. All instances are correctly predicted. Boxes of the
same color stem from the identical proposal (best viewed in color).

very challenging for crowded detection in practice. Fig. 1
(a) shows a common failure case: the detector fails to predict instances heavily overlapped with others (indicated in
dashed box).
This kind of typical failure in crowded scenes is mainly
ascribed to two reasons. First, highly overlapped instances
(as well as their associated proposals) are likely to have very
similar features. As a result, it is difficult for a detector to
generate distinguishing prediction for each proposal respectively (illustration is show in Fig. 2 for a concrete example).
Second, since instances may heavily overlap each other, the
predictions are very likely to be mistakenly suppressed by

12214

