VQA with No Questions-Answers Training
Ben-Zion Vatashsky
Shimon Ullman
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
vatashsky@gmail.com, shimon.ullman@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Methods for teaching machines to answer visual questions have made significant progress in recent years, but
current methods still lack important human capabilities, including integrating new visual classes and concepts in a
modular manner, providing explanations for the answers
and handling new domains without explicit examples. We
propose a novel method that consists of two main parts:
generating a question graph representation, and an answering procedure, guided by the abstract structure of the question graph to invoke an extendable set of visual estimators.
Training is performed for the language part and the visual
part on their own, but unlike existing schemes, the method
does not require any training using images with associated questions and answers. This approach is able to handle novel domains (extended question types and new object
classes, properties and relations) as long as corresponding
visual estimators are available. In addition, it can provide
explanations to its answers and suggest alternatives when
questions are not grounded in the image. We demonstrate
that this approach achieves both high performance and domain extensibility without any questions-answers training.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering is inspired by the remarkable human ability to answer specific questions on images,
which may require analysis of subtle cues, along with the
integration of prior knowledge and experience. The learning of new visual classes, properties and relations, can be
easily integrated into the question-answering process. Humans can elaborate on the answers they give, explain how
they were derived, and why they failed to produce an adequate answer. Current approaches to handle VQA by a
machine [67, 62, 55, 77, 32] take a different path, where
most answering systems are trained directly to select an answer from common answers of a training set, based on fused
image features (mostly using a pre-trained CNN [25]) and
question features (mostly using an RNN).
The answering approach we take below is the first, as
far as we know, that does not rely on any explicit question-

Q: What shape is the object closest to
the red sphere?
A: cube

Q: How many other objects are the same
size as the yellow stackable object?
A: 2

Q: Are all the boats white?
A: no [full: There are not enough white boats

Q: There is a person that is of a different

(failed due to a red boat)]

gender than the young person
closest to the cup; how old is he?

A: 22-35

Figure 1. UnCoRd generalizes without QA training to novel properties and relations (top), and to real-world domain (bottom).

answering training. It uses a process composed according
to the question’s structure, and applies a sequence of ‘visual estimators’ for object detection and identifying a set of
visual properties and relations. Answering by our ’Understand, Compose and Respond’ (UnCoRd) approach is divided into two stages (illustrated in Figure 2). First, a graph
representation is generated for the question, in terms of
classes, properties and relations, supplemented with quantifiers and logical connectives. An answering procedure
then follows the question graph, and seeks either a single
or multiple assignments of the classes, properties and relations in the graph to the image (Section 3.3). The method
is modular, extensible and uses intermediate results to provide elaborated answers, including alternatives to answers
not grounded in the image, and notifying about unsupported
categories. With an ability to handle extended domains,
the UnCoRd approach demonstrates the potential to build a
general answering scheme, not coupled to a specific dataset.
Our work includes several novel contributions. First, a
method that produces state-of-the-art results on the CLEVR
dataset [30] without any questions-answers training. Second, we developed sequence-to-sequence based method, in110376

