Collaborative Distillation for Ultra-Resolution Universal Style Transfer
Huan Wang1,2∗ , Yijun Li3 , Yuehai Wang1 , Haoji Hu1† , Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1
Zhejiang University 2 Notheastern University 3 Adobe Research 4 UC Merced 5 Google Research
wang.huan@husky.neu.edu

yijli@adobe.com

{wyuehai,haoji hu}@zju.edu.cn

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Figure 1: An ultra-resolution stylized sample (10240 × 4096 pixels), rendered in about 31 seconds on a single Tesla P100
(12GB) GPU. On the upper left are the content and style. Four close-ups (539 × 248) are shown under the stylized image.

Abstract
Universal style transfer methods typically leverage rich
representations from deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) models (e.g., VGG-19) pre-trained on large collections of images. Despite the effectiveness, its application
is heavily constrained by the large model size to handle
ultra-resolution images given limited memory. In this work,
we present a new knowledge distillation method (named
Collaborative Distillation) for encoder-decoder based neural style transfer to reduce the convolutional filters. The
main idea is underpinned by a finding that the encoderdecoder pairs construct an exclusive collaborative relationship, which is regarded as a new kind of knowledge for style

transfer models. Moreover, to overcome the feature size
mismatch when applying collaborative distillation, a linear
embedding loss is introduced to drive the student network to
learn a linear embedding of the teacher’s features. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our method when
applied to different universal style transfer approaches
(WCT and AdaIN), even if the model size is reduced by
15.5 times. Especially, on WCT with the compressed models, we achieve ultra-resolution (over 40 megapixels) universal style transfer on a 12GB GPU for the first time. Further experiments on optimization-based stylization scheme
show the generality of our algorithm on different stylization
paradigms. Our code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/mingsun-tse/collaborative-distillation.

* This work is mainly done when Huan Wang was with the Department of ISEE, Zhejiang University, China. † Corresponding author.

11860

