Combating Noisy Labels by Agreement:
A Joint Training Method with Co-Regularization

1

Hongxin Wei1 Lei Feng1∗ Xiangyu Chen2 Bo An1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Open FIESTA Center, Tsinghua University, China

{owenwei,boan}@ntu.edu.sg

feng0093@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep Learning with noisy labels is a practically challenging problem in weakly supervised learning. The stateof-the-art approaches “Decoupling" and “Co-teaching+"
claim that the “disagreement" strategy is crucial for alleviating the problem of learning with noisy labels. In this
paper, we start from a different perspective and propose a
robust learning paradigm called JoCoR, which aims to reduce the diversity of two networks during training. Specifically, we first use two networks to make predictions on
the same mini-batch data and calculate a joint loss with
Co-Regularization for each training example. Then we select small-loss examples to update the parameters of both
two networks simultaneously. Trained by the joint loss,
these two networks would be more and more similar due
to the effect of Co-Regularization. Extensive experimental
results on corrupted data from benchmark datasets including MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and Clothing1M demonstrate that JoCoR is superior to many state-of-the-art approaches for learning with noisy labels.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieve remarkable success on various tasks, and most of them are trained in a supervised manner, which heavily relies on a large number of
training instances with accurate labels [14]. However, collecting large-scale datasets with fully precise annotations is
expensive and time-consuming. To alleviate this problem,
data annotation companies choose some alternating methods such as crowdsourcing [39, 43] and online queries [3] to
improve labelling efficiency. Unfortunately, these methods
usually suffer from unavoidable noisy labels, which have
been proven to lead to noticeable decrease in performance
of DNNs [1, 44].
As this problem has severely limited the expansion of
neural network applications, a large number of algorithms
∗ Corresponding author.

chenxian18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

have been developed for learning with noisy labels, which
belongs to the family of weakly supervised learning frameworks [2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11]. Some of them focus on improving the methods to estimate the latent noisy transition matrix [21, 24, 32]. However, it is challenging to estimate the
noise transition matrix accurately. An alternative approach
is training on selected or weighted samples, e.g., Mentornet [16], gradient-based reweight [30] and Co-teaching
[12]. Furthermore, the state-of-the-art methods including
Co-teaching+ [41] and Decoupling [23] have shown excellent performance in learning with noisy labels by introducing the “Disagreement" strategy, where “when to update"
depends on a disagreement between two different networks.
However, there are only a part of training examples that can
be selected by the “Disagreement" strategy, and these examples cannot be guaranteed to have ground-truth labels [12].
Therefore, there arises a question to be answered: Is “Disagreement" necessary for training two networks to deal with
noisy labels?
Motivated by Co-training for multi-view learning and
semi-supervised learning that aims to maximize the agreement on multiple distinct views [4, 19, 34, 45], a straightforward method for handling noisy labels is to apply the
regularization from peer networks when training each single network. However, although the regularization may improve the generalization ability of networks by encouraging agreement between them, it still suffers from memorization effects on noisy labels [44]. To address this problem,
we propose a novel approach named JoCoR (Joint Training with Co-Regularization). Specifically, we train two networks with a joint loss, including the conventional supervised loss and the Co-Regularization loss. Furthermore, we
use the joint loss to select small-loss examples, thereby ensuring the error flow from the biased selection would not be
accumulated in a single network.
To show that JoCoR significantly improves the robustness of deep learning on noisy labels, we conduct extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world noisy
datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and

13726

