Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Xiaoyu Tao1 , Xiaopeng Hong1,3∗, Xinyuan Chang2 , Songlin Dong1 , Xing Wei2 , Yihong Gong2
1
Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
txy666793@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, hongxiaopeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, cxy19960919@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
dsl972731417@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, xingxjtu@gmail.com, ygong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The ability to incrementally learn new classes is crucial
to the development of real-world artificial intelligence systems. In this paper, we focus on a challenging but practical few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) problem.
FSCIL requires CNN models to incrementally learn new
classes from very few labelled samples, without forgetting
the previously learned ones. To address this problem, we
represent the knowledge using a neural gas (NG) network,
which can learn and preserve the topology of the feature
manifold formed by different classes. On this basis, we
propose the TOpology-Preserving knowledge InCrementer
(TOPIC) framework. TOPIC mitigates the forgetting of
the old classes by stabilizing NG’s topology and improves
the representation learning for few-shot new classes by
growing and adapting NG to new training samples. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method significantly outperforms other state-of-theart class-incremental learning methods on CIFAR100, miniImageNet, and CUB200 datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied to a broad range of computer vision tasks
[17, 11, 34, 4, 22, 25, 45, 19]. For practical use, we train
CNN models on large scale image datasets [5] and then deploy them on smart agents. As the smart agents are often exposed in a new and dynamic environment, there is an urgent
need to continuously adapt the models to recognize new
classes emerging. For example, the smart album function
on smartphones is designed to automatically classify user
photos into both the pre-defined and user-defined classes.
The model underpinning the smart album is pre-trained on
the training set of the pre-defined classes, and is required to
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparisons of two ways to characterize a heterogenous manifold. (a) Randomly sampled representatives, which are
adopted by conventional CIL studies for knowledge distillation.
(b) The representatives learned by neural gas, which well preserves the topology of the manifold.

adapt to the new user-defined classes by learning from new
photos. From the users’ perspective, they are only willing
to annotate very few image examples for the new class, as
the labeling process consumes manpower. Therefore, it is
crucial for CNNs to be capable of incrementally learning
new classes from very few training examples. We term this
ability as few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL).
A naı̈ve approach for FSCIL is to finetune the base model
on the new class training set. However, a simple finetuning
with limited number of training samples would cause two
severe problems: one is “forgetting old”, where the model’s
performance deteriorates drastically on old classes due to
catastrophic forgetting [7]; the other is “overfitting new”,
where the model is prone to overfit to new classes, which
loses generalization ability on large set of test samples.
Recently, there have been many research efforts attempting to solve the catastrophic forgetting problem [15, 49, 20,
24, 18, 32, 2, 13, 41, 37, 1]. They usually conduct incremental learning under the multi-task or the multi-class scenarios. The former incrementally learns a sequence of disjoint
tasks, which requires the task identity in advance. This is
seldom satisfied in real applications where the task identity
is typically unavailable. The latter learns a unified classifier
to recognize all the encountered classes within a single task.

12183

