Nested Scale-Editing for Conditional Image Synthesis
Lingzhi Zhang∗
Jiancong Wang∗
Yinshuang Xu
Tarmily Wen
James C. Gee
Jianbo Shi

Jie Min

University of Pennsylvania

Figure 1: Our approach enables scale-specific visual editings in conditional image synthesis. We can choose to surgically
manipulate coarse-level structural information or fine-level details in Cat2Dog translation and image outpainting tasks.
Abstract
We propose an image synthesis approach that provides
stratified navigation in the latent code space. With
a tiny amount of partial or very low-resolution image, our approach can consistently out-perform stateof-the-art counterparts in terms of generating the closest sampled image to the ground truth. We achieve
this through scale-independent editing while expanding scale-specific diversity. Scale-independence is
achieved with a nested scale disentanglement loss.
Scale-specific diversity is created by incorporating a
progressive diversification constraint. We introduce semantic persistency across the scales by sharing common latent codes. Together they provide better control
of the image synthesis process. We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed approach through various
tasks, including image outpainting, image superresolution, and cross-domain image translation.

1. Introduction
Imagine that we want to identify a person based on the appearance of their eyes and nose, or a lower resolution image,
as shown in figure 1. One solution may be to outpaint the
entire face, conditioned on the partial information available.
∗ equal contribution.

We want to be as imaginative and as detailed as possible to
give us a greater chance of success in finding the right person. These tasks are multimodal in nature, i.e., a single
input corresponds to many plausible outputs.
Conditional image synthesis approaches aim to solve this
problem by sampling stochastic latent codes to generate
images in a GAN setting. However, these image synthesis methods of sampling operate as uncontrollable “black
boxes”. During inference, we can only hope that a sampled random variable generates the ideal image we desire;
otherwise, we need to keep sampling.
We propose a steerable conditional image synthesis approach. Inspired by the steerable filtering in the wavelet
process [48], we wish to ‘steer’ the image synthesis across
the spatial scales consistently. While in steerable filtering we are concerned with angular edge orientation, in our
domain, we focus on object semantics. Specifically, we
aim to create visual information from a coarse-level structure to fine-level texture. The key objectives are 1) scaleindependence: we learn disentangled representations that
model scale-specific visual details, and 2) diversity/mode
covering: we ensure that the decoder covers diverse variations presented on ground truth images.
To implement the scale-independent objective, we take
inspiration from the Laplacian image pyramid decomposi4321
5477

