Towards Verifying Robustness of Neural Networks Against
A Family of Semantic Perturbations
Jeet Mohapatra1 , Tsui-Wei Weng1 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Sijia Liu2 and Luca Daniel1
1

MIT EECS, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research

Abstract
Verifying robustness of neural networks given a specified
threat model is a fundamental yet challenging task. While
current verification methods mainly focus on the ℓp -norm
threat model of the input instances, robustness verification
against semantic adversarial attacks inducing large ℓp -norm
perturbations, such as color shifting and lighting adjustment,
are beyond their capacity. To bridge this gap, we propose
Semantify-NN, a model-agnostic and generic robustness verification approach against semantic perturbations for neural
networks. By simply inserting our proposed semantic perturbation layers (SP-layers) to the input layer of any given
model, Semantify-NN is model-agnostic, and any ℓp -norm
based verification tools can be used to verify the model robustness against semantic perturbations. We illustrate the
principles of designing the SP-layers and provide examples
including semantic perturbations to image classification in
the space of hue, saturation, lightness, brightness, contrast
and rotation, respectively. In addition, an efficient refinement
technique is proposed to further significantly improve the
semantic certificate. Experiments on various network architectures and different datasets demonstrate the superior verification performance of Semantify-NN over ℓp -norm-based
verification frameworks that naively convert semantic perturbation to ℓp -norm. The results show that Semantify-NN
can support robustness verification against a wide range of
semantic perturbations.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks (DNNs) become prevalent in
machine learning and achieve the best performance in many
standard benchmarks, their unexpected vulnerability to adversarial examples has spawned a wide spectrum of research
disciplines in adversarial robustness, spanning from effective and efficient methods to find adversarial examples for
causing model misbehavior (i.e., attacks), to detect adversar-

ial inputs and become attack-resistant (i.e., defenses), and
to formally evaluate and quantify the level of vulnerability of well-trained models (i.e., robustness verification [10],
certification [20], or evaluation [21]).
Given a data sample x and a trained DNN, the primary
goal of verification tools is to provide a “robustness certificate” for verifying its properties in a specified threat model.
For image classification tasks, the commonly used threat
model is an ℓp -norm bounded perturbation to x, where p
usually takes the value p ∈ {1, 2, ∞}, approximating the
similarity measure of visual perception between x and its perturbed version. The robustness property to be verified is the
consistent decision making of the DNN of any sample drawn
from an ℓp -norm ball centered at x with radius ǫ. In other
words, verification methods aim to verify whether the DNN
can give the same top-1 class prediction to all samples in the
ǫ-ball centered at x. Note that verification is attack-agnostic
as it does not incur any attack methods for verification. Moreover, if the ǫ-ball robustness certificate for x is verified, it
assures no adversarial attacks using the same threat model
can alter the top-1 prediction of the DNN for x. Although
finding the maximal verifiable ǫ value (i.e. the minimum
distortion) is computationally intractable for DNNs [10], recent verification methods have developed efficient means
for computing an lower bound on minimum distortion as a
verifiable ǫ-ball certificate [11, 22, 20, 4, 23, 16, 19, 15, 3].
Beyond the ℓp -norm bounded threat model, recent works
have shown the possibility of generating semantic adversarial examples based on semantic perturbation techniques
such as color shifting, lighting adjustment and rotation
[8, 13, 2, 9, 6, 5]. We refer the readers to Figure 1 for the illustration of some semantic perturbations for images. Notably,
although semantically similar, these semantic adversarial
attacks essentially consider different threat models than ℓp norm bounded attacks in the RGB space. Therefore, semantic
adversarial examples usually incur large ℓp -norm perturbations to the original data sample and thus exceed the verification capacity of ℓp -norm based verification methods. To
bridge this gap and with an endeavor to render robustness ver1244

