Orderless Recurrent Models for Multi-label Classification
Vacit Oguz Yazici1,2 , Abel Gonzalez-Garcia1 , Arnau Ramisa2,3 ,
Bartlomiej Twardowski1 , Joost van de Weijer1
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
2
Wide-Eyes Technologies, Barcelona, Spain 3 Universitat de Vic, Barcelona, Spain
{voyazici,agonzalez,bartlomiej.twardowski,joost}@cvc.uab.es, arnau.ramisa@uvic.cat

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are popular for many
computer vision tasks, including multi-label classification.
Since RNNs produce sequential outputs, labels need to be
ordered for the multi-label classification task. Current approaches sort labels according to their frequency, typically
ordering them in either rare-first or frequent-first. These
imposed orderings do not take into account that the natural order to generate the labels can change for each image,
e.g. first the dominant object before summing up the smaller
objects in the image. Therefore, we propose ways to dynamically order the ground truth labels with the predicted label
sequence. This allows for faster training of more optimal
LSTM models. Analysis evidences that our method does not
suffer from duplicate generation, something which is common for other models. Furthermore, it outperforms other
CNN-RNN models, and we show that a standard architecture of an image encoder and language decoder trained
with our proposed loss obtains the state-of-the-art results
on the challenging MS-COCO, WIDER Attribute and PA100K and competitive results on NUS-WIDE.

1. Introduction
RNNs have demonstrated good performance in many
tasks that require processing variable length sequential data.
One of the most popular types of RNN is the Long-Short
Term Memory networks (LSTM) [17]. LSTMs improve
over earlier RNNs, especially addressing the vanishing gradient problem, and have advanced the state of the art in machine translation [44] and speech recognition [13], among
other tasks. They have also been combined with deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and used for computer
vision tasks, such as image captioning [46], and video representations [43]. Furthermore, LSTMs have been shown to
be useful for traditionally non-sequential tasks, like multilabel classification [3, 21, 32, 48].
Multi-label classification is the task of assigning a wide

Rare: dog
Freq: dog, frisbee
PLA: dog, frisbee

Rare: bus, car, person
Freq: car, bus
PLA: bus, car, person

Figure 1: Estimated labels for various approaches. In the Rare
(rare-first) approach bigger and more frequent classes might cause
other classes to be ignored (frisbee in the left figure), meanwhile in
the Freq (frequent-first) approach smaller frequent classes are ignored (person in the right figure). Our approach PLA circumvents
these problems and correctly assigns the labels to both images.

range of visual concepts to images. These concepts could
include object classes or actions, but also attributes such
as colors, textures, materials, or even more abstract notions
like mood. The large variety of concepts makes this a very
challenging task and, to successfully address it, methods
should learn the dependencies between the many concepts:
boats are not common in office spaces, and penguins are seldom seen in deserts. Another problem of multi-label classification is the fact that similarities between classes may
make the model uncertain about a particular object (e.g. it
could be either a bicycle or a motorcycle) while being sure
that both are not simultaneously present in the image. Consequently, it should choose one of the labels and not both,
but traditional approaches like Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE)
do not discount evidence already used in support of another
label, and would predict both. In practice, these dependencies between the labels turn the task of multi-label classification into a structured labelling problem [32].
Image captioning, where the task is to generate a natural
113440

