Gold Seeker: Information Gain from Policy Distributions
for Goal-oriented Vision-and-Langauge Reasoning
Ehsan Abbasnejad1 , Iman Abbasnejad2 , Qi Wu1 , Javen Shi1 , Anton van den Hengel1
1

{ehsan.abbasnejad,qi.wu01,javen.shi,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au
2

1

i.abbasnejad@fugro.com

Australian Institute for Machine Learning & The University of Adelaide, Australia,
2
Fugro Australia Marine

Abstract
Dialog
history

Proposed RL
Dialog
history

Query 1
Query 2
Policy Distribution

Selected
Query

The majority of problems that computer vision might be
applied to greatly benefit from agents capable of actively
seeking the information they need. This might be because
the information required is not available at training time,
or because it is too broad to be embodied in the code or
weights of an algorithm. The ability to seek the information required to complete a task enables a degree of flexibility and robustness that cannot be achieved through other
means.
Some of the applications that lie at the intersection of
vision and language have this property, including visual dialog [12, 11], visual question answering [13, 23, 40], and

Query 1

Selected
Query

1. Introduction

Policy

…

As Computer Vision moves from passive analysis of pixels to active analysis of semantics, the breadth of information algorithms need to reason over has expanded significantly. One of the key challenges in this vein is the ability to identify the information required to make a decision, and select an action that will recover it. We propose
a reinforcement-learning approach that maintains a distribution over its internal information, thus explicitly representing the ambiguity in what it knows, and needs to know,
towards achieving its goal. Potential actions are then generated according to this distribution. For each potential action a distribution of the expected outcomes is calculated,
and the value of the potential information gain assessed.
The action taken is that which maximizes the potential information gain. We demonstrate this approach applied to
two vision-and-language problems that have attracted significant recent interest, visual dialog and visual query generation. In both cases the method actively selects actions
that will best reduce its internal uncertainty, and outperforms its competitors in achieving the goal of the challenge.

Conventional RL

Figure 1: The role of the SEEKER in many conventional RL-based
agents is to select an action based on the current (single) policy. In goal-oriented visual dialogue this means selecting the next
query based on the image and the dialogue thus far. Our proposed
SEEKER instead exploits a distribution of policies to generate multiple query hypotheses. The one that maximises the potential information gain is then selected. In this sense the agent is able to
identify gaps in the information it holds and ask questions that will
fill them.
vision-and-language navigation[6]. These problems require
an agent (model) to acquire information on the fly to help to
make decisions, because the space of all possible questions
(or dialogues) encompasses more information than can be
encoded in a training set. Additionally, a range of tasks have
been proposed recently that use ‘language generation’ as a
mechanism to gather information towards achieving a (nonlanguage based) goal[47, 23, 24]. These tasks offer a particular challenge because the set of all information that might
possibly be involved is inevitably very broad, which makes
concrete representations difficult to employ practically.
In a visual dialog, and particularly goal-oriented visual
question generation, an agent needs to understand the user
request and complete a task by asking a limited number of
questions. Similarly, compositional VQA (e.g. [21]) is a visual query generation problem that requires a model first
to convert a natural language question to a sequence of actions (a ‘program’) and then obtain the answer by running
113450

