A Lighting-Invariant Point Processor for Shading
Kathryn Heal

Jialiang Wang
Steven J. Gortler
Harvard University

Todd Zickler

{kathrynheal@g, jialiangwang@g, sjg@cs, zickler@seas}.harvard.edu

Abstract
Under the conventional diffuse shading model with unknown directional lighting, the set of quadratic surface
shapes that are consistent with the spatial derivatives of
intensity at a single image point is a two-dimensional algebraic variety embedded in the five-dimensional space of
quadratic shapes. We describe the geometry of this variety,
and we introduce a concise feedforward model that computes
an explicit, differentiable approximation of the variety from
the intensity and its derivatives at any single image point.
The result is a parallelizable processor that operates at each
image point and produces a lighting-invariant descriptor of
the continuous set of compatible surface shapes at the point.
We describe two applications of this processor: two-shot uncalibrated photometric stereo and quadratic-surface shape
from shading.

1. Introduction
The shading variations in an image I(x, y) of a diffuse,
curved surface—say, a surface with height function f (x, y)—
induce a perception of the surface shape. Mimicking this
perceptual capability in machines is referred to as recovering
“shape from shading.”
There exist established techniques for recovering shape
from shading in special cases where the strengths and locations of the light sources around the surface are known a
priori, or are somehow accurately inferred. These techniques
can be understood as using a connected two-dimensional array of image “point processors”, where each point processor
reads the intensity I at a single image point and, based on
the known or estimated lighting conditions, calculates an intermediate numerical representation of the set of compatible
local shapes at that point, comprising a set of (or probability density over) local surface orientations {(fx , fy )} at the
point. Each of the intermediate per-point orientation sets is
ambiguous on its own, but when the array of point processors is connected together—by enforcing surface continuity
and by including supplementary visual cues like occluding
contours or top-down semantics—one can begin to recover

7→

y
x

x

y

Figure 1.
The set of local second order surface shapes
{(fx , fy ,fxx ,fxy , fyy )} that are consistent with the derivatives
I = (I, Ix , Iy , Ixx , Ixy , Iyy ) at one image point (black circle, left)
satisfy three polynomial equations. The zero locus (i.e., variety) is
two-dimensional and is visualized here projected to three dimensions (fxx , fxy , fyy ). Each element of the variety is a local shape
(four are called out) that produces the image derivatives under some
light direction. We show that for any non-degenerate I the twodimensional variety has four isomorphic components (colored in
this example) and can be efficiently approximated by a coupled
pair of shallow neural networks.

shapes f (x, y).
This has been the dominant paradigm for shape from
shading for nearly fifty years [10], but it is far from satisfactory. Despite a half-century of research, it remains sensitive
to non-idealities and is rarely deployed without substantial
aid from a human annotator who first indicates occluding
contours in an image or provides a segmentation of a relevant
diffuse surface region. One reason for this fragility is that
lighting is typically non-uniform across surfaces, due to selfshadowing and other physical effects. This makes it hard to
infer the lighting conditions for each image point, which in
turn distorts the per-point orientation sets {(fx , fy )} upon
which reconstruction is based. Moreover, even when lighting is uniform across a surface, the veridical location and
strength of a scene’s dominant light source can be impossible to infer from an image due to inherent mathematical
ambiguities [3]. In comparison, monocular human vision
1 94

