Use the Force, Luke!
Learning to Predict Physical Forces by Simulating Effects
Kiana Ehsani∗2 , Shubham Tulsiani1 , Saurabh Gupta3 , Ali Farhadi2 , Abhinav Gupta1,4
1
FAIR, 2 University of Washington, 3 UIUC, 4 Carnegie Mellon University
https://ehsanik.github.io/forcecvpr2020

Gravity

Gravity
Gravity
Physics Simulation

Input
Videos

Output
Contact points + Forces

Applying
Forces

Simulated
Result

Figure 1: We study the problem of physical understanding of human-object interactions by inferring object motion, points of contacts and
forces from RGB videos. We use physics simulation to see how these interactions change the dynamics of the object and try to imitate the
motion observed in the video.

Abstract
When we humans look at a video of human-object interaction, we can not only infer what is happening but we can
even extract actionable information and imitate those interactions. On the other hand, current recognition or geometric approaches lack the physicality of action representation.
In this paper, we take a step towards more physical understanding of actions. We address the problem of inferring
contact points and the physical forces from videos of humans interacting with objects. One of the main challenges
in tackling this problem is obtaining ground-truth labels for
forces. We sidestep this problem by instead using a physics
simulator for supervision. Specifically, we use a simulator
to predict effects, and enforce that estimated forces must
lead to same effect as depicted in the video. Our quantitative and qualitative results show that (a) we can predict
meaningful forces from videos whose effects lead to accurate imitation of the motions observed, (b) by jointly optimizing for contact point and force prediction, we can improve the performance on both tasks in comparison to independent training, and (c) we can learn a representation
from this model that generalizes to novel objects using few
shot examples.

∗ Work done during an internship at FAIR.

1. Introduction
What does it mean to understand a video of human-object
interaction such as the one shown in Figure 1? One popular
answer would be to recognize the nouns (objects) and verbs
(actions) – e.g., in this case lifting a pot. But such an understanding is quite limited in nature. For example, simply
recognizing ‘lifting’ does not tell one anything about how
the pot was grasped, or how high it was lifted. To address
these shortcomings, there has been a recent push towards a
deeper geometric understanding of videos. From estimating
contact points on the object [2] to estimating human and object poses [21], these approaches tend to estimate the visible
geometric structure. While the high-level semantic labeling (’lifting’) or the geometric inferences (human and object
pose estimation), both provide an answer to what happened
in the video, it lacks the true physical substance for actionable understanding. For example, just knowing how the pot
is moved is not sufficient for the robot to imitate – it needs
to also understand how the act was accomplished.
In order to obtain a more actionable understanding, we argue that one must account for the physical nature of the task.
The answer then, to the question of how the act was done, is
rather straightforward from a physical perspective – the object was in contact with the human hand on two sides, and
a combination of inward and upward forces applied at these
contact points allowed it to be lifted up against gravity. This

224

