D3S – A Discriminative Single Shot Segmentation Tracker
Alan Lukežič1 , Jiřı́ Matas2 , Matej Kristan1
1
2

Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
alan.lukezic@fri.uni-lj.si
Input image

Abstract
Template-based discriminative trackers are currently the
dominant tracking paradigm due to their robustness, but are
restricted to bounding box tracking and a limited range of
transformation models, which reduces their localization accuracy. We propose a discriminative single-shot segmentation tracker – D3S, which narrows the gap between visual
object tracking and video object segmentation. A singleshot network applies two target models with complementary geometric properties, one invariant to a broad range
of transformations, including non-rigid deformations, the
other assuming a rigid object to simultaneously achieve
high robustness and online target segmentation. Without
per-dataset finetuning and trained only for segmentation
as the primary output, D3S outperforms all trackers on
VOT2016, VOT2018 and GOT-10k benchmarks and performs close to the state-of-the-art trackers on the TrackingNet. D3S outperforms the leading segmentation tracker
SiamMask on video object segmentation benchmarks and
performs on par with top video object segmentation algorithms, while running an order of magnitude faster, close to
real-time.

GEM

GIM

Output

1. Introduction

Figure 1. The D3S tracker represents the target by two models with complementary geometric properties, one invariant to a
broad range of transformations, including non-rigid deformations
(GIM - geometrically invariant model), the other assuming a rigid
object with motion well approximated by an euclidean transformation (GEM - geometrically constrained Euclidean model). The
D3S, exploiting the complementary strengths of GIM and GEM,
provides both state-of-the-art localisation and accurate segmentation, even in the presence of substantial deformation.

Visual object tracking is one of core computer vision
problems. The most common formulation considers the
task of reporting target location in each frame of the video
given a single training image. Currently, the dominant
tracking paradigm, performing best in evaluations [22, 24],
is correlation bounding box tracking [11, 3, 33, 2, 54, 28]
where the target represented by a multi-channel rectangular
template is localized by cross-correlation between the template and a search region.
State-of-the-art template-based trackers apply an efficient brute-force search for target localization. Such strategy is appropriate for low-dimensional transformations like
translation and scale change, but becomes inefficient for
more general situations e.g. such that induce an aspect ratio change and rotation. As a compromise, modern trackers combine approximate exhaustive search with sampling

and/or bounding box refinement/regression networks [10,
27] for aspect ratio estimation. However, these approaches
are restricted to axis-aligned rectangles.
Estimation of high-dimensional template-based transformation is unreliable when a bounding box is a poor approximation of the target [31]. This is common – consider e.g.
elongated, rotating, deformable objects, or a person with
spread out hands. In these cases, the most accurate and
well-defined target location model is a binary per-pixel segmentation mask. If such output is required, tracking becomes the video object segmentation task recently popularized by DAVIS [38, 40] and YoutubeVOS [51] challenges.
Unlike in tracking, video object segmentation challenges
typically consider large targets observed for less than 100

7133

