Active 3D Motion Visualization Based on Spatiotemporal Light-Ray Integration
Fumihiko Sakaue
Jun Sato
Nagoya Institute of Technology
Gokiso Showa Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan
{sakaue, junsato}@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a method of visualizing 3D
motion with zero latency. This method achieves motion visualization by projecting special high-frequency light patterns on moving objects without using any feedback mechanisms. For this objective, we focus on the time integration of light rays in the sensing system of observers. It
is known that the visual system of human observers integrates light rays in a certain period. Similarly, the image
sensor in a camera integrates light rays during the exposure time. Thus, our method embeds multiple images into a
time-varying light field, such that the observer of the timevarying light field observes completely different images according to the dynamic motion of the scene. Based on this
concept, we propose a method of generating special highfrequency patterns of projector lights. After projection onto
target objects with projectors, the image observed on the
target changes automatically depending on the motion of
the objects and without any scene sensing and data analysis. In other words, we achieve motion visualization without
the time delay incurred during sensing and computing.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, 3D motion estimation has a long history, and many efficient methods have been proposed under
various conditions [17, 4, 13, 14, 6]. Standard methods first
extract point correspondences and optic flows in sequential
images [7, 2, 10, 3]. The extracted point correspondences
and optic flows are then used to compute 3D motion and
the structures of the scene [17, 4, 14]. Active sensors, such
as 3D range sensors, are also used to measure the 3D distance, which is then used to compute 3D motion [15]. The
direct motion estimation method is also proposed based on
the Doppler shift of the reflected light on the moving object [6].
Although 3D motion estimation methods have become
very advanced in recent years, all existing methods have an
essential and unavoidable problem caused by their system

structure: an inevitable time delay in measurements from
real dynamic scenes. Indeed, the estimated 3D motions are
not the current motions, but rather the past motions in the
scene.
In all existing methods, 3D motion is estimated in two
steps: image data or 3D data is first obtained using cameras
or 3D sensors; and 3D motion is then computed from the
observed data based on changes in the observations during
a specific time interval. As a result, these existing methods require a certain amount of time to estimate 3D motion, because they need to obtain at least two observations
by sensors at different instants in time before computing the
motion based on these multiple observations. Furthermore,
estimating 3D motion becomes unstable with a shorter sampling interval of observations. This is because 3D motion is
computed from the change in observations, and the signalto-noise ratio of the change in observation degrades drastically in small intervals of observations. Hence, we cannot
shorten this interval for stable motion estimations. Observation and computational costs are consequently never zero,
even when expensive sensors and powerful computers are
used.
Observation and computation delays are severe problems
in real-time computer vision applications, such as driver assistance systems for vehicles [16]. In these real-time systems, delayed motion estimations impose a delay on the
driver’s decisions and actions, risking serious accidents in
traffic environments.
In this paper, we propose a novel method of visualizing the dynamic information in a scene, by projecting images with projectors without using any sensors. With the
proposed method, the appearance of target objects changes
drastically according to their dynamic motion, as shown in
Fig. 1. Furthermore, the proposed method can visualize
motion information using complex images—for example,
when an angry face appears on a forward-moving surface,
whereas a smiling face appears on a backward-moving surface. All the processes can be done merely by projecting
lights from projectors. As a result, the proposed method can
achieve 3D motion estimation and visualization exclusively
4321
1980

