DUNIT: Detection-based Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Deblina Bhattacharjee, Seungryong Kim, Guillaume Vizier, Mathieu Salzmann
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
{deblina.bhattacharjee, seungryong.kim, guillaume.vizier, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Image-to-image translation has made great strides in
recent years, with current techniques being able to handle unpaired training images and to account for the multimodality of the translation problem. Despite this, most
methods treat the image as a whole, which makes the results they produce for content-rich scenes less realistic. In
this paper, we introduce a Detection-based Unsupervised
Image-to-image Translation (DUNIT) approach that explicitly accounts for the object instances in the translation process. To this end, we extract separate representations for
the global image and for the instances, which we then fuse
into a common representation from which we generate the
translated image. This allows us to preserve the detailed
content of object instances, while still modeling the fact that
we aim to produce an image of a single consistent scene. We
introduce an instance consistency loss to maintain the coherence between the detections. Furthermore, by incorporating a detector into our architecture, we can still exploit
object instances at test time. As evidenced by our experiments, this allows us to outperform the state-of-the-art unsupervised image-to-image translation methods. Furthermore, our approach can also be used as an unsupervised
domain adaptation strategy for object detection, and it also
achieves state-of-the-art performance on this task.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation (I2I) has recently gained significant traction, to the point of being deployed in diverse
applications, such as super-resolution [20], photo-realistic
image synthesis [37, 29], colorization [19, 41] and domain
adaptation [2]. This trend was initiated by the pioneering Pix2Pix work [15] that used conditional generative adversarial networks (GANs) [27] on paired training images.
Since then, great progress has been made in this field, first
by removing the requirement for the training images to be
paired, leading to cycleGAN [45] and UNIT [25], and then
by accounting for the inherent multimodality of the I2I task,
both with paired [44] and unpaired [12, 22] images.

Bilinear
Sampling
Global Style

Input Style Image
Global Content
Generator
Instance1 Content
Instance2 Content
Instance3 Content

Input Content Image

Merged Feature Map

Translated Image

Figure 1: Overview of DUNIT. (Top) We combine the style of
one domain with the image-level and instance-level content of the
other. Instance-level and image-level features are extracted separately and fused to generate a single consistent image. (Bottom) By accounting for the instances, our method produces more
realistic results than image-level translation techniques such as
UNIT [25] and DRIT [22].

While these methods have demonstrated promising results, they all consider the I2I task as a global translation
problem over the whole image. Consequently, they remain limited in their ability to translate content-rich images
with many disparate object instances. INIT [34] and InstaGAN [28] address this issue by treating the object instances
and the global image/background separately. While InstaGAN aims to preserve the background style when translating the instances, INIT targets the same goal as us, and as
the previous methods, of translating the entire image. To
achieve this, INIT independently translates the global image and the instances, using separate reconstruction losses
on these different elements. At test time, INIT then uses the
global image translation module only, thus discarding the
instance-level information. Further, INIT has not used the
instance-boosted feature representation which is shown by
14787

