ARCH: Animatable Reconstruction of Clothed Humans

1

Zeng Huang1,2∗, Yuanlu Xu1 , Christoph Lassner1 , Hao Li2 , Tony Tung1
2
Facebook Reality Labs, Sausalito, USA
University of Southern California, USA

zenghuan@usc.edu, merayxu@gmail.com, classner@fb.com, hao@hao-li.com, tony.tung@fb.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose ARCH (Animatable Reconstruction of Clothed Humans), a novel end-to-end framework for accurate reconstruction of animation-ready 3D
clothed humans from a monocular image. Existing approaches to digitize 3D humans struggle to handle pose
variations and recover details. Also, they do not produce
models that are animation ready. In contrast, ARCH is a
learned pose-aware model that produces detailed 3D rigged
full-body human avatars from a single unconstrained RGB
image. A Semantic Space and a Semantic Deformation
Field are created using a parametric 3D body estimator.
They allow the transformation of 2D/3D clothed humans
into a canonical space, reducing ambiguities in geometry
caused by pose variations and occlusions in training data.
Detailed surface geometry and appearance are learned using an implicit function representation with spatial local
features. Furthermore, we propose additional per-pixel supervision on the 3D reconstruction using opacity-aware differentiable rendering. Our experiments indicate that ARCH
increases the fidelity of the reconstructed humans. We obtain more than 50% lower reconstruction errors for standard metrics compared to state-of-the-art methods on public datasets. We also show numerous qualitative examples
of animated, high-quality reconstructed avatars unseen in
the literature so far.

1. Introduction
3D human reconstruction has been explored for several
decades in the field of computer vision and computer graphics. Accurate methods based on stereo or fusion have been
proposed using various types of sensors [12, 42, 31, 33,
38, 49, 50], and several applications have become popular in sports, medicine and entertainment (e.g., movies,
games, AR/VR experiences). However, these setups require tightly controlled environments. To date, full 3D human reconstruction with detailed geometry and appearance
from in-the-wild pictures is still challenging (i.e., taken in
natural conditions as opposed to laboratory environments).
∗ Work performed at Facebook Reality Labs.

Input

Canonical
Reconstruction

Reconstructed
3D Avatar

Reposed

Figure 1. Given an image of a subject in arbitrary pose (left),
ARCH creates an accurate and animatable avatar with detailed
clothing (center). As rigging and albedo are estimated, the avatar
can be reposed and relit in new environments (right).

Moreover, the lack of automatic rigging prevents animationbased applications.
Recent computer vision models have enabled the recovery of 2D and 3D human pose and shape estimation from
a single image. However, they usually rely on representations that have limitations: (1) skeletons [11] are kinematic structures that are accurate to represent 3D poses,
but do not carry body shape information. (2) surface
meshes [18, 35, 51] can represent body shape geometry,
but have topology constraints; (3) voxels [44] are topologyfree, but memory costly with limited resolution, and need
to be rigged for animation. In this paper, we propose the
ARCH (Animatable Reconstruction of Clothed Humans)
framework that possesses all benefits of current representations. In particular, we introduce a learned model that
has human body structure knowledge (i.e., body part semantics), and is trained with humans in arbitrary poses.
First, 3D body pose and shape estimation can be inferred from a single image of a human in arbitrary pose
by a prediction model [51]. This initialization step is used
for normalized-pose reconstruction of clothed human shape
within a canonical space. This allows us to define a Semantic Space (SemS) and a Semantic Deformation Field
(SemDF) by densely sampling 3D points around the clothed
13093

