Learning Interactions and Relationships between Movie Characters
Anna Kukleva1,2
Makarand Tapaswi1
Ivan Laptev1
1
Inria Paris, France 2 Max-Planck-Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
akukleva@mpi-inf.mpg.de, {makarand.tapaswi,ivan.laptev}@inria.fr

Juno suggests to Mark

Juno confesses to Paulie

Vijay runs with Paulie

- Let's talk about how we're gonna do
this thing.

- Hey, man.

- And also, um...

- Hey, Vijay. How's it going?

- Mark and Vanessa are willing
to negotiate an open adoption.

- Did you hear? Juno MacGuff's pregnant.
- Yeah.

- I think I'm in love with you.
- You mean, as friends?

Mac consoles Juno

- Someday, you'll be back here, honey…
on your terms.

- No. I mean, for real.

(Juno, Mark)

Juno and Mark are strangers

(Vijay, Paulie)

Vijay and Paulie are classmates

(Juno, Paulie)

Juno and Paulie are lovers

(Mac, Juno)

Mac is Juno’s father

Figure 1: The goal of this work is to jointly predict interactions and relationships between all characters in movies. Some interactions are
based on dialog (e.g. suggests, confesses), some are primarily visual (e.g. runs with), and others are based on a fusion of both modalities
(e.g. consoles). The colored rows at the bottom highlight when a pair of characters appear in the movie timeline. Their (directed) relationships
are presented at the right. Example clips obtained from the movie Juno, 2007.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Interactions between people are often governed by their
relationships. On the flip side, social relationships are built
upon several interactions. Two strangers are more likely to
greet and introduce themselves while becoming friends over
time. We are fascinated by this interplay between interactions and relationships, and believe that it is an important
aspect of understanding social situations. In this work, we
propose neural models to learn and jointly predict interactions, relationships, and the pair of characters that are
involved. We note that interactions are informed by a mixture of visual and dialog cues, and present a multimodal
architecture to extract meaningful information from them.
Localizing the pair of interacting characters in video is a
time-consuming process, instead, we train our model to learn
from clip-level weak labels. We evaluate our models on the
MovieGraphs dataset and show the impact of modalities,
use of longer temporal context for predicting relationships,
and achieve encouraging performance using weak labels as
compared with ground-truth labels. Code is online.1
1 https://annusha.github.io/LIReC/

A salient aspect of being human is our ability to interact
with other people and develop various relationships over
the period of our lives. While some relationships drive the
typical interactions experienced by a pair of people in a
top-down manner (e.g. parents customarily love and nurture
their children); almost all social (non-family) relationships
are driven through bottom-up interactions (e.g. strangers
become friends over a good chat or a shared drink) [21].
For an intelligent agent to truly be a part of our lives, we
will need it to assimilate this complex interplay and learn to
behave appropriately in different social situations.
We hypothesize that a first step in this direction involves
learning how people interact and what their relationships
might be. However, training machines with live, real world,
experience-based data is an extremely complicated proposition. Instead, we rely on movies that provide snapshots into
key moments of our lives, portraying human behavior at its
best and worst in various social situations [47].
Interactions and relationships have been addressed separately in literature. Interactions are often modeled as simple

4321
9849

