MixNMatch: Multifactor Disentanglement and Encoding
for Conditional Image Generation

1. Introduction
Consider the real image of the yellow bird in Figure 1 in
the 1st column. What would the bird look like in a different
background, say that of the duck? How about in a different
texture, perhaps that of the rainbow textured bird in the 2nd
column? What if we wanted to keep its texture, but change
its shape to that of the rainbow bird, and background and
pose to that of the duck, as in the 3rd column? How about
sampling shape, pose, texture, and background from four
different reference images and combining them to create an
entirely new image (last column)?
Problem. While research in conditional image generation has made tremendous progress [17, 49, 30], no existing work can simultaneously disentangle background, object pose, object shape, and object texture with minimal supervision, so that these factors can be combined from multiple real images for fine-grained controllable image generation. Learning disentangled representations with minimal supervision is an extremely challenging problem, since
the underlying factors that give rise to the data are often
highly correlated and intertwined. Work that disentangle

Real Images
Generated

Pose

We present MixNMatch, a conditional generative model
that learns to disentangle and encode background, object pose, shape, and texture from real images with minimal supervision, for mix-and-match image generation. We
build upon FineGAN, an unconditional generative model,
to learn the desired disentanglement and image generator, and leverage adversarial joint image-code distribution matching to learn the latent factor encoders. MixNMatch requires bounding boxes during training to model
background, but requires no other supervision. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate MixNMatch’s ability to accurately disentangle, encode, and combine multiple factors for mix-and-match image generation, including
sketch2color, cartoon2img, and img2gif applications. Our
code/models/demo can be found at https://github.
com/Yuheng-Li/MixNMatch

Background Texture

Abstract

Yong Jae Lee

Shape

Krishna Kumar Singh
Utkarsh Ojha
University of California, Davis

MixNMatch

Yuheng Li

Figure 1: Conditional mix-and-match image generation. Our model, MixNMatch, can disentangle and encode up to four factors—background, object pose, shape,
and texture—from real reference images, and can arbitrarily combine them to generate new images. The only supervision used to train our model is bounding box annotations
to model background.
two such factors, by taking as input two reference images
e.g., one for appearance and the other for pose, do exist [16, 18, 23, 26, 40]. But they cannot disentangle other
factors such as foreground vs. background appearance or
pose vs. shape. Since only two factors can be controlled,
these approaches cannot arbitrarily change, for example,
the object’s background, shape, and texture, while keeping its pose the same. Others require strong supervision in
the form of keypoint/pose/mask annotations [31, 1, 27, 9],
which limits their scalability, and still fall short of disentangling all of the four factors outlined above.
Our proposed conditional generative model, MixNMatch, aims to fill this void. MixNMatch learns to disentangle and encode background, object pose, shape, and texture latent factors from real images, and importantly, does
so with minimal human supervision. This allows, for example, each factor to be extracted from a different real im-

8039

