Domain Adaptive Image-to-image Translation
Ying-Cong Chen1
Xiaogang Xu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Jiaya Jia1,2
2
SmartMore

yingcong.ian.chen@gmail.com, {xgxu,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image translation (I2I) has achieved
great success in various applications. However, its generalization capacity is still an open question. In this paper,
we show that existing I2I models do not generalize well for
samples outside the training domain. The cause is twofold.
First, an I2I model may not work well when testing samples
are beyond its valid input domain. Second, results could be
unreliable if the expected output is far from what the model
is trained. To deal with these issues, we propose the Domain Adaptive Image-To-Image translation (DAI2I) framework that adapts an I2I model for out-of-domain samples.
Our framework introduces two sub-modules – one maps
testing samples to the valid input domain of the I2I model,
and the other transforms the output of I2I model to expected
results. Extensive experiments manifest that our framework
improves the capacity of existing I2I models, allowing them
to handle samples that are distinctively different from their
primary targets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, unpaired image-to-image translation
(I2I) [44, 8, 21, 23] has attracted quite a lot of interest in computer vision, graphics, and machine learning.
Given images of certain domain A− , it learns a mapping
FA− →A+ (·) to another domain A+ without requiring any
paired information. It can serve a wide range of applications, including image attribute manipulation [8], style
transfer [44], data augmentation [11], domain adaptation
[14], to name a few.
Despite great success, these approaches could be less effective when the testing images are not in the same domain
as the training set. Speciﬁcally, when a model FA− →A+ (·)
is trained with domain A (A = A− ∪ A+ ), it may not perform well when applied on another domain B. Fig. 1 shows
an example of applying a neutral → smile model trained on
human faces to a cat face. Intuitively, the process of getting smile should include raising the corner of a mouth and
changing other smiling related muscles. Human can easily

(a) I2I

(b) I2I (on cat)

(c) DAI2I

Figure 1. Applying a neutral → smile I2I model on human and
cat faces. The I2I model is trained on human faces. The 1st and
2nd rows are input and output respectively. (a) Result on a human
face. (b) Directly applying the model on a cat face. (c) Our result.

imagine how this happens on a cat face, even if he/she has
never seen such a smiling cat before. However, as shown in
Fig. 1(b), an I2I model does not have such capacity. When
an image is out of the domain A− , the model cannot modify its attribute from “−” to “+” correctly. Accordingly, it
generates artifacts and changes almost no target attribute.
In this paper, we propose the Domain Adaptive Imageto-image translation (DAI2I) framework to enable I2I models to handle out-of-domain samples. The out-of-domain
here has two meanings. First, the input samples are from a
new domain B − instead of A− . As FA− →A+ (·) is trained
with A− , it may not parse information of B − correctly.
Second, in practice the expected output domain B + may
not be available during training. Take Fig. 1 as an example.
Capturing many smiling cat photos is not easy. As a result,
we lack essential information to deﬁne the expected output
domain. Different from existing I2I tasks, modeling the output domain with GAN is infeasible, because there exists no
real data (B + ) to train the discriminator.
From the discussion above, it is clear that out-of-domain
image-to-image translation is still an open problem. In this
paper, we adopt two assumptions to make it tractable. The
ﬁrst assumption is that A and B can be translated bidirectionally. This implies A and B are semantically related;
otherwise the translation, such as a chair mapping to a cat,
15274

