PointASNL: Robust Point Clouds Processing using Nonlocal Neural Networks
with Adaptive Sampling

1

Xu Yan1,2 Chaoda Zheng2,3 Zhen Li1,2,∗ Sheng Wang4 Shuguang Cui1,2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
South China University of Technology, 4 Tencent AI Lab
{xuyan1@link., lizhen@, shuguangcui@}cuhk.edu.cn

Local Aggregation

Abstract
Input Point Cloud

Raw point clouds data inevitably contains outliers or
noise through acquisition from 3D sensors or reconstruction algorithms. In this paper, we present a novel endto-end network for robust point clouds processing, named
PointASNL, which can deal with point clouds with noise effectively. The key component in our approach is the adaptive sampling (AS) module. It first re-weights the neighbors around the initial sampled points from farthest point
sampling (FPS), and then adaptively adjusts the sampled
points beyond the entire point cloud. Our AS module can
not only benefit the feature learning of point clouds, but
also ease the biased effect of outliers. To further capture the neighbor and long-range dependencies of the sampled point, we proposed a local-nonlocal (L-NL) module
inspired by the nonlocal operation. Such L-NL module enables the learning process insensitive to noise. Extensive
experiments verify the robustness and superiority of our approach in point clouds processing tasks regardless of synthesis data, indoor data, and outdoor data with or without noise. Specifically, PointASNL achieves state-of-theart robust performance for classification and segmentation
tasks on all datasets, and significantly outperforms previous
methods on real-world outdoor SemanticKITTI dataset with
considerate noise. Our code is released through https:
//github.com/yanx27/PointASNL.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of 3D sensors, it’s relatively easy for
us to obtain more raw 3D data, e.g., RGB-D data, LiDAR
data, and MEMS data [44]. Considering point clouds as the
fundamental representative of 3D data, the understanding of
point clouds has attracted extensive attention for various applications, e.g., autonomous driving [29], robotics [37], and
place recognition [23]. Here, a point cloud has two components: the points P ∈ RN ×3 and the features F ∈ RN ×D .
∗ Corresponding author: Zhen Li.

: Outliers
: Sampled from FPS
: Adaptive Shifting

Adaptive Sampling

Aggregated Features

Nonlocal Aggregation

Figure 1. PointASNL for robust point clouds processing. The
adaptive sampling module adaptively adjusts the sampled point
from point clouds with noise. Besides, the local-nonlocal module not only combines the local features in Euclidean space, but
also considers the long-range dependency in feature space.

Unlike 2D images, the sparsity and disorder proprieties
make robust point clouds processing a challenging task.
Furthermore, the raw data obtained from those 3D sensors
or reconstruction algorithms inevitably contain outliers or
noise in real-world situations.
In this work, we present a novel end-to-end network for
robust point clouds processing, named PointASNL, which
can deal with point clouds with noise or outliers effectively. Our proposed PointASNL mainly consists of two
general modules: adaptive sampling (AS) module and localnonlocal (L-NL) module. The AS module is used to adjust
the coordinates and features of the sampled points, whereas
the L-NL module is used to capture the neighbor and longrange dependencies of the sampled points.
Unlike the cases in 2D images, traditional convolution
operations cannot directly work on unstructured point cloud
data. Thus, most of the current methods usually use sampling approaches to select points from the original point
clouds for conducting local feature learning. Among these
sampling algorithms, farthest point sampling (FPS) [25],
Poisson disk sampling (PDS) [11], and Gumbel subset sampling (GSS) [48] are proposed in previous works. However, as the most representative one, FPS is rooted in Euclidean distance, which is task-dependent and outliers sen-

5589

