How much time do you have? Modeling multi-duration saliency
Camilo Fosco*1 , Anelise Newman*1 , Pat Sukhum2 , Yun Bin Zhang2 , Nanxuan Zhao3 , Aude Oliva1 ,
and Zoya Bylinskii4
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Harvard University, 3 City University of Hong Kong,
4
Adobe Research
{camilolu, apnewman, oliva}@mit.edu, {psukhum, ybzhang}
@g.harvard.edu, nanxuanzhao@gmail.com, bylinski@adobe.com

Abstract
What jumps out in a single glance of an image is different than what you might notice after closer inspection.
Yet conventional models of visual saliency produce predictions at an arbitrary, fixed viewing duration, offering a limited view of the rich interactions between image content
and gaze location. In this paper we propose to capture
gaze as a series of snapshots, by generating populationlevel saliency heatmaps for multiple viewing durations. We
collect the CodeCharts1K dataset, which contains multiple
distinct heatmaps per image corresponding to 0.5, 3, and 5
seconds of free-viewing. We develop an LSTM-based model
of saliency that simultaneously trains on data from multiple viewing durations. Our Multi-Duration Saliency Excited Model (MD-SEM) achieves competitive performance
on the LSUN 2017 Challenge with 57% fewer parameters
than comparable architectures. It is the first model that
produces heatmaps at multiple viewing durations, enabling
applications where multi-duration saliency can be used to
prioritize visual content to keep, transmit, and render.

1. Introduction
How long an observer has to examine an image determines what they notice and what tasks they can complete.
Despite this dependency of viewing behavior on viewing
time, most models of visual attention predict saliency at an
arbitrary duration because they are trained on data accumulated over 3 or 5 seconds of viewing [9, 22, 30, 33, 43]. On
the other hand, scanpath models, which predict individual
gaze trajectories over time, struggle to summarize the attention patterns of a population [2, 3, 27, 42, 53].
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Predictions of our Multi-Duration Saliency Excited Model at three viewing durations. Images are from
the Abnormal Objects [46], SALICON [33], and EyeCrowd [34] datasets (top to bottom). Insets with blue
borders contain human ground truth collected using the
CodeCharts UI.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of multiduration saliency, which captures multiple attention snapshots corresponding to different viewing durations (Fig. 1)1 .
This offers richer insight into how gaze evolves over time
than conventional saliency, while providing a more robust
representation than scanpaths (Fig. 2). We leverage an efficient crowdsourcing methodology for collecting large scale
human attention data at several viewing durations (Fig. 3).
We use it to assemble CodeCharts1K, a dataset of 1000 images with viewing patterns at three durations: 0.5, 3, and
5 seconds. Our data shows that human gaze patterns are
highly consistent at each viewing duration but can differ
across durations, proving that saliency depends predictably
on viewing duration.
1 Data, code, and models available at:
http://multiduration-saliency.csail.mit.edu/

14473

