Incremental Learning In Online Scenario
Jiangpeng He

Runyu Mao

Zeman Shao

Fengqing Zhu

he416@purdue.edu

mao111@purdue.edu

shao112@purdue.edu

zhu0@purdue.edu

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana USA

Abstract
Modern deep learning approaches have achieved great
success in many vision applications by training a model
using all available task-specific data. However, there are
two major obstacles making it challenging to implement for
real life applications: (1) Learning new classes makes the
trained model quickly forget old classes knowledge, which
is referred to as catastrophic forgetting. (2) As new observations of old classes come sequentially over time, the
distribution may change in unforeseen way, making the performance degrade dramatically on future data, which is referred to as concept drift. Current state-of-the-art incremental learning methods require a long time to train the
model whenever new classes are added and none of them
takes into consideration the new observations of old classes.
In this paper, we propose an incremental learning framework that can work in the challenging online learning scenario and handle both new classes data and new observations of old classes. We address problem (1) in online
mode by introducing a modified cross-distillation loss together with a two-step learning technique. Our method outperforms the results obtained from current state-of-the-art
offline incremental learning methods on the CIFAR-100 and
ImageNet-1000 (ILSVRC 2012) datasets under the same experiment protocol but in online scenario. We also provide
a simple yet effective method to mitigate problem (2) by updating exemplar set using the feature of each new observation of old classes and demonstrate a real life application
of online food image classification based on our complete
framework using the Food-101 dataset.

1. Introduction
One of the major challenges of current deep learning
based methods when applied to real life applications is
learning new classes incrementally, where new classes are
continuously added overtime. Furthermore, in most real life
scenarios, new data comes in sequentially, which may contain both the data from new classes or new observations

of old classes. Therefore, a practical vision system is expected to handle the data streams containing both new and
old classes, and to process data sequentially in an online
learning mode [15], which has similar constrains as in real
life applications. For example, a food image recognition
system designed to automate dietary assessment should be
able to update using each new food image continually without forgetting the food categories already learned.
Most deep learning approaches trained on static datasets
suffer from the following issues. First is catastrophic forgetting [16], a phenomenon where the performance on the
old classes degrades dramatically as new classes are added
due to the unavailability of the complete previous data. This
problem become more severe in online scenario due to limited run-time and data allowed to update the model. The
second issue arises in real life application where the data
distribution of already learned classes may change in unforeseen ways [23], which is related to concept drift [5]. In
this work, we aim to develop an incremental learning framework that can be deployed in a variety of image classification problems and work in the challenging online learning
scenario.
A practical deep learning method for classification is
characterized by (1) its ability to be trained using data
streams including both new classes data and new observations of old classes, (2) good performance for both new and
old classes on future data streams, (3) short run-time to update with constrained resources, and (4) capable of lifelong
learning to handle multiple classes in an incremental fashion. Although progress has been made towards reaching
these goals [14, 21, 2, 31], none of the existing approaches
for incremental learning satisfy all the above conditions.
They assume the distribution of old classes data remain unchanged overtime and consider only new classes data for
incoming data streams. As we mentioned earlier, data distribution are likely to change in real life[23]. When concept
drift happens, regardless the effort put into retaining the
old classes knowledge, degradation in performance is inevitable. In addition, although these existing methods have
achieved state-of-the-art results, none of them work in the
challenging online scenario. They require offline training

13926

