TRPLP – Trifocal Relative Pose from Lines at Points
Ricardo Fabbri∗

Timothy Duff

Hongyi Fan

Margaret H. Regan

Rio de Janeiro State University

Georgia Tech

Brown University

University of Notre Dame

David da Costa de Pinho

Elias Tsigaridas

Charles W. Wampler

Jonathan D. Hauenstein

UENF – Brazil

INRIA Paris

University of Notre Dame

University of Notre Dame

Peter J. Giblin

Benjamin Kimia

Anton Leykin

Tomas Pajdla

University of Liverpool

Brown University

Georgia Tech

CIIRC CTU in Prague†

Abstract
We present a method for solving two minimal problems for
relative camera pose estimation from three views, which are
based on three view correspondences of (i) three points and
one line and (ii) three points and two lines through two
of the points. These problems are too difficult to be efficiently solved by the state of the art Gröbner basis methods.
Our method is based on a new efficient homotopy continuation (HC) solver, which dramatically speeds up previous
HC solving by specializing HC methods to generic cases of
our problems. We characterize their number of solutions
and show with simulated experiments that our solvers are
numerically robust and stable under image noise. We show
in real experiments that (i) SIFT feature location and orientation provide good enough point-and-line correspondences
for three-view reconstruction and (ii) that we can solve difficult cases with too few or too noisy tentative matches where
the state of the art structure from motion initialization fails.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction has made an impact [4] by mostly relying on points in Structure from Motion (SfM) [1, 67, 23,
49]. Still, even production-quality SfM technology fails [4]
∗ Contact: rfabbri@gmail.com, † Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague. RF
is supported by UERJ Prociência and FAPERJ Jovem Cientista do Nosso
Estado E-26/201.557/2014. TD and AL are supported by NSF DMS1151297. JDH and MHR are supported by NSF CCF-1812746, with
additional support for JDH from ONR N00014-16-1-2722 and for MHR
from Schmitt Leadership Fellowship in Science and Engineering. BK
and HF are supported by the NSF grant IIS-1910530. TP is supported
by the EU Regional Development Fund IMPACT CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15
003/0000468 and EU H2020 project ARtwin 856994. This work was initiated while most authors were in residence at Brown University’s Institute
for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics – ICERM,
in Providence, RI, during the Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 semesters (NSF
DMS-1439786 and the Simons Foundation grant 507536).

Figure 1. A deficiency of the traditional two-view approach to
bootstraping SfM: not enough features detected (small red dots)
and thus a SOTA SfM pipeline COLMAP [67] fails to reconstruct the relative camera pose. In contrast, the proposed trinocular method requires only three matching features: two triplets of
point-tangents (points with SIFT orientation shown in green and
cyan) and one triplet of points without orientation (purple) to reconstruct the pose. Red cameras are computed by our approach,
and green shows ground truth.

when the images contain (i) large homogeneous areas with
few or no features; (ii) repeated textures, like brick walls,
giving rise to a large number of ambiguously correlated features; (iii) blurred areas, arising from moving cameras or
objects; (iv) large scale changes where the overlap is not
sufficiently significant; or (v) multiple and independently
moving objects each lacking a sufficient number of features.
The failure of bifocal pose estimation using RANSAC on
hypothesized correspondences, e.g., using 5 points [48], is
highlighted in a dataset of images of mugs, Figure 1 (similar to the dataset in [51] but without a calibration board),
for which the failure rate using the standard SfM pipeline
COLMAP [63] is 75%. The failure of just directly apply-

12073

