Relation-Aware Global Attention for Person Re-identification
Zhizheng Zhang1∗
1

Cuiling Lan2†

Wenjun Zeng2
2

University of Science and Technology of China

{zhizheng,jinxustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Xin Jin1

Zhibo Chen1†

Microsoft Research Asia

{culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com

chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
For person re-identification (re-id), attention mechanisms have become attractive as they aim at strengthening discriminative features and suppressing irrelevant ones,
which matches well the key of re-id, i.e., discriminative feature learning. Previous approaches typically learn attention using local convolutions, ignoring the mining of knowledge from global structure patterns. Intuitively, the affinities among spatial positions/nodes in the feature map provide clustering-like information and are helpful for inferring semantics and thus attention, especially for person images where the feasible human poses are constrained. In
this work, we propose an effective Relation-Aware Global
Attention (RGA) module which captures the global structural information for better attention learning. Specifically, for each feature position, in order to compactly
grasp the structural information of global scope and local appearance information, we propose to stack the relations, i.e., its pairwise correlations/affinities with all the
feature positions (e.g., in raster scan order), and the feature itself together to learn the attention with a shallow
convolutional model. Extensive ablation studies demonstrate that our RGA can significantly enhance the feature
representation power and help achieve the state-of-the-art
performance on several popular benchmarks. The source
code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/
Relation-Aware-Global-Attention-Networks.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) aims to match a specific
person across different times, places, or cameras, which has
drawn a surge of interests from both industry and academia.
The challenge lies in how to extract discriminative features
(for identifying the same person and distinguishing different
persons) from person images where there are background
clutter, diversity of poses, occlusion, etc.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison of the learned attention between (b) spatial attention of CBAM [38] without exploring relations, and (c)
our proposed attention which captures global scope relations and
mines from such structural information. (a) The original image 1 .

Recently, many studies resort to attention design to address the aforementioned challenges in person re-id by
strengthening the discriminative features and suppressing
interference [22, 39, 20, 12, 11, 6]. Most of the attentions
are learned by convolutions with limited receptive fields,
which makes it hard to exploit the rich structural patterns
in a global scope. One solution is to use large size filters
in the convolution layer [38]. The other solution is to stack
deep layers [33] which increases the network size greatly.
Besides, the studies in [24] show that the effective receptive
field of CNN only takes up a fraction of the full theoretical
receptive field. These solutions cannot ensure the effective
exploration of global scope information (e.g., global scope
contents and corresponding positional geometry) for effective person re-id.
Moreover, the non-local neural network is proposed
in [35] to allow the collection of global information by
weighted summation of the features from all positions to
the target position, where the connecting weight is calculated by the pairwise relation/affinity. Actually, for a
target feature position, its pairwise relations with all the
feature nodes/positions could contain valuable structural
information of a global scope, e.g., clustering-like pattern (through pairwise affinities and position information).
However, the non-local network overlooks the exploration

∗ This work was done when Zhizheng Zhang was an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding author.

1 All faces in the images are masked for anonymization.

3186

