Label Distribution Learning on Auxiliary Label Space Graphs
for Facial Expression Recognition
Shikai Chen1 , Jianfeng Wang2 , Yuedong Chen3 , Zhongchao Shi4 , Xin Geng∗,1 , Yong Rui∗,4
1
Southeast University 2 University of Oxford 3 Nanyang Technological University
4
AI Lab, Lenovo Research
{skchen, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn jianfeng.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk
donald.chen@ntu.edu.sg {shizc2, yongrui}@lenovo.com

Abstract
Many existing studies reveal that annotation inconsistency widely exists among a variety of facial expression
recognition (FER) datasets. The reason might be the subjectivity of human annotators and the ambiguous nature
of the expression labels. One promising strategy tackling
such a problem is a recently proposed learning paradigm
called Label Distribution Learning (LDL), which allows
multiple labels with different intensity to be linked to one
expression. However, it is often impractical to directly apply label distribution learning because numerous existing
datasets only contain one-hot labels rather than label distributions. To solve the problem, we propose a novel approach named Label Distribution Learning on Auxiliary Label Space Graphs(LDL-ALSG) that leverages the topological information of the labels from related but more distinct
tasks, such as action unit recognition and facial landmark
detection. The underlying assumption is that facial images
should have similar expression distributions to their neighbours in the label space of action unit recognition and facial
landmark detection. Our proposed method is evaluated on
a variety of datasets and outperforms those state-of-the-art
methods consistently with a huge margin.

1. Introduction
Facial Expression Recognition (FER) plays a vital role in
driver assistance, health care and many other daily scenes.
In recent years, the datasets of facial expression recognition
∗ X. Geng and Y. Rui are the corresponding authors.

This work was performed while Shikai Chen worked as an intern at
Lenovo AI Lab.
This research was partially supported by the National Key Research &
Development Plan of China (No. 2017YFB1002801), the National Science
Foundation of China (61622203), the Collaborative Innovation Center of
Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, and the Collaborative
Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology.

Figure 1. A real-world expressive face can be ambiguous and
mixes multiple basic expressions. The label distribution on the
right side is the output of the network trained in our framework.

Figure 2. Overview of the proposed LDL-ALSG. With our proposed guidance loss, LDL-ALSG uses the facial images and their
nearest neighbors to guide the training of the backbone network.
Their neighbors are from the K-Nearest-Neighbor graphs constructed by the labels of training data in auxiliary tasks.

have increased substantially in quantity and size [9, 22, 27,
28], significantly improving the recognition rate of some
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based approaches,
which incorporated facial images with optical flows [33],
landmarks [40], or prior knowledge [26, 6] to enhance the
performance and interpretability.
Deep learning based methods are mainly affected by
three factors, which are data, model, and label [2]. Researchers have widely studied data and model but paid less
heed to the label. Zeng et al. [39] explored the annotation
subjectivity by suggesting a three-step framework trained
on several inconsistently labeled datasets and abundant unlabeled data, where they did not consider the label ambi4321
13984

