Fast Sparse ConvNets
Erich Elsen∗
DeepMind
London, UK

Marat Dukhan∗
Google
Mountain View, CA

Trevor Gale∗
Google
Mountain View, CA

Karen Simonyan
DeepMind
London, UK

eriche@google.com

maratek@google.com

tgale@google.com

simonyan@google.com

Abstract
Historically, the pursuit of efficient inference has been
one of the driving forces behind the research into new deep
learning architectures and building blocks. Some of the
recent examples include: the squeeze-and-excitation module [16], depthwise separable convolutions in Xception [4],
and the inverted bottleneck in MobileNet v2 [35]. Notably,
in all of these cases, the resulting building blocks enabled
not only higher efficiency, but also higher accuracy, and
found wide adoption in the field. In this work, we further
expand the arsenal of efficient building blocks for neural
network architectures; but instead of combining standard
primitives (such as convolution), we advocate for the replacement of these dense primitives with their sparse counterparts. While the idea of using sparsity to decrease the
parameter count is not new [42], the conventional wisdom is that this reduction in theoretical FLOPs does not
translate into real-world efficiency gains. We aim to correct this misconception by introducing a family of efficient
sparse kernels for several hardware platforms, which we
open-source as part of the XNNPACK library for the benefit
of the community. Equipped with our efficient implementation of sparse primitives, we show that sparse versions
of MobileNet v1, MobileNet v2 and EfficientNet architectures substantially outperform strong dense baselines on the
efficiency-accuracy curve. On Snapdragon 835 our sparse
networks outperform their dense equivalents by 1.3 − 2.4×
– equivalent to approximately one entire generation of improvement. We hope that our findings will facilitate wider
adoption of sparsity as a tool for creating efficient and accurate deep learning architectures.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have proven to
be excellent at solving a diverse range of tasks [2]. Standard
network architectures are used in classification, segmen∗ These authors contributed equally to this work

tation, object detection and generation tasks [31, 26, 47].
Given their wide utility, there has been significant effort to
design efficient architectures that are capable of being run
on mobile and other low power devices while still achieving high classification accuracy on benchmarks such as ImageNet [34]. For example, MobileNets [15, 35] employ the
depthwise separable convolutions introduced in [36] to significantly reduce resource requirements over previous architectures. Inference time and computational complexity in
these architectures are dominated by the 1×1 convolutions,
which directly map to matrix-matrix multiplications.
Weight sparsity is generally known to lead [3] to theoretically smaller and more computationally efficient (in terms
of number of floating-point operations) models, but it is often disregarded as a practical means of accelerating models
because of the misconception that sparse operations cannot
be fast enough to achieve actual speedups during inference.
To address this misconception and firmly establish sparsity
as a tool in the deep learning practitioner’s arsenal, we introduce fast kernels for Sparse Matrix-Dense Matrix Multiplication (SpMM) specifically targeted at the acceleration of
sparse neural networks. The main distinction of our SpMM
kernel from prior art [30, 45] is that we focus on a different point in the design space. While prior work focused on
extremely sparse problems (typically >99%, found in scientific and graph problems), we target the sparsity range of
70-95%, more common when inducing weight sparsity in
neural networks. As a result our kernels significantly outperform the kernels generated by the TACO compiler [22].
Using these kernels, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
weight sparsity across three generations of MobileNet [15,
35, 40] architectures. Sparsity leads to an improvement
of approximately one whole generation in each architecture, with sparse EfficientNets being significantly more efficient than all previous models. These models represent
a new generation of efficient CNNs, which reduces inference times by 1.3 − 2.4×, parameter counts by over 2× and
number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) by up to 3×
relative to the previous generations.
114629

