More Grounded Image Captioning by Distilling Image-Text Matching Model
Yuanen Zhou1,2 , Meng Wang1,2,∗ , Daqing Liu3 , Zhenzhen Hu1,2 , Hanwang Zhang4
1
2

Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data (Ministry of Education)

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
3

University of Science and Technology of China

4

Nanyang Technological University

{y.e.zhou.hb, eric.mengwang,huzhen.ice}@gmail.com, liudq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Visual attention not only improves the performance of
image captioners, but also serves as a visual interpretation
to qualitatively measure the caption rationality and model
transparency. Specifically, we expect that a captioner can
fix its attentive gaze on the correct objects while generating the corresponding words. This ability is also known as
grounded image captioning. However, the grounding accuracy of existing captioners is far from satisfactory. To
improve the grounding accuracy while retaining the captioning quality, it is expensive to collect the word-region
alignment as strong supervision. To this end, we propose a
Part-of-Speech (POS) enhanced image-text matching model
(SCAN [24]): POS-SCAN, as the effective knowledge distillation for more grounded image captioning. The benefits
are two-fold: 1) given a sentence and an image, POS-SCAN
can ground the objects more accurately than SCAN; 2)
POS-SCAN serves as a word-region alignment regularization for the captioner’s visual attention module. By showing benchmark experimental results, we demonstrate that
conventional image captioners equipped with POS-SCAN
can significantly improve the grounding accuracy without
strong supervision. Last but not the least, we explore the indispensable Self-Critical Sequence Training (SCST) [46] in
the context of grounded image captioning and show that the
image-text matching score can serve as a reward for more
grounded captioning 1 .

1. Introduction
Image captioning is one of the primary goals of computer
vision which aims to automatically generate free-form descriptions for images [23, 53]. The caption quality has been
dramatically improved in recent years, partly driven by the
development of attention-based deep neural networks [56],
∗ Corresponding Author.
1 https://github.com/YuanEZhou/Grounded-Image-Captioning

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(a) :POS-SCAN Visualization on Ground Truth Sentence

a woman wearing a pink shirt and red apron stands in her restaurant holding food.
(b) :Up-Down Visualization on Ground Truth Sentence

a woman wearing a pink shirt and red apron stands in her restaurant holding food.
(c) :SCAN Visualization on Ground Truth Sentence

a woman wearing a pink shirt and red apron stands in her restaurant holding food.
(d) :Up-Down Visualization on Generated Sentence Before Distilling POS-SCAN

a woman in a pink shirt is preparing food.
(e) Up-Down Visualization on Generated Sentence After Distilling POS-SCAN

a woman in a red shirt and a yellow hat is cooking in a restaurant.

Figure 1. Visualizations of five different word-region alignment
results, where all the models are trained without any word-region
alignment ground-truth. Words and the corresponding attended region with maximum weight are marked with the same color. POSSCAN (cf. Section 3.1) is a revised image-text matching model,
Up-Down (cf. Section 3.2) is a state-of-the-art image captioning
model. Best viewed in color.

which allow the captioning models to dynamically align image regions to caption words. Conventionally, many previous works are used to qualitatively show the attention visualizations, which aim to indicate that the learned model can
fix its gaze on the correct regions while captioning. However, some quantitative analyses [28, 38] show that although
14777

