Multi-view Neural Human Rendering
Minye Wu1,3,4
Yuehao Wang1
Qiang Hu1
Jingyi Yu1,2
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 DGene Inc. 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology
{wumy, wangyh3, huqiang, yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
We present an end-to-end Neural Human Renderer
(NHR) for dynamic human captures under the multi-view
setting. NHR adopts PointNet++ for feature extraction (FE)
to enable robust 3D correspondence matching on low quality, dynamic 3D reconstructions. To render new views, we
map 3D features onto the target camera as a 2D feature
map and employ an anti-aliased CNN to handle holes and
noises. Newly synthesized views from NHR can be further
used to construct visual hulls to handle textureless and/or
dark regions such as black clothing. Comprehensive experiments show NHR significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art neural and image-based rendering techniques, especially on hands, hair, nose, foot, etc.

1. Introduction
There have been tremendous demand for generating high
quality 3D models of human in motion. Applications are
numerous, ranging from producing ultra-realistic avatars in
virtual and augmented reality [18, 40], to enabling holographic and immersive telecommunications [15] supported
by latest data transmission networks. By far, most existing
approaches have relied on conventional modeling and rendering pipelines: the 3D geometry of a performer is first
captured using either active (e.g., depth cameras such as
Microsoft Kinect) [31, 40] or passive (e.g., a multi-camera
dome) [22, 28] systems and stored in the form of a 3D point
cloud; the point cloud is then triangulated, texture mapped,
compressed, streamed, and rendered at the viewing device.
To achieve high fidelity reconstruction, dome-based systems require a large number of densely sampled cameras
to handle occlusions [42], textureless regions [29], and detailed geometry (e.g., hands). Depth-camera based solutions such as Holoportation [33] are still restricted by the
limited resolution. Often, a lot of manual work is needed to
produce commercial quality results.
Image-based modeling and rendering (IBMR) [11, 32]
attempts to interpolate new views (rays) from the sampled

Figure 1. Our neural human renderer (NHR) produces photorealistic free-view-video (FVV) from multi-view dynamic human
captures.

ones, guided by low quality reconstruction. Earlier techniques such as lumigraph [17] use coarse geometry proxy
such as planes or visual hulls to select and then blend the
sampled rays (images). The quality, however, relies heavily
on the accuracy of the proxy. Image-based visual hull [29]
bypasses 3D proxy generation using image-space ray ordering. In reality, previous IBMR methods are vulnerable
to occlusions and cannot preserve fine details. To improve
proxy geometry, it is also possible to fit an adjustable 3D
model [5, 19]. The seminal work of Skinned Multi-Person
Linear (SMPL) model [27] pre-scans 1786 human shapes
and then learn a human model from them. It then estimates
the shape parameters of the recovered point cloud. SMPL,
however, assumes the “bare skin” model and cannot directly
handle clothing or strong shape variations under complex
poses. Shape deformation [31, 40] can partially mitigate the
problem but are sensitive to reconstruction noise and holes.
In this paper, we resort to neural rendering (NR) to improve IBMR. Previous NR explores deep networks to “fix”
the visual artifacts. [30, 3] exploits semantic information
embedded in the captured imagery data to improve rendering. However, existing methods require using a large volume of training data, i.e., densely sampled input views. It is
also possible to apply NR at the geometry stage of the classical graphics rendering pipeline, e.g., by directly refining
the input 3D and texture data. [37] proposed a Neural Texture technique to handle noisy 3D geometry. Yet, it cannot
handle severe defects such as holes caused by occlusions.

1682

