Say As You Wish: Fine-grained Control of Image Caption Generation with
Abstract Scene Graphs

1

Shizhe Chen1∗, Qin Jin1†, Peng Wang2 , Qi Wu3
Renmin University of China, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, 3 University of Adelaide
{cszhe1, qjin}@ruc.edu.cn, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Humans are able to describe image contents with coarse
to fine details as they wish. However, most image captioning models are intention-agnostic which cannot generate diverse descriptions according to different user intentions initiatively. In this work, we propose the Abstract
Scene Graph (ASG) structure to represent user intention
in fine-grained level and control what and how detailed
the generated description should be. The ASG is a directed graph consisting of three types of abstract nodes
(object, attribute, relationship) grounded in the image without any concrete semantic labels. Thus it is easy to obtain
either manually or automatically. From the ASG, we propose a novel ASG2Caption model, which is able to recognise user intentions and semantics in the graph, and therefore generate desired captions following the graph structure. Our model achieves better controllability conditioning on ASGs than carefully designed baselines on both VisualGenome and MSCOCO datasets. It also significantly
improves the caption diversity via automatically sampling
diverse ASGs as control signals. Code will be released at
https://github.com/cshizhe/asg2cap.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a complex problem since it requires
a machine to complete several computer vision tasks, such
as object recognition, scene classification, attributes and relationship detection simultaneously, and then summarize in
a sentence. Thanks to the rapid development of deep learning [12, 13], recent image captioning models [3, 31, 40]
have made substantial progress and even outperform humans in terms of several accuracy-based evaluation metrics
[5, 27, 36].
However, most image captioning models are intention∗ This work was performed when Shizhe Chen was visiting the University of Adelaide.
† Qin Jin is the corresponding author.

Figure 1: Although intention-agnostic captions can correctly describe image contents, they fail to realise what a
user wants to describe and lack diversity. Therefore, we
propose Abstract Scene Graphs (ASG) to control the generation of user desired and diverse image captions in finegrained level. The corresponding region, ASG node and
generated phrase are labelled with the same colour.
agnostic and only passively generate image descriptions,
which do not care about what contents users are interested
in, and how detailed the description should be. On the contrary, we humans are able to describe image contents from
coarse to fine details as we wish. For example, we can
describe more discriminative details (such as the quantity
and colour) of flowers in Figure 1 if we are asked to do
so, but current systems fail to realise such user intention.
What is worse, such passive caption generation can greatly
hinder diversity and tend to generate mediocre descriptions
[34, 38]. Despite achieving high accuracy, these descriptions mainly capture frequent descriptive patterns and cannot represent holistic image understanding, which is supposed to recognize different aspects in the image and thus
be able to produce more diverse descriptions.
In order to address aforementioned limitations, few previous endeavours have proposed to actively control image
captioning process. One type of works [8, 11, 25] focuses

9962

