DaST: Data-free Substitute Training for Adversarial Attacks
Mingyi Zhou1,2,∗, Jing Wu1,2,∗, Yipeng Liu1,†, Shuaicheng Liu1,2 , Ce Zhu1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China1
Megvii Technology2
{zhoumingyi,wujing}@std.uestc.edu.cn,{yipengliu,liushuaicheng,eczhu}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial
examples. For the black-box setting, current substitute attacks need pre-trained models to generate adversarial examples. However, pre-trained models are hard to obtain in
real-world tasks. In this paper, we propose a data-free substitute training method (DaST) to obtain substitute models
for adversarial black-box attacks without the requirement of
any real data. To achieve this, DaST utilizes specially designed generative adversarial networks (GANs) to train the
substitute models. In particular, we design a multi-branch
architecture and label-control loss for the generative model
to deal with the uneven distribution of synthetic samples.
The substitute model is then trained by the synthetic samples
generated by the generative model, which are labeled by
the attacked model subsequently. The experiments demonstrate the substitute models produced by DaST can achieve
competitive performance compared with the baseline models which are trained by the same train set with attacked
models. Additionally, to evaluate the practicability of the
proposed method on the real-world task, we attack an online machine learning model on the Microsoft Azure platform. The remote model misclassifies 98.35% of the adversarial examples crafted by our method. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to train a substitute model for
adversarial attacks without any real data. Our codes are
publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been shown vulnerable to examples with imperceptible perturbations [38]. This causes
researchers a high interest in studying attacks and defenses
for assessing and improving the robustness of networks.
Adversarial attack methods can be categorized into two
main attacks, white-box attacks that have full access to the
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/zhoumingyi/DaST

attacked model and black-box attacks that have partial information of models.
Black-box attacks are more practical in real world systems compared with white-box attacks. Among these attacks, score-based attacks [8, 19, 20, 16] and decision-based
attacks [3, 9, 7] directly attack the attacked model using
class probabilities or hard labels returned by the attacked
model. These attack methods do not need a pre-trained
substitute model, however, as a cost, they need numerous
queries for attacked models to generate each attack.
Instead, gradient-based attack methods [14, 22, 35, 30]
need knowledge of the architecture and weights of the attacked models. Goodfellow et al. [14] showed that adversarial examples have the property of transferability which
means that adversarial examples generated for one model
through white-box attack methods can also attack other
models. Therefore, to carry out attack methods in the blackbox setting, they use a substitute model to find the adversarial examples and then attack the machine learning model
based on the transferability of these adversarial examples.
Compared with current score-based and decision-based attacks, the substitute attacks do not need queries for generating adversarial examples. However, they need a pretrained model to generate adversarial attacks. Papernot et
al. [34] developed a method that uses a number of images
to imitate the outputs of attacked models to obtain substitute networks. Prediction APIs were also developed to steal
the machine models [39]. Orekondy et al. [32] proposed a
”knockoff” to steal the function of machine learning models. These methods do not need a pre-trained model but require many real data labeled by the attacked model to train
a substitute model. However, the real images are hard to get
in some real-world tasks. Therefore, it is important to develop a data-free substitute attack, such that the risks faced
by current machine learning models can be assessed more
comprehensively.
In this study, we propose a data-free substitute training
(DaST) method to train a substitute model for adversarial attacks. We utilize generative adversarial networks (GANs) to
create synthetic samples to train the substitute model. The
1234

