Information-Driven Direct RGB-D Odometry
Alejandro Fontán1,2

Javier Civera1

Rudolph Triebel2,3

alejandro.fontanvillacampa@dlr.de

jcivera@unizar.es

rudolph.triebel@dlr.de

1

2
University of Zaragoza
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
3
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
This paper presents an information-theoretic approach
to point selection for direct RGB-D odometry. The aim is
to select only the most informative measurements, in order to reduce the optimization problem with a minimal impact in the accuracy. It is usual practice in visual odometry/SLAM to track several hundreds of points, achieving
real-time performance in high-end desktop PCs. Reducing
their computational footprint will facilitate the implementation of odometry and SLAM in low-end platforms such as
small robots and AR/VR glasses. Our experimental results
show that our novel information-based selection criteria allows us to reduce the number of tracked points an order of
magnitude (down to only 24 of them), achieving an accuracy similar to the state of the art (sometimes outperforming
it) while reducing 10× the computational demand.

1. Introduction
In the last years, we have witnessed an impressive
progress in the accuracy and robustness of visual odometry
and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [17,
19, 18, 9, 20]. This boost in the performance has enabled
the transfer of visual odometry and SLAM to several commercial products related to augmented reality (AR), virtual
reality (VR) and robotics.
In spite of their respective successes, visual odometry
and SLAM are still facing significant challenges. The high
computational demand of the state of the art is among the
most critical ones for a widespread use in real applications.
The embodiment of localization and mapping algorithms
into small robotic/AR/VR platforms will impose constraints
on their computational and memory footprints [8]. Most algorithms currently require a hardware that exceeds the capabilities of many existing and foreseeable platforms.
Find more information in our project website rmc.dlr.de/rm/
en/staff/alejandro.fontanvillacampa/IDNav

Figure 1: Top: Trajectories and maps estimated by our
RGB-D odometry (ID-RGBDO) in two cases: tracking 500
image points (blue), and tracking only the 24 most informative points (magenta) with considerable computational
savings. The difference between the two is almost unnoticeable. Bottom: Sample frames and tracks for the 500
points case (blue dots) and the 24 most informative ones
(magenta squares).

In this paper we aim to drastically reduce the computational load of direct RGB-D odometry with a negligible
loss in accuracy. For that, we propose a novel and efficient
information-based criterion to keep only the most informative point in the local Bundle Adjustment and pose tracking
optimizations. We implemented a RGB-D odometry (that
we denote ID-RGBDO) and evaluated our approach in the
TUM dataset, demonstrating that we can achieve substantial

4929

