PointAugment: an Auto-Augmentation Framework
for Point Cloud Classification
Ruihui Li

Xianzhi Li

Pheng-Ann Heng

Chi-Wing Fu

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lirh,xzli,pheng,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We present PointAugment1 , a new auto-augmentation
framework that automatically optimizes and augments point
cloud samples to enrich the data diversity when we train
a classification network. Different from existing autoaugmentation methods for 2D images, PointAugment is
sample-aware and takes an adversarial learning strategy to
jointly optimize an augmentor network and a classifier network, such that the augmentor can learn to produce augmented samples that best fit the classifier. Moreover, we
formulate a learnable point augmentation function with a
shape-wise transformation and a point-wise displacement,
and carefully design loss functions to adopt the augmented
samples based on the learning progress of the classifier. Extensive experiments also confirm PointAugment’s effectiveness and robustness to improve the performance of various
networks on shape classification and retrieval.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in developing deep neural networks [23, 24, 37, 19, 18] for 3D
point cloud processing. To robustly train a network often
relies on the availability and diversity of the data. However, unlike 2D image benchmarks such as ImageNet [10]
and MS COCO dataset [15], which have over millions of
training samples, 3D datasets are typically much smaller in
quantity, with relatively small amount of labels and limited
diversity. For instance, ModelNet40 [38], one of the most
commonly-used benchmark for 3D point cloud classification, only has 12,311 models of 40 categories. The limited
data quantity and diversity may cause overfitting problem
and further affect the generalization ability of the network.
Nowadays, data augmentation (DA) is a very common
strategy to avoid overfitting and improve the network generalization ability by artificially enlarging the quantity and diversity of the training samples. For 3D point clouds, due to
1 Code: https://github.com/liruihui/PointAugment

Figure 1: Classification accuracy (%) on ModelNet40 with
or without training the networks with our PointAugment.
We can see clear improvements on four representative networks. More comparison results are presented in Section 5.
the limited amount of training samples and an immense augmentation space in 3D, conventional DA strategies [23, 24]
often simply perturb the input point cloud randomly in a
small and fixed pre-defined augmentation range to maintain the class label. Despite its effectiveness for the existing
classification networks, this conventional DA approach may
lead to insufficient training, as summarized below.
First, existing methods for deep 3D point cloud processing regard the network training and DA as two independent
phases without jointly optimizing them, e.g., feedback the
training results to enhance the DA. Hence, the trained network could be suboptimal. Second, existing methods apply the same fixed augmentation process with rotation, scaling, and/or jittering, to all input point cloud samples. The
shape complexity of the samples is ignored in the augmentation, e.g., a sphere remains the same no matter how we
rotate it, but a complex shape may need larger rotations.
Hence, conventional DA may be redundant or insufficient
for augmenting the training samples [6].
To improve the augmentation of point cloud samples, we
formulate PointAugment, a new auto-augmentation framework for 3D point clouds, and demonstrate its effective-

6378

