Cooling-Shrinking Attack: Blinding the Tracker with Imperceptible Noises
Bin Yan1 , Dong Wang1∗, Huchuan Lu1,2 and Xiaoyun Yang3
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
China Science IntelliCloud Technology Co., Ltd.,
yan bin@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, xiaoyun.yang@intellicloud.ai

Abstract
Adversarial attack of CNN aims at deceiving models to
misbehave by adding imperceptible perturbations to images. This feature facilitates to understand neural networks
deeply and to improve the robustness of deep learning models. Although several works have focused on attacking image classifiers and object detectors, an effective and efficient method for attacking single object trackers of any
target in a model-free way remains lacking. In this paper, a cooling-shrinking attack method is proposed to deceive state-of-the-art SiameseRPN-based trackers. An effective and efficient perturbation generator is trained with
a carefully designed adversarial loss, which can simultaneously cool hot regions where the target exists on the
heatmaps and force the predicted bounding box to shrink,
making the tracked target invisible to trackers. Numerous
experiments on OTB100, VOT2018, and LaSOT datasets
show that our method can effectively fool the state-of-theart SiameseRPN++ tracker by adding small perturbations
to the template or the search regions. Besides, our method
has good transferability and is able to deceive other topperformance trackers such as DaSiamRPN, DaSiamRPNUpdateNet, and DiMP. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/MasterBin-IIAU/CSA.

1. Introduction
Online single object tracking is a fundamental task
in computer vision and has many important applications including intelligent surveillance, autonomous driving, human-machine interaction, to name a few. In recent years, as deep learning matures and large-scale tracking datasets [18, 7, 12] are introduced, the single object
tracking field has developed rapidly. Current state-ofthe-art trackers [16, 40, 15, 8, 17, 6, 3] can be grouped
into two categories: deep discriminative trackers [6, 3, 4],
and SiameseRPN-based trackers [16, 40, 39, 15]. Deep
∗ Corresponding Author: Dr. Dong Wang, wdice@dlut.edu.cn

discriminative trackers decompose tracking into two subproblems: classification and state estimation. The first one
is solved by an online-learning classifier and the second
one is achieved by maximizing the overlap between candidates and the ground truth. SiameseRPN-based trackers
formulate tracking as a one-shot detection problem, locating objects that have similar appearance with the initial template on the search region in each frame. Considering their
balance between accuracy and speed, SiameseRPN-series
trackers have attracted more attention than deep discriminative trackers.
Adversarial attack is originated from [29], which has
shown that state-of-the-art deep learning models can be
fooled by adding small perturbations to original images.
Research on adversarial attack is beneficial to understand
deep neural networks and design robust models. Popular adversarial attack methods can be roughly summarized into two categories: iterative-optimization-based and
deep-network-based attacks. The former method [9, 21,
35] applies many times of gradient ascent to maximize
an adversarial objective function for deceiving deep networks and is usually time-consuming. However, the latter
one [34, 31] applies tremendous data to train an adversarial perturbation-generator. The latter method is faster than
the former method because only one-time forward propagation is needed for each attack after training. In recent years,
adversarial attack has become a popular topic and has extended from image classification to more challenging tasks,
such as object detection [35, 31] and semantic segmentation [35].
However, an effective and efficient adversarial attack
method for single object tracking remains lacking. In
this study, we choose the state-of-the-art SiamRPN++ [15]
tracker as our main research object and propose a novel
cooling-shrinking attack method. This method learns an
efficient perturbation generator to make the tracker fail by
simultaneously cooling down hot regions where the target
exists on the heatmaps and forcing the predicted bounding
box to shrink during online tracking. Our main contribution

990

