CoverNet: Multimodal Behavior Prediction using Trajectory Sets
Tung Phan-Minh∗
Caltech

Elena Corina Grigore, Freddy A. Boulton, Oscar Beijbom, and Eric M. Wolff
nuTonomy, an Aptiv company

tung@caltech.edu

{elena.corina.grigore, freddy.boulton, oscar, eric}@nutonomy.com

Abstract
We present CoverNet, a new method for multimodal,
probabilistic trajectory prediction for urban driving. Previous work has employed a variety of methods, including multimodal regression, occupancy maps, and 1-step stochastic
policies. We instead frame the trajectory prediction problem
as classification over a diverse set of trajectories. The size
of this set remains manageable due to the limited number of
distinct actions that can be taken over a reasonable prediction horizon. We structure the trajectory set to a) ensure a
desired level of coverage of the state space, and b) eliminate
physically impossible trajectories. By dynamically generating trajectory sets based on the agent’s current state, we can
further improve our method’s efficiency. We demonstrate
our approach on public, real-world self-driving datasets,
and show that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
We are motivated by autonomous systems operating in
dynamic, interactive, and uncertain environments. Specifically, we focus on the problem of a self-driving car navigating in an urban environment, where it must share the road
with a diverse set of other agents, including vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians. In this context, reasoning about the
possible future states of agents is critical for safe and confident operation. Effective prediction of future agent states
depends on both road context (e.g., lane geometry, crosswalks, traffic lights) and the recent behavior of other agents.
Trajectory prediction is inherently challenging due to a
wide distribution of agent preferences (e.g., a cautious vs.
aggressive) and intents (e.g., turn right vs. go straight).
Useful predictions must represent multiple possibilities and
their associated likelihoods. Furthermore, we expect that
predicted trajectories are physically realizable.
Multimodal regression models appear naturally suited
for this task, but may degenerate during training into a single mode. Avoiding this “mode collapse” requires careful
∗ Work done during an internship at nuTonomy, an Aptiv company.

considerations [13, 7, 20]. Additionaly, most state-of-theart methods predict unconstrained positions [13, 7, 20, 31],
resulting in trajectories that may not be physically possible
for execution ([12] is a recent exception). Our main insights
leverage domain-specific knowledge to effectively structure
the output representation and address these concerns.
Our first insight is that there are relatively few distinct
actions that can be taken over a reasonable time horizon.
Dynamic constraints considerably limit the set of reachable
states over a standard six second prediction horizon, and
the inherent uncertainty in agent behavior outweighs small
approximation errors. We exploit this insight to formulate
multimodal, probabilistic trajectory prediction as classification over a trajectory set. This avoids mode collapse and lets
the user design the trajectory set to meet specific requirements (e.g., dynamically feasible, coverage guarantees).
Our second insight is that predicted trajectories should
be consistent with the current dynamic state. Thus, we formulate our output as motions relative to our initial state
(e.g., turn slightly right, accelerate). When integrated with
a dynamics model, the output is converted to an appropriate sequence of positions. Beyond helping ensure physically valid trajectories, this dynamic output representation
ensures that the outputs are diverse in the control space
across a wide range of speeds. While [12] exploit a similar insight for regression, we extend the use of a dynamic
representation to classification and anchor-box regression.
We now summarize our main contributions on multimodal, probabilistic trajectory prediction with CoverNet:
• introduce the notion of trajectory sets for multimodal
trajectory prediction, and show how to generate them
in both a fixed and dynamic manner;
• compare state-of-the-art methods on nuScenes [5], a
public, real-world urban driving benchmark;
• empirically show the benefits of classification on trajectory sets over multimodal regression.

2. Related Work
We focus on trajectory prediction approaches based on
deep learning, and refer the reader to [26] for a survey of
more classical approaches. The approaches below typically
114074

