Meshlet Priors for 3D Mesh Reconstruction

Estimating a mesh from an unordered set of sparse, noisy
3D points is a challenging problem that requires to carefully
select priors. Existing hand-crafted priors, such as smoothness regularizers, impose an undesirable trade-off between
attenuating noise and preserving local detail. Recent deeplearning approaches produce impressive results by learning priors directly from the data. However, the priors are
learned at the object level, which makes these algorithms
class-specific, and even sensitive to the pose of the object.
We introduce meshlets, small patches of mesh that we use
to learn local shape priors. Meshlets act as a dictionary of
local features and thus allow to use learned priors to reconstruct object meshes in any pose and from unseen classes,
even when the noise is large and the samples sparse.

1. Introduction
The ability to capture, represent, and digitally manipulate objects is crucial for a wide range of important applications, from content creation to animation, robotics, and
virtual reality. Among the different representations for 3D
objects (which also include depth maps, occupancy grids,
and point clouds), meshes are particularly appealing.
Estimating meshes of real-world objects, however, is not
straightforward since common capture strategies, such as
structured light [30] or multi-view stereo [14, 36], produce
point clouds or depth maps instead. These intermediate representations are noisy, sparse, and, when used to estimate a
continuous surface, they introduce a trade-off between overfitting to the noise and over-smoothing. Traditional methods
require hand-crafted priors (e.g., local smoothness) to balance noise and details, as is the case for Laplacian reconstruction [27]. Figure 1 shows that this balance is difficult
to strike when the point cloud is noisy (rows marked as N ).
Recent learning-based methods learn priors directly from a
large number of examples [16, 34, 15, 26, 29]. Because
This work was done while A. Badki was interning at NVIDIA.

P , N, T

Abstract

P, N, T

University of California, Santa Barbara

P, N , T

2

Pradeep Sen2

P, N, T

NVIDIA

Jan Kautz1

P, N, T

1

Orazio Gallo1

P, N , T

Abhishek Badki1,2

GT+PC

Lap-low

Lap-high AtlasNet

OccNet

Ours

Figure 1: Mesh reconstructions for objects in pose (P) and out
of pose ( P ), under low (N) and moderate ( N ) noise, and for
objects in (T) and out ( T ) of training. GT+PC ground truth
mesh and the point cloud used by the various methods to estimate the mesh. Traditional methods introduce a noise vs. smoothness trade-off (Laplacian low/high [27]). State-of-the-art, deeplearning methods (AtlasNet [11] and OccNet [26]) learn objectlevel priors, which causes them to fail on objects not seen in training ( T ), or even on objects that are just rotated w.r.t. the training
set ( P ). Our method learns local priors and forces global consistency with the point cloud.

of their ability to learn priors directly from the data, these
approaches can produce impressive results from both point
clouds and single images. However, they learn priors at the
object level, which limits their ability to reconstruct objects
from classes not seen during training (rows marked as T ).
They also struggle to disentangle the shape priors with the
object pose: state-of-the-art learning methods can fail completely on a rotated point cloud (rows marked as P ) even
though they can reconstruct the same point cloud when its
pose resembles that of the training set (rows marked as P).
Tatarchenko et al. suggest that many of these methods may
12849

