Probability Weighted Compact Feature for Domain Adaptive Retrieval
Fuxiang Huang1 , Lei Zhang1() , Yang Yang2 , Xichuan Zhou1
1
Learning Intelligence & Vision Essential (LiVE) Group
1
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{huangfuxiang, leizhang}@cqu.edu.cn, dlyyang@gmail.com, zxc@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive image retrieval includes single-domain
retrieval and cross-domain retrieval. Most of the existing
image retrieval methods only focus on single-domain retrieval, which assumes that the distributions of retrieval
databases and queries are similar. However, in practical
application, the discrepancies between retrieval databases
often taken in ideal illumination/pose/background/camera
conditions and queries usually obtained in uncontrolled
conditions are very large. In this paper, considering
the practical application, we focus on challenging crossdomain retrieval. To address the problem, we propose an
effective method named Probability Weighted Compact Feature Learning (PWCF), which provides inter-domain correlation guidance to promote cross-domain retrieval accuracy and learns a series of compact binary codes to improve the retrieval speed. First, we derive our loss function through the Maximum A Posteriori Estimation (MAP):
Bayesian Perspective (BP) induced focal-triplet loss, BP induced quantization loss and BP induced classification loss.
Second, we propose a common manifold structure between
domains to explore the potential correlation across domains. Considering the original feature representation is biased
due to the inter-domain discrepancy, the manifold structure is difficult to be constructed. Therefore, we propose
a new feature named Histogram Feature of Neighbors (HFON) from the sample statistics perspective. Extensive experiments on various benchmark databases validate that
our method outperforms many state-of-the-art image retrieval methods for domain adaptive image retrieval. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
fuxianghuang1/PWCF.

1. Introduction
The problem of domain adaptive image retrieval including single-domain retrieval and cross-domain retrieval is
an important task for many practical applications. Single-

Query

Database

Returned

Single-domain retrieval

...

Cross-domain retrieval

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. Many advanced methods
have achieved excellent performance in solving the single-domain
retrieval problem, but the performance drops signiﬁcantly when
they are used in cross-domain retrieval. In practice, queries and
databases usually come from different domains, so it is necessary
to solve the problem of cross-domain retrieval.

domain retrieval refers to a sort of image retrieval problem
that the queries and databases are both from the same domain. On the contrary, cross-domain retrieval means the
queries and databases permitting to come from different domains, which is more ﬂexible and applicable in real-world
applications. In practice, retrieval databases have often taken in ideal illumination/pose/background/camera conditions and queries usually obtained in uncontrolled conditions,
which leads to the large discrepancy between the databases
and queries. For example, mobile product image search [5]
aims at identifying a product, or retrieving similar products
from the online shopping domain based on a photo captured
in unconstrained scenarios by a mobile phone camera.
However, as shown in Fig. 1, most of the existing methods only focus on single-domain retrieval and the performance deteriorates rapidly in handling cross-domain retrieval. Few people have proposed solutions to crossdomain retrieval problems. DARN [10] simultaneously integrates the attributes and visual similarity constraint into
the retrieval feature learning to solve the cross-domain retrieval problem. However, attributes are usually insufﬁcient
and sorting high-dimensional features requires a lot of computation, resulting in slow retrieval.
Recently, due to the low storage and high computation
efﬁciency of binary codes, the hashing algorithm has been

9582

