An Adaptive Neural Network for Unsupervised Mosaic Consistency Analysis in
Image Forensics
Quentin Bammey
Rafael Grompone von Gioi Jean-Michel Morel
CMLA, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay
{quentin.bammey, grompone, morel}@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
Automatically finding suspicious regions in a potentially
forged image by splicing, inpainting or copy-move remains
a widely open problem. Blind detection neural networks
trained on benchmark data are flourishing. Yet, these methods do not provide an explanation of their detections. The
more traditional methods try to provide such evidence by
pointing out local inconsistencies in the image noise, JPEG
compression, chromatic aberration, or in the mosaic. In
this paper we develop a blind method that can train directly
on unlabelled and potentially forged images to point out
local mosaic inconsistencies. To this aim we designed a
CNN structure inspired from demosaicing algorithms and
directed at classifying image blocks by their position in the
image modulo (2 × 2). Creating a diversified benchmark
database using varied demosaicing methods, we explore the
efficiency of the method and its ability to adapt quickly to
any new data.

1. Introduction
Detecting image forgeries is a problem with critical applications ranging from the control of fake news in online
media and social networks [59] to the avoidance of scientific misconduct involving image manipulation1 . Images are
easy to modify in a visually realistic way, but those modifications can be difficult to detect automatically.
The most common image forgery techniques are copymove, both internal and external (splicing), inpainting and
enhancement, which may include a modification of the hue,
contrast, brightness, etc., of an image to hide objects or
change their meaning [22, 75]. The settings in which
these images are created and distributed may further alter the image and hinder certain detection methods. For
instance, uncompressed images have characteristic demosaicing and noise signatures which are nearly erased by a
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_
scientific_misconduct_incidents

strong compression. On the other hand, detection in tampered JPEG images may be based on the inconsistency of
JPEG encoding caused by splicing [56, 33, 21, 43, 6, 7, 42].
Yet, this detection method is so efficient that research on
counterforensics has been very active and has proposed efficient ways to reinstate a coherent JPEG encoding after
forgery [62, 63, 66, 20].
There are two concurrent paradigms for forgery detection techniques. The first way consists in developing many
different methods, that address separately the varied forgeries and inconsistencies created by these forgeries. Error
Level Analysis (ELA) [34] fits in this category and creates
a heatmap by recompressing the image and visualising the
difference. As we just mentioned, many methods look for
inconsistencies in JPEG encoding; many other try to detect
noise discrepancies [36, 58, 14, 27, 48, 49, 5, 51, 48, 49, 5,
51, 41, 67, 35, 16, 54, 47, 44, 76, 73] or attempt to directly
detect internal copy-move operations [68, 71, 70, 61, 1, 23].
The variety of setups before and after forgery makes exhaustiveness difficult, yet results obtained by such specific
methods are self-explanatory. However, with few exceptions such as the recent development of Siamese Networks,
which we briefly describe in Section 2, most of these methods are created manually, which can limit their performances, especially when forged images are created with a
combination of methods rather than just one move.
Another possibility is to consider forgery detection as a
unique learning problem and develop a structure – usually
a neural network – to classify and/or localise forgeries independently of the setup and forgery type. For instance in
[74] a heat map is computed, in [3] the network segments
the image into forged and non-forged parts. See also [10]
and [4]. While exhaustiveness is theoretically possible with
these methods, it is actually limited by the database itself:
they learn how to detect forgeries as seen in a training
database, and can thus fail when confronted with images
whose forgeries were made differently.
In this article, we choose to focus on the detection of
demosaicing artefacts to detect forged regions on an image.
Most cameras cannot directly capture colour. In order to
114194

