Don’t Even Look Once: Synthesizing Features for Zero-Shot Detection
Pengkai Zhu†
Hanxiao Wang†,‡
Venkatesh Saligrama†
†
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Boston University
‡
Onfido ltd, London, UK
†

{zpk, hxw, srv}@bu.edu, ‡ hanxiao.wang@onfido.com

Abstract
Zero-shot detection, namely, localizing both seen and
unseen objects, increasingly gains importance for largescale applications, with large number of object classes,
since, collecting sufficient annotated data with ground truth
bounding boxes is simply not scalable. While vanilla deep
neural networks deliver high performance for objects available during training, unseen object detection degrades significantly. At a fundamental level, while vanilla detectors
are capable of proposing bounding boxes, which include
unseen objects, they are often incapable of assigning highconfidence to unseen objects, due to the inherent precision/recall tradeoffs that requires rejecting background objects. We propose a novel detection algorithm “Don’t Even
Look Once (DELO),” that synthesizes visual features for unseen objects and augments existing training algorithms to
incorporate unseen object detection. Our proposed scheme
is evaluated on PascalVOC and MSCOCO, and we demonstrate significant improvements in test accuracy over vanilla
and other state-of-art zero-shot detectors.

1. Introduction
While deep learning based object detection methods
have achieved impressive average precision over the last
five years [13, 35, 32, 27, 14, 33], these gains can be attributed to the availability of training data in the form of
fully annotated ground-truth object bounding boxes.
Zero-Shot Detection (ZSD): The Need. As we scale
up detection to large-scale applications and “in the wild”
scenarios, the demand for bounding-box level annotations
across a large number of object classes is simply not scalable. Consequently, as object detection moves towards
large-scale 1 , it is imperative that we move towards a framework that serves the dual role of detecting objects seen during training as well as detecting unseen classes as and when
they appear at test-time.
1 Although annotations have increased in common detection datasets
(e.g. 20 classes provided by PASCAL VOC [8]; 80 in MSCOCO [26]), the
size is substantially smaller relative to image classification [7].

Reusing Existing Detectors. Vanilla DNN detectors relegate unseen objects into the background leading to missed
detection of unseen objects. To understand the root of this
issue, we note that most detectors, base their detection, on
three components, (a) proposing object bounding boxes; (b)
outputting objectness score to provide confidence for a candidate bounding box, and to filter out bounding boxes with
low confidence; (c) a classification score for recognizing the
object in a high-confidence bounding box.
Objectness Scores. Evidently, our empirical results suggest that, of the three different components, the high missdetection rate of vanilla DNN detectors for unseen objects
can be attributed to (b). Indeed, (a) is less of an issue, since
existing detectors typically propose hundreds of bounding
boxes per image, which also include unseen objects, but are
later filtered out because of poor objectness scores. Finally,
(c) is also not a significant issue, since, conditioned on having a good bounding box, the classification component performs sufficiently well even for unseen objects with rates
approaching zero-shot recognition accuracy (i.e., classification with ground-truth bounding boxes). Consequently, the
performance loss primarily stems from assigning poor confidence to bounding boxes that do not contain seen objects.
On the other hand, naively modifying confidence penalty,
while improving recall, leads to poor precision, as the system tends to assign higher confidence to bounding boxes
that are primarily part of the background as well.
Novelty. We seek to improve confidence predictions on
bounding boxes with sufficient overlap with seen and unseen objects, while still ensuring low confidence on bounding boxes that primarily contain background. Our dilemma
is that we do not observe unseen objects during training,
even possibly as unannotated images. With this in mind,
we propose to leverage semantic vectors of unseen objects,
and construct synthetic unseen features based on a conditional variational auto-encoder (CVAE). To train a confidence predictor, we then propose to augment the current
training pipeline, composed of the three components outlined above, along with the unseen synthetic visual features.
This leads to a modified empirical objective for confidence
111693

