Fine-grained Image-to-Image Transformation towards Visual Recognition
Wei Xiong1
1

Yutong He1 Yixuan Zhang1
1
University of Rochester

Wenhan Luo2 Lin Ma2
2
Tencent AI Lab

Jiebo Luo1

{wxiong5,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, yhe29@u.rochester.edu, yzh215@ur.rochester.edu
2

{whluo.china, forest.linma}@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing image-to-image transformation approaches primarily focus on synthesizing visually pleasing data. Generating images with correct identity labels is challenging yet
much less explored. It is even more challenging to deal with
image transformation tasks with large deformation in poses,
viewpoints, or scales while preserving the identity, such as
face rotation and object viewpoint morphing. In this paper, we aim at transforming an image with a fine-grained
category to synthesize new images that preserve the identity of the input image, which can thereby benefit the subsequent fine-grained image recognition and few-shot learning tasks. The generated images, transformed with large
geometric deformation, do not necessarily need to be of
high visual quality but are required to maintain as much
identity information as possible. To this end, we adopt a
model based on generative adversarial networks to disentangle the identity related and unrelated factors of an image. In order to preserve the fine-grained contextual details of the input image during the deformable transformation, a constrained nonalignment connection method is proposed to construct learnable highways between intermediate convolution blocks in the generator. Moreover, an adaptive identity modulation mechanism is proposed to transfer
the identity information into the output image effectively.
Extensive experiments on the CompCars and Multi-PIE
datasets demonstrate that our model preserves the identity
of the generated images much better than the state-of-theart image-to-image transformation models, and as a result
significantly boosts the visual recognition performance in
fine-grained few-shot learning.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image transformation is an important field of
visual synthesis and has many successful applications [23,
50, 46, 19, 53]. A critical application of image-to-image
transformation is to synthesize new images that can benefit the visual recognition systems. For example, synthe-

sized images can augment the original training data, and
subsequently boost the performance of image classification
tasks [1, 45, 52]. Synthesized images that well preserve the
categorical information of the input image have been successfully applied to boost face verification [49, 3], person
re-identification [31] and so on.
In this paper, we focus on fine-grained image-to-image
transformation towards visual recognition, i.e., transforming an image with a fine-grained category to synthesize new
images that preserve the identity of the input image, so that
the new samples can be used to boost the performance of
recognition systems. We pay special attention to transformations with large geometric deformations in object pose,
viewpoint, and scale, e.g., face rotation [17], caricature generation [28] and object attribute editing [2, 25] without ruining the class/identity. For the ultimate goal of recognition,
the generated images are not necessarily required to be of
high visual quality. However, they should be correctly classified even under the scenarios of fine-grained generation.
Achieving such a goal is difficult, since images from different fine-grained categories may exhibit only subtle differences. Transforming an image with geometric deformations
can easily change the category of the image.
Conventional image-to-image transformation approaches primarily focus on synthesizing visually pleasing
images. However, models that perform well in generating visually pleasing data do not necessarily generate
identity-preserved data, thus may not benefit the subsequent
recognition tasks. The problem is even more severe in
fine-grained recognition because the differences between
categories are inherently subtle. A possible reason is that
existing generative models are not specifically designed for
fine-grained image synthesis with identity preservation and
visual recognition in mind.
Specifically, the performance of existing generators may
be limited for the following reasons. 1) Typical generators for image-to-image transformation adopt an encoderdecoder architecture. The encoder maps the image to a
condensed latent feature representation, which is then transformed into a new image by the decoder. During encoding,

5840

