LiDARsim: Realistic LiDAR Simulation by Leveraging the Real World
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Shenlong Wang1,2 Kelvin Wong1,2 Wenyuan Zeng1,2
Mikita Sazanovich1 Shuhan Tan1 Bin Yang1,2 Wei-Chiu Ma1,3 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto
3
Massachusetts Institute of Techonology
{manivasagam, slwang, kelvin.wong, wenyuan, sazanovich, shuhan, byang10, weichiu, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
We tackle the problem of producing realistic simulations of LiDAR point clouds, the sensor of preference for
most self-driving vehicles. We argue that, by leveraging
real data, we can simulate the complex world more realistically compared to employing virtual worlds built from
CAD/procedural models. Towards this goal, we first build
a large catalog of 3D static maps and 3D dynamic objects by driving around several cities with our self-driving
fleet. We can then generate scenarios by selecting a scene
from our catalog and ”virtually” placing the self-driving
vehicle (SDV) and a set of dynamic objects from the catalog in plausible locations in the scene. To produce realistic simulations, we develop a novel simulator that captures both the power of physics-based and learning-based
simulation. We first utilize ray casting over the 3D scene
and then use a deep neural network to produce deviations
from the physics-based simulation, producing realistic LiDAR point clouds. We showcase LiDARsim’s usefulness for
perception algorithms-testing on long-tail events and endto-end closed-loop evaluation on safety-critical scenarios.

1. Introduction
On a cold winter night, you are hosting a holiday gathering for friends and family. As the festivities come to a
close, you notice that your best friend does not have a ride,
so you request a self-driving car to take her home. You say
farewell and go back inside to sleep, resting well knowing
your friend is in good hands and will make it back safely.
Many open questions remain to be answered to make
self-driving vehicles (SDVs) a safe and trustworthy choice.
How can we verify that the SDV can detect and handle properly objects it has never seen before (Fig. 1, right)? How
do we guarantee that the SDV is robust and can maneuver safely in dangerous and safety-critical scenarios (Fig. 1,
left)? More generally, what evidence would you need to be
confident about placing a loved one in a self-driving car?

Figure 1: Left: What if a car hidden by the bus turns into
our lane - can we avoid collision? Right: What if there is a
goose on the road - can we detect it? See Fig. 11 for results.
To make SDVs come closer to becoming a reality, we
need to improve the safety of the autonomous system,
demonstrate the safety case, and earn public trust. There
are three main approaches that the self-driving industry typically uses for improving and testing safety: (1) real-world
repeatable structured testing in a controlled environment,
(2) evaluating on pre-recorded real-world data, (3) running
experiments in simulation. Each of these approaches, while
useful and effective, have limitations.
Real-world testing in a structured environment, such as
a test track, allows for full end-to-end testing of the autonomy system, but it is constrained to a very limited number of test cases, as it is very expensive and time consuming. Furthermore, safety-critical scenarios (i.e., mattress
falling off of a truck at high speed, animals crossing street)
are difficult to test safely and ethically. Evaluating on prerecorded real-world data can leverage the high-diversity of
real-world scenarios, but we can only collect data that we
observe. Thus, the number of miles necessary to collect
sufficient long-tail events is way too large. Additionally,
it is expensive to obtain labels. Like test-track evaluation,
we can never fully test how the system will behave for scenarios it has never encountered and what the safety limit
of the system is, which is crucial for demonstrating safety
and gaining confidence with the public. Furthermore, because the data is prerecorded, this approach prevents the
agent from interacting with the environment, as the sensor
data will look different if the executed plan differs to what
happened, and thus it cannot be used to fully test the system performance. Simulation systems can in principle solve
111167

