Visual-Semantic Matching by Exploring High-Order Attention and Distraction

1

Yongzhi Li1 , Duo Zhang2 , Yadong Mu3∗
Center for Data Science, EECS, 3 Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
{yongzhili,zhduodyx,myd}@pku.edu.cn
2

(A)

Abstract
Cross-modality semantic matching is a vital task in computer vision and has attracted increasing attention in recent
years. Existing methods mainly explore object-based alignment between image objects and text words. In this work,
we address this task from two previously-ignored aspects:
high-order semantic information (e.g., object-predicatesubject triplet, object-attribute pair) and visual distraction
(i.e., despite the high relevance to textual query, images may
also contain many prominent distracting objects or visual
relations). Specifically, we build scene graphs for both visual and textual modalities. Our technical contributions are
two-folds: firstly, we formulate the visual-semantic matching task as an attention-driven cross-modality scene graph
matching problem. Graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
are used to extract high-order information from two scene
graphs. A novel cross-graph attention mechanism is proposed to contextually reweigh graph elements and calculate
the inter-graph similarity; Secondly, some top-ranked samples are indeed false matching due to the co-occurrence of
both highly-relevant and distracting information. We devise
an information-theoretic measure for estimating semantic
distraction and re-ranking the initial retrieval results. Comprehensive experiments and ablation studies on two large
public datasets (MS-COCO and Flickr30K) demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed method and the effectiveness
of both high-order attention and distraction.

1. Introduction
The rapid growth of various multimedia data such as
text, images, and videos has brought great difﬁculties to
users in accurate and effective search nowadays. Among
them, cross-modal search between vision and language is of
great importance in practical applications. Therefore, crossmodal retrieval between images and text has attracted plenty
of attention from researchers in recent years [43]. This paper focuses on cross-modal retrieval of text and images with
complex semantics. For this task, how to effectively elimi∗ Corresponding author.

(B)

(C)

A man riding
on a horse on a
street
A brown dog
laying in the grass
with a yellow
frisbee
A lady on a
motorcycle with
a helmet on
Figure 1. Illustration of the importance of predicate (top row), attributes (middle row), and semantic distraction (bottom row) in
visual-semantic matching. From left to right, three columns represent the querying caption, ground-truth images, and the highlyranked false matching returned by conventional methods, respectively. Key words in queries are highlighted in bold.

nate the huge gap between data of two different modalities
is the key to solve the problem.
Thanks to advances in computer vision and natural language processing, some early developments [17, 5] have
proposed to use pre-trained neural networks that encode
multi-modality data into feature vectors, then project them
into a common feature space and measure the similarity by
computing the distance between their representations. Although such methods are capable of capturing global semantic information, they lack accurate modeling of highlevel semantic information and are not clearly interpretable.
Some modern methods have attempted to perform some
more granular semantic learning to enhance the feature representation of data. For example, Karpathy et al. [14]
aligned textual words and image regions for image captioning. The work in [10, 35] proposed using CNN to extract
semantic concepts from pictures to enhance the representation of global features. Kuang et al. [20] introduced an
attention mechanism to identify important parts of text and
images.
A majority of these methods are based on ﬁrst-order
12786

