Two-shot Spatially-varying BRDF and Shape Estimation
Mark Boss1∗ ,

Varun Jampani2 ,
1

Flash

No-Flash
Mask

Kihwan Kim2 ,

University of Tübingen,

Novel Re-render

Diffuse

Specular

Hendrik P.A. Lensch1 ,
2

Jan Kautz2

NVIDIA

Roughness

Normal

Depth

Figure 1: Practical SVBRDF and shape estimation. Sample two-shot input and the corresponding estimates for SVBRDF
(albedo, specularity, roughness) and shape (depth and normals). Samples are taken from [5].

Abstract
Capturing the shape and spatially-varying appearance
(SVBRDF) of an object from images is a challenging task
that has applications in both computer vision and graphics. Traditional optimization-based approaches often need
a large number of images taken from multiple views in a
controlled environment. Newer deep learning-based approaches require only a few input images, but the reconstruction quality is not on par with optimization techniques.
We propose a novel deep learning architecture with a stagewise estimation of shape and SVBRDF. The earlier predictions guide each estimation, and a joint refinement network
later refines both SVBRDF and shape. We follow a practical mobile image capture setting and use unaligned twoshot flash and no-flash images as input. Both our two-shot
image capture and network inference can run on mobile
hardware. We also create a large-scale synthetic training dataset with domain-randomized geometry and realis* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

Dataset and Code available at: markboss.me/publication/
cvpr20-two-shot-brdf

tic materials. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets show that our networks trained on a
synthetic dataset can generalize well to real-world images.
Comparisons with recent approaches demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
The estimation of intrinsic attributes of a scene such as
shape and reflectance of objects and the illumination condition of the scene is often called as an inverse rendering
problem in computer vision [51, 45, 23], and has been a
core of many applications such as relighting of images [46],
photo-realistic mixed reality [39], and automatic creation of
assets for content creation tasks [4].
In this work, we are interested in the automatic estimation of the shape and appearance of the object in a scene
from only two images. In particular, we represent the shape
of the object with a depth map and the appearance as a Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) [43]. A
BRDF describes the low-level material properties of an object that defines how light is reflected at any given point
on an object surface. One of the most popular parametric
13982

