SDFDiff: Differentiable Rendering of Signed Distance Fields for 3D Shape
Optimization
Yue Jiang, Dantong Ji, Zhizhong Han, Matthias Zwicker
University of Maryland, College Park
{yuejiang, dji, h312h, zwicker}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We propose SDFDiff, a novel approach for image-based
shape optimization using differentiable rendering of 3D
shapes represented by signed distance functions (SDFs).
Compared to other representations, SDFs have the advantage that they can represent shapes with arbitrary topology,
and that they guarantee watertight surfaces. We apply our
approach to the problem of multi-view 3D reconstruction,
where we achieve high reconstruction quality and can capture complex topology of 3D objects. In addition, we employ
a multi-resolution strategy to obtain a robust optimization
algorithm. We further demonstrate that our SDF-based differentiable renderer can be integrated with deep learning
models, which opens up options for learning approaches on
3D objects without 3D supervision. In particular, we apply
our method to single-view 3D reconstruction and achieve
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The “vision as inverse graphics” or “inverse rendering”
strategy has long been attractive as a conceptual framework
to solve inverse problems such as recovering shape or appearance models from images. In this analysis-by-synthesis
approach, the goal is to reproduce given input images by
synthesizing them using an image formation model, possibly including shape, appearance, illumination, and camera
parameters. Solving this problem implies finding suitable
model parameters (shape, appearance, illumination, camera) that describe the underlying scene. While conceptually
simple, this approach can be challenging to use in practice,
because it requires a suitable parameterization of a powerful
image formation model, and effective numerical techniques
to solve the resulting optimization problem. Recently, automatic differentiation has attracted renewed attention to implement differentiable renderers or image formation models
that can be used in gradient-based optimization techniques.
In particular, it is attractive to combine differentiable ren-

dering with neural networks to solve highly ill-posed inverse problems, such as single-view 3D reconstruction.
In this paper, we advocate using signed distance fields
(SDFs) in a differentiable image formation model because
they have several advantages over other geometry representations. In contrast to triangle meshes, the surface topology is not fixed in SDFs and can adapt to the actual scene
topology during optimization. Point clouds can also represent arbitrary topologies but they do not provide continuous surface reconstructions. Instead, SDFs inherently represent continuous, watertight surfaces, which are required for
downstream applications such as 3D printing and physicsbased simulation. In addition, SDFs can easily be used in
a multi-resolution framework, which is important to avoid
undesired local minima during optimization.
The main contribution of our paper is SDFDiff, a differentiable renderer based on ray-casting SDFs. Our renderer
is integrated with a deep learning framework such that it can
be combined with neural networks to learn how to solve
highly ill-posed inverse problems. Finally, we provide an
effective multi-resolution strategy to improve the robustness
of gradient-based optimization. We demonstrate the usefulness of our approach using several application studies,
including multi-view 3D reconstruction and learning-based
single-view 3D reconstruction. Our results demonstrate the
advantages of SDFs over other surface representations.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We introduce a differentiable renderer based on raycasting SDFs, and we describe an implementation that
is integrated into a standard deep learning framework.
Advantages of using SDFs for differentiable rendering
and shape optimization include that we can adapt the
topology freely, and that the resulting shapes are guaranteed to consist of watertight surfaces.
• We present results of a multi-view 3D reconstruction approach using shape optimization via differentiable rendering. Using a multi-resolution approach,
our gradient-descent optimization reliably converges

1251

