Hierarchical Pyramid Diverse Attention Networks for Face Recognition
Qiangchang Wang1 , Tianyi Wu2,3 , He Zheng2,3 , Guodong Guo1,2,3,*
1
West Virginia University, Morgantown, USA, 2 Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
qiangchang.wang666@gmail.com, {wutianyi01,zhenghe01}@baidu.com,guodong.guo@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved a great success in face
recognition (FR), however, few existing models take hierarchical multi-scale local features into consideration. In this
work, we propose a hierarchical pyramid diverse attention
(HPDA) network. First, it is observed that local patches
would play important roles in FR when the global face
appearance changes dramatically. Some recent works apply attention modules to locate local patches automatically
without relying on face landmarks. Unfortunately, without
considering diversity, some learned attentions tend to have
redundant responses around some similar local patches,
while neglecting other potential discriminative facial parts.
Meanwhile, local patches may appear at different scales
due to pose variations or large expression changes. To alleviate these challenges, we propose a pyramid diverse attention (PDA) to learn multi-scale diverse local representations automatically and adaptively. More specifically, a
pyramid attention is developed to capture multi-scale features. Meanwhile, a diverse learning is developed to encourage models to focus on different local patches and generate diverse local features. Second, almost all existing
models focus on extracting features from the last convolutional layer, lacking of local details or small-scale face
parts in lower layers. Instead of simple concatenation or
addition, we propose to use a hierarchical bilinear pooling
(HBP) to fuse information from multiple layers effectively.
Thus, the HPDA is developed by integrating the PDA into
the HBP. Experimental results on several datasets show the
effectiveness of the HPDA, compared to the state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
CNN representations achieve the state-of-the-art in face
recognition (FR). However, most existing models learn
∗ Corresponding author.
‡ Part of this work was done when Qiangchang Wang was a research
intern with Baidu.

Figure 1. Illustration on the effects of local CNNs, the diverse
learning and global CNN. Local CNNs learn diverse local representations using multiple local branches at various scales from
different hierarchical layers. For good illustration, only one scale
and the last convolutional layer are used. The number of local
branches is 3. The diverse learning guides multiple local branches
to locate diverse local patches. Global CNN extracts holistic representations. Column 1: faces with varying challenging factors
(e.g. resolution, pose, occlusion, aging and expression). Column
2: a model which has a single local branch. Columns 3, 4 and 5:
1st , 2nd and 3rd local branch of local CNNs, which are guided by
the diverse learning. Column 6: local CNNs. Column 7: global
CNN. Column 8: fused global and local CNNs.

global representations where whole faces are regarded as
CNN inputs [22, 34, 19, 3]. Few works take hierarchical
multi-scale local representations into account.
It is observed that global face geometry and appearances
may change dramatically under pose, age, or large quality
variations. In contrast, some facial parts remain similar in
these cases, which would play important roles in FR. For
instance, as shown in Fig. 1, it is difficult to consider the
global face representation to match the frontal face (Row 1)
with the profile (Row 2) which is influenced by blur, pose
and background distraction. However, we notice that similar eyes in these two faces can contribute to verification.

8326

