UCTGAN: Diverse Image Inpainting based on Unsupervised Cross-Space
Translation
Lei Zhao∗ , Qihang Mo, Sihuan Lin, Zhizhong Wang,
Zhiwen Zuo, Haibo Chen, Wei Xing, Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{cszhl, moqihang, linsh, endywon, zzwcs, feng123, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1: Exemplar inpainting results of our method on images of face (from CelebA-HQ [9]), building ( from Paris [4]) and
natural scene (from Places2 [30]). Missing regions are shown in gray. From left to right, we show the masked input image,
the diverse and reasonable outputs of our model without any post-processing (zoom in to see the details).

Abstract
Although existing image inpainting approaches have
been able to produce visually realistic and semantically correct results, they produce only one result for each masked
input. In order to produce multiple and diverse reasonable
solutions, we present Unsupervised Cross-space Translation Generative Adversarial Network (called UCTGAN)
which mainly consists of three network modules: conditional encoder module, manifold projection module and
generation module. The manifold projection module and
the generation module are combined to learn one-to-one
image mapping between two spaces in an unsupervised way
by projecting instance image space and conditional completion image space into common low-dimensional manifold
space, which can greatly improve the diversity of the re* Corresponding author

paired samples. For understanding of global information,
we also introduce a new cross semantic attention layer that
exploits the long-range dependencies between the known
parts and the completed parts, which can improve realism
and appearance consistency of repaired samples. Extensive experiments on various datasets such as CelebA-HQ,
Places2, Paris Street View and ImageNet clearly demonstrate that our method not only generates diverse inpainting
solutions from the same image to be repaired, but also has
high image quality.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting (also known as image completion or
image hole-filling) refers to using the known information of
the images and a specific method to repair a partially damaged or missing image in an undetectable way. It fills the

5741

