A Multi-Hypothesis Approach to Color Constancy
Daniel Hernandez-Juarez1 , Sarah Parisot1,2 , Benjamin Busam1,3 , Aleš Leonardis1
Gregory Slabaugh1 , Steven McDonagh1
dhernandez0@gmail.com,
{sarah.parisot, benjamin.busam, ales.leonardis, gregory.slabaugh, steven.mcdonagh} @huawei.com
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

2

Mila, Montréal

3

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Contemporary approaches frame the color constancy
problem as learning camera specific illuminant mappings.
While high accuracy can be achieved on camera specific
data, these models depend on camera spectral sensitivity and typically exhibit poor generalisation to new devices. Additionally, regression methods produce point estimates that do not explicitly account for potential ambiguities among plausible illuminant solutions, due to the illposed nature of the problem. We propose a Bayesian framework that naturally handles color constancy ambiguity via
a multi-hypothesis strategy. Firstly, we select a set of candidate scene illuminants in a data-driven fashion and apply
them to a target image to generate a set of corrected images.
Secondly, we estimate, for each corrected image, the likelihood of the light source being achromatic using a cameraagnostic CNN. Finally, our method explicitly learns a final
illumination estimate from the generated posterior probability distribution. Our likelihood estimator learns to answer a camera-agnostic question and thus enables effective
multi-camera training by disentangling illuminant estimation from the supervised learning task. We extensively evaluate our proposed approach and additionally set a benchmark for novel sensor generalisation without re-training.
Our method provides state-of-the-art accuracy on multiple
public datasets (up to 11% median angular error improvement) while maintaining real-time execution.

1. Introduction
Color constancy is an essential part of digital image processing pipelines. When treated as a computational process,
this involves estimation of scene light source color, present
at capture time, and correcting an image such that its appearance matches that of the scene captured under an achromatic light source. The algorithmic process of recovering
the illuminant of a scene is commonly known as computa-

Figure 1. Our multi-hypothesis strategy allows us to leverage
multi-camera datasets. Example image taken from the NUS
dataset [14]. Single camera training: (a) state of the art method
FFCC [7] and (b) our method obtains similar angular-error. Training with all 8 dataset cameras: aggregate all images to (c) define
FFCC histogram center and (d) use an illuminant candidate set per
camera. [ gr , gb ] color space plots show training set illuminant distributions. Each camera is encoded with a different color in (d)
to highlight camera-specific illuminants. Our model leverages the
extra data to achieve lower angular error. Images are rendered in
sRGB color space.

tional Color Constancy (CC) or Automatic White Balance
(AWB). Accurate estimation is essential for visual aesthetics [24], as well as downstream high-level computer vision
tasks [2, 4, 13, 17] that typically require color-unbiased and
device-independent images.
Under the prevalent assumption that the scene is illuminated by a single or dominant light source, the observed
pixels of an image are typically modelled using the physical model of Lambertian image formation captured under a
trichromatic photosensor:

2270

