Towards Unsupervised Learning of Generative Models
for 3D Controllable Image Synthesis
†

Yiyi Liao1,2,∗ Katja Schwarz1,2,∗ Lars Mescheder1,2,3,
Andreas Geiger1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen 3 Amazon, Tübingen
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract

Classical Rendering Pipeline
Render

3D Design

In recent years, Generative Adversarial Networks have
achieved impressive results in photorealistic image synthesis. This progress nurtures hopes that one day the classical rendering pipeline can be replaced by efficient models
that are learned directly from images. However, current
image synthesis models operate in the 2D domain where
disentangling 3D properties such as camera viewpoint or
object pose is challenging. Furthermore, they lack an interpretable and controllable representation. Our key hypothesis is that the image generation process should be modeled in 3D space as the physical world surrounding us is
intrinsically three-dimensional. We define the new task of
3D controllable image synthesis and propose an approach
for solving it by reasoning both in 3D space and in the 2D
image domain. We demonstrate that our model is able to
disentangle latent 3D factors of simple multi-object scenes
in an unsupervised fashion from raw images. Compared to
pure 2D baselines, it allows for synthesizing scenes that are
consistent wrt. changes in viewpoint or object pose. We further evaluate various 3D representations in terms of their
usefulness for this challenging task.

1. Introduction
Realistic image synthesis is a fundamental task in computer vision and graphics with many applications including
gaming, simulation, virtual reality and data augmentation.
In all these applications, it is essential that the image synthesis algorithm allows for controlling the 3D content and
produces coherent images when changing the camera position and object locations. Imagine exploring a virtual reality
room. When walking around and manipulating objects in
the room, it is essential to observe coherent images, i.e. manipulating the pose of one object should not alter properties
(such as the color) of any other object in the scene.
∗ Joint first authors with equal contribution.
† This work was done prior to joining Amazon.

2D Generative Model
2D
Generator

Sample

Our Approach
Sample

3D
Generator

Render

2D
Generator

Figure 1: Motivation. While classical rendering algorithms
require a holistic scene representation, image-based generative neural networks are able to synthesize images from a
latent code and can hence be trained directly from images.
We propose to consider the generative process in both 3D
and 2D space, yielding a 3D controllable image synthesis
model which learns both the 3D content creation process as
well as the rendering process jointly from raw images.
Currently, image synthesis in these applications is realized using rendering engines (e.g., OpenGL) as illustrated
in Fig. 1 (top). This approach provides full control over
the 3D content since the input to the rendering algorithm is
a holistic description of the 3D scene. However, creating
photorealistic content and 3D assets for a movie or video
game is an extremely expensive and time-consuming process and requires the concerted effort of many 3D artists. In
this paper, we therefore ask the following question:
Is it possible to learn the simulation pipeline including
3D content creation from raw 2D image observations?
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
have achieved impressive results for photorealistic image
synthesis [21, 22, 29] and hence emerged as a promising alternative to classical rendering algorithms, see Fig. 1 (middle). However, a major drawback of image-based GANs is
that the learned latent representation is typically “3D entan15871

