A Local-to-Global Approach to Multi-modal Movie Scene Segmentation
Anyi Rao1 , Linning Xu2 , Yu Xiong1 , Guodong Xu1 , Qingqiu Huang1 , Bolei Zhou1 , Dahua Lin1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{anyirao, xy017, xg018, hq016, bzhou, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, linningxu@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene, as the crucial unit of storytelling in movies, contains complex activities of actors and their interactions in a
physical environment. Identifying the composition of scenes
serves as a critical step towards semantic understanding of
movies. This is very challenging – compared to the videos
studied in conventional vision problems, e.g. action recognition, as scenes in movies usually contain much richer
temporal structures and more complex semantic information. Towards this goal, we scale up the scene segmentation
task by building a large-scale video dataset MovieScenes,
which contains 21K annotated scene segments from 150
movies. We further propose a local-to-global scene segmentation framework, which integrates multi-modal information across three levels, i.e. clip, segment, and movie.
This framework is able to distill complex semantics from
hierarchical temporal structures over a long movie, providing top-down guidance for scene segmentation. Our experiments show that the proposed network is able to segment a
movie into scenes with high accuracy, consistently outperforming previous methods. We also found that pretraining
on our MovieScenes can bring significant improvements to
the existing approaches. 1

1. Introduction
Imagine you are watching the movie Mission Impossible starred by Tom Cruise: In a fight scene, Ethan leaps
onto a helicopter’s landing skid and attaches an exploding
gum to the windshield to destroy the enemy. Suddenly, the
story jumps into an emotional scene where Ethan pulled the
trigger and sacrificed his life to save his wife Julia. Such
a dramatic change of scenes plays an important role in the
movie’s storytelling. Generally speaking, a movie is composed of a well-designed series of intriguing scenes with
transitions, where the underlying storyline determines the
1 The dataset will be published in compliance with regulations. Intermediate features, pretrained models and related codes will be released.
https://anyirao.com/projects/SceneSeg.html

Shot A

Shot B

Previous Scene

Shot 1

Shot 4

Shot 5

(a)

(b)

Shot C

Shot D

Shot 2

Shot 3

Shot 6

Next Scene

Figure 1. When we look at any single shot from figure (a), e.g.
the woman in shot B, we cannot infer what the current event is.
Only when we consider all the shots 1-6 in this scene, as shown in
figure (b), we can recognize that “this woman is inviting a couple
to dance with the band.”

order of the scenes being presented. Therefore recognizing
the movie scenes, including the detection of scene boundaries and the understanding of the scene content, facilitates
a wide-range of movie understanding tasks such as scene
classification, cross movie scene retrieval, human interaction graph and human-centric storyline construction.
It is worth noting that scenes and shots are essentially
different. In general, a shot is captured by a camera that operates for an uninterrupted period of time and thus is visually continuous; while a scene is a semantic unit at a higher
level. As illustrated in Figure 1, a scene comprises a sequence of shots to present a semantically coherent part of
the story. Therefore, whereas a movie can be readily divided into shots based on simple visual cues using existing
tools [23], the task of identifying those sub-sequences of
shots that constitute scenes is challenging, as it requires semantic understanding in order to discover the associations
between those shots that are semantically consistent but visually dissimilar.
There has been extensive studies on video understanding. Despite the great progress in this area, most existing
works focus on recognizing the categories of certain activities from short videos [28, 6, 14]. More importantly, these
works assume a list of pre-defined categories that are visually distinguishable. However, for movie scene segmentation, it is impossible to have such a list of categories. Ad110146

