Correlation-Guided Attention for Corner Detection Based Visual Tracking
Fei Du
Peng Liu
Wei Zhao ∗
Xianglong Tang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{feiaxyt, pengliu, zhaowei, tangxl}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate bounding box estimation has recently attracted much attention in the tracking community because traditional multi-scale search strategies cannot estimate tight
bounding boxes in many challenging scenarios involving
changes to the target. A tracker capable of detecting target
corners can flexibly adapt to such changes, but existing corner detection based tracking methods have not achieved adequate success. We analyze the reasons for their failure and
propose a state-of-the-art tracker that performs correlationguided attentional corner detection in two stages. First, a
region of interest (RoI) is obtained by employing an efficient
Siamese network to distinguish the target from the background. Second, a pixel-wise correlation-guided spatial
attention module and a channel-wise correlation-guided
channel attention module exploit the relationship between
the target template and the RoI to highlight corner regions
and enhance features of the RoI for corner detection. The
correlation-guided attention modules improve the accuracy of corner detection, thus enabling accurate bounding
box estimation. When trained on large-scale datasets using a novel RoI augmentation strategy, the performance of
the proposed tracker, running at a high speed of 70 FPS, is
comparable with that of state-of-the-art trackers in meeting
five challenging performance benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision, and it has attracted increasing attention in recent years. The goal of object tracking is to
locate a target at any point in a video based on the state
of the target in the first frame. The ability to do this online would have multiple applications in human-computer
interactions, video surveillance, and unmanned control systems. Although significant progress has been made, factors such as occlusion, deformation, and scale variation still
pose formidable challenges.
∗ Corresponding author

A tracker is normally required both to locate the target
robustly and to estimate its state (frequently represented by
a bounding box) accurately. Most trackers focus on target location through the construction of robust classifiers,
ignoring target-state estimation. As a result, most trackers cannot handle severe target deformation, because they
rely on a multi-scale search strategy [25, 7] to obtain the
bounding box. Estimating the bounding box would solve
this problem, and a number of ways to do this have been
proposed, including the linear regression model [32], the region proposal network (RPN) [24], and the intersection over
union (IoU) overlap prediction network [6]. As a bounding
box is determined by its top-left and bottom-right corners, one straightforward way to estimate it is to predict the
coordinates of these two points. GOTURN [15] directly estimates the corner coordinates using a fully connected network. SATIN [12] employs a corner pooling strategy [22]
in a Siamese network [1] to predict heatmaps and location
offsets for target corners. By detecting corners, the tracker
can flexibly adapt to deformations and scale changes in the
target. However, approaches based on corner detection have
not yet achieved a level of performance comparable to that
of the other state-of-the-art trackers [46, 23, 6].
Existing corner detection-based tracking methods have
several limitations. First, methods that directly detect corners are complicated by the need to resolve ambiguities: objects in the background also have corners, and the tracker
may have difficulty distinguishing them from the corners of
the target being tracked. Second, existing methods do not
effectively explore the relationship between the template
and the test image. As the target is unknown beforehand,
template appearance information is often integrated into the
test image representations through an integration component. In recent Siamese trackers [1, 37], a cross-correlation
operation is used to calculate similarity between the template and the test image. The target center is located by finding the maximum response. However, spatial information
about the corners is not explicitly encoded in the correlation results. Third, existing methods do not benefit from the
powerful representation capacities of deeper networks (like
ResNet [14]), using either a shallow backbone network [15]

6836

