Transferring and Regularizing Prediction for Semantic Segmentation∗
Yiheng Zhang† , Zhaofan Qiu† , Ting Yao‡ , Chong-Wah Ngo§ , Dong Liu† , and Tao Mei‡
†

‡

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
§
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{yihengzhang.chn, zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com

cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@jd.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation often requires a large set of images with pixel-level annotations. In the view of extremely
expensive expert labeling, recent research has shown that
the models trained on photo-realistic synthetic data (e.g.,
computer games) with computer-generated annotations can
be adapted to real images. Despite this progress, without constraining the prediction on real images, the models will easily overfit on synthetic data due to severe domain mismatch. In this paper, we novelly exploit the intrinsic properties of semantic segmentation to alleviate such
problem for model transfer. Specifically, we present a Regularizer of Prediction Transfer (RPT) that imposes the intrinsic properties as constraints to regularize model transfer in an unsupervised fashion. These constraints include
patch-level, cluster-level and context-level semantic prediction consistencies at different levels of image formation.
As the transfer is label-free and data-driven, the robustness of prediction is addressed by selectively involving a
subset of image regions for model regularization. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify the proposal of
RPT on the transfer of models trained on GTA5 and SYNTHIA (synthetic data) to Cityscapes dataset (urban street
scenes). RPT shows consistent improvements when injecting the constraints on several neural networks for semantic
segmentation. More remarkably, when integrating RPT into
the adversarial-based segmentation framework, we report
to-date the best results: mIoU of 53.2%/51.7% when transferring from GTA5/SYNTHIA to Cityscapes, respectively.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at assigning semantic labels
to every pixel of an image. Leveraging on CNNs [18, 22,
42, 45, 46], significant progress has been reported for this
fundamental task [6, 7, 30, 36]. One drawback of the existing approaches, nevertheless, is the requirement of large
quantities of pixel-level annotations, such as in VOC [15],
∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

COCO [28] and Cityscapes [11] datasets, for model training. Labeling of semantics at pixel-level is cost expensive
and time consuming. For example, the Cityscapes dataset
is composed of 5,000 high-quality pixel-wise annotated images, and the annotation on a single image is reported to
take more than 1.5 hours.
An alternative is by utilizing synthetic data, which is
largely available in 3D engines (e.g., SYNTHIA [41]) and
3D computer games (e.g., GTA5 [40]). The ground-truth semantics of these data can be automatically generated without manual labeling. Nevertheless, in the case where the
synthetic data is different from the real images, the domain gap might be difficult to bridge. Unsupervised domain adaptation is generally regarded as an appealing way
to address the problem of domain gap. The existing approaches include narrowing the gap by transferring images
across domains [14, 32, 50] and learning domain-invariant
representation via adversarial mechanism [13, 31, 49].
In this paper, we consider model overfitting in source domain as the major cause of domain mismatch. As shown in
Figure 1(a), although Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN)
perfectly segment the synthetic image by correct labeling of
pixels, directly deploying this model for real image yields
poor results. Instead of leveraging training samples in the
target domain for model fine-tuning, this paper explores
label-free constraints to alleviate the problem of model
overfitting. These constraints are intrinsic and generic in
the context of semantic segmentation. Figure 1(b)∼(d) illustrate three label-free constraints being investigated. The
first two constraints, namely patch-based and cluster-based
consistencies guide the segmentation based on the prediction consistency among the pixels in an image patch and
among the clusters of patches sharing similar visual properties, respectively. The last criterion, namely spatial logic,
contextualizes the prediction of labels based on spatial relation between image patches. Based on these criteria, we
propose a novel Regularizer of Prediction Transfer (RPT)
for transferring the model trained on synthetic data for semantic segmentation of real images.

9621

