Neural Architecture Search for Lightweight Non-Local Networks
Yingwei Li1∗ Xiaojie Jin2 Jieru Mei1∗ Xiaochen Lian2 Linjie Yang2
Cihang Xie1 Qihang Yu1 Yuyin Zhou1 Song Bai3 Alan Yuille1
1
2
3
Johns Hopkins University
ByteDance AI Lab
University of Oxford

78

Non-Local (NL) blocks have been widely studied in various vision tasks. However, it has been rarely explored to
embed the NL blocks in mobile neural networks, mainly
due to the following challenges: 1) NL blocks generally
have heavy computation cost which makes it difficult to be
applied in applications where computational resources are
limited, and 2) it is an open problem to discover an optimal configuration to embed NL blocks into mobile neural networks. We propose AutoNL to overcome the above
two obstacles. Firstly, we propose a Lightweight Non-Local
(LightNL) block by squeezing the transformation operations
and incorporating compact features. With the novel design
choices, the proposed LightNL block is 400× computationally cheaper than its conventional counterpart without sacrificing the performance. Secondly, by relaxing the structure of the LightNL block to be differentiable during training, we propose an efficient neural architecture search algorithm to learn an optimal configuration of LightNL blocks
in an end-to-end manner. Notably, using only 32 GPU
hours, the searched AutoNL model achieves 77.7% top-1
accuracy on ImageNet under a typical mobile setting (350M
FLOPs), significantly outperforming previous mobile models including MobileNetV2 (+5.7%), FBNet (+2.8%) and
MnasNet (+2.1%). Code and models are available at
https://github.com/LiYingwei/AutoNL.

1. Introduction
Non-Local (NL) block [2, 39] aims to capture longrange dependencies in deep neural networks, which have
been used in a variety of vision tasks such as video classification [39], object detection [39], semantic segmentation [39, 46], image classification [2], and adversarial robustness [41]. Despite the remarkable progress, the general
utilization of non-local modules under resource-constrained
scenarios such as mobile devices remains underexplored.
This may be due to the following two factors.
∗ Work done during an internship at Bytedance AI Lab.

Imagenet Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Abstract

77
76
AutoNL (ours)
MobileNetV2
MobileNetV3
ShuffleNetV2
FBNet
ProxylessNas
SinglePath
MnasNet
EfficientNet

75
74
73
72
250

275

300

325
350
FLOPs (M)

375

400

Figure 1. ImageNet Accuracy vs. Computation Cost. Details
can be found in Table 3.

First, NL blocks compute the response at each position by attending to all other positions and computing a
weighted average of the features in all positions, which incurs a large computation burden. Several efforts have been
explored to reduce the computation overhead. For instance,
[7, 22] use associative law to reduce the memory and computation cost of matrix multiplication; Yue et al. [44] use
Taylor expansion to optimize the non-local module; Cao et
al. [4] compute the affinity matrix via a convolutional layer;
Bello et al. [2] design a novel attention-augmented convolution. However, these methods either still lead to relatively large computation overhead (via using heavy operators, such as large matrix multiplications) or result in a less
accurate outcome (e.g., simplified NL blocks [4]), making
these methods undesirable for mobile-level vision systems.
Second, NL blocks are usually implemented as individual modules which can be plugged into a few manually selected layers (usually relatively deep layers). While it is intractable to densely embed it into a deep network due to the
high computational complexity, it remains unclear where to
insert those modules economically. Existing methods have
not fully exploited the capacity of NL blocks in relational
modeling under mobile settings.
Taking the two factors aforementioned into account, we
aim to answer the following questions in this work: is it pos-

10297

