StegaStamp: Invisible Hyperlinks in Physical Photographs
Matthew Tancik∗

Ben Mildenhall∗
University of California, Berkeley

Ren Ng

{tancik, bmild, ren}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

and ambiently embedded into the ubiquitous imagery of the
modern visual world.

Printed and digitally displayed photos have the ability to
hide imperceptible digital data that can be accessed through
internet-connected imaging systems. Another way to think
about this is physical photographs that have unique QR
codes invisibly embedded within them. This paper presents
an architecture, algorithms, and a prototype implementation addressing this vision. Our key technical contribution is
StegaStamp, a learned steganographic algorithm to enable
robust encoding and decoding of arbitrary hyperlink bitstrings into photos in a manner that approaches perceptual
invisibility. StegaStamp comprises a deep neural network
that learns an encoding/decoding algorithm robust to image
perturbations approximating the space of distortions resulting from real printing and photography. We demonstrates
real-time decoding of hyperlinks in photos from in-the-wild
videos that contain variation in lighting, shadows, perspective, occlusion and viewing distance. Our prototype system
robustly retrieves 56 bit hyperlinks after error correction –
sufficient to embed a unique code within every photo on the
internet.

It is worth taking a moment to consider three potential
use cases of our system. First, at the farmer’s market, a stand
owner may add photos of each type of produce alongside
the price, encoded with extra information for customers
about the source farm, nutrition information, recipes, and
seasonable availability. Second, in the lobby of a university
department, a photo directory of faculty may be augmented
by encoding a unique URL for each person’s photo that
contains the professor’s webpage, office hours, location, and
directions. Third, New York City’s Times Square is plastered
with digital billboards. Each image frame displayed may be
encoded with a URL containing further information about
the products, company, and promotional deals.

1. Introduction
Our vision is a future in which each photo in the real
world invisibly encodes a unique hyperlink to arbitrary information. This information is accessed by pointing a camera
at the photo and using the system described in this paper to
decode and follow the hyperlink. In the future, augmentedreality (AR) systems may perform this task continuously,
visually overlaying retrieved information alongside each
photo in the user’s view.
Our approach is related to the ubiquitous QR code and
similar technologies, which are now commonplace for a wide
variety of data-transfer tasks, such as sharing web addresses,
purchasing goods, and tracking inventory. Our approach can
be thought of as a complementary solution that avoids visible,
ugly barcodes, and enables digital information to be invisibly
∗ Authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1 presents an overview of our system, which we
call StegaStamp, in the context of a typical usage flow. The
inputs are an image and a desired hyperlink. First, we assign
the hyperlink a unique bit string (analogous to the process
used by URL-shortening services such as tinyurl.com). Second, we use our StegaStamp encoder to embed the bit string
into the target image. This produces an encoded image that
is ideally perceptually identical to the input image. As described in detail in Section 4, our encoder is implemented
as a deep neural network jointly trained with a second network that implements decoding. Third, the encoded image is
physically printed (or shown on an electronic display) and
presented in the real world. Fourth, a user takes a photo that
contains the physical print. Fifth, the system uses an image
detector to identify and crop out all images. Sixth, each image is processed with the StegaStamp decoder to retrieve the
unique bitstring, which is used to follow the hyperlink and
retrieve the information associated with the image.
This method of data transmission has a long history in
both the steganography and watermarking literatures. We
present the first end-to-end trained deep pipeline for this
problem that can achieve robust decoding even under “physical transmission,” delivering excellent performance sufficient to encode and retrieve arbitrary hyperlinks for an essentially limitless number of images. We extend the traditional
learned steganography framework by adding a set of differ12117

