Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation via Sub-category Exploration
Yu-Ting Chang1

Qiaosong Wang2 Wei-Chih Hung1 Robinson Piramuthu2
Yi-Hsuan Tsai3 Ming-Hsuan Yang1,4
1
UC Merced 2 eBay Inc. 3 NEC Labs America 4 Google Research

Abstract
Existing weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
methods using image-level annotations typically rely on
initial responses to locate object regions. However, such
response maps generated by the classification network
usually focus on discriminative object parts, due to the fact
that the network does not need the entire object for optimizing the objective function. To enforce the network to pay
attention to other parts of an object, we propose a simple
yet effective approach that introduces a self-supervised task
by exploiting the sub-category information. Specifically,
we perform clustering on image features to generate
pseudo sub-categories labels within each annotated parent
class, and construct a sub-category objective to assign
the network to a more challenging task. By iteratively
clustering image features, the training process does not
limit itself to the most discriminative object parts, hence
improving the quality of the response maps. We conduct
extensive analysis to validate the proposed method and
show that our approach performs favorably against the
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
The goal of semantic segmentation is to assign a semantic category to each pixel in the image. It has been
one of the most important tasks in computer vision that
enjoys a wide range of applications such as image editing
and scene understanding. Recently, deep convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods [16, 5, 42] have been
developed for semantic segmentation and achieved significant progress. However, such approaches rely on learning supervised models that require pixel-wise annotations,
which take extensive effort and time. To reduce the effort in annotating pixel-wise ground truth labels, numerous weakly-supervised methods are proposed using various
types of labels such as image-level [1, 22, 29, 32], videolevel [6, 45, 35], bounding box [28, 8, 20], point-level [2],
and scribble-based [26, 37] labels. In this work, we focus on
using image-level labels which can be obtained effortlessly,

Figure 1: Existing weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods based on image-level supervisions usually apply the class activation map (CAM) to obtain the response
map as the initial prediction. However, this response map
can only highlight the discriminative parts of the object
(top). We propose a self-supervised task via sub-category
exploration to enforce the classification network learn better response maps (bottom).
yet a more challenging case under the weakly-supervised
setting.
Existing algorithms mainly consist of three sequential
steps to perform weakly-supervised training on the imagelevel label: 1) predict an initial category-wise response map
to localize the object, 2) refine the initial response as the
pseudo ground truth, and 3) train the segmentation network
based on pseudo labels. Although promising results have
been achieved by recent methods [1, 18, 38, 40], most of
them focus on improving the second and the third steps.
Therefore, these approaches may suffer from inaccurate
predictions generated in the first step, i.e., initial response.
Here, we aim to improve the performance of initial predictions which will benefit succeeding steps.
In order to predict the initial response map for each
category, numerous approaches based on the class activation map (CAM) model [46] have been developed. Essentially, these methods train a classification network and use
its learned weights in the classifier as the cues to compute
18991

