Structured Multi-Hashing for Model Compression
Elad Eban∗
Google Research.

Yair Movshovitz-Attias∗
Google Research.

Hao Wu
Google Research.

Mark Sandler
Google Research.

elade@google.com

yairmov@google.com

haou@google.com

sandler@google.com

Andrew Poon
Google Research.

Yerlan Idelbayev†
University of California, Merced.

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
University of California, Merced.

ayp@google.com

yidelbayev@ucmerced.edu

mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Despite the success of deep neural networks (DNNs),
state-of-the-art models are too large to deploy on lowresource devices or common server configurations in which
multiple models are held in memory. Model compression
methods address this limitation by reducing the memory
footprint, latency, or energy consumption of a model with
minimal impact on accuracy. We focus on the task of reducing the number of learnable variables in the model.
In this work we combine ideas from weight hashing and
dimensionality reductions resulting in a simple and powerful structured multi-hashing method based on matrix products that allows direct control of model size of any deep
network and is trained end-to-end.
We demonstrate the strength of our approach by compressing models from the ResNet, EfficientNet, and MobileNet architecture families. Our method allows us to drastically decrease the number of variables while maintaining
high accuracy. For instance, by applying our approach to
EfficentNet-B4 (16M parameters) we reduce it to the size
of B0 (5M parameters), while gaining over 3% in accuracy
over B0 baseline.
On the commonly used benchmark CIFAR10 we reduce
the ResNet32 model by 75% with no loss in quality, and are
able to do a 10x compression while still achieving above
90% accuracy.

∗ The author contribute equally to this paper.
Elad and Yair contributed equally to the paper. They jointly proposed
the idea of structured-multi-hashing. Yair was the main contributor to the
manuscript. Elad wrote most of the code and ran EfficentNet experiments.
Hao contributed to coding and experiments. Yerlan ran CIFAR and ResNet
experiments and simplified some aspects of the structured hashing. Miguel
advised Yerlan on issues about optimization and deep net compression.
Mark and Andrew helped with MobileNet, and ResNet experiments.
† Work performed while at Google Research.

1. Introduction
The main factor driving the success of machine learning in recent years is the ability to build and train increasingly larger Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). This has been
enabled by a combination of algorithmic advances such as
ReLU activations [15, 34], Batch Normalization [23], and
residual connections [17]; large training datasets [8]; and
faster, specialized, hardware [25].
Overwhelmingly, when given enough data, larger models show improvements in accuracy. However, this march
upwards comes with a cost in terms of latency, energy, and
memory consumption. For example, the popular Resnet101 model [17] has 44 Million parameters and requires
150MB of storage; AmoebaNet-A [39] requires 469M parameters and 1800MB. The size of DNNs limits their deployment in devices with low resources such as mobile
phones and wearables. On server side, multi-tenancy – the
practice of serving multiple models from the same hardware
accelerator – is also affected by the model size. Furthermore, during inference, layers deeper in the network can be
heavily affected by the cost of loading the weights.
From a scientific perspective, these models have many
more parameters than the number of data points in the
datasets they are trained on. This seems counter-intuitive as
it seems to contradict learning-theory (e.g. VC dimension
properties [45]), but has been widely recognized as critical
property of DNNs [2, 10, 1]. One wonders: Do the parameters of a network live in a lower dimensional space?
Can we restrict the model class in a way that models in it
can be represented efficiently (e.g. have low Kolmogorov
Complexity) without sacrificing accuracy? Can we find an
intrinsic connection between the number of parameters of a
model to its performance [29]?
Note that low dimensionality assumptions are core in
many CNN components. For example, convolutions are low
dimensional linear maps and separable convolutions (i.e.
depthwise followed by 1×1 convolutions) are based on de-

11903

