A Disentangling Invertible Interpretation Network for
Explaining Latent Representations
Patrick Esser∗
Robin Rombach∗
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
Neural networks have greatly boosted performance in
computer vision by learning powerful representations of input data. The drawback of end-to-end training for maximal overall performance are black-box models whose hidden representations are lacking interpretability: Since distributed coding is optimal for latent layers to improve their
robustness, attributing meaning to parts of a hidden feature
vector or to individual neurons is hindered. We formulate
interpretation as a translation of hidden representations
onto semantic concepts that are comprehensible to the user.
The mapping between both domains has to be bijective so
that semantic modifications in the target domain correctly
alter the original representation. The proposed invertible
interpretation network can be transparently applied on top
of existing architectures with no need to modify or retrain
them. Consequently, we translate an original representation to an equivalent yet interpretable one and backwards
without affecting the expressiveness and performance of the
original. The invertible interpretation network disentangles
the hidden representation into separate, semantically meaningful concepts. Moreover, we present an efficient approach
to define semantic concepts by only sketching two images
and also an unsupervised strategy. Experimental evaluation
demonstrates the wide applicability to interpretation of existing classification and image generation networks as well
as to semantically guided image manipulation.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented performance in various computer vision tasks [51, 15] by learning task-specific hidden representations rather than relying
on predefined hand-crafted image features. However, the
significant performance boost due to end-to-end learning
comes at the cost of now having black-box models that are
lacking interpretability: A deep network may have found
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: Our Invertible Interpretation Network T can be applied
to arbitrary existing models. Its invertibility guarantees that the
translation from z to z̃ does not affect the performance of the
model to be interpreted. Code and results can be found at the
project page https://compvis.github.io/iin/.

a solution to a task, but human users cannot understand
the causes for the predictions that the model makes [36].
Conversely, users must also be able to understand what the
hidden representations have not learned and on which data
the overall model will, consequently, fail. Interpretability is
therefore a prerequisite for safeguarding AI, making its decisions transparent to the users it affects, and understanding
its applicability, limitations, and the most promising options
for its future improvement.
A key challenge is that learned latent representations
typically do not correspond to semantic concepts that are
comprehensible to human users. Hidden layer neurons are
trained to help in solving an overall task in the output layer
of the network. Therefore, the output neurons correspond
to human-interpretable concepts such as object classes in
semantic image segmentation [3] or bounding boxes in object detection [48]. In contrast, the hidden layer representa-

9223

