Unsupervised Representation Learning for Gaze Estimation
Yu Yu, Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute, CH-1920, Martigny, Switzerland
EPFL, CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
{yyu, odobez}@idiap.ch
Abstract
Although automatic gaze estimation is very important to
a large variety of application areas, it is difficult to train accurate and robust gaze models, in great part due to the difficulty in collecting large and diverse data (annotating 3D
gaze is expensive and existing datasets use different setups).
To address this issue, our main contribution in this paper is
to propose an effective approach to learn a low dimensional
gaze representation without gaze annotations, which to the
best of our best knowledge, is the first work to do so. The
main idea is to rely on a gaze redirection network and use
the gaze representation difference of the input and target
images (of the redirection network) as the redirection variable. A redirection loss in image domain allows the joint
training of both the redirection network and the gaze representation network. In addition, we propose a warping field
regularization which not only provides an explicit physical
meaning to the gaze representations but also avoids redirection distortions. Promising results on few-shot gaze estimation (competitive results can be achieved with as few
as ≤ 100 calibration samples), cross-dataset gaze estimation, gaze network pretraining, and another task (head pose
estimation) demonstrate the validity of our framework.

1. Introduction
Gaze is a non-verbal cue with many functions. It can
indicate attention, intentions, serve as communication cue
in interactions, or even reveal higher level social contructs
of people in relation with their personality. As such, it
finds applications in many areas. For instance, it can
be used in multi-party interaction analysis [2], HumanRobot-Interaction (HRI) for both floor control analysis and
for robot behaviour synthesis to enable smooth interactions [1, 41]; in the virtual reality industry [3, 28], visual
rendering can be improved by infering the user gaze direction; in psychology, gaze behavior can contribute to mental
health analysis and care [21, 49].
As with other computer vision tasks, the developments
in deep neural networks have largely contributed to the progresses made on gaze estimation [4, 5, 37, 59, 60, 63]. For
all these approaches, it is common sense that their performance depends to a large extent on the available amount of

Figure 1. Proposed framework. Top: the networks Gφ extracts
gaze representations from two input eye images Ii and Io . Their
difference ∆r is used as input to a gaze redirection network Rθ
along with the input image Ii to generate a redirected eye Ired
which should be close to Io . Both the Gφ and Rθ networks are
trained jointly in an unsupervised fashion from unlabbeled image
pairs (Ii , Io ). Middle. Thanks to our warping field regularization,
the distribution of (rp vs pitch) and (ry vs yaw) exhibit high (almost linear) correlation. Bottom. The network Gφ can further be
used to train a gaze regressor.

data. Unfortunately, collecting and annotating 3D gaze data
is complex and expensive, which introduces challenges and
problems for gaze estimation, as summarized below:
• Data amount. The size of benchmark datasets [9,
11, 44, 45, 60, 61] including the number of people,
is limited, making it difficult to train robust personindependent models. Synthetic data [53, 55] offers an
alternative, but the domain gap is hard to eliminate.
• Data annotation. 3D gaze annotation can be noisy,
due to (i) measurement errors: most datasets compute
the 3D line of sight by visually estimating the 3D positions of eyes and gaze targets; (ii) participant distractions or blinks [7, 43], leading to wrong annotations.
• Dataset bias. Existing datasets rely on different cameras and setups, with important variations in visual
17314

