Listen to Look: Action Recognition by Previewing Audio
Ruohan Gao1,2 *
Tae-Hyun Oh2†
Kristen Grauman1,2
Lorenzo Torresani2
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
Facebook AI Research
rhgao@cs.utexas.edu, {taehyun,grauman,torresani}@fb.com

Abstract
In the face of the video data deluge, today’s expensive clip-level classifiers are increasingly impractical. We
propose a framework for efficient action recognition in
untrimmed video that uses audio as a preview mechanism
to eliminate both short-term and long-term visual redundancies. First, we devise an I MG AUD 2V ID framework
that hallucinates clip-level features by distilling from lighter
modalities—a single frame and its accompanying audio—
reducing short-term temporal redundancy for efficient cliplevel recognition. Second, building on I MG AUD 2V ID, we
further propose I MG AUD -S KIMMING, an attention-based
long short-term memory network that iteratively selects
useful moments in untrimmed videos, reducing long-term
temporal redundancy for efficient video-level recognition.
Extensive experiments on four action recognition datasets
demonstrate that our method achieves the state-of-the-art
in terms of both recognition accuracy and speed.

1. Introduction
With the growing popularity of portable image recording
devices as well as online social platforms, internet users are
generating and sharing an ever-increasing number of videos
every day. According to a recent study, it would take a person over 5 million years to watch the amount of video that
will be crossing global networks each month in 2021 [1].
Therefore, it is imperative to devise systems that can recognize actions and events in these videos both accurately and
efficiently. Potential benefits extend to many video applications, including video recommendation, summarization,
editing, and browsing.
Recent advances in action recognition have mostly focused on building powerful clip-level models operating on
short time windows of a few seconds [55, 61, 17, 10, 71,
16]. To recognize the action in a test video, most methods
densely apply the clip classifier and aggregate the prediction
scores of all the clips across the video. Despite encouraging
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
† T.-H. Oh is now with Dept. EE, POSTECH, Korea.

Video clips for an untrimmed video

Image-Audio pairs

Skip

Skip

Figure 1: Our approach learns to use audio as an efficient
preview of the accompanying visual content, at two levels.
First we replace the costly analysis of video clips with a
more efficient processing of image-audio pairs. A single
image captures most of the appearance information within
the clip, while the audio provides important dynamic information. Then our video skimming module selects the key
moments (a subset of image-audio pairs) to perform efficient video-level action recognition.
progress, this approach becomes computationally impractical in real-world scenarios where the videos are untrimmed
and span several minutes or even hours.
We contend that processing all frames or clips in a long
untrimmed video may be unnecessary and even counterproductive. Our key insight is that there are two types of
redundancy in video, manifested in both short-term clips as
well as long-term periods. First, there is typically high temporal redundancy across the entire video (Fig. 1). Many
clips capture the same event repetitively, suggesting it is
unnecessary to process all the clips. Second, there is redundancy even within a clip: the visual composition within
a short time span does not change abruptly; temporally adjacent frames are usually very similar, though there are temporal dynamics (motion) across frames. Therefore, it can be
wasteful to process all clips and frames, especially when the
video is very long. Moreover, for many activities, the actual
actions taking place in the video can be very sparse. It is often a few important moments that are useful for recognition,
while the rest actually distract the classifier. For example,
in a typical video of surfing, a person might talk for a long
110457

