Webly Supervised Knowledge Embedding Model for Visual Reasoning
Wenbo Zheng 1,2 Lan Yan 2,4 Chao Gou 3 * Fei-Yue Wang 2,4
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
The State Key Laboratory for Management and Control of Complex Systems, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zwb2017@stu.xjtu.edu.cn;yanlan2017@ia.ac.cn;gouchao@mail.sysu.edu.cn;feiyue.wang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Visual reasoning between visual image and natural language description is a long-standing challenge in computer
vision. While recent approaches offer a great promise by
compositionality or relational computing, most of them are
oppressed by the challenge of training with datasets containing only a limited number of images with ground-truth
texts. Besides, it is extremely time-consuming and difficult
to build a larger dataset by annotating millions of images
with text descriptions that may very likely lead to a biased model. Inspired by the majority success of webly supervised learning, we utilize readily-available web images
with its noisy annotations for learning a robust representation. Our key idea is to presume on web images and corresponding tags along with fully annotated datasets in learning with knowledge embedding. We present a two-stage approach for the task that can augment knowledge through
an effective embedding model with weakly supervised web
data. This approach learns not only knowledge-based embeddings derived from key-value memory networks to make
joint and full use of textual and visual information but
also exploits the knowledge to improve the performance
with knowledge-based representation learning for applying other general reasoning tasks. Experimental results on
two benchmarks show that the proposed approach significantly improves performance compared with the state-ofthe-art methods and guarantees the robustness of our model
against visual reasoning tasks and other reasoning tasks.

1. Introduction
Visual reasoning demands a strong model to learn relational computing and the ability of compositionality and
generalization, i.e., understanding and answering composi* Chao Gou is the corresponding author.

Fully Annotated Dataset

Web Images

Q: Is there any other thing Q: What number of other
that is the same shape as brown things have the same
the large object? A: Yes
size as the shiny object? A: 1

Q: Is there any other thing Q: What number of other
that is the same shape as brown things have the same
the large object? A: Yes
size as the shiny object? A: 6

Q: What color is the water Q: Is the color of the cloud
glass to the right of the the same as that of the clock?
bowl? A: White
A: Yes

Q: What color is the water Q: Is the color of the cloud
glass to the right of the the same as that of the clock?
bowl? A: White
A: Yes

Figure 1. Illustration of Visual Reasoning Task. The left samples
(image and its questions) are from fully annotated datasets. The
right samples (image and its questions) are from weakly annotated
datasets. The answers are the output of our model when inputting
corresponding samples.

tional or relational questions without having seen similar
semantic compositions before [10, 20, 21, 31]. Besides, visual reasoning tasks, the general task of asking questions
about images, having its own line of datasets, which generally focus on asking a series of simple questions on an
image, is usually answerable in a single glance. The illustrated example is shown in Figure 1.
The success in visual reasoning tasks with image-text
(question, answer) pairs from hand-labeled image datasets
(e.g., GQA [16], CLEVR [19]) has been achieved by training the joint embedding model in the form of supervised
learning. While these datasets cover a large number of images (e.g., about 20M in GQA and 100K in CLEVR), it is
is labor-intensive and difficult for using image-text pairs to
create more larger datasets [17]. In addition, it is usually
feasible for only a limited number of users to annotate the
training images, which may cause the model to be biased
[25, 35]. Therefore, although these datasets provide convenient modeling assumptions, they are very limited given
the large number of rich descriptions that humans can make

12445

