Dynamic Multiscale Graph Neural Networks for
3D Skeleton-Based Human Motion Prediction
Maosen Li1 , Siheng Chen2 , Yangheng Zhao1 , Ya Zhang1 , Yanfeng Wang1 , and Qi Tian1
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories

{maosen li, zhaoyangheng-sjtu, ya zhang, wangyanfeng} @sjtu.edu.cn, schen@merl.com,
wywqtian@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose novel dynamic multiscale graph neural networks (DMGNN) to predict 3D skeleton-based human motions. The core idea of DMGNN is to use a multiscale
graph to comprehensively model the internal relations of
a human body for motion feature learning. This multiscale graph is adaptive during training and dynamic across
network layers. Based on this graph, we propose a multiscale graph computational unit (MGCU) to extract features at individual scales and fuse features across scales.
The entire model is action-category-agnostic and follows
an encoder-decoder framework. The encoder consists of
a sequence of MGCUs to learn motion features. The decoder uses a proposed graph-based gate recurrent unit to
generate future poses. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed DMGNN outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both short and long-term predictions on the datasets
of Human 3.6M and CMU Mocap. We further investigate
the learned multiscale graphs for the interpretability. The
codes could be downloaded from https://github.
com/limaosen0/DMGNN .

1. Introduction
3D skeleton-based human motion prediction forecasts
future poses given the past motions based on the humanbody-skeleton. The motion prediction helps machines understand human behaviors, attracting considerable attention [9, 20, 32, 5, 12, 2]. The related techniques can be
widely applied to many computer vision and robotics scenarios, such as human-computer interaction [24, 23, 17, 13],
autonomous driving [6], and pedestrian tracking [1, 15, 3].
Many methods, including the conventional state-based
methods [25, 44, 38, 37, 36] and deep-network-based methods [9, 32, 10, 7, 12, 14, 11, 33, 43], have been proposed to

Figure 1. Two learned multiscale graphs on ‘Posing’. We show
strong relations associated with torsos in single scales and across
scales. Two multiscale graphs are dynamic from one MGCUs to
another, capturing local and distant relations, respectively.

achieve promising motion prediction. However, most methods did not explicitly exploit the relations or constraints between different body-components, which carry crucial information for motion prediction. A recent work [31] built
graphs across body-joints for pairwise relation modeling;
however, such a graph was still insufficient to reflect a functional group of body-joints. Another work [43] builds predefined sturctures to aggregate body-joint features to represent fixed body-parts, while the model only considers
the body physical constraints without exploiting the movement coordination and relations. For example, the action
of ‘Walking’ tends to be understood based on the collaborative movements of abstract arms and legs, rather than the
detailed locations of fingers and toes.
To model more comprehensive relations, we propose a
new representation for a human body: a multiscale graph,
whose nodes are body-components at various scales and
edges are pairwise relations between components. To model
a body at multiple scales, a multiscale graph consists of two
types of sub-graphs: single-scale graphs, connecting bodycomponents at the same scales, and cross-scale graphs, con-

214

