Model Adaptation: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation without Source Data
Rui Li1 , Qianfen Jiao1 , Wenming Cao3 , Hau-San Wong1 , Si Wu2
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
3
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong
ruili52-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, qjiao4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, wmingcao@hku.hk
B

cshswong@cityu.edu.hk, cswusi@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a challenging unsupervised
domain adaptation setting — unsupervised model adaptation. We aim to explore how to rely only on unlabeled target data to improve performance of an existing source prediction model on the target domain, since labeled source
data may not be available in some real-world scenarios
due to data privacy issues. For this purpose, we propose a
new framework, which is referred to as collaborative class
conditional generative adversarial net to bypass the dependence on the source data. Specifically, the prediction model
is to be improved through generated target-style data, which
provides more accurate guidance for the generator. As a
result, the generator and the prediction model can collaborate with each other without source data. Furthermore, due
to the lack of supervision from source data, we propose a
weight constraint that encourages similarity to the source
model. A clustering-based regularization is also introduced
to produce more discriminative features in the target domain. Compared to conventional domain adaptation methods, our model achieves superior performance on multiple
adaptation tasks with only unlabeled target data, which verifies its effectiveness in this challenging setting.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved state-ofthe-art performance on various visual recognition tasks [24,
17], the promising performance heavily relies on the availability of sufficient labeled dataset with diverse visual variations [7], and the training and test data should be independent and identically distributed. When the test environment is different from the source domain, the performance
of most visual systems will be seriously degraded. This is
known as the domain shift [42], as illustrated in Fig. 1. Domain shift is one of the key factors that prevent the transfer

Figure 1. Comparison between conventional data-based adaptation (left) and our model adaptation (right). Conventional unsupervised domain adaptation methods require labeled source data
during adaptation, while our proposed model adaptation method
only relies on unlabeled target data.

of research results into real-world applications. An intuitive
strategy is to re-collect and annotate sufficient target dataset
to re-train or fine-tune the model [62, 35]. However, this solution is not only expensive but also not practical for manual
annotation in various environments.
There are great interests in developing a visual recognition model that generalize well to different domains with
few or no human annotations. Recently, unsupervised domain adaptation has received a lot of attention, since it
makes large progresses in generalizing the pre-trained prediction model to the target domain where labels are not
available. This is achieved by exploiting knowledge from
sufficiently labeled source data [56, 12, 34]. Existing unsupervised domain adaptation methods normally assume that
the source dataset is available during training. However, this
assumption is not always practical in the following cases:
1. For many companies, they will only provide the
learned models instead of their customer data due to
data privacy and security issues.
2. The source datasets like videos or high-resolution images may be so large that it is not practical or convenient to transfer or retain them to different platforms.
Therefore, developing an unsupervised domain adapta-

9641

