Multi-Modal Graph Neural Network for Joint Reasoning
on Vision and Scene Text

1

Difei Gao1,2* , Ke Li1,2* , Ruiping Wang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{difei.gao, ke.li}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Answering questions that require reading texts in an image is challenging for current models. One key difficulty
of this task is that rare, polysemous, and ambiguous words
frequently appear in images, e.g. names of places, products,
and sports teams. To overcome this difficulty, only resorting
to pre-trained word embedding models is far from enough.
A desired model should utilize the rich information in multiple modalities of the image to help understand the meaning
of scene texts, e.g. the prominent text on a bottle is most
likely to be the brand. Following this idea, we propose a
novel VQA approach, Multi-Modal Graph Neural Network
(MM-GNN). It first represents an image as a graph consisting of three sub-graphs, depicting visual, semantic, and numeric modalities respectively. Then, we introduce three aggregators which guide the message passing from one graph
to another to utilize the contexts in various modalities, so as
to refine the features of nodes. The updated nodes have better features for the downstream question answering module. Experimental evaluations show that our MM-GNN
represents the scene texts better and obviously facilitates
the performances on two VQA tasks that require reading
scene texts.

1. Introduction
The texts in a scene convey rich information that is crucial for performing daily tasks like finding a place, acquiring information about a product, etc. An advanced Visual
Question Answering (VQA) model which is able to reason
over scene texts and other visual contents could have extensive applications in practice, such as assisting visually
impaired users, and education of children. Our focus in this
paper is to endow VQA models the ability of better representing the image containing the scene texts, to facilitate
* indicates equal contribution.

Human

A human can see (Original Image）

Q1. What is the company who makes
the product? A: STP

BERT

CNN

A vision model can “see”

Q2: What color is the text on the top?
A. Black

Calculator

A language model can “see”

A calculator can “see”

Q3: How much is the super charge?
A: 65 cents

Q4: Is the number in the image larger
than 50? A: Yes

Figure 1. An image could contain information in multiple modalities, thus it looks different to models with different abilities. For
example, the image in the eye of a human (top left) combines
multi-modal contents. The visual modality contains the visual appearances of objects and texts. The semantic modality involves
the semantics of the texts, yet it cannot determine the semantics
of rare words like “STP” in the image. The numeric modality is
about the numeric relation between numbers, like 65 is larger than
50. Q2 to Q4 are three common questions involving reasoning on
one of these modalities; while Q1 requires using visual context
to infer the semantic of “STP”. Random characters within green
dashed boxes represent modalities out of the observer’s capability.

the performances of answering on VQA tasks [44, 8] that
requires reading in images.
What are the unique challenges of modeling scene
texts compared to the pure visual entities (such as objects
and scenes) and the natural language texts (sentences or
phrases)? A scene text inherently contains information
in multiple modalities, visual information, including color,
shape, and semantic information, e.g. “New York” is the
name of a city, and numeric information for numbers, e.g.
“65” is larger than “50”. These types of information are

12746

