Gate-Shift Networks for Video Action Recognition
Swathikiran Sudhakaran1 , Sergio Escalera2,3 , Oswald Lanz1
1
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
2
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
3
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
{sudhakaran,lanz}@fbk.eu, sergio@maia.ub.es

Abstract
Deep 3D CNNs for video action recognition are designed to learn powerful representations in the joint spatiotemporal feature space. In practice however, because of
the large number of parameters and computations involved,
they may under-perform in the lack of sufficiently large
datasets for training them at scale. In this paper we introduce spatial gating in spatial-temporal decomposition
of 3D kernels. We implement this concept with GateShift Module (GSM). GSM is lightweight and turns a 2DCNN into a highly efficient spatio-temporal feature extractor. With GSM plugged in, a 2D-CNN learns to adaptively
route features through time and combine them, at almost
no additional parameters and computational overhead. We
perform an extensive evaluation of the proposed module to
study its effectiveness in video action recognition, achieving state-of-the-art results on Something Something-V1 and
Diving48 datasets, and obtaining competitive results on
EPIC-Kitchens with far less model complexity.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: 3D kernel factorization for spatio-temporal learning in video. Existing approaches decompose into channelwise (CSN), spatial followed by temporal (S3D, TSM), or
grouped spatial and spatio-temporal (GST). In all these,
spatial, temporal, and channel-wise interaction is hardwired. Our Gate-Shift Module (GSM) leverages group
spatial gating (blocks in green) to control interactions in
spatial-temporal decomposition. GSM is lightweight and a
building block of high performing video feature extractors.

Video action recognition is receiving increasing attention
due to its potential applications in video surveillance, media analysis, and robotics, just to mention a few. Although
great advances have been achieved during last years, action
recognition models have not yet achieved the success of image recognition models, and the ‘AlexNet momentum for
video’ has still to come.
A key challenge lies in the space-time nature of the
video medium that requires temporal reasoning for finegrained recognition. Methods based on temporal pooling
of frame-level features (TSN [41], ActionVLAD [12]) process the video as a (order-less) set of still images and work
well enough when the action can be discerned from objects
and scene context (UCF-101, Sports-1M, THUMOS). More
akin to the time dimension in video, late temporal aggregation of frame-level features can be formulated as sequence

learning (LRCN [5], VideoLSTM [23]) and with attention
(Attentional Pooling [11], LSTA [33]). At the other hand,
early temporal processing is used to fuse short term motion
features from stack of flow fields (Two-Stream [32]) or predicted directly from the encoded video (DMC-Net [31]).
Fine-grained recognition can benefit from deeper temporal modeling. Full-3D CNNs (C3D [37, 15]) process
the video in space-time by expanding the kernels of a 2D
ConvNet along the temporal dimension. Deep C3Ds are designed to learn powerful representations in the joint spatiotemporal feature space with more parameters (3D kernels)
and computations (kernels slide over 3 densely sampled dimensions). In practice however, they may under-perform
due to the lack of sufficiently large datasets for training

1102

