Screencast Tutorial Video Understanding
Kunpeng Li1 , Chen Fang2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Seokhwan Kim2 , Hailin Jin2 and Yun Fu1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Adobe Research
PsTuts: Screencast Tutorial Video

Abstract
Screencast tutorials are videos created by people to
teach how to use software applications or demonstrate procedures for accomplishing tasks. It is very popular for both
novice and experienced users to learn new skills, compared
to other tutorial media such as text, because of the visual
guidance and the ease of understanding. In this paper, we
propose visual understanding of screencast tutorials as a
new research problem to the computer vision community.
We collect a new dataset of Adobe Photoshop video tutorials
and annotate it with both low-level and high-level semantic
labels. We introduce a bottom-up pipeline to understand
Photoshop video tutorials. We leverage state-of-the-art object detection algorithms with domain specific visual cues
to detect important events in a video tutorial and segment
it into clips according to the detected events. We propose
a visual cue reasoning algorithm for two high-level tasks:
video retrieval and video captioning. We conduct extensive
evaluations of the proposed pipeline. Experimental results
show that it is effective in terms of understanding video tutorials. We believe our work will serves as a starting point
for future research on this important application domain of
video understanding.

1. Introduction
Video is the dominant modality which people use to consume content and share experiences, thanks to ubiquitous
personal computing devices, mobile cameras, video sharing websites, and social media. Among all the different
types of video, screencast tutorial video is of special interests. It is a video screen capture created and edited by
a human educator for the purpose of teaching the use of a
software feature or demonstrating a procedure for solving
a problem. In some cases, screen capture videos may be
augmented with audio narrations and captions to make it
easy for people to understand. Screencast tutorial video is
becoming increasingly popular for both novice and experienced users to learn new skills and therefore for people to
create and share. For instance, Youtube, one of the many
video sharing sites, offers over 45 million videos related
to Adobe Photoshop and over 12 million videos related to
Microsoft Word. Algorithms for understanding screencast

Create a selection around the face.

Existing Video Understanding Datasets
TACoS [35]
MSR-VTT [45]

A woman is giving a speech. The person rinses the carrot.

Figure 1: Comparisons of video understanding data examples. Our PsTuts dataset (top) focuses on screencast tutorial video with significantly different aspects and challenges
from existing datasets (bottom) for general video understanding problems [4, 35, 42, 45].
tutorials can enable many interesting applications ranging
from video retrieval and recommendation based on content
analysis to video synthesis for new tutorial content. Furthermore, they can help extract expert knowledge embedded in
screencast tutorials and build artificial intelligence systems
to perform complex tasks.
In this work, we consider the problem of understanding
screencast tutorial video. Our ultimate goal is that given a
video tutorial which typically ranges between 5 to 20 minutes long and may or may not contain a audio narration or
a caption, we want to understand the actions the user performed, the specific tools and workflow she used, and the
eventual goal she accomplished. We are interested in tasks
such as dividing a video into semantic segments (temporal video segmentation), summarizing a video into a text
description (video captioning) and retrieving related videos
from a database given a text query (video retrieval). To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time the screencast
tutorial video understanding problem is considered in the
Computer Vision community. To facilitate research activities in this area, we collect a large-scale screencast tutorial dataset on Adobe Photoshop and will share the dataset
with the community. We focus on Adobe Photoshop for two
reasons. First, Adobe Photoshop is one of the most popular software. It is used not just for image editing, but for

12526

