Unsupervised Magnification of Posture Deviations Across Subjects
Michael Dorkenwald∗
Uta Büchler∗
Björn Ommer
HCI / IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
Analyzing human posture and precisely comparing it
across different subjects is essential for accurate understanding of behavior and numerous vision applications such
as medical diagnostics or sports. Motion magnification
techniques help to see even small deviations in posture that
are invisible to the naked eye. However, they fail when comparing subtle posture differences across individuals with diverse appearance. Keypoint-based posture estimation and
classification techniques can handle large variations in appearance, but are invariant to subtle deviations in posture.
We present an approach to unsupervised magnification of
posture differences across individuals despite large deviations in appearance. We do not require keypoint annotation
and visualize deviations on a sub-bodypart level. To transfer appearance across subjects onto a magnified posture,
we propose a novel loss for disentangling appearance and
posture in an autoencoder. Posture magnification yields exaggerated images that are different from the training set.
Therefore, we incorporate magnification already into the
training of the disentangled autoencoder and learn on real
data and synthesized magnifications without supervision.
Experiments confirm that our approach improves upon the
state-of-the-art in magnification and on the application of
discovering posture deviations due to impairment.

1. Introduction
Automatic analysis of human posture, movement, and
behavior is a key problem of computer vision with numerous applications such as autonomous driving [37, 57,
39, 20, 42], surveillance [11, 30, 47, 56], and health-care
[7, 32, 54, 2]. A main challenge is to compare related behavior across different subjects despite vast differences in
appearance. Typical approaches towards behavior understanding include action classification [8, 38, 18, 9, 3], posture estimation [1, 29, 44, 6, 5, 45] and tracking [25, 10, 1].
However, as a consequence of being invariant to appearance variability, these methods neglect subtle differences in
∗ Indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Magnification of Posture Deviations Across Subjects.
We visually emphasize subtle posture deviations between a query
xq and reference frame xr by magnifying their differences in the
posture encoding. xq walks with its legs apart, highlighted by the
red line in comparison to the green line of xr . We first disentangle
posture from appearance (the blue boxes show visualization of Eπ ,
Eα ). Then, we extrapolate in the posture encoding the distance of
xr and xq in the direction of xq . The magnified images (bottom
right) are generated by combining the appearance encoding of xq
and the magnified posture encoding using different magnification
intensities λ. The generated images allow a user to easier see differences.

posture. At the opposite end are motion magnification techniques [35, 55, 16, 52, 53, 50, 58, 43] that compare frames
of the same video to visually amplify their subtle differences. Even recent learning-based approaches [43] are designed to magnify the intra-video differences of the same
subject. Being trained for invariance to synthetic appearance changes, they can handle intra-video appearance variability, but fail at the differences across subjects and videos.
What we are lacking is the best of both worlds: a microscope that can selectively amplify subtle posture differences across subjects while suppressing their vast deviations in appearance. Evidently, human vision is easily overwhelmed by the inter-subject appearance differences and,
consequently, fails at discovering subtle posture differences
across different individuals. Numerous applications ranging
from sports (comparing and identifying suboptimal movement) to medicine (discovering impairment of motor behavior) would therefore benefit from such a detailed analysis.

8256

