Joint Training of Variational Auto-Encoder and Latent Energy-Based Model
Tian Han1 , Erik Nijkamp2 , Linqi Zhou2 , Bo Pang2 , Song-Chun Zhu2 , Ying Nian Wu2
1
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles
than6@stevens.edu, {enijkamp,bopang}@ucla.edu, linqizhou907@gmail.com
{sczhu,ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a joint training method to learn both
the variational auto-encoder (VAE) and the latent energybased model (EBM). The joint training of VAE and latent
EBM are based on an objective function that consists of
three Kullback-Leibler divergences between three joint distributions on the latent vector and the image, and the objective function is of an elegant symmetric and anti-symmetric
form of divergence triangle that seamlessly integrates variational and adversarial learning. In this joint training
scheme, the latent EBM serves as a critic of the generator
model, while the generator model and the inference model
in VAE serve as the approximate synthesis sampler and inference sampler of the latent EBM. Our experiments show
that the joint training greatly improves the synthesis quality of the VAE. It also enables learning of an energy function that is capable of detecting out of sample examples for
anomaly detection.

1. Introduction
The variational auto-encoder (VAE) [23, 35] is a powerful method for generative modeling and unsupervised learning. It consists of a generator model that transforms a noise
vector to a signal such as image via a top-down convolutional network (also called deconvolutional network due to
its top-down nature). It also consists of an inference model
that infers the latent vector from the image via a bottomup network. The VAE has seen many applications in image and video synthesis [12, 3] and unsupervised and semisupervised learning [37, 22].
Despite its success, the VAE suffers from relatively weak
synthesis quality compared to methods such as generative
adversarial net (GANs) [11, 34] that are based on adversarial learning. While combing VAE objective function with
the GAN objective function can improve the synthesis quality, such a combination is rather ad hoc. In this paper, we
shall pursue a more systematic integration of variational

learning and adversarial learning. Specifically, instead of
employing a discriminator as in GANs, we recruit a latent
energy-based model (EBM) to mesh with VAE seamlessly
in a joint training scheme.
The generator model in VAE is a directed model, with a
known prior distribution on the latent vector, such as Gaussian white noise distribution, and a conditional distribution
of the image given the latent vector. The advantage of such
a model is that it can generate synthesized examples by direct ancestral sampling. The generator model defines a joint
probability density of the latent vector and the image in a
top-down scheme. We may call this joint density the generator density.
VAE also has an inference model, which defines the conditional distribution of the latent vector given the image. Together with the data distribution that generates the observed
images, they define a joint probability density of the latent
vector and the image in a bottom-up scheme. We may call
this joint density the joint data density, where the latent vector may be considered as the missing data in the language
of the EM algorithm [6].
As we shall explain later, the VAE amounts to joint minimization of the Kullback-Leibler divergence from data density to the generator density, where the joint minimization
is over the parameters of both the generator model and the
inference model. In this minimization, the generator density seeks to cover the modes of the data density, and as a
result, the generator density can be overly dispersed. This
may partially explain VAE’s lack of synthesis quality.
Unlike the generator network, the latent EBM is an undirected model. It defines an unnormalized joint density on
the latent vector and the image via a joint energy function. Such undirected form enables the latent EBM to better
approximate the data density than the generator network.
However, the maximum likelihood learning of latent EBM
requires (1) inference sampling: sampling from the conditional density of the latent vector given the observed example and (2) synthesis sampling: sampling from the joint
density of the latent vector and the image. Both inference
17978

