Learning Integral Objects with Intra-Class Discriminator for
Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Junsong Fan1,2
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3∗ Chunfeng Song1,2
Tieniu Tan1,2,3∗
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{fanjunsong2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {chunfeng.song, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image-level weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) aims at learning semantic segmentation by adopting only image class labels. Existing approaches generally
rely on class activation maps (CAM) to generate pseudomasks and then train segmentation models. The main difficulty is that the CAM estimate only covers partial foreground objects. In this paper, we argue that the critical
factor preventing to obtain the full object mask is the classification boundary mismatch problem in applying the CAM
to WSSS. Because the CAM is optimized by the classification task, it focuses on the discrimination across different
image-level classes. However, the WSSS requires to distinguish pixels sharing the same image-level class to separate
them into the foreground and the background. To alleviate this contradiction, we propose an efficient end-to-end
Intra-Class Discriminator (ICD) framework, which learns
intra-class boundaries to help separate the foreground and
the background within each image-level class. Without
bells and whistles, our approach achieves the state-of-theart performance of image label based WSSS, with mIoU
68.0% on the VOC 2012 semantic segmentation benchmark,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which is a foundation of scene
understanding, has achieved great progress in recent years
[26, 3, 4, 5]. However, it usually requires large-scale
datasets with pixel-level annotations for training [9, 25],
which is very costly to obtain. To alleviate the burden
∗ Corresponding Author

Plane-FG
Plane-BG
Bird-FG
Bird-BG

Ours (ICD)

CAM
Figure 1. Motivation of the approach. The CAM learns to discriminate between different classes. Our ICD learns to discriminate
between the foreground and the background within the same class,
which is more suitable for estimating pseudo-masks for the WSSS.

of pixel-level annotations, researchers proposed weaklysupervised semantic segmentation (WSSS), which only
adopts easily obtained coarse labels for training, e.g.,
image-level labels [20, 40, 1, 38, 37, 15], scribbles [24, 36],
and bounding boxes [7, 19, 34]. This paper focuses on
the most challenging problem that only adopts image-level
class labels for training semantic segmentation models.
Existing approaches usually follow the pipeline that
firstly generates pseudo-masks (a.k.a. seeds) for the target
objects and then adopt the seeds to train segmentation models. The class activation map (CAM) [42] is widely adopted
to estimate the seeds. However, the CAM can only give the
sparse and incomplete estimate of the target object, which
is usually the most discriminative region to recognize the
object class. Previous approaches try to alleviate this problem by adopting dilated convolutions [40], iterative erasing strategy [38], randomly dropping connections [22], and

4283

