Appearance Shock Grammar for Fast Medial Axis Extraction from Real Images
Charles-Olivier Dufresne Camaro1 , Morteza Rezanejad4 ,
Stavros Tsogkas1,2∗, Kaleem Siddiqi4 , Sven Dickinson1,2,3∗
1

University of Toronto 2 Samsung Toronto AI Research Center
3
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
4
School of Computer Science and Centre for Intelligent Machines, McGill University
{camaro,tsogkas,sven}@cs.toronto.edu, {morteza,siddiqi}@cim.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We combine ideas from shock graph theory with more recent appearance-based methods for medial axis extraction
from complex natural scenes, improving upon the present
best unsupervised method, in terms of efficiency and performance. We make the following specific contributions: i) we
extend the shock graph representation to the domain of real
images, by generalizing the shock type definitions using local, appearance-based criteria; ii) we then use the rules of a
Shock Grammar to guide our search for medial points, drastically reducing run time when compared to other methods,
which exhaustively consider all points in the input image;
iii) we remove the need for typical post-processing steps including thinning, non-maximum suppression, and grouping,
by adhering to the Shock Grammar rules while deriving
the medial axis solution; iv) finally, we raise some fundamental concerns with the evaluation scheme used in previous work and propose a more appropriate alternative for
assessing the performance of medial axis extraction from
scenes. Our experiments on the BMAX500 and SK-LARGE
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. We
outperform the present state-of-the-art, excelling particularly in the high-precision regime, while running an order
of magnitude faster and requiring no post-processing.

1. Introduction
Object shape has a fundamental role in visual perception theory. Shape defines a basic level of abstraction that
determines the spatial extent of structures in the physical
world, and drives object recognition. A popular representation of 2D shape is the Medial Axis Transform (MAT) [4].
∗ Sven Dickinson and Stavros Tsogkas contributed to this article in their personal capacity as Professor and Adjunct Professor, respectively, at the University of
Toronto. The views expressed (or the conclusions reached) are their own and do not
necessarily represent the views of Samsung Research America, Inc.

The medial axis has been of particular interest in both human and computer vision because of its direct relationship
to local symmetries of objects. Local symmetries effectively decompose a shape into salient parts, aiding recognition and pose estimation, while being robust to viewpoint
changes. At the same time, symmetry in general has been
proven to be instrumental in the analysis of complex scenes
[26, 32], facilitating the encoding of shape and their discrimination and recall from memory [3, 23, 39]. The importance of symmetry for scene categorization has been recently re-confirmed in [21, 41].
There are many algorithms that compute the MAT of 2D
binary shapes. This problem was first discussed by Blum
in his seminal work [4, 5], followed by several extensions
and variants, including smooth local symmetries [6], shock
graphs [25, 31], bone graphs [15, 16, 17] Hamilton-Jacobi
skeletons [29], augmented fast-marching [34], hierarchical
skeletons [33], and the scale axis transform [10].
In an effort to broaden the application of such methods,
interest in the problem of skeleton extraction from natural
images has been recently revived, with a focus on using supervised learning. The first such approach is that of Tsogkas
and Kokkinos [37], which was later followed by other methods, including the deployment of random forests [35], or
convolutional neural networks [8, 11, 13, 14, 27, 40, 43].
Departing from this trend, Tsogkas and Dickinson defined
the first complete MAT for color images, formulating medial axis extraction as a set cover problem [36]. However,
all these recent approaches have an important limitation:
medial points are extracted in isolation, without explicit
consideration of the local context, i.e., the structural constraints imposed by the fact that they must lie on skeletal
segments within regions bounded by curves, with the associated generic classification of the medial axis point types
[9]. As a result, one has to consider medial proposals at
multiple scales for each point, resulting in a very large space
of medial point proposals to search. To make things worse,
114382

