Attentive Weights Generation for Few Shot Learning via
Information Maximization
Yiluan Guo, Ngai-Man Cheung
Singapore University of Technology and Design
yiluan guo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Few shot image classification aims at learning a classifier from limited labeled data. Generating the classification weights has been applied in many meta-learning
methods for few shot image classification due to its simplicity and effectiveness. In this work, we present Attentive
Weights Generation for few shot learning via Information
Maximization (AWGIM), which introduces two novel contributions: i) Mutual information maximization between
generated weights and data within the task; this enables
the generated weights to retain information of the task and
the specific query sample. ii) Self-attention and crossattention paths to encode the context of the task and individual queries. Both two contributions are shown to be
very effective in extensive experiments. Overall, AWGIM
is competitive with state-of-the-art. Code is available at
https://github.com/Yiluan/AWGIM .

1. Introduction
While deep learning methods achieve great success in
computer vision [14], natural language processing [9], reinforcement learning [38], their hunger for large amount of
labeled data limits the application scenarios where only few
data are available for training. Humans, in contrast, are able
to learn from limited data, which is desirable for deep learning methods. Few shot learning is thus proposed to enable
deep models to learn from very few samples [10].
Meta learning is a promising approach for few shot problems [43, 11, 39, 33, 36]. In meta learning approaches,
the model extracts high level knowledge across different
tasks so that it can adapt itself quickly to a new-coming task
[37, 2]. There are several kinds of meta learning methods
for few shot learning, such as gradient-based [11, 33] and
metric-based [39, 41]. Weights generation, among these
different methods, has shown effectiveness with simple formulation [31, 32, 12, 13]. In general, weights generation
methods learn to generate the classification weights for dif-

ferent tasks conditioned on the limited labeled data. However, fixed classification weights for different query samples
within one task could be sub-optimal.
In this work, we present Attentive Weights Generation
for few shot learning via Information Maximization
(AWGIM) to address the limitation. AWGIM models
the probability distribution of classification weights conditioned on the whole support set and individual query sample. In our model, two paths composed of attention blocks
are employed to encode contextual and query-specific information. However, we show in experiments that cross attention between query samples and support set is not adequate
to generate classification weights that are adaptive to diverse
query data. In particular, some query-specific information
is lost during weights generation.
To address this issue, we take inspiration from
InfoGAN[6]. In particular, when training GAN, [6] proposes to learn disentangled representation by maximizing
the mutual information (MI) between a structured latent
code and the generator output. The MI maximization helps
retain the information of the structured latent code in the
generator output. In a similar spirit, we apply MI maximization in order to retain the information of query/support
samples in the generated weights. Our contributions are:
• We solve the weights generation problem for few shot
classification by maximizing the mutual information
between generated weights and support/query data.
With MI maximization, the weights generator is able
to generate classification weights that adapt to diverse
query samples.
• We propose to encode the task context and individual
query sample in two separate paths. Attention mechanism is applied in both paths to capture the context
information.
• We conduct extensive experiments and show that
AWGIM compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods. We also conduct detailed analysis to validate the
contribution of each component in AWGIM. The in113499

