Image2StyleGAN++: How to Edit the Embedded Images?
Rameen Abdal
KAUST

Yipeng Qin
Cardiff University

Peter Wonka
KAUST

rameen.abdal@kaust.edu.sa

qiny16@cardiff.ac.uk

pwonka@gmail.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) and (b): input images; (c): the “two-face” generated by naively copying the left half from (a) and the right half
from (b); (d): the “two-face” generated by our Image2StyleGAN++ framework.

Abstract
We propose Image2StyleGAN++, a flexible image editing framework with many applications. Our framework extends the recent Image2StyleGAN [1] in three ways. First,
we introduce noise optimization as a complement to the W +
latent space embedding. Our noise optimization can restore
high frequency features in images and thus significantly improves the quality of reconstructed images, e.g. a big increase of PSNR from 20 dB to 45 dB. Second, we extend the
global W + latent space embedding to enable local embeddings. Third, we combine embedding with activation tensor
manipulation to perform high quality local edits along with
global semantic edits on images. Such edits motivate various high quality image editing applications, e.g. image reconstruction, image inpainting, image crossover, local style
transfer, image editing using scribbles, and attribute level
feature transfer. Examples of the edited images are shown
across the paper for visual inspection.

1. Introduction
Recent GANs [19, 6] demonstrated that synthetic images can be generated with very high quality. This motivates research into embedding algorithms that embed a
given photograph into a GAN latent space. Such embed-

ding algorithms can be used to analyze the limitations of
GANs [5], do image inpainting [8, 39, 38, 36], local image editing [40, 17], global image transformations such as
image morphing and expression transfer [1], and few-shot
video generation [35, 34].
In this paper, we propose to extend a very recent embedding algorithm, Image2StyleGAN [1]. In particular, we
would like to improve this previous algorithm in three aspects. First, we noticed that the embedding quality can
be further improved by including Noise space optimization
into the embedding framework. The key insight here is that
stable Noise space optimization can only be conducted if
the optimization is done sequentially with W + space and
not jointly. Second, we would like to improve the capabilities of the embedding algorithm to increase the local control
over the embedding. One way to improve local control is to
include masks in the embedding algorithm with undefined
content. The goal of the embedding algorithm should be to
find a plausible embedding for everything outside the mask,
while filling in reasonable semantic content in the masked
pixels. Similarly, we would like to provide the option of
approximate embeddings, where the specified pixel colors
are only a guide for the embedding. In this way, we aim to
achieve high quality embeddings that can be controlled by
user scribbles. In the third technical part of the paper, we
investigate the combination of embedding algorithm and di18296

