Few-Shot Learning via Embedding Adaptation with Set-to-Set Functions
Han-Jia Ye∗
Nanjing University

Hexiang Hu
USC

De-Chuan Zhan
Nanjing University

Fei Sha†
USC & Google

yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn

hexiangh@usc.edu

zhandc@lamda.nju.edu.cn

fsha@google.com

Abstract
Learning with limited data is a key challenge for visual recognition. Many few-shot learning methods address
this challenge by learning an instance embedding function
from seen classes and apply the function to instances from
unseen classes with limited labels. This style of transfer
learning is task-agnostic: the embedding function is not
learned optimally discriminative with respect to the unseen
classes, where discerning among them leads to the target task. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to
adapt the instance embeddings to the target classification
task with a set-to-set function, yielding embeddings that are
task-specific and are discriminative. We empirically investigated various instantiations of such set-to-set functions and
observed the Transformer is most effective — as it naturally
satisfies key properties of our desired model. We denote this
model as FEAT (few-shot embedding adaptation w/ Transformer) and validate it on both the standard few-shot classification benchmark and four extended few-shot learning settings with essential use cases, i.e., cross-domain, transductive, generalized few-shot learning, and low-shot learning.
It archived consistent improvements over baseline models
as well as previous methods, and established the new stateof-the-art results on two benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Few-shot visual recognition [9, 18, 19, 22, 43] emerged
as a promising direction in tackling the challenge of learning new visual concepts with limited annotations. Concretely, it distinguishes two sets of visual concepts: SEEN
and UNSEEN ones. The target task is to construct visual
classifiers to identify classes from the UNSEEN where each
class has a very small number of exemplars (“few-shot”).
The main idea is to discover transferable visual knowledge in the SEEN classes, which have ample labeled instances, and leverage it to construct the desired classifier.
For example, state-of-the-art approaches for few-shot learn∗ Work mostly done when the author was a visiting scholar at USC.
† On leave from USC

ing [35, 38, 40, 43] usually learn a discriminative instance
embedding model on the SEEN categories, and apply it to
visual data in UNSEEN categories. In this common embedding space, non-parametric classifiers (e.g., nearest neighbors) are then used to avoid learning complicated recognition models from a small number of examples.
Such approaches suffer from one important limitation.
Assuming a common embedding space implies that the discovered knowledge – discriminative visual features – on
the SEEN classes are equally effective for any classification
tasks constructed for an arbitrary set of UNSEEN classes. In
concrete words, suppose we have two different target tasks:
discerning “cat” versus “dog” and discerning “cat” versus
“tiger”. Intuitively, each task uses a different set of discriminative features. Thus, the most desired embedding model
first needs to be able to extract discerning features for either
task at the same time. This could be a challenging aspect in
its own right as the current approaches are agnostic to what
those “downstream” target tasks are and could accidentally
de-emphasize selecting features for future use. Secondly,
even if both sets of discriminative features are extracted,
they do not necessarily lead to the optimal performance for
a specific target task. The most useful features for discerning “cat” versus “tiger” could be irrelevant and noise to the
task of discerning “cat” versus “dog”!
What is missing from the current few-shot learning approaches is an adaptation strategy that tailors the visual
knowledge extracted from the SEEN classes to the UNSEEN
ones in a target task. In other words, we desire separate embedding spaces where each one of them is customized such
that the visual features are most discriminative for a given
task. Towards this, we propose a few-shot model-based embedding adaptation method that adjusts the instance embedding models derived from the SEEN classes. Such modelbased embedding adaptation requires a set-to-set function: a
function mapping that takes all instances from the few-shot
support set and outputs the set of adapted support instance
embeddings, with elements in the set co-adapting with each
other. Such output embeddings are then assembled as the
prototypes for each visual category and serve as the nearest neighbor classifiers. Figure 1 qualitatively illustrates

8808

