Referring Image Segmentation via Cross-Modal Progressive Comprehension
Shaofei Huang1,2∗ Tianrui Hui1,2∗ Si Liu3† Guanbin Li4 Yunchao Wei5
Jizhong Han1,2 Luoqi Liu6 Bo Li3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
4
Sun Yat-sen University 5 University of Technology Sydney 6 360 AI Institute

Referring image segmentation aims at segmenting the
foreground masks of the entities that can well match the
description given in the natural language expression. Previous approaches tackle this problem using implicit feature
interaction and fusion between visual and linguistic modalities, but usually fail to explore informative words of the
expression to well align features from the two modalities
for accurately identifying the referred entity. In this paper, we propose a Cross-Modal Progressive Comprehension (CMPC) module and a Text-Guided Feature Exchange
(TGFE) module to effectively address the challenging task.
Concretely, the CMPC module first employs entity and attribute words to perceive all the related entities that might
be considered by the expression. Then, the relational words
are adopted to highlight the correct entity as well as suppress other irrelevant ones by multimodal graph reasoning.
In addition to the CMPC module, we further leverage a
simple yet effective TGFE module to integrate the reasoned
multimodal features from different levels with the guidance
of textual information. In this way, features from multilevels could communicate with each other and be refined
based on the textual context. We conduct extensive experiments on four popular referring segmentation benchmarks
and achieve new state-of-the-art performances. Code is
available at https://github.com/spyflying/CMPC-Refseg.

1. Introduction
As deep models have made significant progresses in vision or language tasks [31][26][18][12][39], fields combining them [37][28][50] have drawn great attention of researchers. In this paper, we focus on the referring image
segmentation (RIS) problem whose goal is to segment the
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

“The man holding a white frisbee”

“The man holding a white frisbee”

Abstract

1

(a)

(b)

Entity Perception

Relation-Aware Reasoning
“The man holding a white frisbee”

2

“The man holding a white frisbee”

(d)

(c)
Prediction

Entity:

Attribute:

Relation:

Prediction:

Figure 1. Interpretation of our progressive referring segmentation
method. (a) Input referring expression and image. (b) The model
first perceives all the entities described in the expression based on
entity words and attribute words, e.g., “man” and “white frisbee”
(orange masks and blue outline). (c) After finding out all the candidate entities that may match with input expression, relational word
“holding” can be further exploited to highlight the entity involved
with the relationship (green arrow) and suppress the others which
are not involved. (d) Benefiting from the relation-aware reasoning
process, the referred entity is found as the final prediction (purple
mask). (Best viewed in color).

entities described by a natural language expression. Beyond
traditional semantic segmentation, RIS is a more challenging problem since the expression can refer to objects or stuff
belonging to any category in various language forms and
contain diverse contents including entities, attributes and relationships. As a relatively new topic that is still far from
being solved, this problem has a wide range of potential applications such as interactive image editing, language-based
robot controlling, etc. Early works [17][30][34][23] tackle
this problem using a straightforward concatenation-andconvolution scheme to fuse visual and linguistic features.
Later works [38][3][44] further utilize inter-modality atten-

10488

