Graph Embedded Pose Clustering for Anomaly Detection
Amir Markovitz1 , Gilad Sharir2 , Itamar Friedman2 , Lihi Zelnik-Manor2 , and Shai Avidan1
1

Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel

2

Alibaba Group

{markovitz2@mail, avidan@eng}.tau.ac.il, {first.last}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We propose a new method for anomaly detection of human actions. Our method works directly on human pose
graphs that can be computed from an input video sequence.
This makes the analysis independent of nuisance parameters such as viewpoint or illumination. We map these graphs
to a latent space and cluster them. Each action is then
represented by its soft-assignment to each of the clusters.
This gives a kind of ”bag of words” representation to the
data, where every action is represented by its similarity to a
group of base action-words. Then, we use a Dirichlet process based mixture, that is useful for handling proportional
data such as our soft-assignment vectors, to determine if an
action is normal or not.
We evaluate our method on two types of data sets.
The first is a fine-grained anomaly detection data set (e.g.
ShanghaiTech) where we wish to detect unusual variations
of some action. The second is a coarse-grained anomaly
detection data set (e.g., a Kinetics-based data set) where
few actions are considered normal, and every other action
should be considered abnormal.
Extensive experiments on the benchmarks show that our
method1 performs considerably better than other state of the
art methods.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in video has been investigated extensively over the years. This is because the amount of video
captured far surpasses our ability to manually analyze it.
Anomaly detection algorithms are designed to help human
operators deal with this problem. The question is how to
define anomalies and how to detect them.
The decision of whether an action is normal or not is
nuanced. In some cases, we are interested in detecting abnormal variations of an action. For example, an abnormal
type of walking. We term this fine-grained anomaly detection. In other cases, we might be interested in defining nor1 Code available at: https://github.com/amirmk89/gepc

mal actions and regard any other action as abnormal. For
example, we might be interested in determining that dancing is normal, while gymnastics are abnormal. We call this
coarse-grained anomaly detection.
We desire an algorithm that can handle both types of
anomaly detection in a single, unified fashion. Such an algorithm should take as input an unlabeled set of videos that
capture normal actions only (fine- or coarse-grained) and
use that to train a model that will distinguish normal from
abnormal actions.
We take advantage of the recent progress in human pose
estimation and assume our algorithm takes human pose
graphs as input. This offers several advantages. First, it
abstracts the problem and lets the algorithm focus on human pose and not on irrelevant features such as viewing direction, illumination, or background clutter. In addition, a
human pose can be represented as a compact graph, which
makes analyzing, training and testing much faster.
Given a sequence of video frames, we use a pose estimation method to extract the keypoints of every person in
each frame. Every person in a clip is represented as a temporal pose graph. We use a combination of an autoencoder
and a clustering branch to map the training samples into a
latent space where samples are soft clustered. Each sample
is then represented by its soft-assignment to each of the k
clusters. This can be understood as learning a bag-of-words
representation for actions. Each cluster corresponds to an
action-word, and each action is represented by its similarity
to each of the action-words. Figure 1 gives an overview of
our method.
The soft-assignment vectors capture proportional data
and the tool to measure their distribution is the Dirichlet
Process Mixture Model. Once we fit the model to the data,
we can obtain a normality score for each sample and determine if the action is to be classified as normal or not.
The algorithm thus consists of a series of abstractions.
Using human pose graphs eliminates the need to deal
with viewpoint and illumination changes. And the softassignment representation abstracts the type of data (finegrained or coarse-grained) from the Dirichlet model.

10539

