Instance-Aware, Context-Focused, and Memory-Efficient
Weakly Supervised Object Detection

1. Introduction
Recent works on object detection [17, 35, 34, 26] have
achieved impressive results. However, the training process
often requires strong supervision in terms of precise bounding boxes. Obtaining such annotations at a large scale can
be costly, time-consuming, or even infeasible. This motivates weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) methods [5, 45, 22] where detectors are trained with weaker
forms of supervision such as image-level category labels.
These works typically formulate WSOD as a multiple instance learning task, treating the set of object proposals in
each image as a bag. The selection of proposals that truly
cover objects is modeled using learnable latent variables.
∗ Work partially done at NVIDIA.

Grouped
Instance

Weakly supervised learning has emerged as a compelling
tool for object detection by reducing the need for strong
supervision during training. However, major challenges
remain: (1) differentiation of object instances can be ambiguous; (2) detectors tend to focus on discriminative parts
rather than entire objects; (3) without ground truth, object
proposals have to be redundant for high recalls, causing
significant memory consumption. Addressing these challenges is difficult, as it often requires to eliminate uncertainties and trivial solutions. To target these issues we develop
an instance-aware and context-focused unified framework.
It employs an instance-aware self-training algorithm and
a learnable Concrete DropBlock while devising a memoryefficient sequential batch back-propagation. Our proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art results on COCO (12.1%
AP, 24.8% AP50 ), VOC 2007 (54.9% AP), and VOC 2012
(52.1% AP), improving baselines by great margins. In addition, the proposed method is the first to benchmark ResNet
based models and weakly supervised video object detection.
Refer to our project page for code, models, and more details: https://github.com/NVlabs/wetectron.

Part
Domination

Abstract

Missing
Instance

Zhongzheng Ren1,2∗ Zhiding Yu2 Xiaodong Yang2∗ Ming-Yu Liu2
Yong Jae Lee3 Alexander G. Schwing1 Jan Kautz2
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 NVIDIA 3 University of California, Davis

Figure 1: Typical WSOD issues: (1) Instance Ambiguity:
missing less salient objects (top) or failing to differentiate
clustered instances (middle); (2) Part Domination: focusing on most discriminative object parts (bottom).
While alleviating the need for precise annotations, existing weakly supervised object detection methods [5, 45, 50,
40, 60] often face three major challenges due to the underdetermined and ill-posed nature, as demonstrated in Fig. 1:
(1) Instance Ambiguity. This arguably the biggest challenge which subsumes two common types of issues: (a)
Missing Instances: Less salient objects in the background
with rare poses and smaller scales are often ignored (top
row in Fig. 1). (b) Grouped Instances: Multiple instances
of the same category are grouped into a single bounding box
when spatially adjacent (middle row in Fig. 1). Both issues
are caused by bigger or more salient boxes receiving higher
scores than smaller or less salient ones.
(2) Part Domination. Predictions tend to be dominated by
the most discriminative parts of an object (Fig. 1 bottom).
This issue is particularly pronounced for classes with big
intra-class difference. For example, on classes such as animals and people, the model often turns into a ‘face detector’
as faces are the most consistent appearance signal.
(3) Memory Consumption. Existing proposal generation
methods [49, 64] often produce dense proposals. Without ground-truth localization, maintaining a large number
110598

