Straight to the Point: Fast-forwarding Videos via Reinforcement
Learning Using Textual Data
Washington Ramos1 Michel Silva1 Edson Araujo1 Leandro Soriano Marcolino2
Erickson Nascimento1
1
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil 2 Lancaster University, UK
1 {washington.ramos,

michelms, edsonroteia, erickson}@dcc.ufmg.br, 2 l.marcolino@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
The rapid increase in the amount of published visual
data and the limited time of users bring the demand for
processing untrimmed videos to produce shorter versions
that convey the same information. Despite the remarkable
progress that has been made by summarization methods,
most of them can only select a few frames or skims, which
creates visual gaps and breaks the video context. In this
paper, we present a novel methodology based on a reinforcement learning formulation to accelerate instructional
videos. Our approach can adaptively select frames that
are not relevant to convey the information without creating
gaps in the final video. Our agent is textually and visually
oriented to select which frames to remove to shrink the input video. Additionally, we propose a novel network, called
Visually-guided Document Attention Network (VDAN), able
to generate a highly discriminative embedding space to represent both textual and visual data. Our experiments show
that our method achieves the best performance in terms of
F1 Score and coverage at the video segment level.

1. Introduction
From the dawn of the digital revolution until this very
day, we are witnessing an exponential growth of data,
in particular, textual and visual data such as images and
videos. New technologies like social media and smartphones massively changed how we exchange and acquire
information. For instance, there is a plethora of textual tutorials and instructional videos on the Internet teaching a
variety of tasks, from how to cook burritos and tacos, all the
way to how to solve partial differential equations (PDEs),
and to device operations manuals.
Despite many textual tutorials and instructional videos
sharing the increasing growth of available data as well as the
content, they differ in a key aspect for users: how long they
would take to consume the content. In general, information

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of our fast forward method. After
creating an embedding space for encoding the document and video
frames, we train an agent that observes the encoded text and frame
and chooses an action (e.g., increase, decrease or keep the speedup rate) to emphasize highly semantic segments of the input video.

encoded by producers is more concise in textual data than
when they use visual data. For instance, a recipe of tacos
or a tutorial explaining how to solve a PDE is described in
a few sentences. Instructional videos, for their turn, might
have several minutes showing non-relevant information for
the task such as a person opening a refrigerator, picking
up the pencil, or erasing the blackboard. Such segments
could be fast-forwarded without losing the crucial information encoded in the input video to understand the task. Thus,
ideally, instructional videos should be concise, similar to a
textual description, but still having visually-rich demonstrations of all main steps of the task.
In this paper, we address the problem of accelerating
untrimmed videos by using text documents (see Figure 1).
For example, a recipe for cooking tacos could be used
110931

