Learning Filter Pruning Criteria
for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks Acceleration
Yang He1
1

Yuhang Ding2

Ping Liu1

ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

yang.he-1@student.uts.edu.au,

Linchao Zhu1
2

Baidu Research

Hanwang Zhang3
3

Nanyang Technological University

{dyh.ustc.uts,pino.pingliu,zhulinchao7}@gmail.com

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg,

yee.i.yang@gmail.com

Abstract

Previous pruning method

Our pruning method

Images

Filter pruning has been widely applied to neural network compression and acceleration. Existing methods usually utilize pre-defined pruning criteria, such as ℓp -norm, to
prune unimportant filters. There are two major limitations
to these methods. First, prevailing methods fail to consider
the variety of filter distribution across layers. To extract
features of the coarse level to the fine level, the filters of
different layers have various distributions. Therefore, it is
not suitable to utilize the same pruning criteria to different
functional layers. Second, prevailing layer-by-layer pruning methods process each layer independently and sequentially, failing to consider that all the layers in the network
collaboratively make the final prediction.
In this paper, we propose Learning Filter Pruning Criteria (LFPC) to solve the above problems. Specifically, we
develop a differentiable pruning criteria sampler. This sampler is learnable and optimized by the validation loss of the
pruned network obtained from the sampled criteria. In this
way, we could adaptively select the appropriate pruning criteria for different functional layers. Besides, when evaluating the sampled criteria, LFPC comprehensively considers
the contribution of all the layers at the same time. Experiments validate our approach on three image classification
benchmarks. Notably, on ILSVRC-2012, our LFPC reduces
more than 60% FLOPs on ResNet-50 with only 0.83% top-5
accuracy loss.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have achieved significant
advancement in various computer vision research applications [43, 15, 47]. However, most of these manually designed architectures, e.g., VGG [43], ResNet [15], usually
come with the enormous model size and heavy computation cost. It is hard to deploy these models in scenarios de∗ Corresponding Author.

Yi Yang1∗

Images
Label

Label

Pruning
criteria

Pruning
criteria

Images

Images
Label

Network Layer

Layer after pruning

Label

Forward process

Pruning process

Figure 1. (a) Previous filter pruning methods manually select a
criterion and apply it to all layers; (b) our pruning method learns
appropriate criteria for different layers based on the filter distribution. In the blue dashed box, the solid boxes of different colors denote different pruning criteria. The yellow boxes without shadow
correspond to unpruned layers of the network, while the ones with
shadow are the layers pruned by a selected pruning criterion.

manding a real-time response. Recently, studies on model
compression and acceleration are emerging. Due to its efficacy, the pruning strategy attracts attention in previous studies [14, 27, 20].
Recent developments on pruning can be divided into two
categories, i.e., weight pruning [14], and filter pruning [27].
Filter pruning is preferred compared to weight pruning because filter pruning could make the pruned model more
structural and achieve practical acceleration [20]. The existing filter pruning methods follow a three-stage pipeline. (1)
Training: training a large model on the target dataset. (2)
Pruning: based on a particular criterion, unimportant filters from the pre-trained model are pruned. (3) Fine-tuning
(retraining): the pruned model is retrained to recover the
original performance. During the three stages, select an appropriate pruning criterion is the key ingredient.
However, the previous works have a few drawbacks and
might not be the best choice in real scenarios. First, previ12009

