Steering Self-Supervised Feature Learning Beyond Local Pixel Statistics
Simon Jenni1
Hailin Jin2
Paolo Favaro1
University of Bern1
Adobe Research2
{simon.jenni,paolo.favaro}@inf.unibe.ch

hljin@adobe.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel principle for self-supervised feature learning based on the discrimination of specific transformations of an image. We argue that the generalization capability of learned features depends on what image
neighborhood size is sufficient to discriminate different image transformations: The larger the required neighborhood
size and the more global the image statistics that the feature can describe. An accurate description of global image
statistics allows to better represent the shape and configuration of objects and their context, which ultimately generalizes better to new tasks such as object classification and
detection. This suggests a criterion to choose and design
image transformations. Based on this criterion, we introduce a novel image transformation that we call limited context inpainting (LCI). This transformation inpaints an image
patch conditioned only on a small rectangular pixel boundary (the limited context). Because of the limited boundary
information, the inpainter can learn to match local pixel
statistics, but is unlikely to match the global statistics of the
image. We claim that the same principle can be used to justify the performance of transformations such as image rotations and warping. Indeed, we demonstrate experimentally
that learning to discriminate transformations such as LCI,
image warping and rotations, yields features with state of
the art generalization capabilities on several datasets such
as Pascal VOC, STL-10, CelebA, and ImageNet. Remarkably, our trained features achieve a performance on Places
on par with features trained through supervised learning
with ImageNet labels.

1. Introduction
The top-performance approaches to solve vision-based
tasks, such as object classification, detection and segmentation, are currently based on supervised learning. Unfortunately, these methods achieve a high-performance only
through a large amount of labeled data, whose collection
is costly and error-prone. Learning through labels may also
encounter another fundamental limitation, depending on the

Figure 1: The importance of global image statistics. Top
row: Natural images. Bottom row: Images transformed
such that local statistics are preserved while global statistics
are significantly altered.1 An accurate image representation
should be able to distinguish these two categories. A linear
binary classifier trained to distinguish original versus transformed images on top of conv5 features pre-trained on
ImageNet labels yields an accuracy of 78%. If instead we
use features pre-trained with our proposed self-supervised
learning task the classifier achieves an accuracy of 85%.
Notice that this transformation was not used in the training
of our features and that the transformed images were built
independently of either feature.
training procedure and dataset: It might yield features that
describe mostly local statistics, and thus have limited generalization capabilities. An illustration of this issue is shown
in Fig. 1. On the bottom row we show images that have been
transformed such that local statistics of the corresponding
image on the top row are preserved, but global statistics are
not. We find experimentally that features pre-trained with
ImageNet labels [6] have difficulties in telling real images
apart from the transformed ones. This simple test shows that
the classification task in ImageNet could be mostly solved
by focusing on local image statistics. Such problem might
not be noticed when evaluating these features on other tasks
and datasets that can be solved based on similar local statistics. However, more general classification settings would
certainly expose such a limitation. [16] also pointed out this
problem and showed that training supervised models to focus on the global statistics (which they refer to as shape) can
improve the generalization and the robustness of the learned
1 The transformed images are obtained by partitioning an image into a
4 × 4 grid, by randomly permuting the tiles, and by training a network to
inpaint a band of pixels across the tiles through adversarial training [19].

6408

