Learning Dynamic Relationships for 3D Human Motion Prediction
Qiongjie Cui
Huaijiang Sun∗
Fei Yang
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
cuiqiongjie@njust.edu.cn, sunhuaijiang@njust.edu.cn, yangfei92516@163.com

Abstract
3D human motion prediction, i.e., forecasting future sequences from given historical poses, is a fundamental task
for action analysis, human-computer interaction, machine
intelligence. Recently, the state-of-the-art method assumes
that the whole human motion sequence involves a fullyconnected graph formed by links between each joint pair.
Although encouraging performance has been made, due to
the neglect of the inherent and meaningful characteristics of
the natural connectivity of human joints, unexpected results
may be produced. Moreover, such a complicated topology
greatly increases the training difficulty. To tackle these issues, we propose a deep generative model based on graph
networks and adversarial learning. Specifically, the skeleton pose is represented as a novel dynamic graph, in which
natural connectivities of the joint pairs are exploited explicitly, and the links of geometrically separated joints can also
be learned implicitly. Notably, in the proposed model, the
natural connection strength is adaptively learned, whereas,
in previous schemes, it was constant. Our approach is evaluated on two representations (i.e., angle-based, positionbased) from various large-scale 3D skeleton benchmarks
(e.g., H3.6M, CMU, 3DPW MoCap). Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach achieves significant improvements against existing baselines in accuracy and visualization. Code will be available at https://github.
com/cuiqiongjie/LDRGCN .

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction based on 3D skeleton data is
committed to predicting future sequences from historical
poses [24, 15]. Because of the potential in machine intelligence, autonomous vehicle, human-computer interaction, especially applications that require interaction with humans, it has been widely investigated and attracted considerable attention [14, 7, 24, 25, 21].
Traditional approaches have typically resorted to RNNs
to model the human motion sequence [11, 18, 10]. How∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Example result. From top to bottom, we show the
ground truth, the results of ConvSeqSeq, FC-GCN, FC-GCN 3D,
Ours and Ours 3D. The red rectangle refers to a set of contrasting poses. The predictions of ours approach are indistinguishable
from the ground truth in short-term prediction, and even for longer
range prediction, the result are still semantically equivalent.

ever, RNN calculates the temporal context frame by frame,
which may lead to the gradient vanishing or exploding,
bringing their well-known training difficulty. Correspondingly, as described in the previous work [21, 14], recurrent
models inevitably involve error accumulation and convergence to the mean pose. On the other hand, CNNs are
also introduced to further extract multi-scale spatial correlations and have achieved remarkable performance [21].
Yet, skeleton sequence is essentially a non-euclidean data,
while CNNs are theoretically only applicable standard 2D
grid representation.
Recently, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), a
general form of conventional CNNs, with improved generalization and high interpretability, have received increasing attention and widely applied in many applications [6,
20, 33]. Researchers have also attempted to utilize GCNs
to efficiently extract contextual information for forecasting
human motion [23]. They suggest that the whole skeleton
sequence serves as an implicit and unrestricted graph, and
employs GCNs to learn these links between all joint pairs of
the sequence. Although this fully-connected graph model
(FC-GCN) has delivered impressive results, it cannot ex-

6519

