Face X-ray for More General Face Forgery Detection
Lingzhi Li1∗† Jianmin Bao2∗‡ Ting Zhang2 Hao Yang2 Dong Chen2 Fang Wen2
1
2
Peking University
Microsoft Research Asia
lilingzhi@pku.edu.cn

Baining Guo2

{jianbao,tinzhan,haya,doch,fangwen,bainguo}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel image representation
called face X-ray for detecting forgery in face images. The
face X-ray of an input face image is a greyscale image that
reveals whether the input image can be decomposed into the
blending of two images from different sources. It does so by
showing the blending boundary for a forged image and the
absence of blending for a real image. We observe that most
existing face manipulation methods share a common step:
blending the altered face into an existing background image. For this reason, face X-ray provides an effective way
for detecting forgery generated by most existing face manipulation algorithms. Face X-ray is general in the sense that
it only assumes the existence of a blending step and does
not rely on any knowledge of the artifacts associated with a
specific face manipulation technique. Indeed, the algorithm
for computing face X-ray can be trained without fake images generated by any of the state-of-the-art face manipulation methods. Extensive experiments show that face X-ray
remains effective when applied to forgery generated by unseen face manipulation techniques, while most existing face
forgery detection or deepfake detection algorithms experience a significant performance drop.

1. Introduction
Recent studies have shown rapid progress in facial manipulation, which enables an attacker to manipulate the facial area of an image and generate a new image, e.g., changing the identities or modifying the face attributes. With
the remarkable success in synthesizing realistic faces, it becomes infeasible even for humans to distinguish whether
an image has been manipulated. At the same time, these
forged images may be abused for malicious purpose, causing severe trust issues and security concerns in our society.
Therefore, it is of paramount importance to develop effective methods for detecting face forgery.
∗ Equal contribution
† Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia
‡ Corresponding Author

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Face X-ray reveals the blending boundaries in forged
face images and returns a blank image for real images. (a) a real
image and its face X-ray, (b) fake images and their face X-rays.

Our focus in this work is the problem of detecting face
forgeries, such as those produced by current state-of-theart face manipulation algorithms including DeepFakes [1],
Face2Face [46], FaceSwap [2], and NeuralTextures [45].
Face forgery detection is a challenging problem because
in real-world scenarios, we often need to detect forgery
without knowing the underlying face manipulation methods. Most existing works [12, 44, 25, 35, 36] detect face
manipulation in a supervised fashion and their methods are
trained for known face manipulation techniques. For such
face manipulation, these detection methods work quite well
and reach around 98% detection accuracy. However, these
detection methods tend to suffer from overfitting and thus
their effectiveness is limited to the manipulation methods
they are specifically trained for. When applied to forgery
generated by unseen face manipulation methods, these detection methods experience a significant performance drop.
Some recent works [49, 13] have noticed this problem
and attempted to capture more intrinsic forgery evidence
to improve the generalizability. However, their proposed
methods still rely on the generated face forgeries for supervision, resulting in limited generalization capability.
In this paper we propose a novel image representation,
face X-ray, for detecting fake face images or deepfakes.
The key observation behind face X-ray is that most existing
face manipulation methods share the common step of blending an altered face into an existing background image, and
there exist intrinsic image discrepancies across the blending

5001

