Deep Representation Learning on Long-tailed Data: A Learnable Embedding
Augmentation Perspective

1

Jialun Liu1∗, Yifan Sun2∗, Chuchu Han3 , Zhaopeng Dou4 , Wenhui Li1†
Jilin University Megvii Inc. 3 Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 Tsinghua University
2

jialun18@mails.jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper considers learning deep features from longtailed data. We observe that in the deep feature space, the
head classes and the tail classes present different distribution patterns. The head classes have a relatively large spatial span, while the tail classes have a significantly small
spatial span, due to the lack of intra-class diversity. This
uneven distribution between head and tail classes distorts
the overall feature space, which compromises the discriminative ability of the learned features. In response, we seek
to expand the distribution of the tail classes during training, so as to alleviate the distortion of the feature space. To
this end, we propose to augment each instance of the tail
classes with certain disturbances in the deep feature space.
With the augmentation, a specified feature vector becomes
a set of probable features scattered around itself, which is
analogical to an atomic nucleus surrounded by the electron
cloud. Intuitively, we name it as “feature cloud”. The intraclass distribution of the feature cloud is learned from the
head classes, and thus provides higher intra-class variation to the tail classes. Consequentially, it alleviates the
distortion of the learned feature space, and improves deep
representation learning on long tailed data. Extensive experimental evaluations on person re-identification and face
recognition tasks confirm the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets play a crucial role in deep representation learning, as well as in many other deep learning
based visual tasks. In the real-world, large-scale datasets
often exhibit extreme long-tailed distribution [8, 10]. Concretely, some identities have sufficient samples, while for
other massive identities, only very few samples are available. They are defined as the head classes and tail classes,
respectively. Long-tailed distribution poses great challenge
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

peter@megvii.com

liwh@jlu.edu.cn

to deep representation learning [1].
We investigate the impact of long-tailed distribution with
focus on the deeply learned feature space. In a specified
deep representation task, i.e., person re-identification (reID), We visualize several neighboring head classes in Fig. 1
and find that the sample number is an important factor for
intra-class diversity. Firstly we observe the original distribution of the head classes in Fig. 1 (a). The head classes
can be well distinguished with a distinct margin. With rich
intra-class diversity, each head class occupies a wide span in
the feature space. Further, we reduce the samples of some
head classes so they change to tail classes. As is shown
in Fig. 1 (b), we discover that samples from tail class distribute narrowly in the learned feature space, due to the lack
of intra-class diversity. This uneven distribution distorts the
overall feature space and consequentially compromises the
discriminative ability of the learned features.
To be more concrete, we further quantitatively investigate the intra-class diversity w.r.t. the long-tailed distribution. Given a specified class, we calculate the geometric angles between the features and the corresponding class center
in the deep feature space. We transform a re-ID dataset (i.e.,
DukeMTMC-reID) into a long-tailed one by setting some
classes to have only 4 samples. Under a popular baseline
for deep representation learning [35], the variations of head
classes are distributed within 0.463 ± 0.030 (95% Confidence Interval (CI)). In contrast, the variations of tail classes
are significantly small, with 0.288 ± 0.023 as the 95% CI.
Such observations further confirms that 1) tail classes have
smaller variance and 2) the sample number per class is the
dominating factor on the variance.
With this insight, we propose to transfer the intra-class
distribution of head classes to tail classes in the feature
space. Our target is to encourage the tail classes to achieve
similar intra-class angular variability with the head classes
in training. Specifically, we first calculate the distribution
of angles between the features of head class and their corresponding class center. By averaging the angular variances
of all the head classes, we obtain the overall variance of
head classes. Next, we consider transferring the variance

2970

