GanHand: Predicting Human Grasp Affordances in Multi-Object Scenes
Enric Corona1∗ , Albert Pumarola1 , Guillem Alenyà1 , Francesc Moreno-Noguer1 , Grégory Rogez2
1

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
NAVER LABS Europe

Figure 1: GanHand predicts hand shape and pose for grasping multiple objects given a single RGB image. The figure shows sample
results on the YCB-Affordance dataset we propose, the largest dataset of human grasp affordances in real scenes.

Abstract
The rise of deep learning has brought remarkable
progress in estimating hand geometry from images where
the hands are part of the scene. This paper focuses on a new
problem not explored so far, consisting in predicting how a
human would grasp one or several objects, given a single
RGB image of these objects. This is a problem with enormous potential in e.g. augmented reality, robotics or prosthetic design. In order to predict feasible grasps, we need to
understand the semantic content of the image, its geometric
structure and all potential interactions with a hand physical
model. To this end, we introduce a generative model that
jointly reasons in all these levels and 1) regresses the 3D
shape and pose of the objects in the scene; 2) estimates the
grasp types; and 3) refines the 51-DoF of a 3D hand model
that minimize a graspability loss. To train this model we
build the YCB-Affordance dataset, that contains more than
133k images of 21 objects in the YCB-Video dataset [69].
We have annotated these images with more than 28M plausible 3D human grasps according to a 33-class taxonomy.
A thorough evaluation in synthetic and real images shows
that our model can robustly predict realistic grasps, even in
cluttered scenes with multiple objects in close contact.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating 3D hand pose from monocular images has made major advances over the past few
years [71, 61, 46, 10, 31, 50, 55]. Current approaches can
estimate not only the 3D pose of the hand, but also its
shape [21], even when manipulating an object [28].

In this paper, we move beyond these works and tackle
a new problem which has not been explored so far: given
a single RGB image of a scene with an arbitrary number
of objects, we aim to predict human grasp affordances, i.e.
predict multiple plausible solutions of how a human would
grasp each one of the observed objects. We believe that such
a technology would have a great impact in several fields,
including virtual and augmented reality, human-robot interaction, robot imitation learning and would also open new
avenues in areas like prosthetic design to e.g. transfer human hand-like motions to electronic gloves [33].
Predicting human grasps, however, is a very challenging problem as it requires modeling the physical interactions and contacts between a high-dimensional hand model
(e.g. the shape of MANO model in [58] is ruled by 51-DoF)
and a potentially noisy 3D representation of the objects estimated from the input RGB image. Note that this is a significantly more complex problem than that of generating
robotic grasps, as robot end-effectors have much less DoF
than the human hand. For instance, very recently, Mousavian et al. [45] introduced GraspNet to predict 6-DoF for
object manipulation. Furthermore, the common practice in
robotics is to use RGB-D cameras which, despite simplifying the process of modeling the geometry of the objects, do
not have the versatility of standard RGB cameras.
In order to predict feasible human grasps, we introduce
GanHand, a multi-task GAN architecture that given solely
one input image: 1) estimates the 3D shape/pose of the objects; 2) predicts the best grasp type according to a taxon*Work done while visiting NAVER LABS Europe.

5031

