ScopeFlow: Dynamic Scene Scoping for Optical Flow
Aviram Bar-Haim1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1
Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract

5.4

LiteFlowNet

We propose to modify the common training protocols
of optical flow, leading to sizable accuracy improvements
without adding to the computational complexity of the training process. The improvement is based on observing the
bias in sampling challenging data that exists in the current
training protocol, and improving the sampling process. In
addition, we find that both regularization and augmentation
should decrease during the training protocol.
Using an existing low parameters architecture, the
method is ranked first on the MPI Sintel benchmark among
all other methods, improving the best two frames method
accuracy by more than 10%. The method also surpasses all
similar architecture variants by more than 12% and 19.7%
on the KITTI benchmarks, achieving the lowest Average
End-Point Error on KITTI2012 among two-frame methods,
without using extra datasets.

1. Introduction
The field of optical flow estimation has benefited from
the availability of acceptable benchmarks. In the last few
years, with the adoption of new CNN [15] architectures, a
greater emphasis has been placed on the training protocol.
A conventional training protocol now consists of two
stages: (i) pretraining on larger and simpler data and (ii)
finetuning on more complex datasets. In both stages, a training step includes the following: (i) sampling batch frames
and flow maps, (ii) applying photometric augmentations to
the frames, (iii) applying affine (global and relative) transformations to the frames and flow maps, (iv) cropping a
fixed size random crop from both input and flow maps, (v)
feeding the cropped frames into a CNN architecture, and
(vi) backpropagating the loss of the flow estimation.
While photometric augmentations include variations of
the input image values, affine transformations are used to
augment the variety of input flow fields. Due to the limited motion patterns represented by today’s optical flow
datasets, these regularization techniques are required for the
data driven training. We chose the word scoping, to define

AEPE on MPI Sintel test set

5.2
5.0

LiteFlowNet2

4.8

HD3-flow

IRR-PWC
PWC-Net+3
ContinualFlow1, 3
VCN
SelFlow1, 2

4.6
4.4
4.2

ScopeFlow (Ours)
5

10

15

20

25

30

Number of trainable parameters (million)

35

40

Figure 1. Model size and accuracy trade-off. Average-end-pointerror of the leading methods on the MPI Sintel benchmark vs.
the number of trainable parameters. PWC-Net based models are
marked in blue. Our model is in the bottom left corner, achieving
the best performance with low number of parameters during training. 1 Methods that use more than two frames. 2 SelFlow uses half
of the parameters in test time. 3 Trained with additional datasets.

the process of affine transformation followed by cropping,
as this process sets the scope of the input frames.
To improve optical flow training, we ask the following
questions: Q1. How do fixed size crops affect this training?
Q2. What defines a good set of scopes for optical flow? Q3.
Should regularization be relaxed after pretraining?
Our experiments employ the smallest PWC-Net [27]
variant of Hur & Roth [11], with only 6.3M trainable parameters, in order to support low memory, real time processing. We demonstrate that by answering these questions
and contributing to the training procedure, it is possible to
train a dual frame, monocular and small sized model to outperform all other models on the MPI Sintel benchmark. The
trained model improves the accuracy of the baseline model,
which uses the same architecture, by 12%. See Fig. 1 for a
comparison to other networks.
Moreover, despite using the smallest PWC-Net variant,
our model outperformed all other PWC-Net variants on
both KITTI 2012 and KITTI 2015 benchmarks, improving
the baseline model results by 12.2% and 19.7% on the public test set, and demonstrating once more the power of using
the improved training protocol.

7998

