Structure Boundary Preserving Segmentation for Medical Image
with Ambiguous Boundary
Hong Joo Lee, Jung Uk Kim, Sangmin Lee, Hak Gu Kim, Yong Man Ro
Image and Video Systems Lab, School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{dlghdwn008, jukim0701, sangmin.lee, hgkim0331, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel image segmentation
method to tackle two critical problems of medical image,
which are (i) ambiguity of structure boundary in the medical image domain and (ii) uncertainty of the segmented region without specialized domain knowledge. To solve those
two problems in automatic medical segmentation, we propose a novel structure boundary preserving segmentation
framework. To this end, the boundary key point selection
algorithm is proposed. In the proposed algorithm, the key
points on the structural boundary of the target object are
estimated. Then, a boundary preserving block (BPB) with
the boundary key point map is applied for predicting the
structure boundary of the target object. Further, for embedding experts knowledge in the fully automatic segmentation, we propose a novel shape boundary-aware evaluator
(SBE) with the ground-truth structure information indicated
by experts. The proposed SBE could give feedback to the
segmentation network based on the structure boundary key
point. The proposed method is general and flexible enough
to be built on top of any deep learning-based segmentation
network. We demonstrate that the proposed method could
surpass the state-of-the-art segmentation network and improve the accuracy of three different segmentation network
models on different types of medical image datasets.

1. Introduction
For many medical image processing applications, it is an
important key to success for the models to correctly segment anatomical structures in the medical image domain
[24, 17]. However, it is challenging to obtain accurate
segmentation results because of the ambiguity of structure
boundary, heterogeneous texture and the uncertainty of the
segmented region without domain knowledge. Even experts
have differences slightly in their delineation depending on
their experience and skill [18].
In the era of deep learning, many convolutional neu-

Original Image

U-Net

Proposed Method

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Results of automatic segmentation methods on medical
images with the ambiguous structure boundary and heterogeneous
texture image. Note that these segmentation results by U-Net have
failed in preserving structure boundary.

ral networks (CNNs)-based segmentation approaches have
been proposed to accurately segment the target object both
in the natural and medical image domain [15, 31, 21, 33].
Fully Convolution Network (FCN) [15] with skip-layer to
preserve spatial localization information was proposed for
semantic segmentation. Inspired by FCN, U-Net [21] was
proposed for utilizing the context information of the higher
layers to predict precise output by combining higher resolution features with the up-sampled feature. Zhao et al.[33]
integrated FCN and Conditional Random Fields in a unified segmentation framework for brain tumor segmentation. These deep learning-based medical image segmentation methods did not explicitly take into account the difficulties in the medical image such as ambiguous structure
boundaries and heterogeneous textures. Figure 1 shows
cases where U-Net failed to segment the target regions
in ultrasound image. To deal with the ambiguous structure boundary issue, a few approaches have been reported
[6, 11]. These methods enforce inter-pixel dependency to
recover boundary details. However, they need manual parameter tuning as post-processing, which is labor-intensive
tasks, and the results are affected by parameter tuning.
To overcome this limitation, interactive or semiautomatic segmentation methods have been proposed where
ambiguous structure boundary is dealt with interactively
during test time. The interactive segmentation methods em-

4817

