Video Panoptic Segmentation
Dahun Kim1,†

Sanghyun Woo1,†
KAIST

2

In So Kweon1

Adobe Research

Cityscapes-VPS

VIPER

1

Joon-Young Lee2

Figure 1: Example video sequences of reformatted VIPER and newly created Cityscapes-VPS annotations for video panoptic segmentation.

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation has become a new standard of
visual recognition task by unifying previous semantic segmentation and instance segmentation tasks in concert. In
this paper, we propose and explore a new video extension of
this task, called video panoptic segmentation. The task requires generating consistent panoptic segmentation as well
as an association of instance ids across video frames. To
invigorate research on this new task, we present two types
of video panoptic datasets. The first is a re-organization
of the synthetic VIPER dataset into the video panoptic format to exploit its large-scale pixel annotations. The second is a temporal extension on the Cityscapes val. set,
by providing new video panoptic annotations (CityscapesVPS). Moreover, we propose a novel video panoptic segmentation network (VPSNet) which jointly predicts object
classes, bounding boxes, masks, instance id tracking, and
semantic segmentation in video frames. To provide appropriate metrics for this task, we propose a video panoptic
quality (VPQ) metric and evaluate our method and several
other baselines. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the presented two datasets. We achieve stateof-the-art results in image PQ on Cityscapes and also in
VPQ on Cityscapes-VPS and VIPER datasets. The datasets
and code will be released.
† This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.

1. Introduction
As an effort to unify existing recognition tasks, object
classification, detection, and segmentation and to leverage
the possible complementariness of these tasks into a single
complete task, Kirillov et al. [16] proposed a holistic segmentation of all foreground instances and background regions in a scene and named the task panoptic segmentation.
Since then, a large number of works [7, 8, 10, 15, 17–20, 24,
31, 37, 40] have proposed learning-based approaches to this
new benchmark task, confirming its importance to the field.
In this paper, we extend the panoptic segmentation in the
image domain to the video domain. Different from image
panoptic segmentation, the new problem aims at a simultaneous prediction of object classes, bounding boxes, masks,
instance id associations, and semantic segmentation, while
assigning unique answers to each pixel in a video. Figure 1
illustrates sample video sequences of ground truth annotations for this problem. Naturally, we name the new task
video panoptic segmentation (VPS). The new task opens
up possibilities for applications that require a holistic and
global view of video segmentation such as autonomous
driving, augmented reality, and video editing. In particular, temporally dense panoptic segmentation of a video can
work as intermediate-level representations for even higherlevel video understanding tasks such as temporal reasoning
or action-actor recognition which anticipates the behaviors
19859

