On Vocabulary Reliance in Scene Text Recognition
Zhaoyi Wan1∗, Jielei Zhang1∗, Liang Zhang2 , Jiebo Luo3 ,† , Cong Yao1†
1
Megvii, 2 China University of Mining and Technology, 3 University of Rochester
i@wanzy.me, {yctmzjl,yaocong2010}@gmail.com , zhangliang04@hotmail.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
The pursuit of high performance on public benchmarks
has been the driving force for research in scene text recognition, and notable progress has been achieved. However, a
close investigation reveals a startling fact that the state-ofthe-art methods perform well on images with words within
vocabulary but generalize poorly to images with words outside vocabulary. We call this phenomenon “vocabulary reliance”. In this paper, we establish an analytical framework to conduct an in-depth study on the problem of vocabulary reliance in scene text recognition. Key findings
include: (1) Vocabulary reliance is ubiquitous, i.e., all existing algorithms more or less exhibit such characteristic;
(2) Attention-based decoders prove weak in generalizing
to words outside vocabulary and segmentation-based decoders perform well in utilizing visual features; (3) Context modeling is highly coupled with the prediction layers.
These findings provide new insights and can benefit future
research in scene text recognition. Furthermore, we propose a simple yet effective mutual learning strategy to allow
models of two families (attention-based and segmentationbased) to learn collaboratively. This remedy alleviates the
problem of vocabulary reliance and improves the overall
scene text recognition performance.

1. Introduction
As a pivotal task in many visual recognition and comprehension systems [42, 25, 17, 35, 22, 21], scene text
recognition has been an active research field in computer
vision for decades [24, 45, 43, 44, 32, 39, 36]. Recently, the pursuit of high performance on benchmarks has
drawn much attention from the community. Driven by
deep learning [50, 31, 2, 33, 12] and large volume of synthetic data [13, 29, 46], the recognition accuracy on standard benchmarks has escalated rapidly. For instance, the
accuracy on IIIT-5k [27] without lexicon has increased from
78.2% [31] to 96.0% [12] in a very short period.
∗ Authors contribute equally
† Corresponding author

Figure 1: The recurrent memory mechanism in RNNattention based methods [33] is actually a double-edged
sword. The positive aspect is that for text images with
words in the vocabulary (Left), even though image qualities are degraded (blur or partial occlusion), the content can
be still correctly recognized. The negative aspect, which is
previously neglected, lies in that for text images with words
outside the vocabulary (Right), mistakes (marked in red)
might easily occur.
However, an important issue has been overlooked for a
long time: Even though achieving high accuracy on various
benchmarks, state-of-the-art algorithms actually demonstrate obviously higher performance on images with words
in the vocabulary1 than on those with words outside it. The
gap is not caused by the image quality. As shown in Fig. 1,
a top-performing text recognizer [33] can correctly read the
content even for images with poor quality but might make
mistakes for images with better quality. The secret lies in
the vocabulary: state-of-the-art methods seem inclined to
memorize words that have been seen in the training phase.
We call this phenomenon “vocabulary reliance”.
To further verify whether vocabulary reliance is common in scene text recognition, we reproduce a number of
representative methods for scene text recognition, including
CRNN [31], FAN [2], CA-FCN [23] and ASTER [33]. The
same backbone network (ResNet-50 [8]) and training data
(SynthText [7]) are used for these methods, in order to rule
out interference factors. As can be observed from Tab. 1,
the performance gaps between test images with words in
and outside the vocabulary are significant for all evaluated
methods. It reveals that vocabulary reliance is ubiquitous.
In this paper, we systematically investigate the problem
1 To be more specific, vocabulary in this work consists of all the words
that appear in the training set.

11425

