A Certifiably Globally Optimal Solution to
Generalized Essential Matrix Estimation
Ji Zhao
TuSimple
zhaoji84@gmail.com

Wanting Xu
ShanghaiTech University
xuwt@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a convex optimization approach for generalized essential matrix (GEM) estimation. The six-point minimal solver for the GEM has poor numerical stability and
applies only for a minimal number of points. Existing nonminimal solvers for GEM estimation rely on either local
optimization or relinearization techniques, which impedes
high accuracy in common scenarios. Our proposed nonminimal solver minimizes the sum of squared residuals by
reformulating the problem as a quadratically constrained
quadratic program. The globally optimal solution is thus
obtained by a semidefinite relaxation. The algorithm retrieves certifiably globally optimal solutions to the original
non-convex problem in polynomial time. We also provide
the necessary and sufficient conditions to recover the optimal GEM from the relaxed problems. The improved performance is demonstrated over experiments on both synthetic
and real multi-camera systems.

1. Introduction
Relative pose estimation from images plays an important
role in many geometric vision tasks, such as structure-frommotion (SfM) and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM). While central cameras can be modeled by the pinhole or perspective camera model [11], more general noncentral cameras such as multi-camera arrays are modelled
by the generalized camera model [32]. This paper presents
a new method to estimate the generalized essential matrix
(GEM) or relative pose for non-central cameras.
The essential matrix encodes the relative pose for pinhole cameras and is well understood [11, 30, 4]. GEM estimation is more involved. A generalized camera is formed
by abstracting landmark observations into spatial rays that
are no longer required to originate from a common point
(i.e. the focal point). Figure 1 demonstrates the difference
between central and non-central cameras. As illustrated, the
generalized camera model allows us to describe the mea-

Laurent Kneip
ShanghaiTech University
lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

3D points

3D points

𝐶

𝐑, 𝐭 =?

𝐶′

(a) central camera

𝐶

𝐑, 𝐭 =?

𝐶′

(b) non-central camera

Figure 1. Relative pose estimation. Red triangles represent perspective cameras. Solid arrows pointing from 3D points to cameras depict the imaging process. In the non-central camera scenario, three rigidly attached central cameras constitute a noncentral camera.

surements of a number of interesting camera systems, such
as a multi-camera rig of rigidly attached cameras.
From a more abstract and geometric point of view, a generalized camera consists of a Euclidean reference frame in
which measurements are represented by rays in space, described by a suitable parameterization such as Plücker line
vectors. In contrast to the standard essential matrix for
which there exists an unobservability in the norm of the
translation, the translation extracted from a GEM is generally unique. The down-side of this scale observability is
that the minimal solution of the GEM requires at least 6 instead of only 5 correspondences across the two views (i.e.
one correspondence per degree of freedom in the problem).
There are both linear [24] and non-linear solutions [34,
18, 5] to GEM estimation. The linear solver—also known
as the 17-point algorithm—takes 17 correspondences to
derive the relative pose of the generalized camera. This
method can be easily applied to an arbitrarily large number of points. However, its solution is not globally optimal,
as the linearization ignores side-constraints on the GEM
and the contained essential and rotation matrices. The most
closely related works to ours are the non-minimal solvers by
Kneip and Li [18] and Campos et al. [5], which use many
correspondences to calculate a potentially accurate relative
pose, but rely on local optimization methods and therefore

12034

