Stochastic Classifiers for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Zhihe Lu1,2 Yongxin Yang1,2 Xiatian Zhu1 Cong Liu2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2 Tao Xiang1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey 2 iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence
{zhihe.lu, yongxin.yang, xiatian.zhu, y.song, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk, congliu2@iflytek.com

97.0

A common strategy adopted by existing state-of-the-art
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods is to employ two classifiers to identify the misaligned local regions
between a source and target domain. Following the ’wisdom of the crowd’ principle, one has to ask: why stop at
two? Indeed, we find that using more classifiers leads to
better performance, but also introduces more model parameters, therefore risking overfitting. In this paper, we introduce a novel method called STochastic clAssifieRs (STAR)
for addressing this problem. Instead of representing one
classifier as a weight vector, STAR models it as a Gaussian distribution with its variance representing the interclassifier discrepancy. With STAR, we can now sample an
arbitrary number of classifiers from the distribution, whilst
keeping the model size the same as having two classifiers.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that a variety of existing
UDA methods can greatly benefit from STAR and achieve
the state-of-the-art performance on both image classification and semantic segmentation tasks.

1. Introduction
Remarkable advances on image classification accuracy
have been realised in the supervised learning paradigm
[14, 20, 48, 52]. This success is based on two assumptions:
there are hundreds/thousands of labelled training images
per class available for model training, and the training and
test data are drawn from the same domain, and with similar distributions. However, collecting such a big training
set for every target domain is prohibitively expensive and
time-consuming in large scale real-world applications. An
intuitive solution is to transfer knowledge from an available
richly-labelled domain (i.e., source domain) to a target domain without labelled training data but containing the same
set of classes. Often, the data distributions of the source
domain and target domain are different significantly, which
renders the model trained/specialised on the source domain
not directly applicable to the target domain. Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) provides an effective approach
to solving this problem [10, 29].

Accuracy (%) with Std. Dev. in Shadow

Abstract

96.5
96.0
95.5
95.0
94.5
94.0

MCD: MNIST to USPS
MCD: USPS to MNIST
2

3

4

5

6

# Classifiers

7

8

9

10

Figure 1: The test accuracy vs. classifier number using the
Maximum Classifier Discrepancy (MCD) model [45] on
two digit classification UDA tasks. The solid line is the
average accuracy over 5 trials, whilst the standard deviation
is represented by shadows. The best results are clearly not
obtained with two classifiers.
There have been a large spectrum of UDA methods developed in the literature [36, 56]. From a distribution alignment perspective, existing UDA methods can be divided
generally into two groups: (i) Global Alignment (GA) methods [10, 28, 15] and (ii) Local Alignment (LA) methods
[45, 22, 31]. Considering holistically the per-domain data
distribution as a whole, GA methods tend to overlook the
local class decision boundary information during adaptation, thereby resulting in sub-optimal performance on the
target domain. This limitation can be addressed by the recent LA methods which take into account class-level crossdomain distribution alignment. Concretely, LA methods
first leverage the disagreement of a small number (typically
two) of classifiers, to identify the misalignment areas between source and target distributions in a joint feature embedding space. Subsequently, a feature extraction model is
trained in a way such that the discovered misalignment can
be minimised in the embedding space. The two operations
are repeated alternately until convergence.
Whilst the LA methods [45, 22, 31] yield the state-ofthe-art UDA performance on various benchmarks with two
classifiers, a fundamental yet largely ignored question is:

9111

