Where Does It Exist: Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding for Multi-Form
Sentences
∗

Zhu Zhang1 , Zhou Zhao1 , Yang Zhao1 , Qi Wang2 , Huasheng Liu2 , Lianli Gao3
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba Group, 3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhangzhu, zhaozhou, zhaoyang}@zju.edu.cn, {wq140362, fangkong.lhs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a novel task, Spatio-Temporal
Video Grounding for Multi-Form Sentences (STVG). Given
an untrimmed video and a declarative/interrogative sentence depicting an object, STVG aims to localize the spatiotemporal tube of the queried object. STVG has two challenging settings: (1) We need to localize spatio-temporal
object tubes from untrimmed videos, where the object may
only exist in a very small segment of the video; (2) We
deal with multi-form sentences, including the declarative
sentences with explicit objects and interrogative sentences
with unknown objects. Existing methods cannot tackle the
STVG task due to the ineffective tube pre-generation and
the lack of object relationship modeling. Thus, we then
propose a novel Spatio-Temporal Graph Reasoning Network (STGRN) for this task. First, we build a spatiotemporal region graph to capture the region relationships
with temporal object dynamics, which involves the implicit
and explicit spatial subgraphs in each frame and the temporal dynamic subgraph across frames. We then incorporate textual clues into the graph and develop the multi-step
cross-modal graph reasoning. Next, we introduce a spatiotemporal localizer with a dynamic selection method to directly retrieve the spatio-temporal tubes without tube pregeneration. Moreover, we contribute a large-scale video
grounding dataset VidSTG based on video relation dataset
VidOR. The extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The VidSTG dataset is available
at https://github.com/Guaranteer/VidSTG-Dataset.

1. Introduction
Grounding natural language in visual contents is a fundamental and vital task in the visual-language understanding field. Visual grounding aims to localize the object
described by the given referring expression in an im∗ Zhou Zhao is the corresponding author.

25.12s

27.53s

Declarative Sentence: A little boy with a Christmas hat is catching a yellow toy.
Interrogative Sentence: What is caught by the squatting boy on the floor?

Figure 1. An example of STVG for multi-form sentences.

age, which has attracted much attention and made great
progress [14, 24, 6, 40, 37]. Recently, researchers begin
to explore video grounding, including temporal grounding
and spatio-temporal grounding. Temporal sentence grounding [8, 11, 46, 35] determines the temporal boundaries of
events corresponding to the given sentence, but does not
localize the spatio-temporal tube (i.e., a sequence of bounding boxes) of the described object. Further, spatio-temporal
grounding is to retrieve the object tubes according to textual
descriptions, but existing strategies [48, 1, 36, 4] can only
be applied to restricted scenarios, e.g. grounding in a frame
of the video [48, 1] or grounding in trimmed videos [36, 4].
Moreover, due to the lack of bounding box annotations, researchers [48, 4] can only adopt a weakly-supervised setting, leading to suboptimal performance.
To break through above restrictions, we propose a novel
task, Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding for Multi-Form
Sentences (STVG). Concretely, as illustrated in Figure 1,
given an untrimmed video and a declarative/interrogative
sentence depicting an object, STVG aims to localize the
spatio-temporal tube of the queried object.
Compared with previous video grounding [48, 1, 36, 4],
STVG has two novel and challenging points. First, we localize spatio-temporal object tubes from untrimmed videos.
The objects may exist in a very small segment of the video
and be hard to distinguish. And the sentences may only
describe a short-term state of the queried object, e.g. the
action ”catching a toy” of the boy in Figure 1. So it is crucial to determine the temporal boundaries of object tubes
by sufficient cross-modal understanding. Secondly, STVG
deals with multi-form sentences, that it, not only grounds
110668

