Generalized Product Quantization Network for Semi-supervised Image Retrieval
Young Kyun Jang

Nam Ik Cho

Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul Korea
kyun0914@ispl.snu.ac.kr, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Image retrieval methods that employ hashing or vector quantization have achieved great success by taking
advantage of deep learning. However, these approaches
do not meet expectations unless expensive label information is sufficient. To resolve this issue, we propose the
first quantization-based semi-supervised image retrieval
scheme: Generalized Product Quantization (GPQ) network. We design a novel metric learning strategy that preserves semantic similarity between labeled data, and employ entropy regularization term to fully exploit inherent potentials of unlabeled data. Our solution increases the generalization capacity of the quantization network, which allows
overcoming previous limitations in the retrieval community. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that GPQ
yields state-of-the-art performance on large-scale real image benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The amount of multimedia data, including images and
videos, increases exponentially on a daily basis. Hence,
retrieving relevant content from a large-scale database has
become a more complicated problem. There have been
many kinds of fast and accurate search algorithms, and the
Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search is known to
have high retrieval accuracy and computational efficiency.
Recent ANN methods mainly focused on hashing scheme
[31], because of its low storage cost and fast retrieval speed.
To be specific, an image is represented by a binary-valued
compact hash code (binary code) with only a few tens of
bits, and it is utilized to build database and distance computation.
The methods using binary code representation can be
categorized as Binary hashing (BH) and Product Quantization (PQ) [13]. BH-based methods [34, 7, 26] employ a
hash function that maps a high-dimensional vector space to
a Hamming space, where the distance between two codes
can be measured extremely fast via bitwise XOR operation.

Figure 1. Above: an illustration of the overall framework of GPQ
and its three components: feature extractor F , PQ table Z, and
classifier C, where C contributes to build Z. Forward path shows
how the labeled and unlabeled data pass through the network, and
backward path shows the propagation of the gradients originated
from the training objectives. LN -P Q and Lcls train the network to
minimize errors using the labeled data, while LSEM trains the network to simultaneously maximize and minimize entropy using the
unlabeled data. Below: a 2D conceptual Voronoi diagram showing one of the codebooks in GPQ. After training, all codewords
are evenly distributed, and both labeled and unlabeled data points
are clustering around them.

However, BH has a limitation in describing the distance between data points because it can produce only a limited
number of distinct values. PQ, which is a kind of vector
quantization [8], has been introduced to alleviate this problem in information retrieval [13, 6, 15].
To perform PQ, we first need to decompose the input
feature space into a Cartesian product of several disjoint
subspaces (codebooks) and find the centroid (codeword) of
each subspace. Then, from the sub-vectors of the input feature vector, sub-binary code is obtained by replacing each
sub-vector with the index of the nearest codeword in the
codebook. Since codeword consists of real numbers, PQ
allows asymmetric distance calculation in real space using
13420

