Learning a Weakly-Supervised Video Actor-Action Segmentation Model with a
Wise Selection
Jie Chen Zhiheng Li Jiebo Luo Chenliang Xu
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
{jiechen, zhiheng.li, jiebo.luo, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract
We address weakly-supervised video actor-action segmentation (VAAS), which extends general video object segmentation (VOS) to additionally consider action labels of
the actors. The most successful methods on VOS synthesize
a pool of pseudo-annotations (PAs) and then refine them
iteratively. However, they face challenges as to how to select from a massive amount of PAs high-quality ones, how
to set an appropriate stop condition for weakly-supervised
training, and how to initialize PAs pertaining to VAAS. To
overcome these challenges, we propose a general WeaklySupervised framework with a Wise Selection of training
samples and model evaluation criterion (WS 2 ). Instead
of blindly trusting quality-inconsistent PAs, WS 2 employs
a learning-based selection to select effective PAs and a
novel region integrity criterion as a stopping condition for
weakly-supervised training. In addition, a 3D-Conv GCAM
is devised to adapt to the VAAS task. Extensive experiments
show that WS 2 achieves state-of-the-art performance on
both weakly-supervised VOS and VAAS tasks and is on par
with the best fully-supervised method on VAAS.

1. Introduction
Video actor-action segmentation (VAAS) has recently
received significant attention from the community [46, 45,
47, 14, 28, 13, 6]. Extended from general video object segmentation (VOS) which aims to segment out foreground objects, VAAS goes one step further by assigning an action
label to the target actor. Spatial information within a single frame may be sufficient to infer the actors, but it alone
can hardly distinguish the actions, e.g., running v.s. walking. VAAS requires spatiotemporal modeling of videos.
A few existing works have addressed this problem using
supervoxel-based CRF [45], two-stream branch [14, 13],
Conv-LSTM integrated with 2D-/3D-FCN [28], 3D convolution involved Mask-RCNN [13], or under the guidance of
a sentence instead of predefined actor-action pairs [6]. Al-

Figure 1. Two-stage WS 2 for weakly-supervised VAAS. Stage1 (left): Given only a video-level actor-action label, 2D-Conv and
3D-Conv GCAM output actor and action masks (binarized from
the actor- and action-guided attention maps). The union of the
masks is refined by SLIC [1], thus providing a rough location of
the target actor doing a specific action for the whole training set.
This constructs the initial version of PA (PA.v0). Stage-2 (right):
PA evolves through the select-train-predict iterative cycles. First,
we select a high-quality subset from the latest version of PA to
train a segmentation network. The well-trained model is used to
predict the next version of PA. When the model’s region integrity
criterion on the validation set converges, the iteration terminates.

though these fully-supervised models have shown promising results on the Actor-Action Dataset (A2D) [46], the
scarcity of extensive pixel-level annotation prevents them
from being applied to real-world applications.
We approach VAAS in the weakly-supervised setting
where we only have access to video-level actor and action
tags, such that model generalization is boosted by benefiting
from abundant video data without fine-grained annotations.
The only existing weakly-supervised method on A2D we
are aware of is by Yan et al. [47]. Their method replaces the
classifiers in [45] with ranking SVMs, but still uses CRF for
the actual segmentation, which results in slow inference.
We consider weakly-supervised VOS, a more widelystudied problem. To fill the gap between full- and
weak-supervision, a line of works first synthesize a pool

9901

