AdaBits: Neural Network Quantization with Adaptive Bit-Widths
Qing Jin∗
ByteDance Inc.

Linjie Yang∗
ByteDance Inc.

Zhenyu Liao
Kwai Inc.

jinqingking@gmail.com

linjie.yang@bytedance.com

liaozhenyu2004@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks with adaptive configurations have
gained increasing attention due to the instant and flexible
deployment of these models on platforms with different resource budgets. In this paper, we investigate a novel option to achieve this goal by enabling adaptive bit-widths
of weights and activations in the model. We first examine
the benefits and challenges of training quantized model with
adaptive bit-widths, and then experiment with several approaches including direct adaptation, progressive training
and joint training. We discover that joint training is able to
produce comparable performance on the adaptive model as
individual models. We also propose a new technique named
Switchable Clipping Level (S-CL) to further improve quantized models at the lowest bit-width. With our proposed
techniques applied on a bunch of models including MobileNet V1/V2 and ResNet50, we demonstrate that bit-width
of weights and activations is a new option for adaptively
executable deep neural networks, offering a distinct opportunity for improved accuracy-efficiency trade-off as well as
instant adaptation according to the platform constraints in
real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Recent development of deep learning enables application
of deep neural networks across a wide range of platforms that
present different resource constraints. For example, popular
mobile apps such as TikTok and Snapchat on portable devices pose stringent requirements on response latency and
energy consumption, while visual recognition system embedded in a self-driving vehicle [13, 40] is more demanding on fast and accurate prediction. Besides, for medical
application [22, 53] applied with portable testing systems,
implementing efficient model will accelerate the diagnosing
process to save time for doctor and patient. The problem
is more serious if other factors are taken into account, such
as aging of hardware, battery conditions, as well as dif∗ Equal Contribution. Work is done when Qing Jin is an intern at
ByteDance.

ferent versions of software systems. To serve applications
under all these scenarios with drastically different requirements, different models tailored for different resource budgets can be devised either manually [14, 15, 16, 37] or automatically through neural architecture search [39, 56, 57].
This strategy is beneficial for optimal trade-offs with a fixed
combination of constraints, but is not economical, because
it requires time-consuming training and benchmarking for
each of these models, which prohibits instant adaptation to
favor different scenarios. To tackle this problem, recent
work focuses on training a single model that is flexible and
scalable. For example, [49] proposes a method where the
number of channels can be adjusted through changing the
width-multiplier in each layer. Inspired by this work, [3]
integrates adaptation of depth, width and kernel size altogether, and achieves better trade-offs between performance
and efficiency through progressive training. [48] adopts the
same strategy with scaling up factors, but uses simultaneous
training algorithm to achieve improved predictive accuracy.
Surprisingly, albeit the above-mentioned methods
achieve the desired flexibility of adaptive deployment, bitwidth of weights and intermediate activations, as another
degree of freedom, is almost overlooked in previous work.
Suppose we can adaptively choose bit-width for a neural network during inference without further training, it will provide an distinct opportunity for more powerful model compression and acceleration. As an example, compared with
model with full-precision, quantizing MobileNet V2 to 6-bit
compresses the model size by roughly 4.74× and reduces
the BitOPs by 14.25×1, while scaling the model’s channel
numbers by a width-multiplier of 0.35× only shrinks the
model size by 2.06× and cuts down the FLOPs by 5.10×.
Moreover, as presented in [18], 6-bit MobileNet V2 demonstrates improved predictive capability than the full-precision
counterpart, while reducing channel numbers to 0.35× will
significantly impair its performance [37]. It becomes more
contrastive if other constraints are taken into account, such
as memory cost, latency and energy consumption. Addi1According to the IEEE Standard 754, floating-point number is represented with 23-bits mantissa, and here we simplify the analysis by approximating the effective BitOPs of floating-point multiplication with 23-bit
fixed-point multiplication.

12146

