A Multigrid Method for Efficiently Training Video Models
Chao-Yuan Wu1,2
Ross Girshick2
Kaiming He2
Christoph Feichtenhofer2
Philipp Krähenbühl1
The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
Training competitive deep video models is an order of
magnitude slower than training their counterpart image
models. Slow training causes long research cycles, which
hinders progress in video understanding research. Following standard practice for training image models, video
model training has used a fixed mini-batch shape: a specific
number of clips, frames, and spatial size. However, what is
the optimal shape? High resolution models perform well,
but train slowly. Low resolution models train faster, but are
less accurate. Inspired by multigrid methods in numerical
optimization, we propose to use variable mini-batch shapes
with different spatial-temporal resolutions that are varied
according to a schedule. The different shapes arise from
resampling the training data on multiple sampling grids.
Training is accelerated by scaling up the mini-batch size
and learning rate when shrinking the other dimensions. We
empirically demonstrate a general and robust grid schedule that yields a significant out-of-the-box training speedup
without a loss in accuracy for different models (I3D, nonlocal, SlowFast), datasets (Kinetics, Something-Something,
Charades), and training settings (with and without pretraining, 128 GPUs or 1 GPU). As an illustrative example,
the proposed multigrid method trains a ResNet-50 SlowFast
network 4.5× faster (wall-clock time, same hardware) while
also improving accuracy (+0.8% absolute) on Kinetics-400
compared to baseline training. Code is available online.1

1. Introduction
Training deep networks (CNNs [27]) on video is more
computationally intensive than training 2D CNN image
models, potentially by an order of magnitude. Long training
time slows progress in video understanding research, hinders scaling out to real-world data sources, and consumes
significant amounts of energy and hardware. Is this slow
training unavoidable, or might there be video-specific optimization strategies that can accelerate training?
3D CNN video models are trained using mini-batch optimization methods (e.g., SGD) that process one mini-batch

2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Validation top-1 accuracy

1

80

Multigrid
4.5× faster, 76.4%

Baseline
75.6%

75

70
Multigrid training (ours)
Baseline training
65
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Wall-clock training time in hours
Figure 1. Training time vs. top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400 with
a ResNet-50 SlowFast network. Each point corresponds to a model
trained for a specific number of epochs. Multigrid training, the
method developed in this paper, obtains a significantly better tradeoff than baseline training. For example, under default settings,
multigrid training is 4.5× faster while achieving higher (+0.8%
absolute) top-1 accuracy. All methods here, and throughout the
paper, use the same hardware and software implementation.

per iteration. The mini-batch shape B×T ×H×W 2 (minibatch size × number of frames × height × width) is typically constant throughout training. A variety of considerations go into selecting this input shape, but a common
heuristic is to make the T ×H×W dimensions large in order to improve accuracy, e.g., as observed in [9, 45, 47].
This heuristic is only one possible choice, however, and
in general there are trade-offs. For example, one may use
a smaller number of frames and/or spatial size while simultaneously increasing the mini-batch size B. With such
an exchange, it is possible to process the same number of
epochs (passes over the dataset) with lower wall-clock time
because each iteration processes more examples. The resulting trade-off is faster training with lower accuracy.
The central idea of this paper is to avoid this trade-off—
i.e., to have faster training without losing accuracy—by
making the mini-batch shape variable during training. By
viewing the input video clips in a mini-batch as raw video
signals that are sampled on a sampling grid (to be defined),
we can draw a connection to multigrid methods for numeri-

1 github.com/facebookresearch/SlowFast/blob/master/projects/multigrid

2 We omit the channel dimension (3 for RGB) for clarity.

153

