Cross-modal Deep Face Normals with Deactivable Skip Connections
Victoria Fernández Abrevaya∗1 , Adnane Boukhayma∗†2 , Philip H. S. Torr3 , Edmond Boyer1
1
Inria, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, France
2
Inria, Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IRISA, M2S, France
3
University of Oxford, UK
{victoria.fernandez-abrevaya, adnane.boukhayma, edmond.boyer}@inria.fr
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present an approach for estimating surface normals from in-the-wild color images of faces. While datadriven strategies have been proposed for single face images, limited available ground truth data makes this problem difficult. To alleviate this issue, we propose a method
that can leverage all available image and normal data,
whether paired or not, thanks to a novel cross-modal learning architecture. In particular, we enable additional training with single modality data, either color or normal, by
using two encoder-decoder networks with a shared latent
space. The proposed architecture also enables face details
to be transferred between the image and normal domains,
given paired data, through skip connections between the image encoder and normal decoder. Core to our approach is
a novel module that we call deactivable skip connections,
which allows integrating both the auto-encoded and imageto-normal branches within the same architecture that can
be trained end-to-end. This allows learning of a rich latent
space that can accurately capture the normal information.
We compare against state-of-the-art methods and show that
our approach can achieve significant improvements, both
quantitative and qualitative, with natural face images.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of the human face is a long-standing
problem in computer vision, with a wide range of applications including biometrics, forensics, animation, gaming,
and human digitalization. In many of these applications
monocular inputs are considered in order to limit the acquisition constraints, hence enabling uncontrolled environments as well as efficient information usage for e.g. facial
telecommunication and entertainment. Although significant
* Authors contributed equally
† This work was done while the author was at University of Oxford

Figure 1: Our model predicts accurate normals from a single input image that can be used to enhance a coarse geometry (e.g. PRN [15]).
progress has been recently made by the scientific community, recovering detailed 3D face models given only single
images is still an open problem.
Monocular face reconstruction is in essence an ill-posed
problem which requires strong prior knowledge. Assuming
a simple shading model, seminal shape-from-shading (SfS)
approaches [21, 65] were estimating shape normals by considering local pixel intensity variations. Fine scale surface
details can be recovered using this strategy, however the applicability to in-the-wild images is limited by the simplified
image formation model that is assumed. Later on, a more
global strategy was proposed with parametric face models [7, 60]. They allow fitting a template face controlled by
only a few coefficients, resulting hence in improved robustness. While being widely adopted, parametric models are
inherently restricted in expressiveness and have difficulties

4979

