Two-Stage Peer-Regularized Feature Recombination
for Arbitrary Image Style Transfer

1

Jan Svoboda1,2 , Asha Anoosheh1 , Christian Osendorfer1 , Jonathan Masci1
2
NNAISENSE, Switzerland
Universita della Svizzera italiana, Switzerland

{jan.svoboda,asha.anoosheh,christian.osendorfer,jonathan.masci}@nnaisense.com

Abstract
This paper introduces a neural style transfer model to
generate a stylized image conditioning on a set of examples describing the desired style. The proposed solution
produces high-quality images even in the zero-shot setting
and allows for more freedom in changes to the content geometry. This is made possible by introducing a novel TwoStage Peer-Regularization Layer that recombines style and
content in latent space by means of a custom graph convolutional layer. Contrary to the vast majority of existing solutions, our model does not depend on any pre-trained networks for computing perceptual losses and can be trained
fully end-to-end thanks to a new set of cyclic losses that operate directly in latent space and not on the RGB images.
An extensive ablation study confirms the usefulness of the
proposed losses and of the Two-Stage Peer-Regularization
Layer, with qualitative results that are competitive with respect to the current state of the art using a single model for
all presented styles. This opens the door to more abstract
and artistic neural image generation scenarios, along with
simpler deployment of the model.

1. Introduction
Neural style transfer (NST), introduced by the seminal
work of Gatys [8], is an area of research that focuses on
models that transform the visual appearance of an input image (or video) to match the style of a desired target image.
For example, a user may want to convert a given photo to
appear as if Van Gogh had painted the scene.
NST has seen a tremendous growth within the deep
learning community and spans a wide spectrum of applications e.g. converting time-of-day [43, 12], mapping among
artwork and photos [1, 43, 12], transferring facial expressions [17], transforming animal species [43, 12], etc.
Despite their popularity and often-quality results, current NST approaches are not free from limitations. Firstly,
the original formulation of Gatys et al. requires a new op-

Figure 1. Our model is able to take a content image and convert
it into arbitrary target style in a forward manner. In this figure,
a photo in the middle is converted into styles from 4 different
painters, (left side, from top to bottom) Picasso, Kirchner, Roerich
and Monet.

timization process for each transfer performed, making it
impractical for many real-world scenarios. In addition, the
method relies heavily on pre-trained networks, usually borrowed from classification tasks, that are known to be suboptimal and have recently been shown to be biased toward
texture rather than structure [9]. To overcome this first limitation, deep neural networks have been proposed to approx113816

