Front2Back: Single View 3D Shape Reconstruction via Front to Back Prediction
Yuan Yao1 Nico Schertler1 Enrique Rosales1, 2 Helge Rhodin1 Leonid Sigal1, 3 Alla Sheffer1
1
University of British Columbia 2 Universidad Panamericana
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Vector Institute
{rozentil, nschertl, albertr, rhodin, lsigal, sheffa}@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract
Reconstruction of a 3D shape from a single 2D image is
a classical computer vision problem, whose difficulty stems
from the inherent ambiguity of recovering occluded or only
partially observed surfaces. Recent methods address this
challenge through the use of largely unstructured neural
networks that effectively distill conditional mapping and
priors over 3D shape. In this work, we induce structure
and geometric constraints by leveraging three core observations: (1) the surface of most everyday objects is often almost entirely exposed from pairs of typical opposite views;
(2) everyday objects often exhibit global reflective symmetries which can be accurately predicted from single views;
(3) opposite orthographic views of a 3D shape share consistent silhouettes. Following these observations, we first
predict orthographic 2.5D visible surface maps (depth, normal and silhouette) from perspective 2D images, and detect
global reflective symmetries in this data; second, we predict
the back facing depth and normal maps using as input the
front maps and, when available, the symmetric reflections of
these maps; and finally, we reconstruct a 3D mesh from the
union of these maps using a surface reconstruction method.
Our experiments demonstrate that our framework outperforms state-of-the art approaches for 3D shape reconstructions from 2D and 2.5D data in terms of input fidelity and
details preservation. Specifically, we achieve 12% better
performance on average in ShapeNet dataset [3], and up to
19% for certain classes of objects (e.g., chairs and vessels).

1. Introduction
Humans are amazingly adept at predicting the shape of
3D objects from a single 2D image, a task made particularly
challenging by the need to predict occluded surface geometry. Early computer vision researchers hypothesized that
humans achieve this goal by employing a series of intermediate representations, of progressively increasing complexity, and envision the 2.5D visible surface geometry as

(a) Input

(b) Front Maps

(c) Reflected Maps

(d) Predicted Back

Front Output

(e)

Back Output

Figure 1: Front2Back reconstructs 3D surfaces (left) from
single 2D images (a) by first computing the corresponding
front facing 2.5D normal, depth and silhouette (not shown)
visible surface maps (b) and their symmetric reflections
(when present) (c) ; it then predicts the back (opposite) view
maps (d); and finally fuses all these intermediate maps via
surface reconstruction to produce a watertigth 3D surface
(e). Our approach is able to recover more detailed and faithful 3D shape reconstructions compared to state-of-the-art.

one of these representations [26]. This argument motivates
multi-step 3D reconstruction pipelines that use 2.5D visible
surface as an intermediate representation [52]. Our novel
Front2Back algorithm targets complete 3D surface reconstruction from such an intermediate representation, encoded
via multiple depth and normal maps that capture global
reflective symmetries (Figure 1b, 1c). We create a complete image to 3D reconstruction framework by combining
Front2Back with a data-driven predictor that computes accurate 2.5D visible surface geometry from raw 2D images
undoing perspective effects (Figure 1a).
Recent methods directly learn 3D shape representation
from raw 2D images [6, 7, 16, 27, 43, 49] or intermediate 2.5D visible surface maps [39, 48, 50, 52] and represent
3D shapes using voxelizations or implicit functions (defined
over R3 ). Such models often implicitly distill shape prior
information into the network through a large set of 2D3D paired exemplars obtained from ShapeNet [3] or similar large scale 3D model repository. These methods, collectively, produced an increasingly impressive set of results
on single-view 3D shape reconstruction, but are limited in

531

