Solving Jigsaw Puzzles with Eroded Boundaries
Dov Bridger
Technion, Israel

Dov Danon
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Ayellet Tal
Technion, Israel

db@campus.technion.ac.il

dovdanon@post.tau.ac.il

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

input

[27]’s result

Our result

Figure 1: Puzzle solving with eroded boundaries. The black pixels around each puzzle piece represent missing data. None
of the puzzle piece neighbors have a shared border, nevertheless our method is able to place the pieces.

Abstract

complete [8]. Nevertheless, algorithms have been proposed
to solve various types of puzzles.

Jigsaw puzzle solving is an intriguing problem which has
been explored in computer vision for decades. This paper
focuses on a specific variant of the problem—solving puzzles with eroded boundaries. Such erosion makes the problem extremely difficult, since most existing solvers utilize
solely the information at the boundaries. Nevertheless, this
variant is important since erosion and missing data often
occur at the boundaries. The key idea of our proposed approach is to inpaint the eroded boundaries between puzzle
pieces and later leverage the quality of the inpainted area
to classify a pair of pieces as ”neighbors or not”. An interesting feature of our architecture is that the same GAN
discriminator is used for both inpainting and classification;
training of the second task is simply a continuation of the
training of the first, beginning from the point it left off. We
show that our approach outperforms other SOTA methods.

This paper focuses on the case where we are provided
with an unordered set of non-overlapping square image
fragments. We aim to find the correct positioning to reconstruct the image. A variety of solutions have been proposed [6, 11, 27, 29, 31, 33, 36], achieving excellent results.
This success has led to attempts to cope with more challenging cases, in which the basic problem is relaxed. For instance, [27] looked at the case of missing pieces and mixed
puzzles, whereas [15] allowed the pieces to be ”brick”like. Puzzles with eroded boundaries were recently handled
in [28]. Their method works for 3 × 3 puzzles and presents
good results for this case. It cannot be extended to handle
larger puzzles dues to its exponential complexity and its reliance on learning absolute positions of pieces.

1. Introduction
Jigsaw puzzle solving is important in many applications,
including image editing [5], biology [25], archaeology [3, 4,
23] and recovering shredded documents or photographs [4,
22, 26] to name a few. The problem was proven to be NP-

We also look at the latter variant. The goal is to reconstruct a 2D image from square pieces of a photo, where the
edges of the pieces are damaged, as demonstrated in Figure 1. Thus, two adjacent pieces do not have a continuous
border between them. Eroded boundaries may be found in a
variety of real-world applications, such as in restoration of
old documents and in archaeology. Our solution is general
and scalable.
Previous methods for solving large jigsaw puzzles cannot be utilized, since they rely only on information from the

3526

