Deep Face Super-Resolution with Iterative Collaboration between Attentive
Recovery and Landmark Estimation
Cheng Ma1,2,3 , Zhenyu Jiang1 , Yongming Rao1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jie Zhou1,2,3,4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
macheng17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; jiangzhe16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
raoyongming95@gmail.com; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works based on deep learning and facial priors
have succeeded in super-resolving severely degraded facial images. However, the prior knowledge is not fully exploited in existing methods, since facial priors such as landmark and component maps are always estimated by lowresolution or coarsely super-resolved images, which may
be inaccurate and thus affect the recovery performance. In
this paper, we propose a deep face super-resolution (FSR)
method with iterative collaboration between two recurrent
networks which focus on facial image recovery and landmark estimation respectively. In each recurrent step, the recovery branch utilizes the prior knowledge of landmarks to
yield higher-quality images which facilitate more accurate
landmark estimation in turn. Therefore, the iterative information interaction between two processes boosts the performance of each other progressively. Moreover, a new attentive fusion module is designed to strengthen the guidance of
landmark maps, where facial components are generated individually and aggregated attentively for better restoration.
Quantitative and qualitative experimental results show the
proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
FSR methods in recovering high-quality face images. 1

1. Introduction
In recent years, face super-resolution (FSR), also known
as face hallucination, has attracted much attention of the
computer vision community. FSR aims to restore highresolution (HR) face images from the low-resolution (LR)
counterparts, which plays an important role in many appli∗ Corresponding author
1 Code: https://github.com/Maclory/Deep-Iterative-Collaboration

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Figure 1. Data flow of the proposed method. FSR outputs in different steps are shown in the top row while the detected facial landmarks are displayed on HR images accordingly in the bottom row.
The pink arrows denote the face alignment process while the blue
ones denote the face recovery process with the attentive fusion of
landmarks. The black arrows represent the recurrent schemes in
two branches. Through our framework, the quality of SR images
becomes better progressively and the estimated landmarks (red)
also get closer to the ground-truth (green).

cations such as video surveillance and face enhancement.
Moreover, facial analysis techniques including face recognition and face alignment can also benefit a lot from the
quality improvement brought by FSR.
FSR is a special case of the task of single image superresolution (SISR) [28, 29, 34, 35, 44], which is a challenging problem since it is highly ill-posed due to the ambiguity of the super-resolved pixels. Compared to SISR, FSR
only considers facial images instead of arbitrary scenes.
Therefore, the specific facial configuration can be strong
prior knowledge for the generation, so that global struc-

5569

