Self-trained Deep Ordinal Regression for End-to-End Video Anomaly Detection
Guansong Pang1∗ , Cheng Yan2,1∗, Chunhua Shen1†, Anton van den Hengel1 , Xiao Bai2
1
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Beihang University, China

Abstract
Video anomaly detection is of critical practical importance to a variety of real applications because it allows
human attention to be focused on events that are likely to
be of interest, in spite of an otherwise overwhelming volume of video. We show that applying self-trained deep ordinal regression to video anomaly detection overcomes two
key limitations of existing methods, namely, 1) being highly
dependent on manually labeled normal training data; and
2) sub-optimal feature learning. By formulating a surrogate two-class ordinal regression task we devise an end-toend trainable video anomaly detection approach that enables joint representation learning and anomaly scoring
without manually labeled normal/abnormal data. Experiments on eight real-world video scenes show that our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods that require no labeled training data by a substantial margin,
and enables easy and accurate localization of the identified
anomalies. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our method
offers effective human-in-the-loop anomaly detection which
can be critical in applications where anomalies are rare and
the false-negative cost is high.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in video is the task of identifying
frames from a video sequence which depict events that deviate significantly from the norm. Identifying such anomalous events, e.g., fires, traffic accidents or stampedes, can be
of great practical importance, particularly in guiding timely
responses. The task is made particularly challenging, by the
fact that anomalous events are rare, visually unbounded and
often unidentifiable before they occur. It is nonetheless critical in a wide variety of application areas, as it provides a
method for allowing human attention to be focused on the
events that are most likely to be of interest from within an
otherwise overwhelming volume of video.
The practical significance of the problem has seen many
∗ GP and CY equally contributed to this work. CY’s contribution was
made when visiting The University of Adelaide.
† Corresponding author, e-mail: chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Labeled normal data

Feature Extraction
Feature
Learner

Training

Testing data

Testing
Feature
Learner

Anomaly
Measure

Score

(a) Current two-step anomaly detection

Testing data

Self-trained learning and testing

End-to-end
Anomaly
Detection

Score

(b) End-to-end learning of anomaly scores

Figure 1 – Pipelines of (a) two-step and (b) end-to-end anomaly detection. The two-step approach embodies separate feature extraction/learning and anomaly scoring methods, while the end-to-end approach unifies these two modules and directly learns the anomaly scores
from the raw inputs. Also, the former often requires a set of labeled
normal videos, whereas our approach requires no manual annotation of
normal/abnormal data.

methods for video anomaly detection developed. The majority of existing methods assume the availability of a labeled dataset depicting a set of ‘normal’ events. This includes the dictionary learning-based methods [4, 7, 26, 44]
and the more recently emerging deep learning-based methods [12,14,24,27,40,42]. This assumption significantly limits their domain of application, not least because it means
that the system cannot be continuously re-trained without
human involvement, nor applied to database sifting [8]. To
address this issue, here we address what has been termed
‘unsupervised video anomaly detection’ [8, 40], which requires identifying abnormal frames from a large volume of
video frames with no manually labeled normal/abnormal
training data. This version of the problem may be the only
viable approach in the many application domains where human labeling of video is extremely costly or impossible.
This includes, for example, large-scale video surveillance,
Internet video filtering, and industrial process safety moni-

12173

