Closed-loop Matters: Dual Regression Networks for
Single Image Super-Resolution
Yong Guo∗, Jian Chen∗ , Jingdong Wang∗ , Qi Chen, Jiezhang Cao, Zeshuai Deng,
Yanwu Xu†, Mingkui Tan†
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou Laboratory, Microsoft Research Asia, Baidu Inc.
{guo.yong, sechenqi, secaojiezhang, sedengzeshuai}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
{mingkuitan, ellachen}@scut.edu.cn, jingdw@microsoft.com, ywxu@ieee.org
Abstract
Deep neural networks have exhibited promising performance in image super-resolution (SR) by learning a nonlinear mapping function from low-resolution (LR) images
to high-resolution (HR) images. However, there are two underlying limitations to existing SR methods. First, learning
the mapping function from LR to HR images is typically an
ill-posed problem, because there exist infinite HR images
that can be downsampled to the same LR image. As a result,
the space of the possible functions can be extremely large,
which makes it hard to find a good solution. Second, the
paired LR-HR data may be unavailable in real-world applications and the underlying degradation method is often
unknown. For such a more general case, existing SR models often incur the adaptation problem and yield poor performance. To address the above issues, we propose a dual
regression scheme by introducing an additional constraint
on LR data to reduce the space of the possible functions.
Specifically, besides the mapping from LR to HR images, we
learn an additional dual regression mapping estimates the
down-sampling kernel and reconstruct LR images, which
forms a closed-loop to provide additional supervision. More
critically, since the dual regression process does not depend
on HR images, we can directly learn from LR images. In
this sense, we can easily adapt SR models to real-world
data, e.g., raw video frames from YouTube. Extensive experiments with paired training data and unpaired real-world
data demonstrate our superiority over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been the workhorse
of many real-world applications, including image classiﬁcation [18, 14, 9, 15, 27, 13], video understanding [46, 45,
∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Performance comparison of the images produced by the
state-of-the-art methods for 8× SR. Our dual regression scheme is
able to produce sharper images than the baseline methods.

44, 6] and many other applications [7, 50, 52, 11, 20]. Recently, image super-resolution (SR) has become an important task that aims at learning a nonlinear mapping to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution
(LR) images. Based on DNNs, many methods have been
proposed to improve SR performance [51, 26, 10, 12, 49].
However, these methods may suffer from two limitations.
First, learning the mapping from LR to HR images is typically an ill-posed problem since there exist inﬁnitely many
HR images that can be downscaled to obtain the same LR
image [36]. Thus, the space of the possible functions that
map LR to HR images becomes extremely large. As a result,
the learning performance can be limited since learning a
good solution in such a large space is very hard. To improve
the SR performance, one can design effective models by increasing the model capacity, e.g., EDSR [26], DBPN [16],
and RCAN [51]. However, these methods still suffer from
the large space issue of possible mapping functions, resulting in the limited performance without producing sharp textures [24] (See Figure 1). Thus, how to reduce the possible
space of the mapping functions to improve the training of
SR models becomes an important problem.

5407

