BANet: Bidirectional Aggregation Network
with Occlusion Handling for Panoptic Segmentation
Yifeng Chen1 , Guangchen Lin1 , Songyuan Li1 , Omar Bourahla1 , Yiming Wu1 ,
Fangfang Wang1 , Junyi Feng1 , Mingliang Xu2 , Xi Li1∗
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Zhengzhou University

{yifengchen, aaronlin, leizungjyun, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation aims to perform instance segmentation for foreground instances and semantic segmentation for background stuff simultaneously. The typical topdown pipeline concentrates on two key issues: 1) how to
effectively model the intrinsic interaction between semantic segmentation and instance segmentation, and 2) how to
properly handle occlusion for panoptic segmentation. Intuitively, the complementarity between semantic segmentation and instance segmentation can be leveraged to improve the performance. Besides, we notice that using detection/mask scores is insufficient for resolving the occlusion
problem. Motivated by these observations, we propose a
novel deep panoptic segmentation scheme based on a bidirectional learning pipeline. Moreover, we introduce a plugand-play occlusion handling algorithm to deal with the occlusion between different object instances. The experimental results on COCO panoptic benchmark validate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Codes will be released
soon at https://github.com/Mooonside/BANet.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [19], an emerging and challenging problem in computer vision, is a composite task unifying both semantic segmentation (for background stuff) and
instance segmentation (for foreground instances). A typical
solution to the task is in a top-down deep learning mannerwhereby instances are first identified and then assigned to
semantic labels [22, 23, 28, 38]. In this way, two key issues
arise out of a robust solution: 1) how to effectively model
the intrinsic interaction between semantic segmentation and
instance segmentation, and 2) how to robustly handle the
occlusion for panoptic segmentation.
∗ Corresponding author, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

Semantic
Head
Occlusion
Handling

Backbone
Instance
Head

*

Figure 1. The illustration of BANet. We introduce a bidirectional path
to leverage the complementarity between semantic and instance segmentation. To obtain the panoptic segmentation results, low-level appearance
information is utilized in the occlusion handling algorithm.

In principle, the complementarity does exist between the
tasks of semantic segmentation and instance segmentation.
Semantic segmentation concentrates on capturing the rich
pixel-wise class information for scene understanding. Such
information could work as useful contextual clues to enrich
the features for instance segmentation. Conversely, instance
segmentation gives rise to the structural information (e.g.,
shape) on object instances, which enhances the discriminative power of the feature representation for semantic segmentation. Hence, the interaction between these two tasks
is bidirectionally reinforced and reciprocal. However, previous works [22, 23, 38] usually take a unidirectional learning pipeline to use score maps from instance segmentation
to guide semantic segmentation, resulting in the lack of a
path from semantic segmentation to instance segmentation.
Besides, the information contained by these instance score
maps is often coarse-grained with a very limited channel
size, leading to the difficulty in encoding more fine-grained
structural information for semantic segmentation.
In light of the above issue, we propose a Bidirectional
Aggregation NETwork, dubbed BANet, for panoptic segmentation to model the intrinsic interaction between semantic segmentation and instance segmentation at the feature level. Specifically, BANet possesses bidirectional
paths for feature aggregation between these two tasks,
which respectively correspond to two modules: Instance-

3793

