Temporal-Context Enhanced Detection of Heavily Occluded Pedestrians
Jialian Wu1 Chunluan Zhou2 Ming Yang3 Qian Zhang3 Yuan Li3 Junsong Yuan1
1
2
3
State University of New York at Buffalo
Wormpex AI Research
Horizon Robotics, Inc.
{jialianw,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu czhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg
m-yang4@u.northwestern.edu
{qian01.zhang,yuanli}@horizon.ai

Abstract
t+2

State-of-the-art pedestrian detectors have performed
promisingly on non-occluded pedestrians, yet they are still
confronted by heavy occlusions. Although many previous
works have attempted to alleviate the pedestrian occlusion
issue, most of them rest on still images. In this paper, we exploit the local temporal context of pedestrians in videos and
propose a tube feature aggregation network (TFAN) aiming at enhancing pedestrian detectors against severe occlusions. Specifically, for an occluded pedestrian in the current
frame, we iteratively search for its relevant counterparts
along temporal axis to form a tube. Then, features from
the tube are aggregated according to an adaptive weight to
enhance the feature representations of the occluded pedestrian. Furthermore, we devise a temporally discriminative embedding module (TDEM) and a part-based relation
module (PRM), respectively, which adapts our approach to
better handle tube drifting and heavy occlusions. Extensive experiments are conducted on three datasets, Caltech,
NightOwls and KAIST, showing that our proposed method is
significantly effective for heavily occluded pedestrian detection. Moreover, we achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on the Caltech and NightOwls datasets.

1. Introduction
Detecting heavily occluded pedestrians is crucial for
real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving systems,
and remains the Gordian Knot to most state-of-the-art
pedestrian detectors [27, 28, 10, 26, 24, 23, 19, 17, 54, 47,
46, 15, 16]. This challenge boils down to two aspects: (i)
Heavily occluded pedestrians are hard to be distinguished
from background due to missing/incomplete observations;
(ii) Detectors seldom have a clue about how to focus on the
visible parts of partially occluded pedestrians. Many great
efforts have been made to address the occlusion issue, e.g.,
attention mechanisms [29, 9], feature transformation [11]
and part-based detection [22, 19, 13]. While these occlusion
handling approaches alleviate partially occluded pedestrian
detection in still images, they may not bring extra informa-

t

t+1

t-1

Single Frame Detector

t-2

Classifier
features

features

features

features

features

features

0.35

?

Our Detector
Classifier

0.91
𝑤𝑡+2

𝑤𝑡+1

𝑤𝑡−1

Pedestrian Tube

Pedestrian !
𝑤𝑡−2

Figure 1. Top row: A heavily occluded pedestrian often leads to
miss detection for a single frame detector due to incomplete and
weak observations. Bottom row: In our approach, we exploit local
temporal context of a heavily occluded pedestrian, i.e., similar less
occluded pedestrians in nearby frames, to enhance its feature representations. After linking temporally these pedestrian samples
to a tube, we aggregate their features using an adaptive weight
scheme by matching between visible parts, which substantially
help to distinguish the heavily occluded one from the background.

tion beyond a single image for detectors to reliably infer
an occluded pedestrian in essence. In this paper, we argue
that the temporal context can essentially enhance the discriminability of the features of heavily occluded pedestrians
which has not been studied thoroughly in previous works.
Our key idea is to search for non/less-occluded pedestrian examples (which we call them reliable pedestrians)
with discriminative features along temporal axis, and if they
are present, to exploit them to compensate the missing information of the heavily occluded ones in the current frame,
as shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, our approach is carried out
with two main steps. (i) Tube linking: starting from a pedestrian proposal in the current frame, we iteratively search for
its relevant counterparts (not necessarily the same person)
in adjacent frames to form a tube; (ii) Feature aggregation:
the proposal features from the formed tube are aggregated,
weighted by their semantic similarities with the current proposal candidate, enhancing the feature representations of
the pedestrian in the current frame. Using the augmented
features, the classifier tends to more confidently distinguish
heavily occluded pedestrians from background. We imple113430

