Learn to Augment: Joint Data Augmentation and Network Optimization
for Text Recognition
Canjie Luo1 , Yuanzhi Zhu1 , Lianwen Jin1∗ , Yongpan Wang2
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Alibaba Group
{canjie.luo, zzz.yuanzhi, lianwen.jin}@gmail.com, yongpan@taobao.com

Abstract
Handwritten text and scene text suffer from various
shapes and distorted patterns. Thus training a robust recognition model requires a large amount of data to cover diversity as much as possible. In contrast to data collection and
annotation, data augmentation is a low cost way. In this paper, we propose a new method for text image augmentation.
Different from traditional augmentation methods such as
rotation, scaling and perspective transformation, our proposed augmentation method is designed to learn proper and
efficient data augmentation which is more effective and specific for training a robust recognizer. By using a set of custom fiducial points, the proposed augmentation method is
flexible and controllable. Furthermore, we bridge the gap
between the isolated processes of data augmentation and
network optimization by joint learning. An agent network
learns from the output of the recognition network and controls the fiducial points to generate more proper training
samples for the recognition network. Extensive experiments
on various benchmarks, including regular scene text, irregular scene text and handwritten text, show that the proposed
augmentation and the joint learning methods significantly
boost the performance of the recognition networks. A general toolkit for geometric augmentation is available1 .

1. Introduction
The last decade witnessed the tremendous progress
brought by the deep neural network in the computer vision
community [3, 11, 14, 21]. Limited data is not sufficient
to train a robust deep neural network, because the network
may overfit to the training data and produce poor generalization on the test set [5]. However, data collection and
annotation require a lot of resources. Different from single object classification task [21], the annotation work of
text string is more tough, because there are multiple charac∗ Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/Canjie-Luo/Text-Image-Augmentation

Figure 1. (a) Existing geometric augmentation, including rotation,
scaling and perspective transformation; (b) Our proposed flexible
augmentation. Moreover, a joint learning method bridges the isolated processes of data augmentation and network training.

ters in a text image. This is also a reason why most stateof-the-art scene text recognition methods [23, 28, 38] only
used synthetic samples [13, 17] for training. The data limitation also effects handwritten text recognition. There exists a wide variety of writing styles. Collecting large scale
annotated handwritten text image is high-cost and cannot
cover all diversities [47]. It is also challenging to generate
synthetic data for handwritten text, because it is difficult to
imitate various writing styles.
To obtain more training samples, it is possible to apply
random augmentation to the existing data [9]. Handwritten
text with varying writing styles, and scene text with different shapes, such as perspective and curved text, are still
very challenging to be recognized [5, 28, 38]. Therefore,
geometric augmentation is an important way to gain robustness for recognition methods. As shown in Figure 1 (a),
the common geometric transformations are rotation, scaling and perspective transformation. Multiple characters in
an image are regarded as one entity, and a global augmentation is performed on the image. However, the diversity
of each character should be taken into account. Given a
text image, the augmentation goal is to increase the diver-

13746

