Multi-Scale Progressive Fusion Network for Single Image Deraining
Kui Jiang1 Zhongyuan Wang1∗ Peng Yi1 Chen Chen2∗
Baojin Huang1 Yimin Luo3 Jiayi Ma1 Junjun Jiang4
1
Wuhan University 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte
3
King’s College London 4 Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract
Rain streaks in the air appear in various blurring degrees and resolutions due to different distances from their
positions to the camera. Similar rain patterns are visible in a rain image as well as its multi-scale (or multiresolution) versions, which makes it possible to exploit such
complementary information for rain streak representation.
In this work, we explore the multi-scale collaborative representation for rain streaks from the perspective of input
image scales and hierarchical deep features in a unified
framework, termed multi-scale progressive fusion network
(MSPFN) for single image rain streak removal. For the
similar rain streaks at different positions, we employ recurrent calculation to capture the global texture, thus allowing to explore the complementary and redundant information at the spatial dimension to characterize target rain
streaks. Besides, we construct multi-scale pyramid structure, and further introduce the attention mechanism to guide
the fine fusion of these correlated information from different scales. This multi-scale progressive fusion strategy
not only promotes the cooperative representation, but also boosts the end-to-end training. Our proposed method
is extensively evaluated on several benchmark datasets and
achieves the state-of-the-art results. Moreover, we conduct
experiments on joint deraining, detection, and segmentation tasks, and inspire a new research direction of vision
task driven image deraining. The source code is available
at https://github.com/kuihua/MSPFN .

1. Introduction
Due to substantial degradation of the image content in
rain images and videos, traditional image enhancement algorithms [27] struggle to make desirable improvements on
image quality. Therefore, developing specialized solutions for image deraining is imperative to a wide range of
tasks [12], e.g. object detection and semantic segmentation.
∗ Corresponding author

Rain image ½ scale
from downsampling
Information fusion
across other scales
Information fusion
within the same scale

Rain image (original scale)

Figure 1. Demonstration of the collaborative representation of rain
streaks. Specifically, similar rain patterns among rain streaks, both
within the same scale (highlighted in cyan, pink and dark blue boxes) or cross different scales (highlighted in red, yellow, orange and
green boxes), can help reconstruct the target rain streak (white box
in the original rain image) with the complementary information
(e.g. similar appearance, formation, etc.).

Traditional deraining methods [2, 1, 5, 9, 32] use simple linear-mapping transformations and are not robust to
variations of the input [11], e.g., rain streaks with various directions, densities and sizes. Recently, deep-learning
based methods [6, 35, 16] which operate with convolutional and non-linear layers have witnessed remarkable advantages over traditional methods. Despite obvious improvements on feature representation brought by those methods [6, 16], their single-scale frameworks can hardly capture
the inherent correlations of rain streaks across scales.
The repetitive samples of rain streaks in a rain image
as well as its multi-scale versions (multi-scale pyramid images) may carry complementary information (e.g. similar
appearance) to characterize target rain streaks. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the rain streaks (highlighted in the white box)
in the original rain image share the similar rain patterns with
the rain streaks (highlighted in the cyan, pink and dark blue
boxes) at different positions as well as those (highlighted
in the red, yellow, orange and green boxes) in the 1/2 scale rain image. Therefore, rain streaks both from the same
scale (solid arrows) and across different scales (dashed ar-

8346

