Towards Universal Representation Learning for Deep Face Recognition
Yichun Shi1,2∗
Xiang Yu2
1
Michigan State University

Kihyuk Sohn2
Manmohan Chandraker2,3
Anil K. Jain1
2
3
NEC Labs America
University of California, San Diego

Abstract

Traditional
Model 1

Recognizing faces in the wild is extremely hard as they
appear with diverse variations. Traditional methods either
train with specifically annotated target domain data which
contains the variations, or introduce unlabeled target domain data to adapt from the training domain. Instead, we
propose a universal representation learning face recognition
framework, URFace, that can deal with larger variations
unseen in the given training data, without leveraging knowledge of the target domain. We firstly synthesize the training
data that corresponds to several semantically meaningful
variations, such as low resolution, occlusion and head pose.
However, directly using the augmented data hinders training convergence, since the augmented samples are usually
hard examples. We propose to split the feature embedding
into multiple sub-embeddings and associate different confidence values for each sub-embedding to smooth the training
procedure. The sub-embeddings are further decorrelated by
regularizing classification loss on variations and adversarial
loss on different partitions of them. Experiments show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on general face recognition datasets such as LFW and MegaFace,
while being significantly better on extreme benchmarks such
as TinyFace and IJB-S.

1. Introduction
Deep face recognition seeks to map input images to a
feature space with small intra-identity distance and large
inter-identity distance, which has been achieved by prior
works through loss design and datasets with rich withinclass variations [29, 41, 17, 39, 4]. However, even very
large public datasets manifest strong biases, such as ethnicity
[33, 34] or head poses [20, 24, 45]. This lack of variation
leads to significant performance drops on challenging test
datasets, for example, accuracy reported by prior state-ofthe-art [31] on IJB-S or TinyFace [11, 3] are about 30%
lower than IJB-A [14] or LFW [10].
Recent works seek to close the domain gap caused by
∗ This work was conducted as part of a summer internship at NEC Labs
America.

Large-pose

Model 2

Low-res

Model 3

Occlusion

Adaptation

Our Method
Single
Model

High-quality
Training Data

Large-pose

(2) Large Model
Complexity!

Low-resolution

Ensemble

Confidence-aware
Identification

Occlusion

Blur

(1) Need Target
Domain Data!

Universal
Features

Pose

Variation
Augmentation

Variation
Decorrelation

Occlusion

Others
……

Unconstrained
Testing Data

Figure 1: Traditional recognition models require target domain
data to adapt from the high-quality training data to conduct
unconstrained/low-quality face recognition. Model ensemble is
further needed for a universal representation purpose which significantly increases model complexity. In contrast, our method
works only on original training data without any target domain data
information, and can deal with unconstrained testing scenarios.

such data bias through domain adaptation, i.e., identifying
specific factors of variation and augmenting the training
datasets [24], or further leveraging unlabeled data along
such nameable factors [33]. While nameable variations are
hard to identify exhaustively, prior works have sought to
align the feature space between source and target domains
[28, 34]. Alternatively, individual models might be trained
on various datasets and ensembles to obtain good performance on each [19]. All these approaches either only handle
specific variations, or require access to test data distributions, or accrue additional run-time complexity to handle
wider variations. In contrast, we propose learning a single
“universal” deep feature representation that handles the variations in face recognition without requiring access to test data
distribution and retains run-time efficiency, while achieving
strong performance across diverse situations especially on
low-quality images (see Figure 1).
This paper introduces several novel contributions in Section 3 to learn such a universal representation. First, we
note that inputs with non-frontal poses, low resolutions and
heavy occlusions are key nameable factors that present challenges for “in-the-wild” applications, for which training data
may be synthetically augmented. But directly adding hard
augmented examples into training leads to a more difficult
16817

