NETNet: Neighbor Erasing and Transferring Network for Better
Single Shot Object Detection
Yazhao Li1 , Yanwei Pang1∗, Jianbing Shen2 , Jiale Cao1 , Ling Shao2
1

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology,
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
1

{lyztju, pyw, connor}@tju.edu.cn, 2 {shenjianbingcg@gmail.com, ling.shao@ieee.org}

Abstract

Person: 0.953

Person: 0.837
Person: 0.676
Surfboard:
0.915

Due to the advantages of real-time detection and improved performance, single-shot detectors have gained
great attention recently. To solve the complex scale variations, single-shot detectors make scale-aware predictions
based on multiple pyramid layers. However, the features in
the pyramid are not scale-aware enough, which limits the
detection performance. Two common problems in singleshot detectors caused by object scale variations can be observed: (1) small objects are easily missed; (2) the salient
part of a large object is sometimes detected as an object.
With this observation, we propose a new Neighbor Erasing and Transferring (NET) mechanism to reconfigure the
pyramid features and explore scale-aware features. In NET,
a Neighbor Erasing Module (NEM) is designed to erase the
salient features of large objects and emphasize the features
of small objects in shallow layers. A Neighbor Transferring
Module (NTM) is introduced to transfer the erased features
and highlight large objects in deep layers. With this mechanism, a single-shot network called NETNet is constructed
for scale-aware object detection. In addition, we propose to
aggregate nearest neighboring pyramid features to enhance
our NET. NETNet achieves 38.5% AP at a speed of 27 FPS
and 32.0% AP at a speed of 55 FPS on MS COCO dataset.
As a result, NETNet achieves a better trade-off for real-time
and accurate object detection.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of deep neural networks [26, 43, 7],
object detection built on deep networks has achieved significant progress both in detection accuracy [13, 5, 27] and
detection efficiency [39, 40, 18]. Despite this success, complex scale variations in practical scenes exist as a fundamental challenge and a bottleneck for accurate object de∗ Corresponding author: Yanwei Pang

(a) baseline

(b) baseline feature

Person: 0.989
Tennis racket: 0.933

(f) baseline feature

Person: 0.999

Sports ball:0.982

(c) ours

(e) baseline

Surfboard: 0.985

(d) our feature

(I) Tackle false negative problem

(g) ours

(h) our feature

(II) Tackle part false positive problem

Figure 1. Two common detection problems for baseline SSD [35]
and the solution using our NETNet. The visualized features are extracted from the first pyramid layer for detecting small objects. (I)
False negative problem. The small objects (tennis racket, sports
ball) are missed in (a) because features of small objects are not
salient on the corresponding pyramid features (b). Our NETNet
can detect small objects with high confidence by erasing the features of large objects and focusing on small objects as (c, d). (II)
Part false positive problem. The head is detected as another person
in baseline because this part region is highlighted on the features
(f) for detecting small objects. Our NETNet can solve this problem
by suppressing the salient part features of large objects, as (h).

tection [44, 45, 20]. Beneficial from an optimal trade-off
between real-time detection efficiency and accurate detection performance, single-shot detectors [35, 31] have gained
increased popularity recently.
Exploring multi-level features is essential [36, 58, 50] to
tackle complex scale variations. The single-shot detector
SSD [35] has been proposed and developed based on pyramid feature representation. SSD implements scale-aware
object detection by detecting different-sized objects within
different layers of the pyramid, which is motivated by the
fact that deep-layer features with small feature resolution
contain more semantic information for large objects, while
the features for small objects are found in the shallow layers with large feature resolution [24, 59]. Therefore, shallow layers are responsible for detecting small objects and

13349

