Single-View View Synthesis with Multiplane Images
Richard Tucker
Noah Snavely
Google Research
richardt@google.com

snavely@google.com

Abstract
A recent strand of work in view synthesis uses deep learning to generate multiplane images—a camera-centric, layered 3D representation—given two or more input images at
known viewpoints. We apply this representation to singleview view synthesis, a problem which is more challenging but
has potentially much wider application. Our method learns
to predict a multiplane image directly from a single image
input, and we introduce scale-invariant view synthesis for
supervision, enabling us to train on online video. We show
this approach is applicable to several different datasets, that
it additionally generates reasonable depth maps, and that
it learns to fill in content behind the edges of foreground
objects in background layers.

Single image
input

Multiplane
image

Rendered
novel views

Rendered
disparity

Figure 1. Our network generates a multiplane image (MPI) from
a single image input. The MPI can be used to render images from
novel viewpoints, and to generate a disparity map. (Video frames
here and in other figures are used under Creative Commons license
from Youtube user Sona Visual.)

1. Introduction
Taking a photograph and being able to move the camera
around is a compelling way to bring photos to life. It requires
understanding the 3D structure of the scene, reasoning about
occlusions and what might be behind them, and rendering
high quality, spatially consistent new views in real time.
We present a deep learning approach to this task which
can be trained on online videos or multi-camera imagery
using view synthesis quality as an objective—hence, the
approach does not require additional ground truth inputs such
as depth. At inference time, our method takes a single RGB
image input and produces a representation of a local light
field. We adopt the multiplane image (MPI) representation,
which can model disocclusions and non-Lambertian effects,
produces views that are inherently spatially consistent, is
well-suited to generation by convolutional networks, and can
be rendered efficiently in real time [37].
Our approach is the first to generate multiplane images
directly from a single image input, whereas prior work has
only estimated MPIs from multiple input views (anywhere
from a stereo pair [37] to twelve images from a camera array [4]). Compared with multiple-input view synthesis, ours
is a much more challenging task. We want the network to
learn where different parts of the scene are in space without

being able to observe correlations between multiple views,
and without any chance to look even a tiny bit ‘around the
corner’ of objects. A particular difficulty arises when supervising such a system using view synthesis because of the
global scale ambiguity inherent in the input data. We address
this with a method of scale invariant view synthesis which
makes use of sparse point sets produced in the course of generating our training data. We also introduce an edge-aware
smoothness loss which discourages the depth-maps derived
from our predicted MPIs from being unnaturally blurry, even
in the absence of depth supervision.
We train and evaluate our method using a dataset of online
videos, and measure the quality of derived depth-estimates
on the iBims-1 benchmark. We show the versatility of our approach by comparing it to two previous view synthesis methods using different representations: one that predicts complete 4D light fields and learns from a narrow-baseline multiangle light field dataset, and another that predicts layered
depth images and learns from wide-baseline stereo-camera
imagery. Our method not only achieves higher quality view
synthesis than these but is more general, not requiring light
field data or known-scale inputs for training.

551

