Towards Photo-Realistic Virtual Try-On by Adaptively
Generating↔Preserving Image Content
Han Yang1,2

Ruimao Zhang2 Xiaobao Guo2 Wei Liu3 Wangmeng Zuo1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 SenseTime Research
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 The University of Hong Kong

Ping Luo4

{yanghancv, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu, pluo@cs.hku.hk
{zhangruimao, guoxiaobao}@sensetime.com

Target
Clothes

CP-VTON
Results

ACGPN
(Vanilla)

ACGPN†
Results

ACGPN
(Full)

2.5 ×
Zooming-in

Hard

Medium

Easy

Reference Segmentation
Person
Results

Figure 1. We define the difficulty level of the try-on task to easy, medium, and hard based on current works. Given a target clothing image and a reference
image, our method synthesizes a person in target clothes while preserving photo-realistic details such as characteristics of clothes (texture, logo), posture
of person (non-target body parts, bottom clothes), and identity of person. ACGPN (Vanilla) indicates ACGPN without the warping constraint or non-target
body composition, ACGPN† adds the warping constraint on ACGPN (Vanilla). Also, zooming-in of the greatly improved regions are given on the right.

Abstract
Image visual try-on aims at transferring a target clothing image onto a reference person, and has become a hot
topic in recent years. Prior arts usually focus on preserving the characteristics of a clothing image (e.g., texture,
logo, and embroidery) when warping it to an arbitrary human pose. However, it remains a big challenge to generate
photo-realistic try-on images when large occlusions and human poses are presented in the reference person (Fig. 1).
To address this issue, we propose a novel visual try-on network, namely Adaptive Content Generating and Preserving
Network (ACGPN). In particular, ACGPN first predicts the

semantic layout of the reference image that will be changed
after try-on (e.g., long sleeve shirt→arm, arm→jacket), and
then determines whether its image content needs to be generated or preserved according to the predicted semantic
layout, leading to photo-realistic try-on and rich clothing
details. ACGPN generally involves three major modules.
First, a semantic layout generation module utilizes semantic segmentation of the reference image to progressively
predict the desired semantic layout after try-on. Second,
a clothes warping module warps clothing images according to the generated semantic layout, where a second-order

7850

