Spatially Attentive Output Layer for Image Classification
Ildoo Kim∗

Woonhyuk Baek∗
Sungwoong Kim
Kakao Brain
Seongnam, South Korea

{ildoo.kim, wbaek, swkim}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Most convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image
classification use a global average pooling (GAP) followed
by a fully-connected (FC) layer for output logits. However, this spatial aggregation procedure inherently restricts
the utilization of location-specific information at the output
layer, although this spatial information can be beneficial
for classification. In this paper, we propose a novel spatial output layer on top of the existing convolutional feature maps to explicitly exploit the location-specific output
information. In specific, given the spatial feature maps,
we replace the previous GAP-FC layer with a spatially attentive output layer (SAOL) by employing a attention mask
on spatial logits. The proposed location-specific attention
selectively aggregates spatial logits within a target region,
which leads to not only the performance improvement but
also spatially interpretable outputs. Moreover, the proposed
SAOL also permits to fully exploit location-specific selfsupervision as well as self-distillation to enhance the generalization ability during training. The proposed SAOL with
self-supervision and self-distillation can be easily plugged
into existing CNNs. Experimental results on various classification tasks with representative architectures show consistent performance improvements by SAOL at almost the
same computational cost.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made
great progress in various computer vision tasks including
image classification [23, 16], object detection [13, 31, 27],
and semantic segmentation [28, 2]. In particular, there have
been lots of researches on modifying convolutional blocks
and their connections such as depthwise separable convolution [5], deformable ConvNet [7], ResNet [16], and NASNet [48] to improve feature representations. However, in
contrast to well-developed convolutional architectures for
(multi-scale) spatial feature extraction, the output module
∗ Contributed equally.

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) the conventional GAPFC based output layer and (b) the proposed output layer,
SAOL. SAOL separately obtains Spatial Attention Map and
Spatial Logits (classification outputs for each spatial location). Then, Spatial Logits are weighted averaged by the
Spatial Attention Map for the final output.

to generate the classification logits from the feature maps
has been almost unchanged from a standard module that
is composed of a global average pooling (GAP) layer and
fully-connected (FC) layers. Even though it has shown that
CNNs with this feature aggregation can retain its localization ability to some extent [26, 46, 47], in principle, these
CNNs have a restriction in full exploitation of benefits from
an explicit localization of output logits for image classification.
Recently, the use of localized class-specific responses
has drawn increasing attention for image classification,
which allows taking the following three main advantages:
(1) it can help to interpret the decision making of a CNN
19533

