Learning Multi-Granular Hypergraphs for Video-Based Person Re-Identification
Yichao Yan1∗, Jie Qin1∗† , Jiaxin Chen1 , Li Liu1 , Fan Zhu1 , Ying Tai2 , and Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
Tencent YouTu Lab, Shanghai, China
{firstname.lastname}@inceptioniai.org, yingtai@tencent.com

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at associating individuals across non-overlapping cameras, with great potential in surveillance-related applications. As such, significant
efforts have been made in the past few years to address the
challenging task. In parallel with the prevalence of imagebased person re-ID, person re-ID based on video sequences
has also recently emerged. This is because the richer information in videos can be utilized to reduce visual ambigui∗ indicates equal contributions; † indicates corresponding author

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

(a)

short-term

local

Video-based person re-identification (re-ID) is an important research topic in computer vision. The key to tackling
the challenging task is to exploit both spatial and temporal clues in video sequences. In this work, we propose a
novel graph-based framework, namely Multi-Granular Hypergraph (MGH), to pursue better representational capabilities by modeling spatiotemporal dependencies in terms
of multiple granularities. Specifically, hypergraphs with
different spatial granularities are constructed using various levels of part-based features across the video sequence.
In each hypergraph, different temporal granularities are
captured by hyperedges that connect a set of graph nodes
(i.e., part-based features) across different temporal ranges.
Two critical issues (misalignment and occlusion) are explicitly addressed by the proposed hypergraph propagation
and feature aggregation schemes. Finally, we further enhance the overall video representation by learning more
diversified graph-level representations of multiple granularities based on mutual information minimization. Extensive experiments on three widely-adopted benchmarks
clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Notably, 90.0% top-1 accuracy on MARS is achieved
using MGH, outperforming the state-of-the-arts. Code
will be released at https://github.com/daodaofr/
hypergraph_reid.

spatial

global

Abstract

temporal Standard graphs

long-term

(b)

Hypergraphs
(c)

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of multi-granular spatial and temporal clues, which provide important insights into addressing the challenges of misalignment and occlusion in videobased person re-ID. (b) Standard graphs can only model the
dependency between node pairs, lacking the capability of
modeling long-term temporal dependency. (c) Hypergraphs
can model both short-term and long-term dependencies by
associating multiple nodes within a single hyperedge.
ties, especially for people sharing similar appearances. The
key to solving video-based person re-ID is to concurrently
exploit spatial and temporal clues within video sequences.
In this sense, this work aims to shed light on two important
clues (see Figure 1) for tackling video-based person re-ID.
1) Multi-granularity of spatial clues. As the structural information of the human body is beneficial for person
identification, part-based models [49, 30, 47] have generally achieved promising performance in person re-ID. Compared with fixed partitions, multi-granular part-based models [51, 64] have further enhanced the performance by dividing the human body into multiple granularities. In videobased re-ID, the multi-granular spatial clues are particularly
important since different levels of granularities capture discrepancies between different partitions, thus addressing the
spatial misalignment issue due to inaccurate detection in the
video sequence (see Figure 1(a)). However, in this way,
misalignment can only be solved implicitly to some extent.
To better tackle spatial misalignment, we need to explicitly align different body parts across the whole sequence in

2899

