SCT: Set Constrained Temporal Transformer for Set Supervised Action
Segmentation
Mohsen Fayyaz and Juergen Gall
University of Bonn
Bonn, Germany
{fayyaz, gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Temporal action segmentation is a topic of increasing interest, however, annotating each frame in a video is cumbersome and costly. Weakly supervised approaches therefore
aim at learning temporal action segmentation from videos
that are only weakly labeled. In this work, we assume that
for each training video only the list of actions is given that
occur in the video, but not when, how often, and in which order they occur. In order to address this task, we propose an
approach that can be trained end-to-end on such data. The
approach divides the video into smaller temporal regions
and predicts for each region the action label and its length.
In addition, the network estimates the action labels for each
frame. By measuring how consistent the frame-wise predictions are with respect to the temporal regions and the annotated action labels, the network learns to divide a video
into class-consistent regions. We evaluate our approach on
three datasets where the approach achieves state-of-the-art
results.

1. Introduction
For many applications large amount of video data needs
to be analyzed. This includes temporal action segmentation,
which requires to label each frame in a long video by an action class. In the last years, several strong models for temporal action segmentation have been proposed [17, 22, 10].
These models are, however, trained in a fully supervised setting, i.e., each training video needs to be fully annotated by
frame-wise labels. Since acquiring such annotations is very
expensive, several works investigated methods to learn the
models with less supervision. An example of weakly annotated training data are videos where only transcripts are
provided [20, 12, 27, 29, 8, 4, 34, 24]. While transcripts
of videos can be obtained from scripts or subtitles, they are
still costly to obtain. In [28] it was therefore proposed to
learn temporal action segmentation only from a set of ac-

tion labels that are provided for a complete video of several
minutes. In this case, it is only known which actions occur,
but not when, in which order, or how often. This makes
the task much more challenging compared to learning from
transcripts or fully supervised learning.
In the work [28], the problem has been addressed by hypothesizing transcripts that contain each action label of a
video at least once and then infer a frame-wise labeling of
the video by aligning the hypothesized transcripts. While
the approach showed that it is possible to learn from such
weak annotation even for long videos, the approach does
not solve the problem directly but converts it into a weakly
supervised learning problem where multiple hypothesized
transcripts per video are given. This is, however, ineffective
since it is infeasible to align all transcripts that can be generated from a set of action labels and it uses the provided
annotations not directly for learning.
In this work, we propose a method that uses the action
labels that are given for each training video directly for the
loss function. In this way, we can train the model in an
end-to-end fashion. The main idea is to divide a video into
smaller temporal regions as illustrated in Figure 1. For each
region, we estimate its length and the corresponding action
label. Since for each training video the set of actions is
known, we can directly apply a set loss to the predicted action labels of the temporal regions, which penalizes the network if it predicts actions that are not present in the video
or if it misses an action. The problem, however, is that we
cannot directly apply a loss to the prediction of the region
lengths. While a regularizer for the predicted length that penalizes if the lengths of the regions get too large improves
the results, it is insufficient as we show in our experiments.
We therefore introduce a second branch to make frame-wise
predictions and measure how consistent the frame-wise predictions are with respect to the temporal regions and the
annotated action labels. Using our differentiable Set Constrained Temporal Transformation (SCT), this loss affects
the lengths of the regions, which substantially improves the
accuracy of the model.
1501

