Extreme Relative Pose Network under Hybrid Representations
Zhenpei Yang∗
UT Austin

Siming Yan∗
UT Austin

Qixing Huang†
UT Austin

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel RGB-D based relative pose estimation approach that is suitable for smalloverlapping or non-overlapping scans and can output multiple relative poses. Our method performs scene completion
and matches the completed scans. However, instead of using a fixed representation for completion, the key idea is to
utilize hybrid representations that combine 360-image, 2D
image-based layout, and planar patches. This approach offers adaptively feature representations for relative pose estimation. Besides, we introduce a global-2-local matching
procedure, which utilizes initial relative poses obtained during the global phase to detect and then integrate geometric
relations for pose refinement. Experimental results justify
the potential of this approach across a wide range of benchmark datasets. For example, on ScanNet, the rotation translation errors of the top-1/top-5 predictions of our approach
are 28.6◦ /0.90m and 16.8◦ /0.76m, respectively. Our approach also considerably boosts the performance of multiscan reconstruction in few-view reconstruction settings.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose between two RGB-D scans
is a crucial problem in 3D vision and robotics. In this paper, we are interested in the setting where the overlapping
region between two input scans is small, or they may not
even overlap. Efficient and robust solutions to this extreme
relative pose problem (c.f. [49]) enjoy a wide range of applications. Examples include 3D reconstruction from a few
views [12] (e.g., RGB-D scans of an indoor scene captured
at a few distinctive locations), enhancing the performance
of interactive scanning [42, 35] when there are interruptions
during the acquisition process, early detection of loop closure [2], and solving jigsaw puzzles [8].
A standard pipeline in relative pose estimation or object
matching, in general, is to first extract features from the
input objects and then match these features to derive relative poses or dense correspondences [19, 1]. While early
works [15, 21] use hand-crafted features or matching proce∗ Both authors contributed equally
† huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

(a) RobustRecons

(b) Ours

(c) Ground-truth

Figure 1: Results of multi-scan alignment under the fewview setting. Each block shows the results from 5 randomly
sampled scans of a 3D scene that show minimal overlaps.
(a) RobustRecons [9]. (b) Our approach. (c) Ground-truth.
dures, recent works [16, 33, 39] have focused on applying
deep neural networks to aid this pipeline. The challenge in
the extreme relative pose setting is that there are insufficient
features to match, and one has to leverage priors about the
underlying object/scene. In this paper, we focus on two aspects of utilizing deep neural networks to instill priors into
feature extraction and feature matching.
The first aspect focuses on completing the input scans
and matching completed scans [49]. This strategy learns
from data to predict the surrounding regions of each input
scan, turning non-overlapping scans into overlapping scans.
A critical factor in this context is the data representation
for scan completion. This representation not only dictates
the extracted features for relative pose estimation but also
affects the type of completion networks. Instead of focusing on one data representation, a key contribution of this
paper is to combine multiple data representations (i.e., 360image [49], 2D layout [40], and planar patches [32]) for
scan completion. Our approach then extracts a subset of
consistent features to compute the relative pose. The proposed hybrid representation exhibits two appealing advantages. First, it alleviates the issue of lacking a particular
type of feature on the input scans (e.g., planar elements from

2455

