Learning Fast and Robust Target Models for Video Object Segmentation
Andreas Robinson1∗
Felix Järemo Lawin1∗
Martin Danelljan2
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3
Michael Felsberg1
1

CVL, Linköping University, Sweden

2

CVL, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Image

Abstract
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a highly challenging problem since the initial mask, defining the target object, is only given at test-time. The main difficulty is to
effectively handle appearance changes and similar background objects, while maintaining accurate segmentation.
Most previous approaches fine-tune segmentation networks
on the first frame, resulting in impractical frame-rates and
risk of overfitting. More recent methods integrate generative target appearance models, but either achieve limited
robustness or require large amounts of training data.
We propose a novel VOS architecture consisting of two
network components. The target appearance model consists of a light-weight module, which is learned during the
inference stage using fast optimization techniques to predict a coarse but robust target segmentation. The segmentation model is exclusively trained offline, designed to process the coarse scores into high quality segmentation masks.
Our method is fast, easily trainable and remains highly effective in cases of limited training data. We perform extensive experiments on the challenging YouTube-VOS and
DAVIS datasets. Our network achieves favorable performance, while operating at higher frame-rates compared to
state-of-the-art. Code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/andr345/frtm-vos.

1. Introduction
The problem of video object segmentation (VOS) has a
variety of important applications, including object boundary estimation for grasping [1, 25], autonomous driving
[38, 40], surveillance [10, 13] and video editing [33]. The
task is to predict pixel-accurate masks of the region occupied by a specific target object, in every frame of a given
video sequence. This work focuses on the semi-supervised
setting, where a target ground truth mask is provided in the
first frame. Challenges arise in dynamic environments with
similar background objects and when the target undergoes
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Target model output

3

IIAI, UAE
Segmentation

Figure 1. During inference, our target model learns to produce segmentation score maps (center) of the target. As demonstrated in
these examples, the target scores remain robust, despite difficult
challenges, including distracting objects and appearance changes.
Our segmentation network is trained to refine these coarse target
score maps into a high-quality final object segmentation (right).

considerable appearance changes or occlusions. Successful video object segmentation therefore requires both robust
and accurate target pixel classification.
Aiming to achieve a robust target-specific segmentation,
several methods [4, 30, 36, 47] fine-tune a generic segmentation network on the first frame, given the ground-truth
mask. Although capable of generating accurate segmentation masks under favorable circumstances, these methods suffer from low frame-rates, impractical for many real
world applications. Moreover, fine-tuning is prone to overfit to a single view of the scene, while degrading generic
segmentation functionality learned during offline training.
This limits performance in more challenging videos involving drastic appearance changes, occlusions and distractor
objects [48]. Further, the crucial fine-tuning step is not included in the offline training stage, which therefore does not
simulate the full inference procedure.
Recent works [20, 22, 33, 34, 44] address these limitations by employing internal models of the target and back-

7406

