Light-weight calibrator: a separable component for unsupervised domain
adaptation
Shaokai Ye1 Kailu Wu2 Mu Zhou3 Yunfei Yang2 Sia huat Tan2 Kaidi Xu4 Jiebo Song1
Chenglong Bao2∗
Kaisheng Ma2∗
1
Institute for interdisciplinary information core technology(IIISCT), China;
2
Tsinghua University, China; 3 University of Tsukuba, Japan; 4 Northeastern University, USA

Abstract
Existing domain adaptation methods aim at learning
features that can be generalized among domains. These
methods commonly require to update source classifier to
adapt to the target domain and do not properly handle
the trade-off between the source domain and the target
domain. In this work, instead of training a classifier to
adapt to the target domain, we use a separable component called data calibrator to help the fixed source classifier recover discrimination power in the target domain,
while preserving the source domain’s performance. When
the difference between two domains is small, the source
classifier’s representation is sufficient to perform well in
the target domain and outperforms GAN-based methods in
digits. Otherwise, the proposed method can leverage synthetic images generated by GANs to boost performance and
achieve state-of-the-art performance in digits datasets and
driving scene semantic segmentation. Our method also
empirically suggests the potential connection between domain adaptation and adversarial attacks. Code release
is available at https://github.com/yeshaokai/
Calibrator-Domain-Adaptation

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great performance
in solving diverse machine learning problems. However,
solving the so-called domain shift problem is challenging
when neural networks are trying to generalize across domains [29, 35, 25]. Extensive efforts have been made on
unsupervised domain adaptation [29, 6, 38, 32, 13, 37, 12,
20, 30]. Early domain adaptation methods use different
distance metrics or statistics data to align neural networks’
feature distribution of source domain with their feature distribution of target domain. Adversarial domain adaptation
methods [6, 37] leverage a two players adversarial game to
∗ Corresponding Authors

(b)

(a)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Figure 1. Concept Illustration. (a) The source classifier in labeled source domain. (b) The source classifier in unlabeled target
domain. (c) Existing methods that are developed to learn domaininvariant features. (d) In real world, the testing set consists of
both source domain images and target domain images. (e) The
proposed method keeps the representation of source classifier and
calibrates target images to fit the source classifier’s representation.

achieve domain adaptation: A domain classifier is encouraged to learn the difference between the feature distribution
of two domains while the classification model is encouraged
to maximize the classification loss of the domain classifier
by learning domain invariant representation that is indistinguishable to the domain classifier. In addition to featurelevel adversarial game, there is another line of works that
use Generative Adversarial Networks(GANs) [8] to generate source domain images with target domain styles, playing
a pixel-level adversarial game.
However, there are issues that have been rarely discussed. Consider a neural network that is deployed in a
device and the device needs to move between different domains. It moves from a domain that is close to its trained
source domain to another domain that has no labeled data.

13736

