Learning Dynamic Routing for Semantic Segmentation
Yanwei Li1,2 , Lin Song3 , Yukang Chen1,2 , Zeming Li4 , Xiangyu Zhang4 ,
Xingang Wang1 , Jian Sun4
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University 4 Megvii Technology
Input

Abstract
Recently, numerous handcrafted and searched networks
have been applied for semantic segmentation. However,
previous works intend to handle inputs with various scales
in pre-defined static architectures, such as FCN, U-Net, and
DeepLab series. This paper studies a conceptually new
method to alleviate the scale variance in semantic representation, named dynamic routing. The proposed framework
generates data-dependent routes, adapting to the scale distribution of each image. To this end, a differentiable gating
function, called soft conditional gate, is proposed to select
scale transform paths on the fly. In addition, the computational cost can be further reduced in an end-to-end manner
by giving budget constraints to the gating function. We further relax the network level routing space to support multipath propagations and skip-connections in each forward,
bringing substantial network capacity. To demonstrate the
superiority of the dynamic property, we compare with several static architectures, which can be modeled as special
cases in the routing space. Extensive experiments are conducted on Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012 to illustrate
the effectiveness of the dynamic framework. Code is available at https://github.com/yanwei-li/DynamicRouting.1

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims at assigning each
pixel with semantic categories, is one of the most fundamental yet challenging tasks in the computer vision field.
One of the problems in semantic segmentation comes from
the huge scale variance among inputs, e.g., the tiny object
instances and the picture-filled background stuff. Moreover, the large distribution variance brings difficulties to
feature representation as well as relationship modeling. Traditional methods try to solve this problem by well-designed
network architectures. For instance, multi-resolution fu1 Work was done in Megvii Research. Email: liyanwei2017@ia.ac.cn

Output

(a) Network architecture of large-scale input
Input

Output

(b) Network architecture of small-scale input
Input

Output

(c) Network architecture of mixed-scale input

Figure 1. Given inputs with different scale distributions, the proposed dynamic routing will choose corresponding forward paths.
For example, the architecture of large-scale instances 1(a) could
ignore low-level features. The small-scale objects 1(b) may depend on low-level details as well as higher resolution. And the
mixed-scale things 1(c) would enjoy both connection patterns. Red
lines in diagrams denote the difference among them.

sion [24, 28, 1, 32, 19] is adopted for detail-oriented feature maps, and long-range dependencies are captured for
global context modeling [43, 35, 44, 6, 31]. With the development of Neural Architecture Search (NAS), there are
several works delving in searching effective architectures
for semantic segmentation automatically [3, 22, 25].
However, both classic human-designed and NAS-based
networks intend to represent all of the instances in a single
network architecture, which lacks the adaptability to diverse
scale distributions in the real-world environment. An example is presented in Fig. 1, where the scale of instances varies
a lot. To this end, a more customizable network is needed
to accommodate the scale variance of each image.
In this paper, we propose a framework that is conceptu-

8553

