In Perfect Shape: Certifiably Optimal
3D Shape Reconstruction from 2D Landmarks
Heng Yang and Luca Carlone
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems (LIDS)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{hankyang, lcarlone}@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of 3D shape reconstruction from
2D landmarks extracted in a single image. We adopt the
3D deformable shape model and formulate the reconstruction as a joint optimization of the camera pose and the
linear shape parameters. Our first contribution is to apply Lasserre’s hierarchy of convex Sums-of-Squares (SOS)
relaxations to solve the shape reconstruction problem and
show that the SOS relaxation of minimum order 2 empirically solves the original non-convex problem exactly. Our
second contribution is to exploit the structure of the polynomial in the objective function and find a reduced set of basis monomials for the SOS relaxation that significantly decreases the size of the resulting semidefinite program (SDP)
without compromising its accuracy. These two contributions, to the best of our knowledge, lead to the first certifiably optimal solver for 3D shape reconstruction, that we
name Shape⋆ . Our third contribution is to add an outlier
rejection layer to Shape⋆ using a truncated least squares
(TLS) robust cost function and leveraging graduated nonconvexity to solve TLS without initialization. The result is a
robust reconstruction algorithm, named Shape#, that tolerates a large amount of outlier measurements. We evaluate
the performance of Shape⋆ and Shape# in both simulated
and real experiments, showing that Shape⋆ outperforms local optimization and previous convex relaxation techniques,
while Shape# achieves state-of-the-art performance and is
robust against 70% outliers in the FG3DCar dataset.

1. Introduction
3D object detection and pose estimation from a single
image is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Despite the progress in semantic segmentation [11], depth estimation [20], and pose estimation [16, 43], reconstructing
the 3D shape and pose of an object from a single image remains a challenging task [2, 49, 37, 42, 18, 35].
A typical approach for 3D shape reconstruction is to first
detect 2D landmarks in a single image, and then solve a
model-based optimization to lift the 2D landmarks to form
a 3D model [48, 49, 35, 25, 40]. For the optimization to

be well-posed, the unknown shape is assumed to be a 3D
deformable model, composed by a linear combination of
basis shapes, handcrafted or learned from a large corpus
of training data [8]. The optimization then seeks to jointly
optimize the coefficients of the linear combination (shape
parameters) and the camera pose to minimize the reprojection errors between the 3D model and the 2D landmarks.
This model-based paradigm has been successful in several
applications such as face recognition [4, 10], car model fitting [25, 12], and human pose estimation [49, 35].
Despite its long history and broad range of applications,
there is still no globally optimal solver for the non-convex
optimization problem arising in 3D shape reconstruction.
Therefore, most existing solutions adopt a local optimization strategy, which alternates between solving for the camera pose and the shape parameters. These techniques, as
shown in prior works [35, 12], require an initial guess for
the solution and often get stuck in local minima. In addition, 2D landmark detectors are prone to produce outliers,
causing existing methods to be brittle [40]. Therefore, the
motivation for this paper is two-fold: (i) to develop a certifiably optimal shape reconstruction solver, and (ii) to develop a robust reconstruction algorithm that is insensitive to
a large amount of outlier 2D measurements (e.g., 70%).
Contributions. Our first contribution is to formulate the
shape reconstruction problem as a polynomial optimization
problem and apply Lasserre’s hierarchy of Sums-of-Squares
(SOS) relaxations to relax the non-convex polynomial optimization into a convex semidefinite program (SDP). We
show the SOS relaxation of minimum order 2 empirically
solves the non-convex shape reconstruction problem exactly
and provides a global optimality certificate. The second
contribution is to apply basis reduction, a technique that exploits the sparse structure of the polynomial in the objective
function, to reduce the size of the resulting SDP. We show
that basis reduction significantly improves the efficiency of
the SOS relaxation without compromising global optimality. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first certifiably optimal solver for shape reconstruction, and we name
it Shape⋆ . Our third contribution is to robustify Shape⋆ by
adopting a truncated least squares (TLS) robust cost function and solving the resulting robust estimation problem us1621

