Differentiable Volumetric Rendering:
Learning Implicit 3D Representations without 3D Supervision
Michael Niemeyer1,2 Lars Mescheder1,2,3† Michael Oechsle1,2,4 Andreas Geiger1,2
1
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Tübingen
3
4
Amazon, Tübingen
ETAS GmbH, Bosch Group, Stuttgart
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Learning-based 3D reconstruction methods have shown
impressive results. However, most methods require 3D
supervision which is often hard to obtain for real-world
datasets. Recently, several works have proposed differentiable rendering techniques to train reconstruction models
from RGB images. Unfortunately, these approaches are
currently restricted to voxel- and mesh-based representations, suffering from discretization or low resolution. In
this work, we propose a differentiable rendering formulation for implicit shape and texture representations. Implicit representations have recently gained popularity as
they represent shape and texture continuously. Our key insight is that depth gradients can be derived analytically using the concept of implicit differentiation. This allows us
to learn implicit shape and texture representations directly
from RGB images. We experimentally show that our singleview reconstructions rival those learned with full 3D supervision. Moreover, we find that our method can be used for
multi-view 3D reconstruction, directly resulting in watertight meshes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, learning-based 3D reconstruction approaches have achieved impressive results [12, 13, 17, 24,
41, 48, 49, 56, 64, 80]. By using rich prior knowledge obtained during the training process, they are able to infer a 3D model from as little as a single image. However, most learning-based methods are restricted to synthetic data, mainly because they require accurate 3D ground
truth models as supervision for training.
To overcome this barrier, recent works have investigated
approaches that require only 2D supervision in the form
of depth maps or multi-view images. Most existing approaches achieve this by modifying the rendering process
† This work was done prior to joining Amazon.

Figure 1: Overview. We show that volumetric rendering is
inherently differentiable for implicit shape and texture representations. Using an analytic expression for the gradient
ˆ
of the depth ∂∂θd wrt. the network parameters θ, we learn implicit 3D representations fθ from 2D images.
to make it differentiable [4, 11, 15, 21, 33, 36, 43, 44, 47, 50,
58,59,62,75,76,79,88]. While yielding compelling results,
they are restricted to specific 3D representations (e.g. voxels
or meshes) that suffer from discretization artifacts and the
computational cost limits them to small resolutions or deforming a fixed template mesh. At the same time, implicit
representations [12, 48, 56] for shape and texture [54, 66]
have been proposed which do not require discretization during training and have a constant memory footprint. However, existing approaches using implicit representations require 3D ground truth for training and it remains unclear
how to learn implicit representations from image data alone.
Contribution: In this work, we introduce Differentiable
Volumetric Rendering (DVR). Our key insight is that we can
derive analytic gradients for the predicted depth map with
respect to the network parameters of the implicit shape and
texture representation (see Fig. 1). This insight enables us
to design a differentiable renderer for implicit shape and
texture representations and allows us to learn these representations solely from multi-view images and object masks.
13504

