Polarized Reflection Removal with Perfect Alignment in the Wild
Chenyang Lei1

Xuhua Huang1

Mengdi Zhang1 Qiong Yan2
1
2
HKUST
Sensetime

Wenxiu Sun2

Qifeng Chen1

Abstract
We present a novel formulation to removing reflection
from polarized images in the wild. We first identify the
misalignment issues of existing reflection removal datasets
where the collected reflection-free images are not perfectly
aligned with input mixed images due to glass refraction.
Then we build a new dataset with more than 100 types of
glass in which obtained transmission images are perfectly
aligned with input mixed images. Second, capitalizing on
the special relationship between reflection and polarized
light, we propose a polarized reflection removal model with
a two-stage architecture. In addition, we design a novel
perceptual NCC loss that can improve the performance of
reflection removal and general image decomposition tasks.
We conduct extensive experiments, and results suggest that
our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on reflection removal.

1. Introduction
It is often desirable to remove glass reflection as it may
contaminate the visual quality of a photograph. Reflection
separation is also arguably important for robots to work robustly in the real world as the content in reflection usually
does not exist in the viewing frustum of a camera. One intriguing property of reflection is that reflected light is often
polarized, which may facilitate reflection removal. In this
paper, we study reflection removal with polarized sensors
by designing a customized deep learning framework.
An image with reflection is a mixture of reflection and
transmission, as shown in Fig. 1. In raw data space, the
mixed image M can be formulated as
M = T + R,

(1)

where T and R are transmission and reflection, respectively.
We name the light behind glass as background B and the
light that passes through glass as transmission T . Although
most prior work treats B as the same as T [34, 28], we argue
that T and B are different. T is darker than B as some light
is reflected or absorbed by glass, and there is a spatial shift
between T and B due to refraction.

Figure 1. The image formation process of the mixed image M .
Due to refraction, background B dims and shifts after passing the
glass and forms transmission T , resulting in intensity discrepancy
and spatial misalignment between B and T . Reflection R from the
glass surface is linearly added to T to form M in raw data space.
Therefore, we can obtain T by computing T = M − R.

A common issue of many existing reflection removal
methods [34, 32, 7, 31, 24] is that strict assumptions are
imposed on reflection. These assumptions make previous
methods work well in special cases but fail in many others.
For example, many works assume reflection images are out
of focus [7, 34]. As a result, these approaches may not remove reflection properly when the reflection is sharp and
strong. Another prior assumption is on ghost cues [24] that
result from multiple reflections inside a thick glass. However, ghost cues do not exist in thin glass.
The lack of diverse and high quality real-world data is
another challenging issue. Zhang et al. [34] and Wei et
al. [28] have collected a small set of real-world data where
only background images (in Fig. 1 and Fig. 4) are captured
as the ground-truth transmission images. However, background images are not perfectly aligned with the mixed image M due to refraction and also have the problem of intensity decay (T appears darker than B) and color distortion
(colored glass). Misalignment introduces great challenges
in training a machine learning model [28] and the intensity
difference makes it even more difficult. Moreover, since the
type of reflection depends on the glass type and only one
type of glass is used to collect data, the models trained on
these data cannot generalize well to other types of glass.
To be able to relax the assumptions about the appear11750

