Learning to Cartoonize Using White-box Cartoon Representations
Xinrui Wang1,2,3
Jinze Yu2
1
ByteDance, 2 The University of Tokyo, 3 Style2Paints Research

(a) A frame in animation “Garden of words”

(b) A real photo processed by our method

Figure 1: Comparison between a real cartoon image and an image processed by our method.

Abstract
This paper presents an approach for image cartoonization. By observing the cartoon painting behavior and
consulting artists, we propose to separately identify three
white-box representations from images: the surface representation that contains a smooth surface of cartoon images, the structure representation that refers to the sparse
color-blocks and flatten global content in the celluloid style
workflow, and the texture representation that reflects highfrequency texture, contours, and details in cartoon images. A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) framework
is used to learn the extracted representations and to cartoonize images.
The learning objectives of our method are separately
based on each extracted representations, making our framework controllable and adjustable. This enables our approach to meet artists’ requirements in different styles and
diverse use cases. Qualitative comparisons and quantitative analyses, as well as user studies, have been conducted to validate the effectiveness of this approach, and
our method outperforms previous methods in all comparisons. Finally, the ablation study demonstrates the influence
of each component in our framework.

1. Introduction
Cartoon is a popular art form that has been widely applied in diverse scenes. Modern cartoon animation workflows allow artists to use a variety of sources to create content. Some famous products have been created by turning
real-world photography into usable cartoon scene materials,

where the process is called image cartoonization.
The variety of cartoon styles and use cases require taskspecific assumptions or prior knowledge to develop usable
algorithms. For example, some cartoon workflows pay
more attention to global palette themes, but the sharpness of
lines is a secondary issue. In some other workflows, sparse
and clean color blocks play a dominant role in artistic expression, but the themes are relatively less emphasized.
These variants pose non-trivial challenges to black-box
models, e.g., [20, 48, 6], when faced with diverse demands
of artists in different use cases, and simply change the training dataset does not help. Especially, CartoonGAN [6] is
designed for image cartoonization, in which a GAN framework with a novel edge loss is proposed, and achieves good
results in certain cases. But using a black-box model to directly fit the training data decreased its generality and stylization quality, causing bad cases in some situations.
To address the above-mentioned problems, we made extensive observations on human painting behaviors and cartoon images of different styles, and also consulted several
cartoon artists. According to our observations, which is
shown in Figure 3, we propose to decompose images into
several cartoon representations, and list them as follows:
Firstly, we extract the surface representation to represent the smooth surface of images. Given an image I ∈
RW ×H×3 , we extract a weighted low-frequency component
Isf ∈ RW ×H×3 , where the color composition and surface
texture are preserved with edges, textures and details ignored. This design is inspired by the cartoon painting be18090

