Cross-Spectral Face Hallucination via Disentangling Independent Factors
Boyan Duan1∗ Chaoyou Fu1,2∗ Yi Li1,2 Xingguang Song3 Ran He1,2†
1
NLPR & CEBSIT & CRIPAC, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Central Media Technology Institute, Huawei Technology Co., Ltd.
dby96@163.com, {chaoyou.fu, rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, yi.li@cripac.ia.ac.cn, songxingguang@huawei.com

Abstract
The cross-sensor gap is one of the challenges that
have aroused much research interests in Heterogeneous
Face Recognition (HFR). Although recent methods have attempted to fill the gap with deep generative networks, most
of them suffer from the inevitable misalignment between
different face modalities. Instead of imaging sensors, the
misalignment primarily results from facial geometric variations that are independent of the spectrum. Rather than
building a monolithic but complex structure, this paper proposes a Pose Aligned Cross-spectral Hallucination (PACH)
approach to disentangle the independent factors and deal
with them in individual stages. In the first stage, an Unsupervised Face Alignment (UFA) module is designed to
align the facial shapes of the near-infrared (NIR) images
with those of the visible (VIS) images in a generative way,
where UV maps are effectively utilized as the shape guidance. Thus the task of the second stage becomes spectrum
translation with aligned paired data. We develop a Texture
Prior Synthesis (TPS) module to achieve complexion control and consequently generate more realistic VIS images
than existing methods. Experiments on three challenging
NIR-VIS datasets verify the effectiveness of our approach in
producing visually appealing images and achieving stateof-the-art performance in HFR.

1. Introduction
In real world systems, there are multiple imaging sensors in cameras. For example, near infrared (NIR) sensors
work well in low lighting conditions and are widely used
in night-vision devices and surveillance cameras. Nevertheless, visible (VIS) images are much easier to capture,
leading them to the most common type. Different sensors
result in face appearance variations, which imposes a great
challenge to precisely match face images in different light
∗ Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Synthesis results (the 2nd row, 256 × 256 resolution) of
PACH. There are distinct facial shape deviations between the NIR
images (the 1st row) and the VIS images (the 3rd row). PACH disentangles the independent factors in cross-spectral hallucination
and produces realistic VIS images from NIR inputs.

spectra. Face recognition with NIR images is an important
task in computer vision [22]. However, in most face recognition scenarios, the only available faces are VIS images.
There lack large-scale datasets with NIR faces for effective model learning, compared with the VIS face datasets.
Therefore, it is significant to effectively utilize both NIR
and VIS images to boost HFR. In past decades, many efforts have been paid to HFR. These methods can be classified into three categories [30]. The first category contrives
to learn domain-invariant features of faces in different domains [20]. The second category projects NIR and VIS images into a common subspace [31]. Face synthesis (or hallucination) has raised as another popular trend [26], especially
in recent years. It usually translates NIR images to the VIS
ones while keeping the identity of faces, and then evaluates recognition models on the synthesized VIS images to
reduce the domain gap.
However, there are still challenges regarding the image
synthesis based methods. A major challenge comes from
the misalignment. The paired NIR and VIS images (com-

7930

