Understanding Adversarial Examples from the Mutual Influence of Images and
Perturbations
Chaoning Zhang∗

Philipp Benz∗

Tooba Imtiaz

chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com

pbenz@kaist.ac.kr

timtiaz@kaist.ac.kr

In-So Kweon
iskweon@kaist.ac.kr
∗

indicates equal contribution

Robotics and Computer Vision (RCV) Laboratory
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Korea

Abstract

Lx,1

Backpropagation

A wide variety of works have explored the reason for the
existence of adversarial examples, but there is no consensus
on the explanation. We propose to treat the DNN logits as
a vector for feature representation, and exploit them to analyze the mutual influence of two independent inputs based
on the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC). We utilize this
vector representation to understand adversarial examples
by disentangling the clean images and adversarial perturbations, and analyze their influence on each other. Our results suggest a new perspective towards the relationship between images and universal perturbations: Universal perturbations contain dominant features, and images behave
like noise to them. This feature perspective leads to a new
method for generating targeted universal adversarial perturbations using random source images. We are the first to
achieve the challenging task of a targeted universal attack
without utilizing original training data. Our approach using a proxy dataset achieves comparable performance to the
state-of-the-art baselines which utilize the original training
dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown impressive
performance in numerous applications, ranging from image classification [16, 48] to motion regression [8, 47].
However, DNNs are also known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [42, 37]. A wide variety of previous
works [14, 43, 44, 21, 33, 3] explore the reason for the existence of adversarial examples, but there is a lack of consensus on the explanation [1]. While the working mecha-

Lx,2
Lx,3
Lx

L(Lx ,t)

Perturbation
Target Network
(Fixed)

Lx,K
Logit Vector

Proxy Dataset

Figure 1. Based on our observation that adversarial perturbations
contain dominant features and images behave like noise to them,
we design a new method of generating targeted universal adversarial perturbations without data, by using a proxy dataset.

nism of DNNs is not fully understood, one widely accepted
interpretation considers DNNs as feature extractors [16],
which inspires the recent work [17] to link the existence of
adversarial examples to non-robust features in the training
dataset.
Contrary to previous works analyzing adversarial examples as a whole (summation of image and perturbation), we
instead propose to analyze adversarial examples by disentangling image and perturbations and studying their mutual
influence. Specifically, we analyze the influence of two
independent inputs on each other in terms of contributing
to the obtained feature representation when the inputs are
combined. We treat the network logit outputs as a means
of feature representation. Traditionally, only the most important logit values, such as the highest logit value for
classification tasks, are considered while other values are
disregarded. We propose that all logit values contribute
to the feature representation and therefore treat them as a
114521

