Bi-directional Interaction Network for Person Search
Wenkai Dong1, 3 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1, 2, 3∗, Chunfeng Song1, 3 , Tieniu Tan 1, 2, 3∗
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, NLPR, CASIA
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{dongwenkai2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {chunfeng.song, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

End-to-end
Det

Existing works have designed end-to-end frameworks
based on Faster-RCNN for person search. Due to the large
receptive fields in deep networks, the feature maps of each
proposal, cropped from the stem feature maps, involve redundant context information outside the bounding boxes.
However, person search is a fine-grained task which needs
accurate appearance information. Such context information can make the model fail to focus on persons, so the
learned representations lack the capacity to discriminate
various identities. To address this issue, we propose a
Siamese network which owns an additional instance-aware
branch, named Bi-directional Interaction Network (BINet).
During the training phase, in addition to scene images,
BINet also takes as inputs person patches which help the
model discriminate identities based on human appearance.
Moreover, two interaction losses are designed to achieve
bi-directional interaction between branches at two levels.
The interaction can help the model learn more discriminative features for persons in the scene. At the inference stage,
only the major branch is applied, so BINet introduces no additional computation. Extensive experiments on two widely
used person search benchmarks, CUHK-SYSU and PRW,
have shown that our BINet achieves state-of-the-art results
among end-to-end methods without loss of efficiency.

1. Introduction
Person search [28] aims at localizing a target person
in a gallery of unconstrained scene images. Compared
with person re-identification (Re-id), it contains the process
of generating person proposals from scene images, which
makes it more suitable for real-world applications, such as
video surveillance and security, video retrieval, and humancomputer interaction. It is a challenging problem because
of raw unrefined detections, camera view changes, low res∗ Corresponding Author.

Re-id

Two-stage
Re-id

Ours
Det

Re-id

Re-id

Share

Det

Figure 1. Comparison of three methods for person search. (a). Existing end-to-end framework. (b). Existing two-stage framework.
(c). Our framework.

olution, background clutter, and occlusion, etc.
Person search is a fine-grained task which needs accurate
human appearance information. Compared with the classification task in generic object detection, person search is
more likely to be affected by the redundant context information outside the bounding boxes. For example, in the
training procedure, the model discriminates some identities
based on the various context rather than human appearance.
During inference, the model may still fail to focus on persons, so the identity features lack the capacity of discrimination.
Existing approaches to person search separate this task
into generating person proposals from scene images and
person Re-id. As shown in Figure 1, they tackle two subtasks together in a multi-task framework (end-to-end methods) or separately via two independent networks (two-stage
methods). For the end-to-end methods, existing works
[26, 21, 24] apply multi-task frameworks based on Faster
R-CNN to solve the two sub-tasks together. Similar to the
pipeline of Faster R-CNN, an RoI-Pooling layer is applied
to pool feature maps of the same size for each proposal.
Generally, receptive fields in deep CNN such as ResNet

2839

