STAViS: Spatio-Temporal AudioVisual Saliency Network
Antigoni Tsiami, Petros Koutras and Petros Maragos
School of E.C.E., National Technical University of Athens, Greece

1. Introduction
Audio is present in the majority of scenes where vision
is also present. Nature as well as everyday life offer unlimited examples of multi-sensory and cross-modal events, a
large amount of which concern auditory and visual senses.
Audiovisual integration is a well studied phenomenon in
neuroscience with interesting findings that have motivated
research in the area [36, 37, 60]. Many of them provide
sufficient evidence that human attention and perception is
influenced by audiovisual stimuli in a different way than
auditory or visual stimuli in isolation. For example, the
well-known McGurk effect [35] proved that attention can be
heavily affected by incongruent audiovisual stimuli, leading to illusionary perceptions. On the other hand, congruent ones, like in the pip & pop effect [59], can lead to enhanced attention. Modeling human attention is important in
1 This research has been cofinanced by the European Union and Greek

national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH CREATE INNOVATE (project code:T1EDK- 01248 / MIS: 5030856).

visual

We introduce STAViS1 , a spatio-temporal audiovisual
saliency network that combines spatio-temporal visual and
auditory information in order to efficiently address the
problem of saliency estimation in videos. Our approach
employs a single network that combines visual saliency and
auditory features and learns to appropriately localize sound
sources and to fuse the two saliencies in order to obtain a
final saliency map. The network has been designed, trained
end-to-end, and evaluated on six different databases that
contain audiovisual eye-tracking data of a large variety of
videos. We compare our method against 8 different stateof-the-art visual saliency models. Evaluation results across
databases indicate that our STAViS model outperforms our
visual only variant as well as the other state-of-the-art models in the majority of cases. Also, the consistently good
performance it achieves for all databases indicates that it
is appropriate for estimating saliency “in-the-wild”. The
code is available at https://github.com/atsiami/STAViS.

audio-visual

Abstract

frames

{antsiami, pkoutras, maragos}@cs.ntua.gr

Figure 1. Example frames with their eye-tracking data of a bell
tolling. The second row depicts the saliency maps produced by our
visual-only saliency network, while the third row is the output of
our proposed STAViS network, which succeeds in better capturing
human attention.

a variety of applications, like video summarization [28, 16],
robotics [15, 30, 67], and virtual reality [54].
Despite the previously mentioned evidence of a strong
audiovisual interplay, audio modality has been rather neglected when modeling human attention, with most computer vision research focusing only on visual information.
We aim to address the problem of saliency estimation in
videos “in-the-wild”, namely how bottom-up human attention is modeled, by integrating auditory information into
visual saliency, without prior knowledge of the video content. Fig. 1 highlights and motivates the problem we aim
to address: tolling bells is an audiovisual event. The depicted frames, with their eye-tracking data superimposed,
exhibit an example of human attention in an audiovisual
scene. This attention can be much better captured by an
audiovisual attention model than by a visual-only one, as
the corresponding saliency maps indicate.
In parallel, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have infiltrated computer vision and have enhanced dramatically the performance in the majority of spatial tasks in
computer vision, such as object detection or semantic segmentation [53, 22, 21]. The huge amounts of video data
that are becoming more and more available through online sources, enable and at the same time require continuously better performance in tasks like activity recognition,

4766

