Local Implicit Grid Representations for 3D Scenes
Chiyu “Max” Jiang1,2 Avneesh Sud2 Ameesh Makadia2 Jingwei Huang2,3
Matthias Nießner4 Thomas Funkhouser2
1

UC Berkeley

2

Google Research

3

Stanford University

4

Technical University of Munich

Cabinet
Chair

Lamp

Chair

Table

Cabinet
Sofa
Table

Plane
Lamp

(a) Training parts from ShapeNet. (b) t-SNE plot of part embeddings.

(c) Reconstructing entire scenes with Local Implicit Grids

Figure 1: We learn an embedding of parts from objects in ShapeNet [3] using a part autoencoder with an implicit decoder. We show that
this representation of parts is generalizable across object categories, and easily scalable to large scenes. By localizing implicit functions in
a grid, we are able to reconstruct entire scenes from points via optimization of the latent grid.

Abstract
Shape priors learned from data are commonly used to reconstruct 3D objects from partial or noisy data. Yet no such
shape priors are available for indoor scenes, since typical
3D autoencoders cannot handle their scale, complexity, or
diversity. In this paper, we introduce Local Implicit Grid
Representations, a new 3D shape representation designed
for scalability and generality. The motivating idea is that
most 3D surfaces share geometric details at some scale –
i.e., at a scale smaller than an entire object and larger than
a small patch. We train an autoencoder to learn an embedding of local crops of 3D shapes at that size. Then, we use
the decoder as a component in a shape optimization that
solves for a set of latent codes on a regular grid of overlapping crops such that an interpolation of the decoded local
shapes matches a partial or noisy observation. We demonstrate the value of this proposed approach for 3D surface
reconstruction from sparse point observations, showing significantly better results than alternative approaches.

1. Introduction
Geometric representation for scenes has been central to
various tasks in computer vision and graphics, including geometric reconstruction, compression, and higher-level tasks
such as scene understanding, object detection and segmentation. An effective representation should generalize well
across a wide range of semantic categories, scale efficiently
to large scenes, exhibit a rich expressive capacity for representing sharp features and complex topologies, and at the
same time leverage learned geometric priors acquired from
data.
In the last years, several works have proposed new network architectures to allow conventional geometric representations such as point clouds [31, 13, 43], meshes
[37, 15], and voxel grids [9, 40] to leverage data priors.
More recently, a neural implicit representation [4, 28, 29]
has been proposed as an alternative to these approaches for
its expressive capacity for representing fine geometric details. However, the aforementioned works focus on learning representations for whole objects within one or a few
categories, and they have not been studied in the context of
generalizing to other categories, or scaling to large scenes.
16001

