PF-Net: Point Fractal Network for 3D Point Cloud Completion
Zitian Huang1 , Yikuan Yu1,2 , Jiawen Xu1 , Feng Ni2 , Xinyi Le1∗
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
lexinyi@sjtu.edu.cn

2

SenseTime

∗

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Point Fractal Network (PFNet), a novel learning-based approach for precise and highfidelity point cloud completion. Unlike existing point cloud
completion networks, which generate the overall shape of
the point cloud from the incomplete point cloud and always
change existing points and encounter noise and geometrical loss, PF-Net preserves the spatial arrangements of the
incomplete point cloud and can figure out the detailed geometrical structure of the missing region(s) in the prediction. To succeed at this task, PF-Net estimates the missing point cloud hierarchically by utilizing a feature-pointsbased multi-scale generating network. Further, we add up
multi-stage completion loss and adversarial loss to generate more realistic missing region(s). The adversarial loss
can better tackle multiple modes in the prediction. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for
several challenging point cloud completion tasks.

1. Introduction
3D vision has become one of the current research topics recently. Among various types of 3D data description,
point cloud has been widely used in 3D data processing
due to its small data size but more delicate presenting ability [1–3]. Real-world point cloud data is often captured by
using laser scanners, stereo cameras, or low-cost RGB-D
scanners. However, due to occlusion, light reflection, transparency of surface material, and limitations of sensor resolution and viewing angle, it will cause a loss of geometric and semantic information, resulting in incomplete point
clouds. Therefore, it is an essential task to repair incomplete point clouds for further applications. Since the 3D
point cloud is unstructured and unordered, the majority of
the deep-learning-based methods for dealing with 3D data
transform point cloud to collections of images(e.g., views)
∗ The work described in the paper was jointly sponsored by Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (18ZR1420100) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (61703274).

Figure 1. Our PF-Net takes the incomplete point cloud as input and
directly predicts the missing point cloud. The display of multiscale predictions (indicated by blue, red and yellow) are made by
layers from different depths of Point Pyramid Decoder (PPD). The
low resolution prediction serves as the center point to generate
high resolution prediction, leading to a coarse-to-fine prediction.

or regularly voxel-based representations of 3D data. However, multi-view and voxel-based representation [4–9] leads
to unnecessarily voluminous and limits the output resolution of voxels [10, 11].
Thanks to the advent of PointNet [10], learning-based architectures are capable of directly operating on point cloud
data. L-GAN [12] introduces the first deep-learning-based
network for point cloud completion by utilizing an EncoderDecoder framework. PCN [11] combines the advantages
of L-GAN [12] and FoldingNet [13] which is specialized
on repairing incomplete point clouds. Recently, RL-GANNet [14] proposes a reinforcement learning agent controlled
GAN for reducing prediction time of point cloud completion.
Previous works for completion take incomplete point
cloud as input and aim to output the overall complete models. They pay more attention to learning the general character of a genus/category but not the local details of a specific object. Therefore, they may change the position of
known points, and encounter genus-wise distortions [13],
which causes noise and detailed geometrical loss. For example, in Fig. 6(3), the reconstruction of a chair in previ-

7662

