Adversarial Texture Optimization from RGB-D Scans
Jingwei Huang1,3 , Justus Thies2 , Angela Dai2 , Abhijit Kundu3 , Chiyu “Max” Jiang3,4 , Leonidas Guibas1 ,
Matthias Nießner2 , and Thomas Funkhouser3
1 Stanford University

Input Image

2 Technical University of Munich

Geometry

3 Google Research

Our Reconstructed Textured Model

4 UC Berkeley

Zhou and Koltun

Ours

Figure 1. Our goal is to reconstruct high-quality textures from an RGB-D scan. Unlike traditional methods which optimize for a parametric
color map to reduce misalignment error (Zhou and Koltun [36]), we learn a misalignment-tolerant discriminator, producing sharper textures.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Realistic color texture generation is an important step
in RGB-D surface reconstruction, but remains challenging
in practice due to inaccuracies in reconstructed geometry,
misaligned camera poses, and view-dependent imaging artifacts. In this work, we present a novel approach for color
texture generation using a conditional adversarial loss obtained from weakly-supervised views. Specifically, we propose an approach to produce photorealistic textures for approximate surfaces, even from misaligned images, by learning an objective function that is robust to these errors. The
key idea of our approach is to learn a patch-based conditional discriminator which guides the texture optimization
to be tolerant to misalignments. Our discriminator takes a
synthesized view and a real image, and evaluates whether
the synthesized one is realistic, under a broadened definition of realism. We train the discriminator by providing as
‘real’ examples pairs of input views and their misaligned
versions – so that the learned adversarial loss will tolerate
errors from the scans. Experiments on synthetic and real
data under quantitative or qualitative evaluation demonstrate the advantage of our approach in comparison to state
of the art (see Figure 1, right). Our code is publicly available1 with video demonstration2 .

The wide availability of consumer range cameras has
spurred extensive research in geometric reconstruction of
real-world objects and scenes, with state-of-the-art 3D
reconstruction approaches now providing robust camera
tracking and 3D surface reconstruction [22, 19, 33, 9].
However, producing photorealistic models of real-world
environments requires not only geometric reconstruction
but also high-quality color texturing. Unfortunately, due
to noisy input data, poorly estimated surface geometry,
misaligned camera poses, unmodeled optical distortions,
and view-dependent lighting effects, aggregating multiple
real-world images into high-quality, realistic surface textures is still a challenging problem. In order to overcome
these problems, various approaches have been developed
to optimize color textures using models to adjust camera
poses [36, 15], distort images [4, 15, 36], and balance colors [15, 36]. However, these prior approaches are not expressive enough and/or their optimization algorithms are
not robust enough to handle the complex distortions and
misalignments commonly found in scans with commodity
cameras – and therefore they fail to produce high-quality
results for typical scans, as shown in the results from Zhou
and Koltun [36] in Figure 1.

1 https://github.com/hjwdzh/AdversarialTexture

To address these issues, we propose a flexible texture optimization framework based on a learned metric that is robust to common scanning errors (right side of Figure 1).

2 https://youtu.be/52xlRn0ESek

11559

