Unsupervised Learning for Intrinsic Image Decomposition from a Single Image
Yunfei Liu1
Yu Li2
Shaodi You3
Feng Lu1, 4, ∗
1
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
2
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG 3 University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherland
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{lyunfei,lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

ianyli@tencent.com

s.you@uva.nl

Abstract
Intrinsic image decomposition, which is an essential task
in computer vision, aims to infer the reflectance and shading of the scene. It is challenging since it needs to separate
one image into two components. To tackle this, conventional
methods introduce various priors to constrain the solution,
yet with limited performance. Meanwhile, the problem is
typically solved by supervised learning methods, which is
actually not an ideal solution since obtaining ground truth
reflectance and shading for massive general natural scenes
is challenging and even impossible. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised intrinsic image decomposition
framework, which relies on neither labelled training data
nor hand-crafted priors. Instead, it directly learns the latent feature of reflectance and shading from unsupervised and
uncorrelated data. To enable this, we explore the independence between reflectance and shading, the domain invariant content constraint and the physical constraint. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real image datasets
demonstrate consistently superior performance of the proposed method.

Natural image prior

∗ Corresponding Author.

This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61972012 and Grant 61732016, and
Baidu academic collaboration program.

Shading prior

Content consistent transfer

Natural image

Reflectance

Physical consistency constraint

Shading
Independence constraint

Figure 1. Our method learns intrinsic image decomposition in an
unsupervised fashion where the ground truth reflectance and shading is not available in the training data. We learn the distribution
priors from unlabeled and uncorrelated collections of natural image, reflectance and shading. Then we perform intrinsic image
decomposition through content preserving image translation with
independence constraint and physical consistency constraint.

illumination invariance, the reflectance R(I); and the illumination variance, the shading S(I), i.e.,
I = R(I) ⊙ S(I).

1. Introduction
The appearance of a natural image depends on various
factors, such as illumination, shape and material. Intrinsic image decomposition aims to decompose such a natural image into an illumination-invariant component and an
illumination-variant component. Therefore, it can benefit a
variety of high-level computer vision tasks such as texture
editing [3], face appearance editing [5] and many others. In
this paper, we follow the common practice [8, 18, 28] that
assumes the ideal Lambertian surface. Then, a natural image I can be decomposed as the pixel-wise product of the

Reflectance prior

(1)

Eq. (1) is ill-posed because there are twice the unknowns
than the knowns. Conventional methods [3, 18] therefore
explore physical priors as extra constraints, while recent researches tend to use deep neutral networks to directly learn
such priors [8, 28, 33, 38].
Unlike high-level vision tasks, intrinsic image decomposition is obviously physics-based, and therefore designing a
supervised learning method will heavily rely on high quality
physical realistic ground truth. However, existing datasets
are either created from a small set of manually painted objects [9], synthetic objects or scenes [4, 6, 19] or manual
annotations [15, 31]. These datasets are either too small or
far from natural images and therefore limit the performance
of supervised learning.
13248

