FPConv: Learning Local Flattening for Point Convolution

Yiqun Lin1,2 , Zizheng Yan1,2 , Haibin Huang4 , Dong Du2,3 , Ligang Liu3 ,
Shuguang Cui1,2 , Xiaoguang Han∗1,2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
We introduce FPConv, a novel surface-style convolution operator designed for 3D point cloud analysis. Unlike previous methods, FPConv doesn’t require transforming to intermediate representation like 3D grid or graph
and directly works on surface geometry of point cloud. To
be more specific, for each point, FPConv performs a local flattening by automatically learning a weight map to
softly project surrounding points onto a 2D grid. Regular 2D convolution can thus be applied for efficient feature learning. FPConv can be easily integrated into various network architectures for tasks like 3D object classification and 3D scene segmentation, and achieve comparable performance with existing volumetric-type convolutions. More importantly, our experiments also show that
FPConv can be a complementary of volumetric convolutions and jointly training them can further boost overall performance into state-of-the-art results. Code is available at
https://github.com/lyqun/FPConv

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D scan devices, it is
more and more easy to generate and access 3D data in the
form of point clouds. This also brings the challenging of
robust and efficient 3D point clouds analysis, which serves
as an important component in many real world applications
like robotics navigation, autonomous driving, augmented
reality applications and so on [35, 52, 3, 38].
Despite decades of development in 3D analysing technologies, it is still quite challenging to perform point cloud
based semantic analysis, largely due to its sparse and unordered structure. Early methods [7, 8, 11, 28] utilized
hand-crafted features with complex rules to tackle this prob∗ Corresponding Author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

Figure 1: Flattening Projection Convolution: flatten local
patch onto a grid plane and then apply 2D convolutions.

lem. Such empirical human-designed features would suffer
from limited performance in general scenes. Recently, with
the explosive growth of machine learning and deep learning techniques, Deep Neural Network (CNN) based methods have been introduced into this task [36, 37] and reveal promising improvements. However, both PointNet [36]
and PointNet++ [37] doesn’t support convolution operation
which is a key contributing factor in Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) for efficient local processing and handling
large-scale data.
A straightforward extension of 2D CNN is treating 3D
space as a volumetric grid and using 3D convolution for
analysis [49, 39]. Although these approaches have achieved
success in tasks like object classification and indoor semantic segmentation [30, 9], they still have limitations like cubic growth rate of memory requirement and high computational cost, leading to insufficient analysis and low predication accuracy on large-scale scenes. Recently, [48, 44] are
proposed to approximate such volumetric convolutions with
point-based convolution operations, which greatly improves
the efficiency and preserves the output accuracy. However,
these methods are still difficult to capture fine details on surface with relatively flat and thin structures.
In reality, data captured by 3D sensors and LiDAR are

4293

