Total Deep Variation for Linear Inverse Problems
Erich Kobler†,∗
†

Alexander Effland†,∗

Karl Kunisch◦

Graz University of Technology

◦

Thomas Pock†

University of Graz

Abstract
Diverse inverse problems in imaging can be cast as variational problems composed of a task-specific data fidelity
term and a regularization term. In this paper, we propose a
novel learnable general-purpose regularizer exploiting recent architectural design patterns from deep learning. We
cast the learning problem as a discrete sampled optimal
control problem, for which we derive the adjoint state equations and an optimality condition. By exploiting the variational structure of our approach, we perform a sensitivity
analysis with respect to the learned parameters obtained
from different training datasets. Moreover, we carry out a
nonlinear eigenfunction analysis, which reveals interesting
properties of the learned regularizer. We show state-of-theart performance for classical image restoration and medical image reconstruction problems.

1. Introduction
The statistical interpretation of linear inverse problems
allows the treatment of measurement uncertainties in the input data z and missing information in a rigorous framework.
Bayes’ theorem states that the posterior distribution p(x|z)
is proportional to the product of the data likelihood p(z|x)
and the prior p(x), which represents the belief in a certain
solution x given the input data z. A classical estimator
for x is given by the maximum a posterior (MAP) estimator,
which in a negative log-domain amounts to minimizing the
variational problem
E(x) := D(x, z) + R(x).

(1)

Here, the data fidelity term D can be identified with the
negative log-likelihood − log p(z|x) and the regularization
term corresponds to the negative log-probability of the prior
distribution− log p(x). Assuming Gaussian noise in the
data z, the data fidelity term naturally arises from the negative log-Gaussian, which essentially leads to a quadratic
ℓ2 -term of the form D(x, z) := 21 kAx − zk22 . In this paper,
we assume that A is a task-specific linear operator (see [4])
∗ indicates equal contribution

w⊤

N (Kx)

K

Ma1

Ma2

Ma3

Mi21

/
+

Mi22

/

K2
3,1
φ
K2
3,2

+

Mi25

Mi24

Mi23

+
/
+

downsampling
upsampling
concatenation
addition

Figure 1. Visualization of the deep regularizer r (TDV3 ), where
colors indicate different hierarchical levels. On the highest level,
r(x, θ) = w⊤ N (Kx) assigns to each pixel an energy value incorporating the local neighborhood. The function N (yellow) is
composed of three macro-blocks (red), each representing a CNN
with a U-Net type architecture. The macro-blocks consist of five
micro-blocks (blue) with a residual structure on three scales.

such as a downsampling operator in the case of single image
super-resolution. While the data fidelity term is straightforward to model, the grand challenge in inverse problems for
imaging is the design of a regularizer that captures the complexity of the statistics of natural images.
A classical and widely used regularizer is the total variation (TV) originally proposed in [37], which is based on the
first principle assumption that images are piecewise constant with sparse gradients. A well-known caveat of the
sparsity assumption of TV is the formation of clearly visible
artifacts known as staircasing effect. To overcome this problem, the first principle assumption has later been extended
to piecewise smooth images incorporating higher order image derivatives such as infimal convolution based models [3] or the total generalized variation [2]. Inspired by the
fact that edge continuity plays a fundamental role in the hu17549

