Cross-Domain Document Object Detection: Benchmark Suite and Method
Kai Li1 , Curtis Wigington2 , Chris Tensmeyer2 , Handong Zhao2 ,
Nikolaos Barmpalios3 , Vlad I. Morariu2 , Varun Manjunatha2 , Tong Sun2 , Yun Fu1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Adobe Research, 3 Adobe Document Cloud
{kaili,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu
{wigingto,tensmeye,hazhao,barmpali,morariu,vmanjuna,tsun}@adobe.com

Abstract
Decomposing images of document pages into high-level
semantic regions (e.g., figures, tables, paragraphs), document object detection (DOD) is fundamental for downstream tasks like intelligent document editing and understanding. DOD remains a challenging problem as document objects vary significantly in layout, size, aspect ratio, texture, etc. An additional challenge arises in practice because large labeled training datasets are only available for domains that differ from the target domain. We
investigate cross-domain DOD, where the goal is to learn
a detector for the target domain using labeled data from
the source domain and only unlabeled data from the target domain. Documents from the two domains may vary
significantly in layout, language, and genre. We establish a benchmark suite consisting of different types of PDF
document datasets that can be utilized for cross-domain
DOD model training and evaluation. For each dataset, we
provide the page images, bounding box annotations, PDF
files, and the rendering layers extracted from the PDF files.
Moreover, we propose a novel cross-domain DOD model
which builds upon the standard detection model and addresses domain shifts by incorporating three novel alignment modules: Feature Pyramid Alignment (FPA) module, Region Alignment (RA) module and Rendering Layer
alignment (RLA) module. Extensive experiments on the
benchmark suite substantiate the efficacy of the three proposed modules and the proposed method significantly outperforms the baseline methods. The project page is at
https://github.com/kailigo/cddod.

1. Introduction
Document Object Detection (DOD) is the task of automatically decomposing a document page image into its
structural and logical units (e.g., figures, tables, paragraphs). DOD is critical for a variety of document image
analysis applications, such as document editing, document

structure analysis and content understanding [31, 1, 30].
Two popular document formats, image (e.g. scanned and
camera-captured documents) and PDF, do not explicitly encode document structure: images consist of pixels, while
PDFs consist of vector, raster, and text marking operations
that allow a document to be faithfully reproduced across devices (e.g., printers, and displays).
Though recent advances in object detection for natural
scene images are impressive [27, 21], directly applying the
same model to document images is likely sub-optimal due
to large domain differences. For example, document objects
are more diverse in aspect ratio and scale than natural scene
objects: tables may occupy a whole page, page numbers can
be as small as a single digit, and a single line of text spanning the page has an extreme aspect ratio. The intra-class
variance of document objects is also usually larger than that
of natural scene objects. Text can have arbitrary font face,
style, position, orientation, and size. Table cells can be filled
with arbitrary content as long as they are aligned in a grid
layout. Document layouts and objects are also modular entities, so that, for example, examining the left half of a paragraph gives little information on how wide that paragraph is.
In contrast, missing parts of natural objects and scenes can
be reasonably in-painted based on surrounding context [26].
Another key challenge is that many factors influence the
appearance of a document, such as document type (e.g.
menu, scientific article), layout (e.g. Portrait vs Landscape
or single/multi-column), and written language. While learning a single model that can handle all varieties of documents
is desirable, constructing such a comprehensive dataset appears infeasible. Because labeled data is not available for
every kind of document collection, we are motivated to examine cross-domain DOD. In cross-domain DOD, we leverage labeled data in the source domain and unlabeled data in
the target domain to train a detector for the target domain.
To facilitate advancements in this field, we establish a
benchmark suite on which cross-domain DOD models can
be trained and evaluated. The benchmark suite consists of
different types of document datasets; each serves as one do-

12915

