Multiple Anchor Learning for Visual Object Detection
Wei Ke∗1,2 , Tianliang Zhang∗3 , Zeyi Huang2 , Qixiang Ye†3 , Jianzhuang Liu4 , and Dong Huang2
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University , Xi’an, China
Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh, US
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China
2

wei.ke@xjtu.edu.cn, zhangtianliang17@mails.ucas.ac.cn, zeyih@andrew.cmu.edu
qxye@ucas.ac.cn, jz.liu@siat.ac.cn, donghuang@cmu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based object detectors have achieved unprecedented advances in the past
few years [9, 8, 27, 25, 21, 17, 18]. In both recent two-stage
and single-stage object detectors, the bounding box classiﬁcation and localization modules are highly integrated: they
∗ indicates equal contributions
† Corresponding author
1 The code is available at github.com/KevinKecc/MAL.

Before NMS

Score: 0.951
IoU: 0.53

Score: 0.975
IoU: 0.81
Score: 0.984
IoU: 0.94

After NMS

Classification and localization are two pillars of visual
object detectors. However, in CNN-based detectors, these
two modules are usually optimized under a fixed set of candidate (or anchor) bounding boxes. This configuration significantly limits the possibility to jointly optimize classification and localization. In this paper, we propose a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) approach that selects anchors
and jointly optimizes the two modules of a CNN-based object detector. Our approach, referred to as Multiple Anchor
Learning (MAL), constructs anchor bags and selects the
most representative anchors from each bag. Such an iterative selection process is potentially NP-hard to optimize. To
address this issue, we solve MAL by repetitively depressing
the confidence of selected anchors by perturbing their corresponding features. In an adversarial selection-depression
manner, MAL not only pursues optimal solutions but also
fully leverages multiple anchors/features to learn a detection model. Experiments show that MAL improves the baseline RetinaNet with significant margins on the commonly
used MS-COCO object detection benchmark and achieves
new state-of-the-art detection performance compared with
recent methods. 1

Score: 0.984
IoU: 0.94

Score: 0.937
IoU: 0.70

Score: 0.951
IoU: 0.53

(a) Baseline

(b) MAL

Figure 1: Detection outputs of the baseline detector (RetinaNet) and the Multiple Anchor Learning (MAL), before
and after NMS. The baseline detector may produce bounding boxes with high localization IoU with a low classiﬁcation score (the yellow bbox), or low localization IoU with a
high classiﬁcation score (the red bbox), which lead to suboptimal results after NMS. MAL produces bounding boxes
with high co-occurrence of top classiﬁcation and localization, leading to better detection results after NMS.
are conducted on the shared local features, and are optimized over the sum of the loss functions.
To provide rich candidates of shared local features, a
prevalent approach is the introduce hand-crafted dense anchors [18] on the convolutional feature maps. These anchors create a uniform distribution of bounding box scales
and aspect ratios, enabling objects with various scales and
10206

