Neural Blind Deconvolution Using Deep Priors
Dongwei Ren1 , Kai Zhang2 , Qilong Wang1 , Qinghua Hu1(B) , and Wangmeng Zuo2
1

Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{csdren, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Blind deconvolution is a classical yet challenging lowlevel vision problem with many real-world applications.
Traditional maximum a posterior (MAP) based methods rely heavily on fixed and handcrafted priors that certainly are
insufficient in characterizing clean images and blur kernels,
and usually adopt specially designed alternating minimization to avoid trivial solution. In contrast, existing deep motion deblurring networks learn from massive training images the mapping to clean image or blur kernel, but are
limited in handling various complex and large size blur kernels. To connect MAP and deep models, we in this paper present two generative networks for respectively modeling the deep priors of clean image and blur kernel, and
propose an unconstrained neural optimization solution to
blind deconvolution. In particular, we adopt an asymmetric Autoencoder with skip connections for generating latent clean image, and a fully-connected network (FCN) for
generating blur kernel. Moreover, the SoftMax nonlinearity is applied to the output layer of FCN to meet the nonnegative and equality constraints. The process of neural
optimization can be explained as a kind of “zero-shot” selfsupervised learning of the generative networks, and thus
our proposed method is dubbed SelfDeblur. Experimental results show that our SelfDeblur can achieve notable
quantitative gains as well as more visually plausible deblurring results in comparison to state-of-the-art blind deconvolution methods on benchmark datasets and real-world
blurry images. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/csdwren/SelfDeblur.

1. Introduction
Camera shake during exposure inevitably yields blurry
images and is a long-standing annoying issue in digital pho-

Blurry image

Xu & Jia [48]

Pan-L0 [27]

Sun et al. [41]

Pan-DCP [29]
SelfDeblur
Figure 1: Visual quality comparison on a severe blurry image.

tography. The removal of distortion from a blurry image,
i.e., image deblurring, is a classical ill-posed problem in
low-level vision and has received considerable research attention [2–4, 10, 19, 28, 29, 32, 56]. When the blur kernel is
spatially invariant, it is also known as blind deconvolution,
where the blurry image y can be formulated as,
y = k ⊗ x + n,
(1)
where ⊗ denotes the 2D convolution operator, x is the latent clean image, k is the blur kernel, and n is the additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with noise level σ. It can be
seen that blind deconvolution should estimate both k and x
from a blurry image y, making it remain a very challenging
problem after decades of studies.
Most traditional blind deconvolution methods are based

3341

