SegGCN: Efficient 3D Point Cloud Segmentation with Fuzzy Spherical Kernel
Huan Lei Naveed Akhtar Ajmal Mian
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
The University of Western Australia
huan.lei@research.uwa.edu.au, {naveed.akhtar,ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Fuzzy clustering is known to perform well in real-world
applications. Inspired by this observation, we incorporate
a fuzzy mechanism into discrete convolutional kernels for
3D point clouds as our first major contribution. The proposed fuzzy kernel is defined over a spherical volume that
uses discrete bins. Discrete volumetric division can normally make a kernel vulnerable to boundary effects during
learning as well as point density during inference. However, the proposed kernel remains robust to boundary conditions and point density due to the fuzzy mechanism. Our
second major contribution comes as the proposal of an efficient graph convolutional network, SegGCN for segmenting point clouds. The proposed network exploits ResNet
like blocks in the encoder and 1 × 1 convolutions in the
decoder. SegGCN capitalizes on the separable convolution
operation of the proposed fuzzy kernel for efficiency. We establish the effectiveness of the SegGCN with the proposed
kernel on the challenging S3DIS and ScanNet real-world
datasets. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed
network can segment over one million points per second
with highly competitive performance.

1. Introduction
Learning directly from 3D point clouds is gaining increasing research interest due to its applications is autonomous vehicles and robotics in general. The main challenge here is that 3D point clouds captured by sensors (e.g.
LiDAR) are unorganized, unlike images. Hence, the use of
conventional CNN architectures is not feasible since they
require organized grid-like inputs.
Currently, one of the most promising solution for feature learning from point clouds is to use the spatial-domain
graph convolutional networks (GCNs). GCNs perform spatial convolutions on graph representations constructed from
the point clouds. Most of the existing GCNs in the literature rely on mini-networks to achieve the graph convolution [24, 34, 43, 44], which incurs significant network complexity and computational overhead.
Discrete kernels have been recently proposed in the 3D

s t

s t
i

i

(a) 4 × 2 + 1 hard kernel

(b) 4 × 1 + 1 fuzzy kernel

Figure 1. Hard versus fuzzy spherical kernel (2D slices of 3D
spheres are shown). The color gradient depicts fuzziness. Both
kernels have 4 divisions along the azimuth. There is a split along
the radial dimension for the hard kernel, assigning different coefficients to different bins. Hence, the neighbourhood points ‘s’
and ‘t’ of the target ‘i’ get very different weights. For the fuzzy
kernel, these neighbors use similar parameters to compute the feature of ‘i’ as the product of their fuzzy coefficients and learnable
parameters of their common bin.

Euclidean space [21, 40] that are well-suited for direct
graph convolution without the need for mini-networks. Applications of these kernels to GCN architectures can make
it significantly lightweight and efficient. Among these discrete kernels, the spherical kernel [21] partitions the local
neighborhood in a compact way while preserving the attractive properties of translation-invariance and asymmetry
similar to the standard CNN kernels [12, 16, 20, 35, 37], as
well as permutation-invariance. More importantly, it does
not require any online/offline learning of template points
like the other kernels [33, 40]. Instead the kernel divides a
spherical region systematically along its azimuth, elevation
and radial directions into multiple non-overlapped bins.
However, since point coordinates in the 3D space (R3 )
are real numbers, such a discretization of the space into volumetric bins is potentially vulnerable to boundary effects,
considering that many points will inevitably be very close to
the boundaries. To address this issue and motivated by the
success of fuzzy clustering in machine learning [4], we introduce the fuzzy mechanism into the spherical kernel. We
remark that the standard CNN kernels do not suffer from the
boundary effects because the image pixel coordinates are
defined in Manhattan space. In Fig. 1, we provide a simple
111611

