Barycenters of Natural Images –
Constrained Wasserstein Barycenters for Image Morphing
Dror Simon
Technion
Haifa, Israel

Aviad Aberdam
Technion
Haifa, Israel

dror.simon@cs.technion.ac.il

aaberdam@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Image interpolation, or image morphing, refers to a visual transition between two (or more) input images. For
such a transition to look visually appealing, its desirable
properties are (i) to be smooth; (ii) to apply the minimal
required change in the image; and (iii) to seem “real”,
avoiding unnatural artifacts in each image in the transition. To obtain a smooth and straightforward transition, one
may adopt the well-known Wasserstein Barycenter Problem
(WBP). While this approach guarantees minimal changes
under the Wasserstein metric, the resulting images might
seem unnatural. In this work, we propose a novel approach
for image morphing that possesses all three desired properties. To this end, we define a constrained variant of the WBP
that enforces the intermediate images to satisfy an image
prior. We describe an algorithm that solves this problem
and demonstrate it using the sparse prior and generative
adversarial networks.1

1. Introduction
Image morphing of two input images is a visual effect
in which a sequence of images is obtained, transforming
one image into the other. By denoting the input images as
x1 , x2 ∈ Rn , the objective is to find a sequence of N imn
ages {yi }N
i=1 , yi ∈ R that transform x1 to x2 . Generally,
there are infinite possible ways of transforming one image
into the other. Nevertheless, a pleasant transition should uphold the following properties. First, the difference between
any two consecutive frames should be quite similar, leading
to a smooth steady-paced animation. Second, the overall
variation in the entire transition should be minimal, avoiding unnecessary changes.
The naive solution to consider for image morphing is
a simple linear interpolation between the two images, i.e.
i
yi = NN+1−i
+1 x1 + N +1 x2 . While this method indeed pro1 Source code available at http://tiny.cc/barycenter

(a) Wasserstein barycenters

(b) GAN latent space linear interpolation

(c) Ours – WBP with a GAN as an image prior

Figure 1: Morphing a ’t’ image to a ’y’ using 3 different
methods, where α ∈ {0, 0.1, ..., 1} (colors are used to emphasize the transition). In Figure 1a the intermediate images do not look like English letters. In Figure 1b the rate
of the changes varies throughout the transformation. Figure
1c demonstrates a smooth transition of English characters.
Images taken from the EMNIST dataset [1].
duces a smooth transition, it leads to unnatural intermediate
samples that contain unpleasant double-exposure artifacts.
Therefore, to obtain a pleasant transition, an additional requirement is needed.
An approach that overcomes the double-exposure artifact, is solving the Wasserstein Barycenter Problem (WBP)
[3, 4]. The Wasserstein barycenter is the probability distribution function that minimizes the mean of its Wasserstein
distances [5] to each element in a given set of probability
distributions. Considering two input probability distributions located on the simplex {p1 , p2 } ∈ Σn the WBP is
then defined as
pα = arg min (1 − α)W22 (p1 , q) + αW22 (p2 , q),

(1)

q∈Σn

where α ∈ [0, 1] and W2 (p, q) denotes the ℓ2 Euclidean
Wasserstein distance between p and q (see Section 3). To
obtain a sequence that morphs the distribution p1 to p2
smoothly, a common approach is to solve Equation (1) for
a linear series of α values, e.g. α ∈ N1+1 {1, 2, ..., N }.
17910

