Gated Channel Transformation for Visual Recognition
Zongxin Yang1,2 , Linchao Zhu2 , Yu Wu1,2 , and Yi Yang2∗
1
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
{zongxin.yang,yu.wu-3}@student.uts.edu.au, {linchao.zhu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
In this work, we propose a generally applicable transformation unit for visual recognition with deep convolutional
neural networks. This transformation explicitly models
channel relationships with explainable control variables.
These variables determine the neuron behaviors of competition or cooperation, and they are jointly optimized with
the convolutional weight towards more accurate recognition. In Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE) Networks, the channel relationships are implicitly learned by fully connected
layers, and the SE block is integrated at the block-level.
We instead introduce a channel normalization layer to reduce the number of parameters and computational complexity. This lightweight layer incorporates a simple ℓ2 normalization, enabling our transformation unit applicable to
operator-level without much increase of additional parameters. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our unit with clear margins on many vision tasks, i.e., image
classification on ImageNet, object detection and instance
segmentation on COCO, video classification on Kinetics.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have proven to
be critical and robust in visual recognition tasks, such as
image classification [18], detection [32], and segmentation [32]. Notably, a single convolutional layer operates
only on a neighboring local context of each spatial position
of a feature map, which could possibly lead to local ambiguities [35]. To relieve this problem, VGGNets [31] were
proposed to construct deep CNNs, using a series of convolutional layers with non-linear activation functions and downsampling operators to cover a large extent of context. Moreover, [13] introduced a residual connection to help CNNs
benefit from deeper architectures further.
Apart from improving the depth of CNNs, another
branch of methods focuses on augmenting the convolutional layer with modules that directly operate on context
* This work was done when Zongxin Yang and Yu Wu interned at Baidu
Research. Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

Variance

Variance

H
C

W

GCT

H
C

H

W

Competition

Input feature

or
C

W

Cooperation

Output feature

Figure 1: An illustration of the behavior of GCT. Combining normalization methods and gating mechanisms, GCT
can create the channel relations of both competition (increasing the variance of channel activation) and cooperation
(decreasing the variance of channel activation).
across large neighborhoods. Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks (SE-Nets) [17] leveraged globally embedding information to model channel relationships and modulate feature
maps on the channel-wise level. Moreover, its following
method, GE-Nets [16], used largely neighboring embedding instead. These modules can be conveniently assembled into modern networks, such as ResNets [13] and Inception [33] networks, to improve the representational ability of networks.
However, the SE module uses two fully connected (FC)
layers to process channel-wise embeddings, which leads to
two problems. First, the number of SE modules to be applied in CNNs is limited. In [17], SE module was applied
at the block-level, i.e., a single SE module is utilized per
Res-block [13] or Inception-block [34]. The dimension of
the FC layer is decreased to save the computational cost
further. However, the designed FC layers still hinder the
wide deployment of SE modules across all layers. Second,
due to the complexity of the parameters in FC (or convolutional layer in GE), it is difficult to analyze the interactions among the channels at different layers. The channel
relationships learned by convolution and FC operations are
inherently implicit [17], resulting in agnostic behaviors of

11794

