Learn2Perturb: an End-to-end Feature Perturbation Learning to Improve
Adversarial Robustness
Ahmadreza Jeddi1 , Mohammad Javad Shafiee1
Michelle Karg2 , Christian Scharfenberger2 , Alexander Wong1
1
Waterloo AI Institute, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
2
ADC Automotive Distance Control Systems GmbH, Continental, Germany
1
{a2jeddi, mjshafiee, a28wong}@uwaterloo.ca
2
{michelle.karg, christian.scharfenberger}@continental-corporation.com
Abstract
While deep neural networks have been achieving stateof-the-art performance across a wide variety of applications, their vulnerability to adversarial attacks limits
their widespread deployment for safety-critical applications. Alongside other adversarial defense approaches
being investigated, there has been a very recent interest
in improving adversarial robustness in deep neural networks through the introduction of perturbations during the
training process. However, such methods leverage fixed,
pre-defined perturbations and require significant hyperparameter tuning that makes them very difficult to leverage in a general fashion. In this study, we introduce
Learn2Perturb, an end-to-end feature perturbation learning approach for improving the adversarial robustness of
deep neural networks. More specifically, we introduce
novel perturbation-injection modules that are incorporated
at each layer to perturb the feature space and increase
uncertainty in the network. This feature perturbation is
performed at both the training and the inference stages.
Furthermore, inspired by the Expectation-Maximization, an
alternating back-propagation training algorithm is introduced to train the network and noise parameters consecutively. Experimental results on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
datasets show that the proposed Learn2Perturb method can
result in deep neural networks which are 4-7% more robust
on l∞ FGSM and PDG adversarial attacks and significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art against l2 C&W attack and
a wide range of well-known black-box attacks1 .

1. Introduction
The vulnerability of DNN models to adversarial examples have raised major concerns [1, 7, 9, 25, 31] on their
1 The source code is available at https://github.com/
Ahmadreza-Jeddi/Learn2Perturb.

large-scale adaption in a wide variety of applications.
Adversarial attacks can be divided into two categories of
black-box and white-box attacks based on the level of information available to the attacker. Black-box attacks usually perform queries on the model, and they have partial
information regarding the data and the structure of the targeted model [16, 28]. On the other hand, white-box attacks
have a better understanding of the model that they attack
to; therefore, they are more powerful than black-box attacks [14, 34]. This understanding might vary between different white-box attack algorithms; nonetheless, gradients
of the model’s loss function with respect to the input data is
the most common information utilized to modify input samples and generate adversarial examples. First-order whitebox adversaries are the most common attacking algorithms
which only use the first order of gradients [6, 24, 25, 34] to
craft the adversarial perturbation.
In the realm of defense mechanisms, approaches like distillation [26, 29], feature denoising [35], and adversarial
training [11, 24] have been proposed to resolve the vulnerability of DNNs on adversarial attacks. Adversarial training
is considered as a very intuitive yet very promising solution
to improve the robustness of DNN models against adversarial attacks.
Madry et al. [24] illustrated that adversarial learning
using Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) for generating
on-the-fly adversarial samples during training can lead to
trained models which provide robustness guarantees against
all first-order adversaries. They experimentally showed that
the adversarial examples in a l∞ ball distance around the
original sample with many random starts in the ball generated with PGD, all have approximately the same loss value
when are fed to the network as input. Due to this fact, they
provide the guarantee that as long as the attack algorithm is
a first-order adversary, the local maximas of the loss value
would not be significantly better than those found by PGD.

1241

