Conditional Gaussian Distribution Learning for Open Set Recognition
Xin Sun1 , Zhenning Yang1 , Chi Zhang1 , Keck-Voon Ling2 , Guohao Peng1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
1

{xin001,zhenning002,chi007,peng0086}@e.ntu.edu.sg,

2

ekvling@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art
performance in a wide range of recognition/classification
tasks. However, when applying deep learning to real-world
applications, there are still multiple challenges. A typical
challenge is that unknown samples may be fed into the system during the testing phase and traditional deep neural
networks will wrongly recognize the unknown sample as
one of the known classes. Open set recognition is a potential solution to overcome this problem, where the open set
classifier should have the ability to reject unknown samples
as well as maintain high classification accuracy on known
classes. The variational auto-encoder (VAE) is a popular
model to detect unknowns, but it cannot provide discriminative representations for known classification. In this paper,
we propose a novel method, Conditional Gaussian Distribution Learning (CGDL), for open set recognition. In addition to detecting unknown samples, this method can also
classify known samples by forcing different latent features
to approximate different Gaussian models. Meanwhile, to
avoid information hidden in the input vanishing in the middle layers, we also adopt the probabilistic ladder architecture to extract high-level abstract features. Experiments on
several standard image datasets reveal that the proposed
method significantly outperforms the baseline method and
achieves new state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep learning has achieved stateof-the-art performance in many recognition/classification
tasks [9, 10, 19, 26], but there are still multiple challenges
when applying deep learning to real-world problems. One
typical challenge is that incomplete knowledge exists during the training phase, and unknown samples may be fed
into the system during the testing phase. While traditional
recognition/classification tasks are under a common closed
set assumption: all training and testing data come from the
same label space. When meeting an unknown sample, traditional deep neural networks (DNNs) will wrongly recognize

(a) VAE

(b) Ours: CGDL

Figure 1: Comparison of latent representations on MNIST
dataset of the VAE (a) and the proposed method CGDL
(b). The VAE is widely used in unknown detection, but
it cannot provide discriminative features to undertake classification tasks as all features just follow one distribution.
Comparatively, the proposed method can learn conditional
Gaussian distributions by forcing different latent features to
approximate different Gaussian models, which enables the
proposed method to classify known samples as well as reject unknown samples.

it as one of the known classes.
The concept of open set recognition (OSR) [31] was proposed, assuming the testing samples can come from any
classes, even unknown during the training phase. The open
set classifier should have a dual character: unknown de-

13480

