DEPARA: Deep Attribution Graph for Deep Knowledge Transferability
Jie Song1∗, Yixin Chen1∗, Jingwen Ye1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Chengchao Shen1 , Feng Mao3 ,
and Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology
3
Alibaba Group

Abstract
Exploring the intrinsic interconnections between the
knowledge encoded in PRe-trained Deep Neural Networks
(PR-DNNs) of heterogeneous tasks sheds light on their mutual transferability, and consequently enables knowledge
transfer from one task to another so as to reduce the training
effort of the latter. In this paper, we propose the DEeP Attribution gRAph (DEPARA) to investigate the transferability
of knowledge learned from PR-DNNs. In DEPARA, nodes
correspond to the inputs and are represented by their vectorized attribution maps with regards to the outputs of the
PR-DNN. Edges denote the relatedness between inputs and
are measured by the similarity of their features extracted
from the PR-DNN. The knowledge transferability of two PRDNNs is measured by the similarity of their corresponding
DEPARAs. We apply DEPARA to two important yet understudied problems in transfer learning: pre-trained model
selection and layer selection. Extensive experiments are
conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method in solving both these problems.
Code, data and models reproducing the results in this paper
are available at https://github.com/zju-vipa/
DEPARA.

1. Introduction
Driven by massive labeled data [5] and the developing
advanced deep models [9], the field of artificial intelligence
has made remarkable progress in recent years. However, in
real-world scenarios we often encounter the dilemma where
limited labeled training data are available for addressing our
problems at hand. The common practice in this situation is
transferring the pre-trained models, which are open sourced
by dedicated researchers or industries, to solve our own
problems. Yet, along this road comes up another problem:
faced with countless PR-DNNs of various layers, which
model and which layer of it should be transferred to ben∗ Equal contribution.

efit the target task most? Currently the model selection is
usually done blindly by adopting the ImageNet pre-trained
models [21, 15] and the layer selection is usually conducted
heuristically. However, the ImageNet pre-trained models
will not always produce satisfactory performances for all
the tasks, especially when the task is significantly different
from the one defined by ImageNet [2, 28]. Likewise, the
heuristically selected layer may also perform sub-optimally,
as the optimal layer for being transferred depends on various factors such as task relatedness and the amount of the
target data.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we need to explore and reveal the underlying transferability among deep
knowledge from PR-DNNs of heterogeneous tasks. Recently, Zamir et al. [33] did the pioneering work towards
this direction. They proposed a fully computational approach, termed taskonomy, to measure the task transferability. However, there are three unneglected limitations in
taskonomy tremendously hampering its real-world application. The first is its prohibitively expensive cost in computation. For computing the pairwise relatedness for a given
task dictionary, the computation cost will grow quadratically with the number of the tasks, which will be excessively expensive when the number of tasks becomes large.
The second limitation is that it adopts transfer learning to
model the relatedness between tasks, which still requires a
moderately large amount of labeled data to train the transfer
models. Lastly, taskonomy only consider the transferability
across different models or tasks while ignoring the transferability across different layers, which we argue is also important for a transfer to be successful.
The main obstacle standing in the way of measuring
the transferability learned from different PR-DNNs is the
“black-box” nature of deep models. As the knowledge (e.g.,
features) learned from different PR-DNNs is unexplainable
and actually in different embedding space, it is very tricky
to compute the transferability directly. In this paper, to derive the transferability of knowledge encoded in PR-DNNs,
we propose the DEeP Attribution gRAph (DEPARA) to represent the knowledge learned in PR-DNNs. In DEPARA,

3922

