Learning to Dress 3D People in Generative Clothing
Qianli Ma1 , Jinlong Yang1 , Anurag Ranjan1,2 , Sergi Pujades4 , Gerard Pons-Moll5 ,
Siyu Tang*3 , and Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 University of Tübingen, Germany
3
ETH Zürich, Switzerland 4 Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, France
5
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

{qma, jyang, aranjan, black}@tue.mpg.de
sergi.pujades-rocamora@inria.fr
gpons@mpi-inf.mpg.de
siyu.tang@inf.ethz.ch

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: CAPE model for clothed humans. Given a SMPL body shape and pose (a), CAPE adds clothing by randomly sampling from a learned model
(b, c), can generate different clothing types — shorts in (b, c) vs. long-pants in (d). The generated clothed humans can generalize to diverse body shapes
(e) and body poses (f). Best viewed zoomed-in on screen.

Abstract
Three-dimensional human body models are widely used
in the analysis of human pose and motion. Existing models, however, are learned from minimally-clothed 3D scans
and thus do not generalize to the complexity of dressed people in common images and videos. Additionally, current
models lack the expressive power needed to represent the
complex non-linear geometry of pose-dependent clothing
shapes. To address this, we learn a generative 3D mesh
model of clothed people from 3D scans with varying pose
and clothing. Specifically, we train a conditional MeshVAE-GAN to learn the clothing deformation from the SMPL
body model, making clothing an additional term in SMPL.
Our model is conditioned on both pose and clothing type,
giving the ability to draw samples of clothing to dress different body shapes in a variety of styles and poses. To preserve
wrinkle detail, our Mesh-VAE-GAN extends patchwise discriminators to 3D meshes. Our model, named CAPE, represents global shape and fine local structure, effectively extending the SMPL body model to clothing. To our knowl-

edge, this is the first generative model that directly dresses
3D human body meshes and generalizes to different poses.
The model, code and data are available for research purposes at https://cape.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Existing generative human models [6, 22, 33, 38] successfully capture the statistics of human shape and pose deformation, but still miss an important component: clothing.
This leads to several problems in various applications. For
example, when body models are used to generate synthetic
training data [20, 42, 43, 49], the minimal body geometry results in a significant domain gap between synthetic
and real images of humans. Deep learning methods reconstruct human shape from images, based on minimally
dressed human models [5, 23, 26, 27, 30, 36, 38, 39]. Although the body pose matches the image observation, the
minimal body geometry does not match clothed humans in
∗ Work was done when S. Tang was at MPI-IS and University of Tübingen.

6469

