Neural Voxel Renderer: Learning an Accurate and Controllable Rendering Tool
Konstantinos Rematas
Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research

Scene Voxels

Original

Rotation

Translation

Scaling

Illumination

Object Painting

Floor painting

Texturing

Neural Voxel Renderer

Figure 1. Neural voxel renderer converts a set of colored voxels into a realistic and detailed image. It also allows elaborate modifications
in the geometry or the appearance of the input that are faithfully represented in the synthesized image.

Abstract
We present a neural rendering framework that maps a
voxelized scene into a high quality image. Highly-textured
objects and scene element interactions are realistically rendered by our method, despite having a rough representation as an input. Moreover, our approach allows controllable rendering: geometric and appearance modifications
in the input are accurately propagated to the output. The
user can move, rotate and scale an object, change its appearance and texture or modify the position of the light and
all these edits are represented in the final rendering. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by rendering scenes with varying appearance, from single color per
object to complex, high-frequency textures. We show that
our rerendering network can generate very detailed images
that represent precisely the appearance of the input scene.
Our experiments illustrate that our approach achieves more
accurate image synthesis results compared to alternatives
and can also handle low voxel grid resolutions. Finally,
we show how our neural rendering framework can capture
and faithfully render objects from real images and from a
diverse set of classes.

1. Introduction
What is the typical process for rendering a synthetic
scene? In a 3D graphics software, like Blender [3] and
3D Studio Max [2], the user creates a set of geometric objects in a virtual 3D world, edits their material properties
and adds the light sources. Once the desired configuration

is achieved, the program renders the 3D scene into an image using a rendering algorithm such as Path Tracing [24].
While this setup unfolds the creativity of the user, it increases the learning complexity of the system, requires a
lot of manual input and it is not differentiable.
The emergence of deep generative models introduced
a new image synthesis medium. Generative adversarial
networks [18] are able to produce highly realistic images
of faces [25] or Imagenet [57] categories [9] using only
class labels as input. Moreover, image-to-image translation [23] presented a framework where an input image
featuring only partial information (e.g. only edges), can
be transformed into a naturally looking one. Neural networks are also applied for graphics applications. Feed forward networks can learn a mapping between geometric attributes [44] or voxels [45] to shaded outputs, and rerendering networks can correct the artifacts of traditional rendering approaches [43, 41]. However, these approaches often
produce blurry results and have limited control over the input: appearance changes are mostly restricted to viewpoint
or high-level attributes.
In this paper we present a neural network model that
learns how to render a scene given voxels as input. The
scene can be modified in terms of appearance, location,
orientation and lighting, and all changes are faithfully expressed in the rendered output. With only requiring a rough
specification of the geometry as a voxel grid, our framework produces an accurate image, with plausible light interactions between the scene elements (e.g. casting shad15417

