Compressed Volumetric Heatmaps for Multi-Person 3D Pose Estimation
Matteo Fabbri1*
1

Fabio Lanzi1

Simone Calderara1
2

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

Stefano Alletto2

Rita Cucchiara1

Panasonic R&D Company of America
{name.surname}@us.panasonic.com

{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel approach for bottomup multi-person 3D human pose estimation from monocular RGB images. We propose to use high resolution volumetric heatmaps to model joint locations, devising a simple and effective compression method to drastically reduce
the size of this representation. At the core of the proposed method lies our Volumetric Heatmap Autoencoder, a
fully-convolutional network tasked with the compression of
ground-truth heatmaps into a dense intermediate representation. A second model, the Code Predictor, is then trained
to predict these codes, which can be decompressed at test
time to re-obtain the original representation. Our experimental evaluation shows that our method performs favorably when compared to state of the art on both multi-person
and single-person 3D human pose estimation datasets and,
thanks to our novel compression strategy, can process fullHD images at the constant runtime of 8 fps regardless of
the number of subjects in the scene. Code and models are
publicly available.

1. Introduction
Human Pose Estimation (HPE) has seen significant
progress in recent years, mainly thanks to deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Best performing methods
on 2D HPE are all leveraging heatmaps to predict body joint
locations [3, 49, 43]. Heatmaps have also been extended for
3D HPE, showing promising results in single person contexts [38, 29, 41].
Despite their good performance, these methods do not
easily generalize to multi-person 3D HPE, mainly because
of their high demands for memory and computation. This
drawback also limits the resolution of those maps, that have
to be kept small, leading to quantization errors. Using larger
volumetric heatmaps can address those issues, but at the
cost of extra storage, computation and training complexity.
* Work done while interning at Panasonic R&D Company of America

Figure 1: Examples of 3D poses estimated by our LoCO
approach. Close-ups show that 3D poses are correctly computed even in very complex and articulated scenarios

In this paper, we propose a simple solution to the aforementioned problems that allows us to directly predict highresolution volumetric heatmaps while keeping storage and
computation small. This new solution enables our method
to tackle multi-person 3D HPE using heatmaps in a singleshot bottom-up fashion. Moreover, thanks to our highresolution output, we are able to produce fine-grained absolute 3D predictions even in single person contexts. This
allows our method to achieve state of the art performance
on the most popular single person benchmark [11].
The core of our proposal relies on the creation of an alternative ground-truth representation that preserves the most
informative content of the original ground-truth but reduces
its memory footprint. Indeed, this new compressed representation is used as the target ground-truth during our network training. We named this solution LoCO, Learning on
Compressed Output.
By leveraging on the analogy between compression and
dimensionality reduction on sparse signals [47, 39, 1], we
empirically follow the intuition that 3D body poses can be
represented in an alternative space where data redundancy
17204

