DOPS: Learning to Detect 3D Objects and Predict their 3D Shapes
Mahyar Najibi1
Guangda Lai2
Abhijit Kundu2
Zhichao Lu2
Vivek Rathod2
Thomas Funkhouser2
Caroline Pantofaru2
David Ross2
Larry S. Davis1
Alireza Fathi2
1

University of Maryland

2

Google

Abstract
We propose DOPS, a fast single-stage 3D object detection method for LIDAR data. Previous methods often make
domain-specific design decisions, for example projecting
points into a bird-eye view image in autonomous driving scenarios. In contrast, we propose a general-purpose
method that works on both indoor and outdoor scenes. The
core novelty of our method is a fast, single-pass architecture
that both detects objects in 3D and estimates their shapes.
3D bounding box parameters are estimated in one pass for
every point, aggregated through graph convolutions, and
fed into a branch of the network that predicts latent codes
representing the shape of each detected object. The latent shape space and shape decoder are learned on a synthetic dataset and then used as supervision for the end-toend training of the 3D object detection pipeline. Thus our
model is able to extract shapes without access to groundtruth shape information in the target dataset. During experiments, we find that our proposed method achieves stateof-the-art results by ∼5% on object detection in ScanNet
scenes, and it gets top results by 3.4% in the Waymo Open
Dataset, while reproducing the shapes of detected cars.

1. Introduction
There has been great progress in recent years on 3D object detection for robotics and autonomous driving applications. Previous work on 3D object detection takes one of
these following approaches: (a) projecting LIDAR points to
2D bird’s-eye view and performing 2D detection on the projected image, (b) performing 2D detection on images and
using a frustum to overlap that with the point cloud, or (c)
using a two-stage approach where points are first grouped
together and then an object is predicted for each group.
Each of these approaches come with their own drawbacks. Projecting LIDAR to a bird’s-eye view image sacrifices geometric details which may be critical in cluttered
indoor environments. The frustum based approaches are
strictly dependent on the 2D detector and will miss an ob-

Figure 1: A sample output of our object detection pipeline.

ject entirely if it is not detected in 2D. Finally, the two-stage
methods introduce additional hyperparameters and design
choices which require tuning and adapting for each domain
separately. Furthermore, we believe grouping the points is
a harder task than predicting 3D objects. Solving the former to predict the latter will result in an unnecessary upperbound that limits the accuracy of 3D object detection.
In this paper, we propose a single-stage 3D object detection method that outperforms previous approaches. We
predict 3D object properties for every point while allowing
the information to flow in the 3D adjacency graph of predictions. This way, we do not make hard grouping decisions
while at the same time let the information to propagate from
each point to its neighborhood.
In addition to predicting 3D bounding boxes, our
pipeline can also output the reconstructed 3D object shapes
as depicted in Figure 1. Even though there have been various approaches proposed for predicting 3D bounding boxes,
predicting the 3D shapes and extents of objects remains
largely under-explored. The main challenges in predicting the 3D shapes of objects are sparsity in LIDAR scans,
predominant partial occlusion, and lack of ground-truth 3D
shape annotations. In this work, we address these challenges by proposing a novel weakly-supervised approach.
Our proposed solution for shape prediction consists of
two steps. First, we learn 3D object shape priors using an
external 3D CAD-model dataset by training an encoder that
maps an object shape into an embedding representation and

11913

