Image Demoireing with Learnable Bandpass Filters
Bolun Zheng

Shanxin Yuan

Gregory Slabaugh

Aleš Leonardis

Hangzhou Dianzi University

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

zhengbolun1024@163.com

shanxin.yuan@huawei.com

gregory.slabaugh@huawei.com

ales.leonardis@huawei.com

Abstract
Image demoireing is a multi-faceted image restoration
task involving both texture and color restoration. In this paper, we propose a novel multiscale bandpass convolutional
neural network (MBCNN) to address this problem. As an
end-to-end solution, MBCNN respectively solves the two
sub-problems. For texture restoration, we propose a learnable bandpass filter (LBF) to learn the frequency prior for
moire texture removal. For color restoration, we propose a
two-step tone mapping strategy, which first applies a global
tone mapping to correct for a global color shift, and then
performs local fine tuning of the color per pixel. Through an
ablation study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the different components of MBCNN. Experimental results on two
public datasets show that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin (more than 2dB in terms
of PSNR).

1. Introduction
Digital screens are ubiquitous in modern daily life. We
have TV screens at home, laptop/desktop screens in the office, and large LED screens in public spaces. It is becoming
common practice to take pictures of these screens to quickly
save information. Sometimes taking a photo is the only
practical way to save information. Unfortunately, a common side effect is that moire patterns can appear, degrading
the image quality of the photo. Moire patterns appear when
two repetitive patterns interfere with each other. In the case
of taking pictures of screens, the camera’s color filter array
(CFA) interferes with the screen’s subpixel layout.
Unlike other image restoration problems, including denoising [44], demosaicing [9], color constancy [1], sharpening [28], etc., much less attention has been paid to image
demoireing, which is to recover the underlying clean image
from an image contaminated by moire patterns. Only very
recently, a few attempts [31, 24, 8, 12] have been made to
address image demoireing. However, the problem remains
to a large extent an unsolved problem, due to the large vari-

Figure 1. Moire texture of different scales, frequencies, and colors.

ation of moire patterns in terms of frequencies, shapes, colors, etc.
Recent works [31, 3, 12] tried to remove moire patterns of different frequency bands through multi-scale design. DMCNN [31] proposed to deal with moire patterns
with a multi-scale CNN with multi-resolution branches
and summed up the outputs from different scales to obtain a final output. MDDM [3] improved DMCNN by
introducing an adaptive instance normalization [17] based
on a dynamic feature encoder. DCNN [24] proposed a
coarse-to-fine structure to remove moire patterns from two
scales. The coarse scale result was upsampled and concatenated with the fine scale input for further residual learning. MopNet [12] used a multi-scale feature aggregation
sub-module to address the complex frequency, and two
other sub-modules to address edges and pre-defined moire
types. Our model also adopts a multi-scale design with
three branches for three different scales. Among different
scales, our model adopts a gradual upsampling strategy to
smoothly increase the resolution.
Generally, none of the existing methods tried to model
the moire patterns explicitly. In our model, we explicitly
model the moire patterns by learning the frequency prior
of moire patterns and respectively restore the moire image
from texture and color. Our contributions are as follows.
• We introduce a unified framework namely multi-scale
bandpass CNN (MBCNN) for image demoireing. The
network performs both texture restoration and color
13636

