Perspective Plane Program Induction from a Single Image

1

MIT CSAIL

Yikai Li1,2∗
Jiayuan Mao1∗
Xiuming Zhang1
William T. Freeman1,3
Joshua B. Tenenbaum1
Jiajun Wu4
2
3
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Google Research
Stanford University
RPD (Non-Perspective-Aware)

Perspective-Aware
Regularity Inference

(b) P3I (Ours, Joint Inference)
Regularity-Based
Perspective Correction

(a) Input Image

(d) Failed Regularity Inference
PlaneNet (Learning-Based)

SetCameraPose(pitch = -42, yaw = -15)
for i in range(0, 4):

(c) Perspective Plane Program

for j in range(0, 4):
if i + j >= 3:
draw(

, x = 18.7 * i + 9.7 * j, y = 19.7 * j)

(e) Failed Perspective Correction

Figure 1: Perspective effects and scene structure regularity are ubiquitous in natural images (a). To detect such regularity, one may
directly apply regularity structure detection (RPD) [21] to natural images, but this often fails due to the existence of perspective effects (d).
Attempting to remedy this, one may perform perspective correction as an independent preprocessing step, but perspective correction often
relies on line and/or vanishing point cues, and fails when such cues are missing (e). We observe that these two tasks are interconnected:
image regularity serves as a new perspective correction cue, and regularity detection, in turn, also benefits from perspective correction.
Thus, we propose to jointly solve perspective correction and regularity structure detection (b) by simultaneously seeking the program and
perspective parameters that best describe the image (c). Project page: http://p3i.csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We study the inverse graphics problem of inferring a holistic representation for natural images. Given an input image,
our goal is to induce a neuro-symbolic, program-like representation that jointly models camera poses, object locations,
and global scene structures. Such high-level, holistic scene
representations further facilitate low-level image manipulation tasks such as inpainting. We formulate this problem
as jointly finding the camera pose and scene structure that
best describe the input image. The benefits of such joint
inference are two-fold: scene regularity serves as a new cue
for perspective correction, and in turn, correct perspective
correction leads to a simplified scene structure, similar to
how the correct shape leads to the most regular texture in
shape from texture. Our proposed framework, Perspective
Plane Program Induction (P3I), combines search-based and
gradient-based algorithms to efficiently solve the problem.
P3I outperforms a set of baselines on a collection of Internet images, across tasks including camera pose estimation,
global structure inference, and down-stream image manipulation tasks.

1. Introduction
From a single image in Fig. 1, humans can effortlessly
induce a holistic scene representation that captures both
local textures and global scene structures. We can localize
the objects in the scene (the “strawberry mice”). We also see
the global scene regularities: the mice collectively form a
2D lattice pattern with a triangular boundary. Meanwhile,
we can estimate the camera pose: the image is shot at an
elevation of roughly 45 degrees.
Building holistic scene representations requires scene
understanding from various perspectives and levels of detail: estimating camera poses [26, 9, 3], detecting objects
in the scene [17, 21], and inferring the global structure of
scenes [15, 29]. Humans are able to resolve these inference
tasks simultaneously. The estimation of global camera pose
guides the localization of individual objects and the summarization of the scene structure, such as the lattice pattern in
Fig. 1(a), in a top-down manner. Meanwhile, the localization of individual objects provides bottom-up cues for the
inference of both scene structures and camera poses.
∗ indicates equal contribution.

4434

