Efficient Neural Vision Systems Based on Convolutional Image Acquisition
Pedram Pad, Simon Narduzzi, Clément Kündig,
Engin Türetken, Siavash A. Bigdeli, L. Andrea Dunbar
Centre Suisse d’Électronique et de Microtechnique (CSEM), Neuchâtel, Switzerland
www.csem.ch

Abstract
Despite the substantial progress made in deep learning
in recent years, advanced approaches remain computationally intensive. The trade-off between accuracy and computation time and energy limits their use in real-time applications on low power and other resource-constrained systems. In this paper, we tackle this fundamental challenge
by introducing a hybrid optical-digital implementation of a
convolutional neural network (CNN) based on engineering
of the point spread function (PSF) of an optical imaging
system. This is done by coding an imaging aperture such
that its PSF replicates a large convolution kernel of the first
layer of a pre-trained CNN. As the convolution takes place
in the optical domain, it has zero cost in terms of energy
consumption and has zero latency independent of the kernel size. Experimental results on two datasets demonstrate
that our approach yields more than two orders of magnitude
reduction in the computational cost while achieving nearstate-of-the-art accuracy, or equivalently, better accuracy
at the same computational cost.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have proven to be very powerful for various vision applications such as image classification and object detection,
among many others [30, 13]. However, practical implementations still remain in the order of giga multiplicationaddition operations (MAdds) [32, 36] despite the significant effort that has been put into lowering their computational cost [15]. This poses a major barrier in many embedded intelligence applications with ultra-low power, small
form factor or low-cost requirements which impose strong
constraints on the available computational resources to run
them in real-time. Such constraints are present in an increasing number of application domains such as internet
of things (IoT), smart sensors and quality control systems,

which creates a strong incentive to develop new approaches
that can deliver high accuracy at a low power budget and
with limited computational resources.
Optical systems provide efficient computing capabilities thanks to their inherent parallelism and extremely high
speed while effectively consuming no power [37]. Imaging
an object through an optical system can be modelled as its
convolution with its PSF which is shift invariant under certain assumptions. Engineering this function has recently become a widespread practice in numerous applications such
as monocular depth estimation [14], de-blurring [21], template matching [18], and privacy preservation through random coded apertures in human video sequences [38]. This
approach has also been proposed as a way to efficiently run
neural networks in the optical domain [4]. However, this
work is purely a conceptual design of an optical system to
perform matrix multiplication and no physical implementation of it in practice has been proposed. Recently, new
practical ideas have been proposed to partially or fully outsource the neural network computations from the processing unit to the optical frontend [22, 6, 10]. These techniques
rely on phase masks, and hence, their systems require a coherent monochromatic light source to function. This is a serious drawback as natural scenes emit incoherent and polychromatic light. In such systems this produces a considerable amount of chromatic aberration that dramatically degrades their performance. As a result, these approaches are
not readily applicable to general-purpose computer vision
tasks in practical applications. For the sake of completeness, it should be mentioned that there have been efforts to
perform some basic image processing on the sensor pixel
before photon-to-electron conversion which are out of the
scope of this work [8].
In this work, we propose a generic approach for optical
convolutions based on amplitude-varying masks to address
the challenge of processing incoherent and broadband light
that exists in natural scenes. More specifically, we design
a compact optical system, made up of an amplitude-only
transmittance mask and double lenses. The physical mask
112285

