Interactive Image Segmentation with First Click Attention
Zheng Lin

Zhao Zhang Lin-Zhuo Chen Ming-Ming Cheng Shao-Ping Lu
TKLNDST, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
http://mmcheng.net/fclick/

Abstract
In the task of interactive image segmentation, users initially click one point to segment the main body of the target
object and then provide more points on mislabeled regions
iteratively for a precise segmentation. Existing methods
treat all interaction points indiscriminately, ignoring the
difference between the first click and the remaining ones. In
this paper, we demonstrate the critical role of the first click
about providing the location and main body information of
the target object. A deep framework, named First Click Attention Network (FCA-Net), is proposed to make better use
of the first click. In this network, the interactive segmentation result can be much improved with the following benefits: focus invariance, location guidance, and error-tolerant
ability. We then put forward a click-based loss function and
a structural integrity strategy for better segmentation effect.
The visualized segmentation results and sufficient experiments on five datasets demonstrate the importance of the
first click and the superiority of our FCA-Net.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation aims to segment the instances of interest with minimal user input. It directly benefits many applications, e.g. image editing [8, 11, 29] and
medical imaging analysis [46]. Recent years, with the popularization of data-driven deep learning techniques, the demand for mask-level annotations has increased dramatically
in some fields, such as salient object detection [4, 9, 14, 23],
semantic segmentation [34], instance segmentation [21, 35],
camouflaged object detection [15], and image/video manipulation [17, 28, 48]. Efficient interactive segmentation technologies are in urgent need to alleviate the annotating cost.
Therefore, more and more researchers are carrying out extensive exploration in this field.
Many ways of interaction have been explored, such as
bounding boxes [10, 43], scribbles [2, 6], and points [25,
30, 31, 37, 47]. Drawing a bounding box as the interaction is a widely-used and convenient way. However, in most

Figure 1. The crucial role of the first click in our method. We
utilize the first click as a segmentation anchor to guide other clicks
for a precise segmentation, while the conventional click-based interactive segmentation methods treat all clicks indiscriminately.

cases, users usually need to further correct the segmentation
results which are not satisfactory enough. Therefore, the
more practical approaches are based on interaction points
or scribbles, which can further improve the segmentation result by iteratively marking the mislabeled areas. Compared
with drawing scribbles, the clicking for points places less
burden on users because it does not require a drag process.
The typical interaction workflow of point-based methods,
seen in Fig. 1, is as follows: Users first provide a positive
point on the target object. According to the initial segmentation result, users further provide a positive point on the
foreground or a negative point on the background, and the
segmentation result is iteratively refined until it meets the
users’ requirement.
A mount of traditional and deep learning based methods have been explored in this direction. For most existing works, they use all interaction points indiscriminately
to generate the final predictions. However, we observe that
not all interaction points have the same segmentation effect. We collect the statistics of real human interactions over

13339

