Generalizing Hand Segmentation in Egocentric Videos with
Uncertainty-Guided Model Adaptation
Minjie Cai1,* , Feng Lu2,3,4,* , and Yoichi Sato5
Hunan University, State Key Lab. of VR Technology and Systems, Beihang University,
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine, Beihang University,
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 5 The University of Tokyo
1

2

caiminjie@hnu.edu.cn,

lufeng@buaa.edu.cn,

ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

Model adaptation

Although the performance of hand segmentation in egocentric videos has been significantly improved by using
CNNs, it still remains a challenging issue to generalize the
trained models to new domains, e.g., unseen environments.
In this work, we solve the hand segmentation generalization problem without requiring segmentation labels in the
target domain. To this end, we propose a Bayesian CNNbased model adaptation framework for hand segmentation,
which introduces and considers two key factors: 1) prediction uncertainty when the model is applied in a new domain and 2) common information about hand shapes shared
across domains. Consequently, we propose an iterative selftraining method for hand segmentation in the new domain,
which is guided by the model uncertainty estimated by a
Bayesian CNN. We further use an adversarial component
in our framework to utilize shared information about hand
shapes to constrain the model adaptation process. Experiments on multiple egocentric datasets show that the proposed method significantly improves the generalization performance of hand segmentation.

Selftraining

1. Introduction
The popularity of wearable cameras in recent years is
accompanied by a large amount of first-person view (egocentric) videos recording persons’ daily interactions with
their surrounding environments [27, 5, 46]. Since hands are
among the most common objects in a user’s field of view,
hand segmentation is critically important for various objectives of egocentric video analysis [10, 12, 14]. Hand segmentation in egocentric videos is challenging due to rapidly
changing imaging conditions and the lack of body cues [30].
Although recent researches have shown significant performance improvement by using various CNN-based models
*Corresponding authors.

Input images

Hand labels

Source domain

𝒟𝑠 ~ 𝒟𝑡

Model
uncertainty

Hand shape
prior

Before adaptation

After adaptation

Target domain

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed model adaptation framework
for hand segmentation in a new domain.

[43], how to generalize such models to new domains, e.g.,
egocentric videos taken in unseen environments, remains a
challenging issue.
This work aims to generalize hand segmentation in egocentric videos in an unsupervised manner. The task can be
viewed as unsupervised domain adaptation for hand segmentation and is challenging since the lack of annotated
data in the new domain prohibits conventional approaches
of fine-tuning models. Furthermore, the unique characteristics of egocentric videos (e.g., rapidly changing illumination and background, lack of contextual information from
body part) make it difficult to adapt model parameters to the
new domain. As shown in Figure 1, the images in the target domain have different hand appearance and background
compared with the images in the source domain. Consequently, a hand segmentation model trained in the source
domain would have poor performance by directly applying
to the target domain.
Based on such observation, we identify two major factors that are important for improving generalization performance of hand segmentation. The first factor is model uncertainty which measures how confident a model is with its
prediction. The model uncertainty provides a good mea-

14392

