Action Genome: Actions as Compositions of Spatio-temporal Scene Graphs
Jingwei Ji

Ranjay Krishna Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University

Juan Carlos Niebles

{jingweij, ranjaykrishna, feifeili, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Action recognition has typically treated actions and activities as monolithic events that occur in videos. However, there is evidence from Cognitive Science and Neuroscience that people actively encode activities into consistent hierarchical part structures. However, in Computer Vision, few explorations on representations that encode event
partonomies have been made. Inspired by evidence that the
prototypical unit of an event is an action-object interaction,
we introduce Action Genome, a representation that decomposes actions into spatio-temporal scene graphs. Action
Genome captures changes between objects and their pairwise relationships while an action occurs. It contains 10K
videos with 0.4M objects and 1.7M visual relationships annotated. With Action Genome, we extend an existing action
recognition model by incorporating scene graphs as spatiotemporal feature banks to achieve better performance on
the Charades dataset. Next, by decomposing and learning the temporal changes in visual relationships that result
in an action, we demonstrate the utility of a hierarchical
event decomposition by enabling few-shot action recognition, achieving 42.7% mAP using as few as 10 examples.
Finally, we benchmark existing scene graph models on the
new task of spatio-temporal scene graph prediction.

1. Introduction
Video understanding tasks, such as action recognition,
have, for the most part, treated actions and activities as
monolithic events [8, 38, 66, 87]. Most recent models proposed have resorted to end-to-end predictions that produce
a single label for a long sequence of a video [10, 23, 31,
69, 72] and do not explicitly decompose events into a series
of interactions between objects. On the other hand, imagebased structured representations like scene graphs have cascaded improvements across multiple image tasks, including image captioning [2], image retrieval [36, 64], visual
question answering [35], relationship modeling [41] and
image generation [34]. The scene graph representation, introduced in Visual Genome [43], provides a scaffold that

Action: “Sitting on a sofa”

person

time

person

person
sitting on

in front of
next to

beneath
sofa

sofa

beneath
sofa

Spatio-temporal scene graphs

Figure 1: We present Action Genome: a representation that
decomposes actions into spatio-temporal scene graphs. Inspired by hierarchical bias theory [84] and event segmentation theory [44], Action Genome provides the scaffold to
study the dynamics of actions as relationships between people and objects. This decomposition also allow us to improve action recognition, enable few-shot action detection,
and introduce spatio-temporal scene graph prediction.

allows vision models to tackle complex inference tasks by
breaking scenes into its corresponding objects and their visual relationships. However, decompositions for temporal
events have not been explored much [50], even though representing events with structured representations could lead
to more accurate and grounded action understanding.
Meanwhile, in Cognitive Science and Neuroscience, it
has been postulated that people segment events into consistent groups [5, 6, 55]. Furthermore, people actively encode
those ongoing activities in a hierarchical part structure — a
phenomenon referred to as hierarchical bias hypothesis [84]
or event segmentation theory [44]. Let’s consider the action
of “sitting on a sofa”. The person initially starts off next to
the sofa, moves in front of it, and finally sits atop it. Such
decompositions can enable machines to predict future and
past scene graphs with objects and relationships as an action occurs: we can predict that the person is about to sit on
110236

