Music Gesture for Visual Sound Separation
Chuang Gan1,2 , Deng Huang2 , Hang Zhao1 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 , Antonio Torralba1
1
MIT, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Figure 1: We propose to leverage explicit body dynamics motion cues for visual sound separation in music performances.
We show that our new model can perform well on both heterogeneous and homogeneous music separation tasks.

Abstract
Recent deep learning approaches have achieved impressive performance on visual sound separation tasks. However, these approaches are mostly built on appearance and
optical flow like motion feature representations, which exhibit limited abilities to find the correlations between audio
signals and visual points, especially when separating multiple instruments of the same types, such as multiple violins
in a scene. To address this, we propose “Music Gesture,” a
keypoint-based structured representation to explicitly model
the body and finger movements of musicians when they perform music. We first adopt a context-aware graph network
to integrate visual semantic context with body dynamics,
and then apply an audio-visual fusion model to associate
body movements with the corresponding audio signals. Experimental results on three music performance datasets
show: 1) strong improvements upon benchmark metrics for
hetero-musical separation tasks (i.e. different instruments);

2) new ability for effective homo-musical separation for piano, flute, and trumpet duets, which to our best knowledge
has never been achieved with alternative methods.

1. Introduction
Music performance is a profoundly physical activity.
Body and instrument interact in nuanced gestures to produce unique sounds [21]. When performing, pianists may
strike the keys at a lower register or “tickle the ivory” up
high; Violin players may move vigorously through a progression while another player sways gently with a melodic
base; Flautists press a combination of keys to produce a specific note. As humans, we have the remarkable ability to
distinguish different sounds from one another, and associate
the sound we hear with the corresponding visual perception
from the musician’s bodily gestures.
Inspired by this human ability, we propose “Music Gesture” (shown in Figure 1), a structured keypoint-based
110478

