Warp to the Future: Joint Forecasting of Features and Feature Motion
Josip Šarić1
Marin Oršić1
Tonći Antunović2
Sacha Vražić2
Siniša Šegvić1
1
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
Rimac Automobili
University of Zagreb, Croatia
Sveta Nedelja, Croatia

Abstract
We address anticipation of scene development by forecasting semantic segmentation of future frames. Several
previous works approach this problem by F2F (featureto-feature) forecasting where future features are regressed
from observed features. Different from previous work,
we consider a novel F2M (feature-to-motion) formulation,
which performs the forecast by warping observed features
according to regressed feature flow. This formulation models a causal relationship between the past and the future,
and regularizes inference by reducing dimensionality of the
forecasting target. However, emergence of future scenery
which was not visible in observed frames can not be explained by warping. We propose to address this issue by
complementing F2M forecasting with the classic F2F approach. We realize this idea as a multi-head F2MF model
built atop shared features. Experiments show that the F2M
head prevails in static parts of the scene while the F2F head
kicks-in to fill-in the novel regions. The proposed F2MF
model operates in synergy with correlation features and
outperforms all previous approaches both in short-term and
mid-term forecast on the Cityscapes dataset.

1. Introduction
Anticipated future [1, 29, 30] is invaluable input to many
decision making systems. For example, in autonomous
driving, future pedestrian location could enable potentially
life-saving decisions. Models for forecasting future events
can often be trained on unlabeled videos, which are an
inexhaustible source of training data. Some recent work
[20, 35, 26] addresses forecasting future RGB frames given
the past frames. However, this difficult task is not required
in many interesting applications. For instance, in the autonomous driving context, we are more concerned about future semantics [37] than about future appearance. Hence,
semantic forecasting [18] represents an interesting alternative with clear potential to improve accuracy and speed.
Several approaches have been proposed for future anticipation on the semantic level. Direct semantic forecasting

F2MF

SPATIO-TEMPORAL
CORRESPONDENCE

F2M

F2F
B

CNN
DN

It-9

CNN
DN

It

CNN
UP

Ŝt+Δt

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed F2MF forecasting approach.
Observed RGB images Iτ , τ ∈ {t − 9, t − 6, t − 3, t}, are processed into low-resolution features Xτ by a pre-trained recognition module (CNN DN). The features are enriched with their
spatio-temporal correlation coefficients and forwarded to F2M and
F2F modules which specialize for forecasting previously observed
and novel scenery. Forecasted future features X̂t+∆t are a blend
(B) of F2M and F2F outputs. Dense predictions Ŝt+∆t are finally
recovered through a pre-trained upsampling module (CNN UP).

maps past predictions into future ones [18, 14, 2, 21, 4, 38].
Unfortunately, this approach risks propagating single-frame
prediction errors into the forecast. Additionally, successful
forecasting requires establishing at least implicit correspondence across the past frames, which is not easily achieved
at the level of final predictions. Finally, this approach can
not be realized in a task agnostic manner.
Flow-based forecasting operates on dense image motion
vectors [34]. It receives reconstructed optical flow from the
past few frames and targets the optical flow between the future frame and the last observed frame. Future predictions
can be recovered by warping past predictions with the forecasted flow. However, this approach requires pre-computed
optical flow, which implies separate training and decreases
inference speed. Additionally, purely geometric forecasting
can not take advantage of semantic information and generate ad-hoc content in disoccluded pixels.
Feature-level forecasting receives intermediate features
110648

