Towards Achieving Adversarial Robustness
by Enforcing Feature Consistency Across Bit Planes
Sravanti Addepalli∗, Vivek B.S.∗, Arya Baburaj, Gaurang Sriramanan, R.Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
As humans, we inherently perceive images based on their
predominant features, and ignore noise embedded within
lower bit planes. On the contrary, Deep Neural Networks
are known to confidently misclassify images corrupted with
meticulously crafted perturbations that are nearly imperceptible to the human eye. In this work, we attempt to
address this problem by training networks to form coarse
impressions based on the information in higher bit planes,
and use the lower bit planes only to refine their prediction.
We demonstrate that, by imposing consistency on the representations learned across differently quantized images, the
adversarial robustness of networks improves significantly
when compared to a normally trained model. Present stateof-the-art defenses against adversarial attacks require the
networks to be explicitly trained using adversarial samples
that are computationally expensive to generate. While such
methods that use adversarial training continue to achieve
the best results, this work paves the way towards achieving
robustness without having to explicitly train on adversarial samples. The proposed approach is therefore faster, and
also closer to the natural learning process in humans.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have been used to achieve remarkable performance in many Computer Vision tasks,
such as Classification [14], Segmentation [19] and Object
recognition [24]. While these networks achieve near-human
accuracy on many benchmark datasets, they are far from being as robust as the human visual system. Deep Networks
are known to be vulnerable to carefully crafted imperceptible noise known as Adversarial Perturbations [30], which
could have disastrous implications in critical applications
such as autonomous navigation and surveillance systems.
The compelling need of securing these systems, coupled
with the goal of improving the worst-case robustness of
∗ Equal contribution

Deep Networks has propelled research in the area of Adversarial Robustness over the last few years. While adversarial
training methods [21, 40] have led to significant progress in
improving adversarial robustness, these methods are computationally expensive and also non-intuitive when compared to the learning process in humans.
Humans perceive images based on features of large magnitude and use finer details only to enhance their impressions [29, 28]. This background knowledge of giving higher
importance to information present in higher bit planes naturally equips the human visual system to develop resistance
towards adversarial perturbations, which are of relatively
lower magnitude. On the contrary, these adversarial perturbations can arbitrarily flip the predictions of Deep Networks
to completely unrelated classes, suggesting that such background knowledge of giving hierarchical importance to different bit planes is missing in these networks. In this work,
we propose to equip Deep Networks with such knowledge,
and demonstrate that this improves their robustness to adversarial examples.
We propose a novel Bit Plane Feature Consistency
(BPFC) regularizer, which can significantly improve adversarial robustness of models, without exposure to adversarial
samples during training. The proposed method is considerably faster than methods that require multi-step adversarial
samples for training [21], and is therefore scalable to large
datasets such as ImageNet. Through this work, we hope to
pave the path towards training robust Deep Networks without using adversarial samples, similar to the learning process that exists in human beings.
The organization of this paper is as follows: The subsequent section presents a discussion on the existing literature
related to our work. Section-3 lays out the preliminaries
related to notation and threat model. This is followed by
details and analysis of our proposed approach in Section4. We present the experiments performed and an analysis
on the results in Section-5, followed by our concluding remarks in Section-6.
The code and pretrained models are available at:
https://github.com/val-iisc/BPFC.

1020

