PointRend: Image Segmentation as Rendering
Alexander Kirillov

Yuxin Wu

Kaiming He

Ross Girshick

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Mask R-CNN

+ PointRend

Abstract
We present a new method for efﬁcient high-quality
image segmentation of objects and scenes. By analogizing
classical computer graphics methods for efﬁcient rendering
with over- and undersampling challenges faced in pixel
labeling tasks, we develop a unique perspective of image
segmentation as a rendering problem. From this vantage,
we present the PointRend (Point-based Rendering) neural
network module: a module that performs point-based
segmentation predictions at adaptively selected locations
based on an iterative subdivision algorithm. PointRend
can be ﬂexibly applied to both instance and semantic
segmentation tasks by building on top of existing state-ofthe-art models. While many concrete implementations of
the general idea are possible, we show that a simple design
already achieves excellent results. Qualitatively, PointRend
outputs crisp object boundaries in regions that are oversmoothed by previous methods. Quantitatively, PointRend
yields signiﬁcant gains on COCO and Cityscapes, for both
instance and semantic segmentation. PointRend’s efﬁciency
enables output resolutions that are otherwise impractical
in terms of memory or computation compared to existing
approaches. Code has been made available at https://
github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2/
tree/master/projects/PointRend.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation tasks involve mapping pixels sampled on a regular grid to a label map, or a set of label maps,
on the same grid. For semantic segmentation, the label map
indicates the predicted category at each pixel. In the case of
instance segmentation, a binary foreground vs. background
map is predicted for each detected object. The modern tools
of choice for these tasks are built on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [24, 23].
CNNs for image segmentation typically operate on regular grids: the input image is a regular grid of pixels, their
hidden representations are feature vectors on a regular grid,
and their outputs are label maps on a regular grid. Regular grids are convenient, but not necessarily computation-

28×28

28×28

56×56

224×224

112×112

224×224

Figure 1: Instance segmentation with PointRend. We introduce
the PointRend (Point-based Rendering) module that makes predictions at adaptively sampled points on the image using a new pointbased feature representation (see Fig. 3). PointRend is general and
can be ﬂexibly integrated into existing semantic and instance segmentation systems. When used to replace Mask R-CNN’s default
mask head [17] (top-left), PointRend yields signiﬁcantly more detailed results (top-right). (bottom) During inference, PointRend iterative computes its prediction. Each step applies bilinear upsampling in smooth regions and makes higher resolution predictions
at a small number of adaptively selected points that are likely to
lie on object boundaries (black points). All ﬁgures in the paper are
best viewed digitally with zoom. Image source: [36].

ally ideal for image segmentation. The label maps predicted by these networks should be mostly smooth, i.e.,
neighboring pixels often take the same label, because highfrequency regions are restricted to the sparse boundaries between objects. A regular grid will unnecessarily oversample
the smooth areas while simultaneously undersampling object boundaries. The result is excess computation in smooth
regions and blurry contours (Fig. 1, upper-left). Image segmentation methods often predict labels on a low-resolution
regular grid, e.g., 1/8-th of the input [30] for semantic segmentation, or 28×28 [17] for instance segmentation, as a
compromise between undersampling and oversampling.
Analogous sampling issues have been studied for
decades in computer graphics. For example, a renderer
maps a model (e.g., a 3D mesh) to a rasterized image, i.e. a

9799

