Learning 3D Semantic Scene Graphs from 3D Indoor Reconstructions
Johanna Wald 1, *

Helisa Dhamo 1, *
Nassir Navab 1
Federico Tombari 1,2
1
2
Technische Universität München
Google

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding relates to the perception and interpretation of a scene from 3D data, with a focus on its
semantic and geometric nature, which includes not only recognizing and localizing the objects present in the 3D space
therein, but also their context and relationships. This thorough understanding is of high interest for various applications such as robotic navigation, augmented and virtual reality. Current 3D scene understanding works include perception tasks such as instance segmentation [12, 21, 44, 50],
semantic segmentation [34, 36, 5, 38] as well as 3D object
detection and classification [40, 34, 35, 54]. While these
works mostly focus on object semantics, their context and
relationships are primarily used to improve the per-object
class accuracy.
Scene understanding from images has recently explored
the use of scene graphs to aid understanding object relationships in addition to characterizing objects individu* the authors contributed equally to this paper

sam

ea

sam

s, f

ea

s, b

ron

t
chair

eh

standing on

Scene understanding has been of high interest in computer vision. It encompasses not only identifying objects in
a scene, but also their relationships within the given context.
With this goal, a recent line of works tackles 3D semantic segmentation and scene layout prediction. In our work
we focus on scene graphs, a data structure that organizes
the entities of a scene in a graph, where objects are nodes
and their relationships modeled as edges. We leverage inference on scene graphs as a way to carry out 3D scene
understanding, mapping objects and their relationships. In
particular, we propose a learned method that regresses a
scene graph from the point cloud of a scene. Our novel architecture is based on PointNet and Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCN). In addition, we introduce 3DSSG, a semiautomatically generated dataset, that contains semantically
rich scene graphs of 3D scenes. We show the application
of our method in a domain-agnostic retrieval task, where
graphs serve as an intermediate representation for 3D-3D
and 2D-3D matching.

chair

ind

n

go

ndin

sta

ﬂoor

Figure 1. Overview Given a class-agnostic instance segmentation
of a 3D scene (left) our graph prediction network infers a semantic
scene graph G (right) from a point cloud.

ally. Before that, scene graphs have been used in computer graphics to arrange spatial representations of a graphical scene, where nodes commonly represent scene entities
(object instances), while the edges represent relative transformations between two nodes. This is a flexible representation of a scene which encompasses also complex spatial
relations and operation grouping. Some of these concepts
where successively adapted or extended in computer vision
datasets, such as support structures [32], semantic relationships and attributes [19] and hierarchical mapping of scene
entities [3]. Scene graphs have been shown to be relevant,
for instance, for partial [46] and full matching [17] in image
search, as well as image generation [16].
In 3D, scene graphs have only recently gained more popularity [3]. In this work, we want to focus on the semantic aspects of 3D scene graphs as well as their potential.
Our goal is to obtain dense graphs with labeled instances
(nodes), semantically meaningful relationships (edges) such
as lying on or same as and attributes including color,
shape or affordances (see Fig. 1). These resemble the scene
graph representation of [17], associated with images. We
believe semantic scene graphs are especially important in
3D since a) they are a compact representation, that describes
a (potentially large) 3D scene, b) they are robust towards
small scene changes and noise and c) they close the gap
between different domains, such as text or images. These
properties make them suitable for cross domain tasks such
as 2D-3D Scene Retrieval or VQA.

3961

