Prime Sample Attention in Object Detection
Yuhang Cao1 Kai Chen1 Chen Change Loy2 Dahua Lin1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Nanyang Technological University
{yhcao6,chenkaidev}@gmail.com

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
score: 0.73
IoU: 0.85

It is a common paradigm in object detection frameworks to treat all samples equally and target at maximizing the performance on average. In this work, we revisit this paradigm through a careful study on how different samples contribute to the overall performance measured
in terms of mAP. Our study suggests that the samples in
each mini-batch are neither independent nor equally important, and therefore a better classifier on average does
not necessarily result in higher mAP. Motivated by this
study, we propose the notion of Prime Samples, those that
play a key role in driving the detection performance. We
further develop a simple yet effective sampling and learning strategy called PrIme Sample Attention (PISA) that directs the focus of the training process towards such samples. Our experiments demonstrate that it is often more effective to focus on prime samples than hard samples when
training a detector. Particularly, on the MSCOCO dataset,
PISA outperforms the random sampling baseline and hard
mining schemes, e.g. OHEM and Focal Loss, consistently
by around 2% on both single-stage and two-stage detectors, even with a strong backbone ResNeXt-101. Code is
available at: https://github.com/open-mmlab/
mmdetection.

1. Introduction
Modern object detection frameworks, including both
single-stage [17, 15] and two-stage [8, 7, 20], usually adopt
a region-based approach, where a detector is trained to classify and localize sampled regions. Therefore, the choice of
region samples is critical to the success of an object detector. In practice, most of the samples are located in the background areas. Hence, simply feeding all the samples, or a
random subset thereof, through a network and optimizing
the average loss is obviously not a very effective strategy.
Recent studies [17, 21, 15] showed that focusing on difficult samples is an effective way to boost the performance
of an object detector. A number of methods have been de-

score: 0.49
IoU: 0.58

Figure 1: Left shows both a prime sample (in red color) and
a hard sample (in blue color) for an object against the groundtruth (in white dotted). The prime sample has a high IoU with
the ground-truth and is located more precisely around the object.
Right shows the RoC curves obtained with different sampling
strategies, which suggests that attending to prime samples instead
of hard samples is a more effective strategy to boost the performance of a detector.

veloped to implement this idea in various ways. Representative methods along this line include OHEM [21] and Focal Loss [15]. The former explicitly selects hard samples,
i.e. those with high loss values; while the latter uses a reshaped loss function to reweight the samples, emphasizing
the difficult ones.
Though simple and widely adopted, random sampling or
hard mining are not necessarily the optimal sampling strategy in terms of training an effective detector. Particularly, a
question remains open – what are the most important samples for training an object detector. In this work, we carry
out a study on this issue with an aim to find a more effective
way to sample/weight regions.
Our study reveals two significant aspects that need to be
taken into consideration when designing a sampling strategy: (1) Samples should not be treated as independent nor
as equally important. Region-based object detection is to
select a small subset of bounding boxes out of a large number of candidates to cover all objects in an image. Hence,
the decisions on different samples are competing with each
other, instead of being independent (like in a classification
task). In general, it is more advisable for a detector to yield
high scores on one bounding box around each object while

11583

