Learning Unseen Concepts via Hierarchical Decomposition and Composition
Muli Yang1 , Cheng Deng1∗, Junchi Yan2 , Xianglong Liu3 , and Dacheng Tao4
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Department of CSE, and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of CS, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
mlyang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn,
xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
“young”

Composing and recognizing new concepts from known
sub-concepts has been a fundamental and challenging vision task, mainly due to 1) the diversity of sub-concepts
and 2) the intricate contextuality between sub-concepts and
their corresponding visual features. However, most of the
current methods simply treat the contextuality as rigid semantic relationships and fail to capture fine-grained contextual correlations. We propose to learn unseen concepts
in a hierarchical decomposition-and-composition manner.
Considering the diversity of sub-concepts, our method decomposes each seen image into visual elements according
to its labels, and learns corresponding sub-concepts in their
individual subspaces. To model intricate contextuality between sub-concepts and their visual features, compositions
are generated from these subspaces in three hierarchical
forms, and the composed concepts are learned in a unified
composition space. To further refine the captured contextual
relationships, adaptively semi-positive concepts are defined
and then learned with pseudo supervision exploited from
the generated compositions. We validate the proposed approach on two challenging benchmarks, and demonstrate
its superiority over state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
A character of human intelligence is the composing ability towards individual concepts [1]. Imagining big, it is
common for us to come up with compositional concepts
such as big building and big cat. The term big here is no
more an independent single concept, but is a sub-concept
that can be combined into new concepts with other subconcepts, reflecting the ability of compositional generalization. However, compositional generalization remains an
∗ Corresponding author.

“tiger”
young tiger

Composing
unseen
concepts

young cat?
old tiger?

old cat
“cat”
“old”

Seen concepts

Sub-concepts

Unseen concepts

Figure 1. An example of unseen compositional concept recognition. Training with young tiger and old cat, it is expected to learn
the sub-concepts of young, tiger, old, and cat that can be used to
compose and recognize unseen young cat and old tiger.

insurmountable obstacle to machines. In this paper, we
explore compositional generalization under the zero-shot
learning (ZSL) setting, where a model needs to recognize
unseen images composed from seen sub-concepts.
As shown in Figure 1, one main challenge is the diversity of sub-concepts, e.g., young tiger, where young is a
semantic description while tiger is a physical entity. Subconcepts can be visually and semantically distinct, resulting
in recognition difficulties when facing many possible compositions. Another challenge is the contextuality of subconcepts, e.g., the old in old tiger should be totally different from the old in old car. The semantic meanings of
sub-concepts tend to highly depend on each other. Contextuality is also associated with specific images [22], e.g.,
how old appears in two different old tiger images depends
on the images themselves, which requires capturing fine-

10248

