Smooth Shells: Multi-Scale Shape Registration with Functional Maps
Marvin Eisenberger

Zorah Lähner
Technical University of Munich

Daniel Cremers

Abstract
We propose a novel 3D shape correspondence method
based on the iterative alignment of so-called smooth shells.
Smooth shells define a series of coarse-to-fine shape approximations designed to work well with multiscale algorithms. The main idea is to first align rough approximations of the geometry and then add more and more details to refine the correspondence. We fuse classical shape
registration with Functional Maps by embedding the input shapes into an intrinsic-extrinsic product space. Moreover, we disambiguate intrinsic symmetries by applying a
surrogate based Markov chain Monte Carlo initialization.
Our method naturally handles various types of noise that
commonly occur in real scans, like non-isometry or incompatible meshing. Finally, we demonstrate state-of-theart quantitative results on several datasets and show that
our pipeline produces smoother, more realistic results than
other automatic matching methods in real world applications.

1. Introduction
The wide selection of affordable 3D scanning devices in
recent years has led to an enormous growth in the amount
of 3D shapes and scans available. In contrast to synthetic
shapes, real-world scans are often noisy and many properties cannot be guaranteed. For example, topological noise
might appear in self-touching areas or the meshing density
varies depending on scanning conditions. These distortions
were proven to be difficult for state-of-the-art shape correspondence methods [24, 34]. Many traditional methods
focus only on the (nearly) isometric case, clearly defined
extensions of this like partiality [28], or learn matching for
different classes of shapes under certain perturbations [18].
Unfortunately, this requires training data and knowledge
about what deformations and noise are to be expected.
In general one can distinguish between intrinsic and extrinsic correspondence methods. Intrinsic methods only use
surface properties that are independent of the embedding,
for example the Laplace-Beltrami operator. On the other
hand, extrinsic methods directly use the 3D embedding of

Figure 1: Given a source (left) and target (right) shape we
propose a hierarchical smoothing procedure to iteratively
align the inputs. First, we align very coarse approximations
and then refine until we get correspondences for the original
inputs. Among other things, we can handle challenging interclass pairs like matching a dog to a horse and our method
is fully automatic, i.e. we do not use any additional information like hand-selected landmarks.
the shapes. While intrinsic methods are invariant to large
scale, near-isometric deformations, extrinsic alignment is
often more suitable for pairs with topological changes or
other non-isometric deformations. A natural step would be
to combine both to get the best of both worlds but only few
previous approaches venture in this direction [11, 13].
Contribution In this paper we combine intrinsic and extrinsic information by embedding the input shapes into the
product space of intrinsic (spectral) and extrinsic (xyz) coordinates. Then, we iteratively align smooth approximations of the two input shapes in this product space which we
call smooth shells. Moreover, we propose a Markov chain
Monte Carlo initialization strategy to find a meaningful local minimum and disambiguate self-similarities. Overall,
we obtain a robust matching pipeline that works out of the
box for a broad range of inputs beyond the isometry assumption and in the presence of various types of noise.

2. Related Work
2.1. Shape Correspondence and Registration
Shape correspondence is an extensively studied topic
with various applications in Computer Vision and Graphics.
Surveys of state-of-the-art methods [55, 47, 52, 46] give a
broader overview of existing approaches but here we focus
on work that is immediately related to ours.
The Functional Maps [38] paper proposes an elegant

12265

