Sequential mastery of multiple visual tasks:
Networks naturally learn to learn and forget to forget
Guy Davidson
NYU Center for Data Science
guy.davidson@nyu.edu

Abstract
We explore the behavior of a standard convolutional
neural net in a continual-learning setting that introduces
visual classification tasks sequentially and requires the
net to master new tasks while preserving mastery of
previously learned tasks. This setting corresponds to
that which human learners face as they acquire domain
expertise serially, for example, as an individual studies
a textbook. Through simulations involving sequences of
ten related visual tasks, we find reason for optimism that
nets will scale well as they advance from having a single
skill to becoming multi-skill domain experts. We observe
two key phenomena. First, forward facilitation—the accelerated learning of task n+1 having learned n previous
tasks—grows with n. Second, backward interference—
the forgetting of the n previous tasks when learning task
n + 1—diminishes with n. Amplifying forward facilitation is the goal of research on metalearning, and
attenuating backward interference is the goal of research
on catastrophic forgetting. We find that both of these
goals are attained simply through broader exposure to a
domain.
In a standard supervised setting, neural networks
are trained to perform a single task, such as classification, defined in terms of a discriminative distribution
p(y | x, D) for labels y conditioned on input x and data
set D. Although such models are useful in engineering
applications, they do not reflect the breadth required for
general intelligence, which includes the ability to select
among many tasks. Multitask learning [1] is concerned
with training models to perform any one of n tasks, typically via a multi-headed neural network, where head
i represents the distribution p(yi | x, D1 , . . . , Dn ). Related tasks serve as regularizers on one another [2, 3].
Continual or lifelong learning [4, 5] addresses a naturalistic variant in which tasks are tackled sequentially
and mastery of previously learned tasks must be main-

Michael C. Mozer
Google Research
University of Colorado at Boulder
mcmozer@google.com

tained while each new task is mastered. Lifelong learning requires consideration of two issues: catastrophic
forgetting [6] and metalearning [7, 8, 4], Catastrophic
forgetting is characterized by a dramatic drop in task
1 performance following training on task 2, i.e., the
accuracy of the model p(y1 | x, D1 → D2 ) is significantly
lower than accuracy of the model p(y1 | x, D1 ), where
the arrow denotes training sequence. Metalearning aims
to facilitate mastery on task n from having previously
learned tasks 1, 2, . . . , n − 1. Success in metalearning is
measured by a reduction in training-trials-to-criterion
or an increase in model accuracy given finite training
for the n’th task, p(yn |x, D1 → . . . → Dn ), relative to
the first task, p(y1 | x, D1 ).
Researchers have proposed a variety of creative
approaches—specialized mechanisms, learning procedures, and architectures—either for mitigating forgetting or for enhancing transfer. We summarize these
approaches in the next (“Related research”) section. Although the literatures on catastrophic forgetting and
metalearning have been considered separately for the
most part, we note that they have a complementary relationship. Whereas catastrophic-forgetting reflects backward interference of a new task on previously learned
tasks, metalearning reflects forward facilitation of previously learned tasks on a new task [9]. Whereas catastrophic forgetting research has focused on the first task
learned, metalearning research has focused on the last
task learned. We thus view these two topics as endpoints of a continuum.
To unify the topics, we examine the continuum from
the first task to the n’th. We train models on a sequence of related visual tasks and investigate the consequences of introducing each new task i. We count
the total number of training trials—presentations of
training examples—required to learn the i’th task while
maintaining performance on tasks 1 . . . i − 1 through
continued practice. Simultaneously, we measure how
performance drops on tasks 1 . . . i − 1 after introducing
19282

