Agriculture-Vision: A Large Aerial Image Database for
Agricultural Pattern Analysis
Mang Tik Chiu1∗ , Xingqian Xu1∗ , Yunchao Wei1 , Zilong Huang1 ,
Alexander Schwing1 , Robert Brunner1 , Hrant Khachatrian2 , Hovnatan Karapetyan2 ,
Ivan Dozier2 , Greg Rose2 , David Wilson2 , Adrian Tudor2 , Naira Hovakimyan2,1 ,
Thomas S. Huang1 , Honghui Shi3,1
1

UIUC, 2 Intelinair, 3 University of Oregon

Abstract
The success of deep learning in visual recognition tasks
has driven advancements in multiple fields of research. Particularly, increasing attention has been drawn towards its
application in agriculture. Nevertheless, while visual pattern recognition on farmlands carries enormous economic
values, little progress has been made to merge computer
vision and crop sciences due to the lack of suitable agricultural image datasets. Meanwhile, problems in agriculture
also pose new challenges in computer vision. For example,
semantic segmentation of aerial farmland images requires
inference over extremely large-size images with extreme annotation sparsity. These challenges are not present in most
of the common object datasets, and we show that they are
more challenging than many other aerial image datasets.
To encourage research in computer vision for agriculture,
we present Agriculture-Vision: a large-scale aerial farmland image dataset for semantic segmentation of agricultural patterns. We collected 94, 986 high-quality aerial images from 3, 432 farmlands across the US, where each image consists of RGB and Near-infrared (NIR) channels with
resolution as high as 10 cm per pixel. We annotate nine
types of field anomaly patterns that are most important to
farmers. As a pilot study of aerial agricultural semantic
segmentation, we perform comprehensive experiments using popular semantic segmentation models; we also propose an effective model designed for aerial agricultural
pattern recognition. Our experiments demonstrate several
challenges Agriculture-Vision poses to both the computer
vision and agriculture communities. Future versions of this
dataset will include even more aerial images, anomaly patterns and image channels.
∗ indicates joint first author. For more information on our database and
other related efforts in Agriculture-Vision, please visit our CVPR 2020
workshop and challenge website https://www.agriculture-vision.com.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of ImageNet [14], a large-scale
image classification dataset, research in computer vision
and pattern recognition using deep neural nets has seen
unprecedented development [31, 23, 49, 48, 25]. Deep
neural networks based algorithms have proven to be effective across multiple domains such as medicine and astronomy [34, 2, 59], across multiple datasets [20, 51, 17], across
different computer vision tasks [58, 28, 56, 9, 11, 10, 47, 43,
59] and across different numerical precision and hardware
architectures [57, 61]. However, progress of visual pattern
recognition in agriculture, one of the fundamental aspects
of the human race, has been relatively slow [29]. This is
partially due to the lack of relevant datasets that encourage
the study of agricultural imagery and visual patterns, which
poses many distinctive characteristics.
A major direction of visual recognition in agriculture is
aerial image semantic segmentation. Solving this problem
is important because it has tremendous economic potential.
Specifically, efficient algorithms for detecting field conditions enable timely actions to prevent major losses or to increase potential yield throughout the growing season. However, this is much more challenging compared to typical semantic segmentation tasks on other aerial image datasets.
For example, to segment weed patterns in aerial farmland
images, the algorithm must be able to identify sparse weed
clusters of vastly different shapes and coverages. In addition, some of these aerial images have sizes exceeding
20000 × 30000 pixels, these images pose a huge problem
for end-to-end segmentation in terms of computation power
and memory consumption. Agricultural data are also inherently multi-modal, where information such as field temperature and near-infrared signal are essential for determining field conditions. These properties deviate from those
of conventional semantic segmentation tasks, thus reducing
their applicability to this area of research.
12828

