Graph-Structured Referring Expression Reasoning in The Wild
Sibei Yang1
1

Guanbin Li2†

Yizhou Yu1,3†

2
3
The University of Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen University
Deepwise AI Lab
sbyang9@hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract

expression: the girl in blue
smock across the table

the girl
in

Grounding referring expressions aims to locate in an image an object referred to by a natural language expression.
The linguistic structure of a referring expression provides
a layout of reasoning over the visual contents, and it is often crucial to align and jointly understand the image and
the referring expression. In this paper, we propose a scene
graph guided modular network (SGMN), which performs
reasoning over a semantic graph and a scene graph with
neural modules under the guidance of the linguistic structure of the expression. In particular, we model the image
as a structured semantic graph, and parse the expression
into a language scene graph. The language scene graph
not only decodes the linguistic structure of the expression,
but also has a consistent representation with the image semantic graph. In addition to exploring structured solutions
to grounding referring expressions, we also propose RefReasoning, a large-scale real-world dataset for structured
referring expression reasoning. We automatically generate
referring expressions over the scene graphs of images using diverse expression templates and functional programs.
This dataset is equipped with real-world visual contents as
well as semantically rich expressions with different reasoning layouts. Experimental results show that our SGMN1
not only significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art
algorithms on the new Ref-Reasoning dataset, but also
surpasses state-of-the-art structured methods on commonly
used benchmark datasets. It can also provide interpretable
visual evidences of reasoning.

1. Introduction
Grounding referring expressions aims to locate in an image an object referred to by a natural language expression,
† Corresponding authors. This work was partially supported by the
Hong Kong PhD Fellowship, the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant No.2020B1515020048, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.61976250 and
No.U1811463.
1 Data and code are available at https://github.com/sibeiyang/sgmn

Scene Graph
Representations

5
across

blue smock the table

the girl
3
in
1
blue smock

Structured
Reasoning

4
across
2
the table
Reasoning Process
Neural Modules

Figure 1. Scene Graph guided Modular Network (SGMN) for
grounding referring expressions. SGMN first parses the expression into a language scene graph and models the image as a semantic graph, then it performs structured reasoning with neural
modules under the guidance of the language scene graph.

and the object is called the referent. It is a challenging problem because it requires understanding as well as performing
reasoning over semantics-rich referring expressions and diverse visual contents including objects, attributes and relations.
Analyzing the linguistic structure of referring expressions is the key to grounding referring expressions because
they naturally provide the layout of reasoning over the visual contents. For the example shown in Figure 1, the
composition of the referring expression “the girl in blue
smock across the table” (i.e., triplets (“the girl”, “in”, “blue
smock”) and (“the girl”, “across” , “the table”)) reveals
a tree-structured layout of finding the blue smock, locating the table and identifying the girl who is “in” the blue
smock and meanwhile is “across” the table. However,
nearly all the existing works either neglect linguistic structures and learn holistic matching scores between monolithic
representations of referring expressions and visual contents
[18, 29, 23] or neglect syntactic information and explore
limited linguistic structures via self-attention mechanisms
[26, 8, 24].
Consequently, in this paper, we propose a Scene Graph
guided modular network (SGMN) to fully analyze the linguistic structure of referring expressions and enable reasoning over visual contents using neural modules under the
guidance of the parsed linguistic structure. Specifically,
SGMN first models the input image with a structured rep19952

