Recursive Least-Squares Estimator-Aided Online Learning for Visual Tracking
Jin Gao1,2
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS

Weiming Hu1,2
2

Yan Lu3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

{jin.gao, wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Online learning is crucial to robust visual object tracking as it can provide high discrimination power in the presence of background distractors. However, there are two
contradictory factors affecting its successful deployment on
the real visual tracking platform: the discrimination issue
due to the challenges in vanilla gradient descent, which
does not guarantee good convergence; the robustness issue due to over-fitting resulting from excessive update with
limited memory size (the oldest samples are discarded).
Despite many dedicated techniques proposed to somehow treat those issues, in this paper we take a new way to
strike a compromise between them based on the recursive
least-squares estimation (LSE) algorithm. After connecting each fully-connected layer with LSE separately via normal equations, we further propose an improved mini-batch
stochastic gradient descent algorithm for fully-connected
network learning with memory retention in a recursive fashion. This characteristic can spontaneously reduce the risk
of over-fitting resulting from catastrophic forgetting in excessive online learning. Meanwhile, it can effectively improve convergence though the cost function is computed
over all the training samples that the algorithm has ever
seen. We realize this recursive LSE-aided online learning
technique in the state-of-the-art RT-MDNet tracker, and the
consistent improvements on four challenging benchmarks
prove its efficiency without additional offline training and
too much tedious work on parameter adjusting.

1. Introduction
Online learning basically aims at updating the predictor
for future data at each step when a continuous stream of data
becomes available in a sequential order. Sometimes it needs
dynamically adapting to new patterns in the stream when
the data itself changes from time to time. Since it is just
right for visual tracking, a number of interesting pioneering
works (e.g. [31, 1, 12, 41, 6, 26, 17, 7, 4, 5]) that use variants
of fundamental online learning methods for visual tracking
are published during the past several years.

3

Microsoft Research

yanlu@microsoft.com

In contrast to the typical supervised learning tasks training static models with fixed volumes of data, e.g. image
classification [34] and object detection [14], the online updated dynamic tracking models need to have flexibility in
tackling the different distortions of the object appearance
over time (e.g. intrinsic object scale and pose variations, and
variations caused by extrinsic illumination change, camera
motion, occlusion and background clutter). This ability is
known as robustness. Nevertheless, a good tracker also need
to strike a compromise between its robustness ability and
instance-level discrimination power in case of background
distractors, because these two requirements are sometimes
contradictory and hard to be fulfilled at the same time [36].
By design, some earlier online trackers [6, 26, 17] face
challenges in meeting those two demands. On one hand,
since the standard gradient descent or its momentum-based
stochastic twin [30] is applied in online updating the target
classification model, it may cause a discrimination issue due
to the convergence challenges stemming from the learning
rate selection, model initialization, non-convex cost function, and so on [32]. Another key factor is the limited
optimization iteration number allowed in the update stage
for the sake of tracking speed. On the other hand, despite the benefits of improved instance-level discrimination
power with frequent update, the excessive update with limited memory size (the oldest samples are discarded) may result in over-fitting to recent training samples, deteriorating
the robustness.
Recently, there have been many dedicated techniques
proposed to treat the above two issues more or less. For
instance, the Conjugate Gradient method [33] is widely applied to efficiently solve normal equations derived from discriminative correlation filter (DCF) learning function [7, 4],
or more generally the positive definite quadratic function [5], leading to improved convergence while online
learning. Some other works [28, 21] concentrate on the offline training stage and exploit some one-shot/meta learning
methods in this stage to provide a robust model initialization
to account for the convergence challenges in online tracking stage. To relieve suffering from over-fitting to recent
training samples, or even corrupted samples, some track-

7386

