Cascaded Human-Object Interaction Recognition
Tianfei Zhou1∗, Wenguan Wang2∗ , Siyuan Qi3 , Haibin Ling4 , Jianbing Shen1†
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

2

ETH Zurich, Switzerland

3

Google, USA

4

Stony Brook University, USA

{ztfei.debug,wenguanwang.ai}@gmail.com
https://github.com/tfzhou/C-HOI

Abstract
Rapid progress has been witnessed for human-object interaction (HOI) recognition, but most existing models are
confined to single-stage reasoning pipelines. Considering
the intrinsic complexity of the task, we introduce a cascade architecture for a multi-stage, coarse-to-fine HOI understanding. At each stage, an instance localization network progressively refines HOI proposals and feeds them
into an interaction recognition network. Each of the two
networks is also connected to its predecessor at the previous stage, enabling cross-stage information propagation.
The interaction recognition network has two crucial parts:
a relation ranking module for high-quality HOI proposal
selection and a triple-stream classifier for relation prediction. With our carefully-designed human-centric relation
features, these two modules work collaboratively towards
effective interaction understanding. Further beyond relation detection on a bounding-box level, we make our framework flexible to perform fine-grained pixel-wise relation
segmentation; this provides a new glimpse into better relation modeling. Our approach reached the 1st place in the
ICCV2019 Person in Context Challenge, on both relation
detection and segmentation tasks. It also shows promising
results on V-COCO.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) recognition aims to
identify meaningful hhuman, verb, objecti triplets from images, such as hhuman, eat, carroti in Fig. 1. It plays a crucial role in many vision tasks, e.g., visual question answering [34, 28, 54], human-centric understanding [46, 47, 56],
image generation [23], and activity recognition [40, 48, 8,
35, 33], to name a few representative ones.
Though great advances have been made recently, the
task is still far from being solved. One of the main challenges comes from its intrinsic complexity: a successful
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

R1

R2

R3

L1

L2

L3

Figure 1: Illustration of our cascade HOI recognition network,
which is able to handle both object-level relation detection and
pixel-wise relation segmentation tasks. Given an input image, our
model performs coarse-to-fine inference over both instance localization (L1 ∼ L3 ) and interaction recognition (R1 ∼ R3 ).

HOI recognition model must accurately 1) localize and recognize each interacted entity (human, object), and 2) predict the interaction classes (verb). Both subtasks are difficult, leading to HOI recognition itself a highly complex
problem. With a broader view of other computer vision and
machine learning related fields, coarse-to-fine and cascade
inference have been shown to deal well with complex problems [25, 10, 11, 45]. The central idea is to leverage sequences of increasingly fine approximations to control the
complexity of learning and inference. This motivates us to
propose a cascade HOI recognition model, which builds up
multiple stages of neural network inference in an annealingstyle. For the two subtasks of instance localization and interaction recognition, this model arranges them in a successive manner within each single stage, and carries out cascade, cross-stage inference for each. Above designs result
in a multi-task, coarse-to-fine inference framework, which
enables asymptotically improved HOI representation learning. This also distinctively differentiates our method from
previous efforts, which rely on single-stage architectures.
As shown in Fig.1, our model consists of an instance localization network and an interaction recognition network,
both working in a cascade manner. Through the instance
localization network, the model step-by-step increases the
selectiveness of the instance proposals. With such progressively refined HOI candidates, as well as the useful relation representation from the preceding stage, better ac-

4263

