Self-Supervised Deep Visual Odometry with Online Adaptation
Shunkai Li
Xin Wang
Yingdian Cao
Fei Xue
Zike Yan
Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
{lishunkai, xinwang cis, yingdianc, feixue, zike.yan}@pku.edu.cn

zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised VO methods have shown great success
in jointly estimating camera pose and depth from videos.
However, like most data-driven methods, existing VO networks suffer from a notable decrease in performance when
confronted with scenes different from the training data,
which makes them unsuitable for practical applications. In
this paper, we propose an online meta-learning algorithm to
enable VO networks to continuously adapt to new environments in a self-supervised manner. The proposed method
utilizes convolutional long short-term memory (convLSTM)
to aggregate rich spatial-temporal information in the past.
The network is able to memorize and learn from its past
experience for better estimation and fast adaptation to the
current frame. When running VO in the open world, in order
to deal with the changing environment, we propose an online feature alignment method by aligning feature distributions at different time. Our VO network is able to seamlessly
adapt to different environments. Extensive experiments on
unseen outdoor scenes, virtual to real world and outdoor to
indoor environments demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art self-supervised VO baselines considerably.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and visual odometry (VO) play a vital role for many real-world
applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics and
mixed reality. Classic SLAM/VO [13, 14, 17, 29] methods
perform well in regular scenes but fail in challenging conditions (e.g. dynamic objects, occlusions, textureless regions) due to their reliance on low-level features. Since deep
learning is able to extract high-level features and infer in
an end-to-end fashion, learning-based VO [22, 40, 41, 44]
methods have been proposed in recent years to alleviate the
limitation of classic hand-engineered algorithms.
However, learning-based VO suffers from a notable decrease in accuracy when confronted with scenes different

Figure 1. We demonstrate the domain shift problem for selfsupervised VO. Previous methods fail to generalize when the
test data are different from the training data. In contrast, our
method performs well when tested on changing environments,
which demonstrates the advantage of fast online adaptation

from the training dataset [8, 37] (Fig. 1). When applied a
pre-trained VO network to the open world, the inability to
generalize itself to new scenes presents a serious problem
for its practical applications. This requires the VO network
to continuously adapt to the new environment.
In contrast to fine-tuning a pre-trained network with
ground truth data on the target domain [37], it is unlikely to collect enough data in advance when running VO in
the open world. This requires the network to adapt itself in
real-time to changing environments. In this online learning
setting, there is no explicit distinction between training and
testing phases — we learn as we perform. This is much
different from conventional learning methods where a pretrained model is fixed during inference.
During online adaptation, the VO network can only learn
from the current data instead of the entire training data with
batch training and multiple epoches [11]. The learning objective is to find an optimal model that is well adapted to
4321
6339

