Evade Deep Image Retrieval by Stashing Private Images in the Hash Space
Yanru Xiao
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA

Cong Wang∗
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA

Xing Gao
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN

yxiao002@odu.edu

c1wang@odu.edu

xgao1@memphis.edu

Abstract
With the rapid growth of visual content, deep learning
to hash is gaining popularity in the image retrieval community recently. Although it greatly facilitates search efficiency, privacy is also at risks when images on the web
are retrieved at a large scale and exploited as a rich mine
of personal information. An adversary can extract private
images by querying similar images from the targeted category for any usable model. Existing methods based on
image processing preserve privacy at a sacrifice of perceptual quality. In this paper, we propose a new mechanism
based on adversarial examples to “stash” private images
in the deep hash space while maintaining perceptual similarity. We first find that a simple approach of hamming
distance maximization is not robust against brute-force adversaries. Then we develop a new loss function by maximizing the hamming distance to not only the original category, but also the centers from all the classes, partitioned
into clusters of various sizes. The extensive experiment
shows that the proposed defense can harden the attacker’s
efforts by 2-7 orders of magnitude, without significant increase of computational overhead and perceptual degradation. We also demonstrate 30-60% transferability in hash
space with a black-box setting. The code is available at:
https://github.com/sugarruy/hashstash

1. Introduction
A picture is worth a thousand words. The rapid growth of
large image and video collections has made content-based
image retrieval possible at a large scale, e.g. Google [1],
Pinterest [2], Bing [3] and TinEye [4]. Powered by deep
learning, they have been increasingly built into social networks [5], e-commerce [6,7](e.g., Pailitao from Taobao [8])
and fashion design [9] to capture semantic similarities from
visual queries for finer results. Social media, e-commerce
websites and even the user’s query are utilized as a rich mine
of images to train these systems. For instance, 100M photos and videos are uploaded everyday on Instagram [10];
more than 1G products are listed on Ebay [11]. Google
also claims a 7-day storage of queried and uploaded images
∗ Corresponding author: Cong Wang, c1wang@odu.edu

and utilizes them for further analysis [12].
Although legislation (e.g. GDPR [13]) imposes restrictions on the usage of personal data, for the exploding volume of visual content, there still remains a vague definition of ownership as well as a weak legal boundary between
what can be learned and what cannot, from an image. Further, users’ awareness of their privacy remains quite subjective towards latent, but sensitive information in their images. The resourceful visual content can be exploited in bewildering ways to learn private information such as family
member, location, income, personal interest or even sexual
orientation for accurate contextual advertising [14–17] or
spear phishing [18]. For example, Facebook has patented
a new application of predicting household demographics
based on image data [19]. Though these applications expedite search efficiency and product offering, they also compromise user privacy and make privacy trampling easier at
a large scale. These issues stretch beyond social media and
search engines: any platform with content-based image retrieval shares the same risk of privacy leakage.
Unfortunately, there is less incentive for the platforms to
implement privacy guarantees, as long as they are faltering
in the grey area of legislation. It is always up to the users to
protect their own privacy. Previous approaches utilize image processing such as blurring, darkening and occlusion
to evade face recognition [20] or disassociate friend tagging [21], at a sacrifice of degraded visual quality. Another
thread of work is to establish a privacy-respecting protocol
by an identifiable tag [22, 23], so anyone wearing the privacy tag is excluded from the image. The success of these
systems relies on building sophisticated, trusted protocols
between the users and the platform, that demands commitments from both sides.
These techniques may be fragile in the eyes of deep
learning, which can still extract useful information from
the local descriptors. The state-of-the-art image retrieval
adopts deep hashing for efficient similarity search [24–28].
It quantizes images in the database into low-dimensional binary codes during training, computes the hamming distance
from the queried image, and returns relevant images (inadvertently) gathered by the database. A well-trained model
would return images with high similarity (usually from the
same category). With some categorical information, e.g.,
gathering a few images from the targeted category, an ad-

9651

