Exploring Bottom-up and Top-down Cues with Attentive Learning for Webly
Supervised Object Detection
Zhonghua Wu1

Qingyi Tao1,2

1

Nanyang Technological University
{zhonghua001,qtao002}@e.ntu.edu.sg

2

Guosheng Lin∗ 1

NVIDIA AI Technology Center 3 Monash University
{gslin}@ntu.edu.sg
{jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

Abstract
Fully supervised object detection has achieved great success in recent years. However, abundant bounding boxes
annotations are needed for training a detector for novel
classes. To reduce the human labeling effort, we propose a
novel webly supervised object detection (WebSOD) method
for novel classes which only requires the web images without further annotations. Our proposed method combines
bottom-up and top-down cues for novel class detection.
Within our approach, we introduce a bottom-up mechanism
based on the well-trained fully supervised object detector
(i.e. Faster RCNN) as an object region estimator for web
images by recognizing the common objectiveness shared by
base and novel classes. With the estimated regions on the
web images, we then utilize the top-down attention cues
as the guidance for region classification. Furthermore, we
propose a residual feature refinement (RFR) block to tackle
the domain mismatch between web domain and the target
domain. We demonstrate our proposed method on PASCAL
VOC dataset with three different novel/base splits. Without any target-domain novel-class images and annotations,
our proposed webly supervised object detection model is
able to achieve promising performance for novel classes.
Moreover, we also conduct transfer learning experiments
on large scale ILSVRC 2013 detection dataset and achieve
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With the development of convolution neural networks
(CNNs) [30, 29], object detection has achieved a great improvement in accuracy and speed. However, state-of-the-art
object detection methods [16, 8, 21] require a huge amount
of bounding box annotations. If we want to detect novel
categories which are not in the pre-defined training set, we
need to make a lot of labeling effort to annotate images of
the new categories. To ease the labeling process, weakly
∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

Jianfei Cai1,3

Target Domain

Novel Class
Detector

Base Class
Detector

dog

horse

car

Web Domain

Wildebeest
Webly Supervised
Object Detection
(WebSOD)

Novel Web Images with
Image-level ‘‘label’’

Figure 1. The proposed webly supervised object detection method
(WebSOD) aims to learn the detector for novel classes with the
base-class detector and the web images of the novel classes without further human annotations.

supervised object detection (WSOD) methods that can be
trained with only image-level labels have been proposed.
However, labeling only image-level labels is still costly and
time-consuming especially in the large-scale multi-instance
object detection scenarios. This motivates us to develop an
object detection method that does not need any further human labeling while scaling out to new classes.
With similar motivation, a web-based weakly supervised
object detection method [23] has been proposed to alleviate
the need for human labor. The method requires the training images obtained from the Internet. One naive method
for novel class object detection is to simply use web images
and their image level “labels” (essentially the pre-defined
labels used as search phrases to obtain the images), train a
web object detector by using the weakly supervised detection method and directly apply the detector to the target image domain. However, such naive web-based weakly supervised method produces poor performance. This is mainly
due to the poor bounding box localization by the weakly
supervised model. Moreover, the domain discrepancies between web domain and target domain also aggravate this
problem.
In order to solve the problem of inadequate localization
on the web images by the weakly supervised object detection method, we build a novel webly supervised object
detection (WebSOD) method for the novel class detection.

12936

