Recursive Social Behavior Graph for Trajectory Prediction
Jianhua Sun1 , Qinhong Jiang2 , Cewu Lu1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
SenseTime Group Limited, China
{gothic, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn jiangqinhong@sensetime.com

Abstract
Social interaction is an important topic in human trajectory prediction to generate plausible paths. In this paper, we present a novel insight of group-based social interaction model to explore relationships among pedestrians. We recursively extract social representations supervised by group-based annotations and formulate them into
a social behavior graph, called Recursive Social Behavior
Graph. Our recursive mechanism explores the representation power largely. Graph Convolutional Neural Network
then is used to propagate social interaction information in
such a graph. With the guidance of Recursive Social Behavior Graph, we surpass state-of-the-art method on ETH
and UCY dataset for 11.1% in ADE and 10.8% in FDE in
average, and successfully predict complex social behaviors.

1. Introduction
Forecasting the future trajectory of humans in a dynamic
scene is an important task in computer vision[28, 16, 31,
32, 33, 42, 44, 20]. It is also one of the key points in autonomous driving and human-robot interaction, which explores dense information for the following decision making
process. A main challenge of trajectory forecasting lies in
how to incorporate human-human interaction into consideration to generate plausible paths [2, 13, 3, 6, 27, 26].
Early works have made a lot effort to solve the problem. Social Force [14, 28] abstracts out different types of
force, such as acceleration and deceleration forces to handle it. In recent years, great progress has been made in
deep learning, which inspired researches start working on
Deep Neural Networks based methods. Some researches
[2, 13, 34, 18, 17] modified Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) architecture with particular pooling or attention
mechanism to integrate information between RNNs.
† Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China.

Figure 1. Examples of distant unrelated human-human interactions. Images are in chronological order from left to right. The
top three images show that two people (with red circle) walk to
the same destination from opposite directions. The bottom three
images show people with left red circle are following the person
in right red circle with little impact from people in blue circle.

Although great improvements have been made, there still
exists challenges. Force based models[28] utilize the distance to compute force, and will fail when the interaction is
complicated. And for pooling methods [2, 13], the distance
between two person at a single timestep is used as a criterion to calculate the strength of the relationship. Attention
method in [18, 34] also meet the same problem that Euclidean distance are used in their method to guide the attention mechanism. In general, these learning methods try to
use distance to formulate the strength of influences between
different agents, but ignore that distance-based scheme cannot handle numerous social behaviours in human society.
Fig. 1 shows two typical examples. The top three images
show that two people walk to the same destination from
opposite directions. The bottom three images show three
pedestrians walk along the street while another three person
stand still and talk with each other. Even though pedestrians in red circles in these two scenes are in a great distance,
they show a strong relationship.
In this paper, we aim to explore relationships among
pedestrians beyond the use of distance. To this end, we
present a new insight of group-based social interaction
modeling. A group can be defined as a set of people with

660

