STINet: Spatio-Temporal-Interactive Network for Pedestrian Detection and
Trajectory Prediction
Zhishuai Zhang1,2∗

Jiyang Gao1 Junhua Mao1 Yukai Liu1 Dragomir Anguelov1
1
2
Waymo LLC
Johns Hopkins University

zzhang99@jhu.edu,

Congcong Li1

{jiyanggao, junhuamao, liuyukai, dragomir, congcongli}@waymo.com

Abstract
Detecting pedestrians and predicting future trajectories
for them are critical tasks for numerous applications, such
as autonomous driving. Previous methods either treat the
detection and prediction as separate tasks or simply add
a trajectory regression head on top of a detector. In this
work, we present a novel end-to-end two-stage network:
Spatio-Temporal-Interactive Network (STINet). In addition
to 3D geometry modeling of pedestrians, we model the
temporal information for each of the pedestrians. To do
so, our method predicts both current and past locations
in the first stage, so that each pedestrian can be linked
across frames and the comprehensive spatio-temporal
information can be captured in the second stage. Also, we
model the interaction among objects with an interaction
graph, to gather the information among the neighboring
objects. Comprehensive experiments on the Lyft Dataset
and the recently released large-scale Waymo Open Dataset
for both object detection and future trajectory prediction
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. For the
Waymo Open Dataset, we achieve a bird-eyes-view (BEV)
detection AP of 80.73 and trajectory prediction average
displacement error (ADE) of 33.67cm for pedestrians,
which establish the state-of-the-art for both tasks.

1. Introduction
To drive safely and smoothly, self-driving cars (SDC)
not only need to detect where the objects are currently (i.e.
object detection), but also need to predict where they will
go in the future (i.e. trajectory prediction). Among the objects, pedestrian is an important and difficult type. The difficulty comes from the complicated properties of pedestrian
appearance and behavior, e.g. deformable shape and interpersonal relations [7]. In this paper, we tackle the problem
of joint pedestrian detection and trajectory prediction from
a sequence of point clouds, as illustrated in Figure 1.
∗ Work done during an internship at Waymo.

Figure 1. Given a sequence of current and past point clouds, our
task is to detect pedestrians in the current frame, and predict the
future trajectory of them. In this figure, white points are input
point cloud sequence (stacked for visualization), yellow boxes are
detected objects, and the cyan lines are predicted future trajectory.

Traditionally, this problem is tackled by dividing the
perception pipeline into multiple modules: object detection [6, 13, 15, 16, 20, 21, 29, 30], tracking [18] and trajectory prediction [2, 7, 9]; latter modules take the outputs
from the former modules. Although such strategy makes
each sub-module easy to design and implement, it sacrifices
the potential advantage of joint optimization. Latter modules can lose critical information bottle-necked by the interfaces between sub-modules, e.g. a pedestrian’s future trajectory depends on many useful geometry features from the
raw sensor data, which may be abstracted away in the detection/tracking stage. To this end, researchers recently have
proposed several end-to-end neural networks to detect objects and predict trajectories simultaneously. FaF [17] and
IntentNet [4] are two of the representative methods, which
are designed based on single stage detectors (SSD) [16]; in
addition to original anchor classification and regression of
SSD, they also regress a future trajectory for each anchor.
We observed that there are two major issues that are critical for joint detection and trajectory prediction, but are
not addressed by previous end-to-end methods: 1) Temporal modeling on object level: existence and future trajectory of an object are embedded in both current and past

11346

