Point-GNN: Graph Neural Network for 3D Object Detection in a Point Cloud
Weijing Shi and Ragunathan (Raj) Rajkumar
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{weijings, rajkumar}@cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a graph neural network to
detect objects from a LiDAR point cloud. Towards this
end, we encode the point cloud efficiently in a fixed radius near-neighbors graph. We design a graph neural network, named Point-GNN, to predict the category and shape
of the object that each vertex in the graph belongs to. In
Point-GNN, we propose an auto-registration mechanism to
reduce translation variance, and also design a box merging and scoring operation to combine detections from multiple vertices accurately. Our experiments on the KITTI
benchmark show the proposed approach achieves leading
accuracy using the point cloud alone and can even surpass fusion-based algorithms. Our results demonstrate the
potential of using the graph neural network as a new approach for 3D object detection. The code is available at
https://github.com/WeijingShi/Point-GNN.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D environment is vital in robotic perception. A point cloud that composes a set of points in space
is a widely-used format for 3D sensors such as LiDAR. Detecting objects accurately from a point cloud is crucial in
applications such as autonomous driving.
Convolutional neural networks that detect objects from
images rely on the convolution operation. While the convolution operation is efficient, it requires a regular grid as
input. Unlike an image, a point cloud is typically sparse and
not spaced evenly on a regular grid. Placing a point cloud on
a regular grid generates an uneven number of points in the
grid cells. Applying the same convolution operation on such
a grid leads to potential information loss in the crowded
cells or wasted computation in the empty cells.
Recent breakthroughs in using neural networks [3] [22]
allow an unordered set of points as input. Studies take
advantage of this type of neural network to extract point
cloud features without mapping the point cloud to a grid.
However, they typically need to sample and group points

Figure 1. Three point cloud representations and their common processing methods.

iteratively to create a point set representation. The repeated grouping and sampling on a large point cloud can
be computationally costly. Recent 3D detection approaches
[10][21][16] often take a hybrid approach to use a grid and
a set representation in different stages. Although they show
some promising results, such hybrid strategies may suffer
the shortcomings of both representations.
In this work, we propose to use a graph as a compact
representation of a point cloud and design a graph neural
network called Point-GNN to detect objects. We encode
the point cloud natively in a graph by using the points as the
graph vertices. The edges of the graph connect neighborhood points that lie within a fixed radius, which allows feature information to flow between neighbors. Such a graph
representation adapts to the structure of a point cloud directly without the need to make it regular. A graph neural
network reuses the graph edges in every layer, and avoids
grouping and sampling the points repeatedly.
Studies [15] [9] [2] [17] have looked into using graph
neural network for the classification and the semantic segmentation of a point cloud. However, little research has
looked into using a graph neural network for the 3D object
detection in a point cloud. Our work demonstrates the feasibility of using a GNN for highly accurate object detection
in a point cloud.
Our proposed graph neural network Point-GNN takes
the point graph as its input. It outputs the category and
bounding boxes of the objects to which each vertex belongs. Point-GNN is a one-stage detection method that detects multiple objects in a single shot. To reduce the translation variance in a graph neural network, we introduce an

1711

