Noise Robust Generative Adversarial Networks
Takuhiro Kaneko1
1

Tatsuya Harada1,2

The University of Tokyo

2

RIKEN

(a) Training images

(b) GAN (baseline)

(c) NR-GAN (ours)

(d) Training images

(e) GAN (baseline)

(f) NR-GAN (ours)

(Gaussian noise)

(Trained with (a))

(Trained with (a))

(Brown Gaussian noise)

(Trained with (d))

(Trained with (d))

Figure 1. Examples of noise robust image generation. Recent GANs have shown promising results for reproducing training images.
However, even when training images are noisy (a)(d), they attempt to reproduce the training images faithfully, as shown in (b)(e). To
remedy this, we propose noise robust GANs (NR-GANs), which can learn to generate clean images (c)(f), even when training images are
noisy (a)(d). Our NR-GANs are unique in that they solve this problem without full knowledge of the noise (e.g., the noise distribution
type, noise amount, or signal-noise relationship). Indeed, in (c) and (f), although the same models (in particular, SI-NR-GAN-II, which is
a variant of NR-GANs) are used for different noises (a)(d), they succeed in learning clean image generators adaptively through training.

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are neural networks that learn data distributions through adversarial
training. In intensive studies, recent GANs have shown
promising results for reproducing training images. However, in spite of noise, they reproduce images with fidelity.
As an alternative, we propose a novel family of GANs called
noise robust GANs (NR-GANs), which can learn a clean
image generator even when training images are noisy. In
particular, NR-GANs can solve this problem without having
complete noise information (e.g., the noise distribution type,
noise amount, or signal-noise relationship). To achieve this,
we introduce a noise generator and train it along with a
clean image generator. However, without any constraints,
there is no incentive to generate an image and noise separately. Therefore, we propose distribution and transformation constraints that encourage the noise generator to
capture only the noise-specific components. In particular,
considering such constraints under different assumptions,
we devise two variants of NR-GANs for signal-independent
noise and three variants of NR-GANs for signal-dependent
noise. On three benchmark datasets, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of NR-GANs in noise robust image generation. Furthermore, we show the applicability of NR-GANs
in image denoising. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/takuhirok/NR-GAN/.

1. Introduction
In computer vision and machine learning, generative
models have been actively studied and used to generate or
reproduce an image that is indistinguishable from a real image. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [21], which
learn data distributions through adversarial training, have
garnered special attention owing to their ability to produce
high-quality images. In particular, with recent advancements [2, 54, 46, 23, 40, 57, 58, 36, 76], the latest GANs
(e.g., BigGAN [6] and StyleGAN [37]) have succeeded in
generating images indistinguishable for humans.
However, a persistent issue is that recent high-capacity
GANs could replicate images faithfully even though the
training images were noisy. Indeed, as shown in Figure 1(b)(e), when standard GAN is trained with noisy images, it attempts to recreate them. Although the long-term
development of devices has steadily improved image quality, image degradation is unavoidable in real situations.
For example, electronic noise is inevitable in digital imaging [60, 1] and estimator variance often appears as noise
in graphic rendering [83, 72]. Therefore, susceptibility to
noise is practically undesirable for GANs.
The question becomes: “How can we learn a clean image generator even when only noisy images are available
for training?” We call this problem noise robust image
generation. One solution is to apply a denoiser as pre-

8404

