Exploiting Joint Robustness to Adversarial Perturbations
Ali Dabouei, Sobhan Soleymani, Fariborz Taherkhani, Jeremy Dawson, Nasser M. Nasrabadi
West Virginia University
{ad0046, ssoleyma, ft0009}@mix.wvu.edu, {nasser.nasrabadi, jeremy.dawson}@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Recently, ensemble models have demonstrated empirical
capabilities to alleviate the adversarial vulnerability. In this
paper, we exploit first-order interactions within ensembles to
formalize a reliable and practical defense. We introduce a
scenario of interactions that certifiably improves the robustness according to the size of the ensemble, the diversity of
the gradient directions, and the balance of the member’s contribution to the robustness. We present a joint gradient phase
and magnitude regularization (GPMR) as a vigorous approach to impose the desired scenario of interactions among
members of the ensemble. Through extensive experiments,
including gradient-based and gradient-free evaluations on
several datasets and network architectures, we validate the
practical effectiveness of the proposed approach compared
to the previous methods. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
GPMR is orthogonal to other defense strategies developed
for single classifiers and their combination can further improve the robustness of ensembles.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have played an astonishing role in the evolution of modern machine learning by
achieving state-of-the-art performance on many challenging
tasks [22, 41]. Despite their excellent performance, scalability, and generalization to unseen test data, they suffer from
a major drawback: slight manipulations of the input samples can form adversarial examples causing drastic changes
in the predictions of the model [38, 19, 31]. Perturbations
required for this aim are often quasi-imperceptible to the
human eye and can transfer across classifiers [7, 14], data
samples [30, 32], and input transformations [3, 5]. This issue
has raised increasing concerns regarding the deployment of
DNNs in security-sensitive applications such as autonomous
vehicles, biometric identification, and e-commerce.
Initially, a large body of work has been devoted to addressing the problem by heuristic approaches built upon the
empirically observed characteristics of perturbations, such
as their noisy structure. However, the uncertainty of assump-

tions and lack of formal explanations for the phenomenon
has caused the majority of the defense attempts to be compromised by more advanced attacks [7, 12, 11]. Recent studies
have made significant progress in explaining the cause of
adversarial vulnerability by demonstrating that adversarial
examples are natural consequences of non-zero test error of
classifiers in the data space [18, 10]. Particularly, due to the
huge cardinality of the input space, a small number of misclassified points around a natural input sample forms a very
close decision boundary which can be reached by adversarial
perturbations. This suggests that adversarial robustness can
only be certified for bounded perturbations [20, 10] since
achieving zero error rate is nontrivial in general [18].
The majority of studies on adversarial robustness have
concerned single classifiers [38, 19, 26, 18, 10, 20]. However, exploring interactions of multiple classifiers has highlighted the potential of ensembles for mitigating the adversarial vulnerability [33, 21, 1, 4]. In this paper, we exploit
first-order interactions in ensembles to provably improve the
robustness of the ensemble prediction. We illustrate that the
diversity of the gradient directions and the balance of the
gradient magnitudes are two key factors for enhancing the
robustness of deep ensembles. Specifically, we make the
following contributions:
• We introduce a practically feasible case of interactions
within ensembles which is certified to improve the robustness of the model against white-box attacks.
• We propose a training framework termed joint gradient
phase and magnitude regularization (GPMR) to impose
the desired interactions among the members of the ensemble.
• We validate the effectiveness of the proposed method
using extensive experiments including gradient-based
and gradient-free evaluations.
• We demonstrate that the proposed training framework is
orthogonal to previous approaches that aim to provide
adversarial robustness by bounding the magnitude of
the gradients, such as adversarial training.

1122

