Correction Filter for Single Image Super-Resolution:
Robustifying Off-the-Shelf Deep Super-Resolvers
Shady Abu Hussein
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Tom Tirer
Tel Aviv University, Israel

Raja Giryes
Tel Aviv University, Israel

shadya@mail.tau.ac.il

tomtirer@mail.tau.ac.il

raja@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
The single image super-resolution task is one of the most
examined inverse problems in the past decade. In the recent
years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown superior
performance over alternative methods when the acquisition
process uses a fixed known downscaling kernel—typically a
bicubic kernel. However, several recent works have shown
that in practical scenarios, where the test data mismatch
the training data (e.g. when the downscaling kernel is not
the bicubic kernel or is not available at training), the leading DNN methods suffer from a huge performance drop.
Inspired by the literature on generalized sampling, in this
work we propose a method for improving the performance
of DNNs that have been trained with a fixed kernel on observations acquired by other kernels. For a known kernel,
we design a closed-form correction filter that modifies the
low-resolution image to match one which is obtained by another kernel (e.g. bicubic), and thus improves the results of
existing pre-trained DNNs. For an unknown kernel, we extend this idea and propose an algorithm for blind estimation
of the required correction filter. We show that our approach
outperforms other super-resolution methods, which are designed for general downscaling kernels.

1. Introduction
The task of Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is one
of the most examined inverse problems in the past decade
[11, 13, 37, 8]. In this problem, the goal is to reconstruct a
latent high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution
(LR) version obtained by an acquisition process that includes low-pass filtering and sub-sampling. In the recent
years, along with the developments in deep learning, many
SISR methods that are based on Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) have been proposed [7, 17, 21, 20, 41, 35, 15].
Typically, the performance of SISR approaches is evaluated on test sets with a fixed known acquisition process,
e.g. a bicubic downscaling kernel. This evaluation method-

ology allows to prepare large training data, which are based
on ground truth HR images and their LR counterparts synthetically obtained through the known observation model.
DNNs, which have been exhaustively trained on such training data, clearly outperform other alternative algorithms,
e.g. methods that are based on hand-crafted prior models
such as sparsity or non-local similarity [8, 13, 37].
Recently, several works have shown that in practical scenarios where the test data mismatch the training data, the
leading DNN methods suffer from a huge performance drop
[38, 27, 31]. Such scenarios include a downscaling kernel
which is not the bicubic kernel and is not available at the
training phase. A primary example is an unknown kernel
that needs to be estimated from the LR image at test time.
Several recent SISR approaches have proposed different strategies for enjoying the advantages of deep learning
while mitigating the restriction of DNNs to the fixed kernel assumption made in the training phase. These strategies include: modifying the training phase such that it covers a predefined set of downscaling kernels [39, 14]; using
DNNs to capture only a natural-image prior which is decoupled from the SISR task [38, 5]; or completely avoid
any offline training and instead train a CNN super-resolver
from scratch at test time [32, 27].
Contribution. In this work we take a different strategy, inspired by the generalized sampling literature [9, 33],
for handling LR images obtained by arbitrary downscaling
kernels. Instead of completely ignoring the state-of-the-art
DNNs that have been trained for the bicubic model, as done
by other prior works, we propose a method that transforms
the LR image to match one which is obtained by the bicubic
kernel. The modified LR can then be inserted into existing
leading super-resolvers, such as DBPN [15], RCAN [41],
and proSR [35], thus, improving their performance significantly on kernels they have not been trained on. The proposed transformation is performed using a correction filter,
which has a closed-form expression when the true (nonbicubic) kernel is given.
In the ”blind” setting, where the kernel is unknown, we
extend our approach and propose an algorithm that esti11428

