Universal Source-Free Domain Adaptation
Jogendra Nath Kundu∗
Naveen Venkat∗
Rahul M V
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, CDS, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
There is a strong incentive to develop versatile learning techniques that can transfer the knowledge of classseparability from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain in the presence of a domain-shift. Existing domain adaptation (DA) approaches are not equipped for practical DA scenarios as a result of their reliance on the knowledge of source-target label-set relationship (e.g. Closed-set,
Open-set or Partial DA). Furthermore, almost all prior unsupervised DA works require coexistence of source and target
samples even during deployment, making them unsuitable
for real-time adaptation. Devoid of such impractical assumptions, we propose a novel two-stage learning process. 1) In
the Procurement stage, we aim to equip the model for future
source-free deployment, assuming no prior knowledge of the
upcoming category-gap and domain-shift. To achieve this,
we enhance the model’s ability to reject out-of-source distribution samples by leveraging the available source data, in a
novel generative classifier framework. 2) In the Deployment
stage, the goal is to design a unified adaptation algorithm
capable of operating across a wide range of category-gaps,
with no access to the previously seen source samples. To
this end, in contrast to the usage of complex adversarial
training regimes, we define a simple yet effective sourcefree adaptation objective by utilizing a novel instance-level
weighting mechanism, named as Source Similarity Metric
(SSM). A thorough evaluation shows the practical usability of the proposed learning framework with superior DA
performance even over state-of-the-art source-dependent
approaches. Our implementation is available on github1 .

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have proven to be highly successful
over a wide variety of tasks [20, 35]. However, a majority
of these are heavily dependent on access to a huge amount
of labeled data to achieve a reliable level of generalization.
A recognition model trained on a certain distribution of labeled samples (source domain) often fails to generalize [7]
∗ Equal contribution.
1 Code: https://github.com/val-iisc/usfda

Source domain

Closed-set DA
Open-set DA
Partial DA

Target domain

Unlabelled
Target dataset

Labeled
Source dataset
Universal DA

Knowledge of
Class-separability

Universal DA
“Source-Free”

Knowledge of
Category-gap

Figure 1: We address unsupervised domain adaptation in absence
of source data (source-free), without any category-gap knowledge
(universal). A lock indicates “no access” during adaptation.

when deployed in a new environment (target domain) with
discrepancy in the data distribution [43]. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (DA) algorithms seek to minimize this
discrepancy without accessing the target label information,
either by learning a domain invariant feature representation [26, 21, 9, 45], or by learning independent transformations [28, 32] to a common latent representation through
adversarial distribution matching [46, 22].
Most of the existing approaches [38, 56, 46] assume a
shared label set between the source and the target domains
(i.e. Cs = Ct ), i.e. Closed-Set DA (Fig. 2A). Though this assumption helps gain various insights for DA algorithms [2],
it rarely holds true in real-world scenarios. Recently, researchers have independently explored two broad adaptation
settings by partly relaxing the Closed-Set assumption (see
Fig. 2A). In the first kind, Partial DA [54, 5, 6], the target
label space is considered as a subset of the source label space
(i.e. Ct ⊂ Cs ). This setting is more suited for large-scale
universal source datasets, which will almost always subsume
the label set of a wide range of target domains. However,
the availability of such a large-scale source is highly questionable for a wide range of input domains. In the second
kind, Open-set DA [39, 1, 10], the target label space is considered as a superset of the source label space (i.e. Ct ⊃ Cs ).
The major challenge in this setting is to detect target samples from the unobserved categories (similar to detection
of out-of-distribution samples [31]) in a fully-unsupervised
scenario. Apart from the above two extremes, certain works
define a partly mixed scenario by allowing a “private” label

4544

