Coherent Reconstruction of Multiple Humans from a Single Image
Wen Jiang2* , Nikos Kolotouros1* , Georgios Pavlakos1 , Xiaowei Zhou2† , Kostas Daniilidis1
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 Zhejiang University

Input image

Baseline

Ours

Figure 1: Coherent reconstruction of pose and shape for multiple people. Typical top-down regression baselines (center) suffer from
predicting people in overlapping positions, or in inconsistent depth orderings. Our approach (right) is trained to respect all these constraints
and recover a coherent reconstruction of all the people in the scene in a feedforward manner.

Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of multi-person
3D pose estimation from a single image. A typical regression approach in the top-down setting of this problem
would first detect all humans and then reconstruct each
one of them independently. However, this type of prediction suffers from incoherent results, e.g., interpenetration
and inconsistent depth ordering between the people in the
scene. Our goal is to train a single network that learns to
avoid these problems and generate a coherent 3D reconstruction of all the humans in the scene. To this end, a
key design choice is the incorporation of the SMPL parametric body model in our top-down framework, which enables the use of two novel losses. First, a distance fieldbased collision loss penalizes interpenetration among the
reconstructed people. Second, a depth ordering-aware loss
reasons about occlusions and promotes a depth ordering
of people that leads to a rendering which is consistent
with the annotated instance segmentation. This provides
depth supervision signals to the network, even if the image has no explicit 3D annotations. The experiments show
that our approach outperforms previous methods on standard 3D pose benchmarks, while our proposed losses enable more coherent reconstruction in natural images. The
project website with videos, results, and code can be found
at: https://jiangwenpl.github.io/multiperson

1. Introduction
Recent work has achieved tremendous progress on the
frontier of 3D human analysis tasks. Current approaches
∗ Equal contribution.
† X. Zhou and W. Jiang are affiliated with the State Key Lab of
CAD&CG, Zhejiang University. Email: xwzhou@zju.edu.cn.

have established impressive performance for 3D keypoint
estimation [35, 57], 3D shape reconstruction [11, 62], fullbody 3D pose and shape recovery [15, 26, 28, 43], or even
going beyond that and estimating more detailed and expressive reconstructions [42, 63]. However, as we progress towards more holistic understanding of scenes and people interacting in them, a crucial step is the coherent 3D reconstruction of multiple people from single images.
Regarding multi-person pose estimation, on one end of
the spectrum, we have bottom-up approaches. The works
following this paradigm, first detect all body joints in the
scene and then group them, i.e., assigning them to the appropriate person. However, it is not straightforward how
bottom-up processing can be extended beyond joints (e.g.,
use it for shape estimation, or mesh recovery). Different
from bottom-up, top-down approaches first detect all people in the scene, and then estimate the pose for each one
of them. Although they take a hard decision early on (person detection), they typically rely on state-of-the-art methods for person detection and pose estimation which allows
them to achieve very compelling results, particularly in the
2D pose case, e.g., [9, 56, 64]. However, when reasoning
about the pose of multiple people in 3D, the problems can
be more complicated than in 2D. For example, the reconstructed people can overlap each other in the 3D space, or
be estimated at depths that are inconsistent with the actual
depth ordering, as is demonstrated in Figure 1. This means
that it is crucial to go beyond just predicting a reasonable
3D pose for each person individually, and instead estimate
a coherent reconstruction of all the people in the scene.
This coherency of the holistic scene is the primary goal
of this work. We adopt the typical top-down paradigm, and
our aim is to train a deep network that learns to estimate a
coherent reconstruction of all the people in the scene. Start1 82

