Detail-recovery Image Deraining via Context Aggregation Networks
Sen Deng1,2 Mingqiang Wei1,2∗ Jun Wang1,2 Yidan Feng1,2
Luming Liang3 Haoran Xie4∗ Fu Lee Wang5 Meng Wang6
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
Microsoft Applied Sciences Group 4 Lingnan University
5
The Open University of Hong Kong 6 Hefei University of Technology

Abstract
This paper looks at this intriguing question: are single
images with their details lost during deraining, reversible
to their artifact-free status? We propose an end-to-end
detail-recovery image deraining network (termed a DRDNet) to solve the problem. Unlike existing image deraining approaches that attempt to meet the conflicting goal of
simultaneously deraining and preserving details in a unified framework, we propose to view rain removal and detail recovery as two separate tasks, so that each part could
be specialized rather than traded off. Specifically, we introduce two parallel sub-networks with a comprehensive
loss function which synergize to derain and recover the lost
details caused by deraining. For complete rain removal,
we present a rain residual network with the squeeze-andexcitation (SE) operation to remove rain streaks from the
rainy images. For detail recovery, we construct a specialized detail repair network consisting of well-designed
blocks, named structure detail context aggregation block
(SDCAB), to encourage the lost details to return for eliminating image degradations. Moreover, the detail recovery
branch of our proposed detail repair framework is detachable and can be incorporated into existing deraining methods to boost their performances. DRD-Net has been validated on several well-known benchmark datasets in terms
of deraining robustness and detail accuracy. Comparisons show clear visual and numerical improvements of our
method over the state-of-the-arts1 .

(a) Ground Truth PSNR=Inf/SSIM=1

(b) Rainy Image 9.56/0.4418

(c) SPA-Net 19.10/0.8280 (CVPR’19)

(d) DAF-Net 21.67/0.8489 (CVPR’19)

(e) Ours w/o Detail Repair Net
24.02/0.9080

(f) Our DRD-Net
26.14/0.9320

Figure 1. Image deraining results tested in the dataset of
Rain200H. From (a)-(f): (a) the ground truth image Castle, (b)
the rainy image Castle and the deraining results of (c) SPA-Net
[25], (d) DAF-Net [10], (e) Ours w/o Detail Repair Net, and (f)
our DRD-Net respectively.

1. Introduction
Images captured in rainy days inevitably suffer from
noticeable degradation of visual quality. The degradation
causes detrimental impacts on outdoor vision-based tasks,
∗ Co-corresponding authors (mqwei@nuaa.edu.cn/hrxie@ln.edu.hk).
1 Source code: https://github.com/Dengsgithub/DRD-Net

such as video surveillance, autonomous driving, and object
detection. It is, therefore, indispensable to remove rain in
rainy images, which is referred to as image deraining.
The ultimate goal of image deraining is to recover the
ground-truth image B from its observation O = B + R
with the rain streaks R, which is an ill-posed problem since

14560

