Conv-MPN: Convolutional Message Passing Neural Network
for Structured Outdoor Architecture Reconstruction
Fuyang Zhang∗, Nelson Nauata∗ and Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada
{fuyangz, nnauata, furukawa}@sfu.ca

Input

Ground-truth

Conv-MPN reconstruction

Iteration 0

Iteration 1

Iteration 3

Figure 1. Conv-MPN, a novel message passing neural network, reconstructs outdoor buildings as planar graphs from a single image. The
reconstructions after 0, 1, or 3 iterations of message passing are as shown.

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel message passing neural
(MPN) architecture Conv-MPN, which reconstructs an outdoor building as a planar graph from a single RGB image.
Conv-MPN is specifically designed for cases where nodes
of a graph have explicit spatial embedding. In our problem, nodes correspond to building edges in an image. ConvMPN is different from MPN in that 1) the feature associated
with a node is represented as a feature volume instead of a
1D vector; and 2) convolutions encode messages instead of
fully connected layers. Conv-MPN learns to select a true
subset of nodes (i.e., building edges) to reconstruct a building planar graph. Our qualitative and quantitative evaluations over 2,000 buildings show that Conv-MPN makes
significant improvements over the existing fully neural solutions. We believe that the paper has a potential to open
a new line of graph neural network research for structured
geometry reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Human vision evolved to master holistic image understanding, capable of detecting structural elements in an im∗ indicates equal contribution.

age and inferring their relationships. Look at a satellite image in Fig. 1. We can quickly see three building components, detect their building corners, and identify the common edges with the neighboring components.
The ultimate form of such structured geometry is the
CAD representation, which enables a wide spectrum of applications such as rendering, effects mapping, simulation, or
human interactions. Unfortunately, CAD model construction is still an open problem for computer vision, and is
possible only by the hands of expert modelers.
Towards the automated construction of CAD geometry, the emergence of deep neural networks (DNNs) have
brought revolutionary improvements to the detection of
low-level primitives (e.g., corners). However, holistic understanding of high-level geometric structures (e.g., the inference of a graph) remains as a challenge for DNNs. The
current state-of-the-art utilizes DNNs for low-level primitive detection, but employs optimization methods for highlevel geometric structure inference [21, 16]. Optimization
is powerful, but requires complex problem formulations and
intensive engineering for injecting structural constraints.
This paper seeks to push the boundary of deep neural
architecture for the task of structured geometry reconstruction. In particular, we propose a convolutional message
passing neural network (Conv-MPN). Conv-MPN is a variant of a graph neural network (GNN), and learns to infer re12798

