Weakly-Supervised Salient Object Detection via Scribble Annotations
2

Jing Zhang1,3,4 Xin Yu1,3,5 Aixuan Li
Peipei Song1,4 Bowen Liu2 Yuchao Dai2∗
1
Australian National University, Australia 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
3
ACRV, Australia 4 Data61, Australia 5 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Compared with laborious pixel-wise dense labeling, it
is much easier to label data by scribbles, which only costs
1∼2 seconds to label one image. However, using scribble labels to learn salient object detection has not been
explored. In this paper, we propose a weakly-supervised
salient object detection model to learn saliency from such
annotations. In doing so, we first relabel an existing largescale salient object detection dataset with scribbles, namely
S-DUTS dataset. Since object structure and detail information is not identified by scribbles, directly training with
scribble labels will lead to saliency maps of poor boundary
localization. To mitigate this problem, we propose an auxiliary edge detection task to localize object edges explicitly,
and a gated structure-aware loss to place constraints on
the scope of structure to be recovered. Moreover, we design a scribble boosting scheme to iteratively consolidate
our scribble annotations, which are then employed as supervision to learn high-quality saliency maps. As existing saliency evaluation metrics neglect to measure structure alignment of the predictions, the saliency map ranking metric may not comply with human perception. We
present a new metric, termed saliency structure measure, as
a complementary metric to evaluate sharpness of the prediction. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our method not only outperforms existing
weakly-supervised/unsupervised methods, but also is on par
with several fully-supervised state-of-the-art models1 .

1. Introduction
Visual salient object detection (SOD) aims at locating interesting regions that attract human attention most in an image. Conventional salient object detection methods [57, 14]
based on hand-crafted features or human experience may
fail to obtain high-quality saliency maps in complicated
scenarios. The deep learning based salient object detection models [42, 50] have been widely studied, and sig∗ Corresponding author: Yuchao Dai (daiyuchao@gmail.com)
1 Our code and data is publicly available at: https://github.
com/JingZhang617/Scribble_Saliency.

(a) GT(scribble)

(b) GT(Bbx)

(c) GT(per-pixel)

(d) Baseline

(e) Bbx-CRF

(f) BASNet

(g) WSS

(h) Bbx-Pred

(i) Ours

Figure 1. (a) Our scribble annotations. (b) Ground-truth bounding
box. (c) Ground-truth pixel-wise annotations. (d) Baseline model:
trained directly on scribbles. (e) Refined bounding box annotation
by DenseCRF [1]. (f) Result of a fully-supervised SOD method
[26]. (g) Result of model trained on image-level annotations [34]
(h) Model trained on the annotation (e). (i) Our result.

nificantly boost the saliency detection performance. However, these methods highly rely on a large amount of labeled
data, which require time-consuming and laborious pixelwise annotations. To achieve a trade-off between labeling
efficiency and model performance, several weakly supervised or unsupervised methods [16, 47, 24, 52] have been
proposed to learn saliency from sparse labeled data [16, 47]
or infer the latent saliency from noisy annotations [24, 52].
In this paper, we propose a new weakly-supervised
salient object detection framework by learning from lowcost labeled data, (i.e., scribbles, as seen in Fig. 1(a)). Here,
we opt to scribble annotations because of their flexibility
(although bounding box annotation is an option, it’s not
suitable for labeling winding objects, thus leading to inferior saliency maps, as seen in Fig. 1 (h)). Since scribble annotations are usually very sparse, object structure and
details cannot be easily inferred. Directly training a deep

12546

