Synchronizing Probability Measures on Rotations via Optimal Transport
Tolga Birdal 1
Michael Arbel 2
Umut Şimşekli 3, 4
Leonidas Guibas 1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA
2
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, UK
3
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Paris, France
4
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
𝛍1

Abstract
We introduce a new paradigm, ‘measure synchronization’, for synchronizing graphs with measure-valued edges.
We formulate this problem as maximization of the cycleconsistency in the space of probability measures over relative rotations. In particular, we aim at estimating marginal
distributions of absolute orientations by synchronizing the
‘conditional’ ones, which are defined on the Riemannian
manifold of quaternions. Such graph optimization on
distributions-on-manifolds enables a natural treatment of
multimodal hypotheses, ambiguities and uncertainties arising in many computer vision applications such as SLAM,
SfM, and object pose estimation. We first formally define the
problem as a generalization of the classical rotation graph
synchronization, where in our case the vertices denote probability measures over rotations. We then measure the quality of the synchronization by using Sinkhorn divergences,
which reduces to other popular metrics such as Wasserstein
distance or the maximum mean discrepancy as limit cases.
We propose a nonparametric Riemannian particle optimization approach to solve the problem. Even though the problem is non-convex, by drawing a connection to the recently
proposed sparse optimization methods, we show that the
proposed algorithm converges to the global optimum in a
special case of the problem under certain conditions. Our
qualitative and quantitative experiments show the validity
of our approach and we bring in new perspectives to the
study of synchronization.

1. Introduction
Synchronization [70, 30, 71], is the art of consistently
recovering absolute quantities from a collection of ratios
or pairwise relationships. An equivalent definition describes the problem as simultaneously upgrading from pairwise local information onto the global one: an averaging [34, 36, 8]. At this point, synchronization is a fundamental piece of most multi-view reconstruction / multishape analysis pipelines [68, 17, 18] as it heavy lifts the
global constraint satisfaction while respecting the geometry

𝛍13
𝛍12

𝛍2

𝛍15

𝛍24

𝛍3
𝛍4

𝛍35
𝛍45

𝛍5

Figure 1. We coin measure synchronization to refer to the problem of recovering distributions over absolute rotations {µi }i
(shown in red) from a given set of potential relative rotations
{µij }(i,j) per pair that are estimated in an independent fashion.

of the parameters. In a wide variety of applications, these
parameters are composed of the elements of a rotation expressed either as a point on a Riemannian manifold (forms
a Lie group) or its tangent space (Lie algebra) [33, 14].
Unfortunately, for our highly complex environments,
symmetries are inevitable and they may render it impossible
to hypothesize an ideal single candidate to explain the configuration of capture, be it pairwise or absolute. In those
cases, there is no single best solution to the 3D perception problem. One might then speak of a set of plausible
solutions that are only collectively useful in characterizing
global positioning of the cameras / objects [42, 54, 14]. Put
more concretely, imagine a 3D sensing device capturing a
rotating untextured, cylindrical coffee mug with a handle
(c.f . Fig. 1). The mug’s image is, by construction, identical
under the rotations around its symmetry axis whenever the
handle is occluded. Any relative or absolute measurement is
then subject to an ambiguity which prohibits the estimation
of a unique best alignment. Whenever the handle appears,
mug’s pose can be determined uniquely, leading to a single
mode. Such phenomena are ubiquitous in real scenarios and
have recently lead to a paradigm shift in computer vision towards reporting the estimates in terms of either empirical or
continuous multimodal probability distributions on the parameter spaces [41, 54, 14, 13], rather than single entities as
done in the conventional methods [61, 55, 37].
11569

