Scale-space flow for end-to-end optimized video compression
Eirikur Agustsson, David Minnen, Nick Johnston, Johannes Ballé, Sung Jin Hwang, George Toderici
Google Research, Perception Team
{eirikur, dminnen, nickj, jballe, sjhwang, gtoderici}@google.com

Abstract
Despite considerable progress on end-to-end optimized
deep networks for image compression, video coding remains a challenging task. Recently proposed methods for
learned video compression use optical flow and bilinear
warping for motion compensation and show competitive
rate–distortion performance relative to hand-engineered
codecs like H.264 and HEVC. However, these learningbased methods rely on complex architectures and training
schemes including the use of pre-trained optical flow networks, sequential training of sub-networks, adaptive rate
control, and buffering intermediate reconstructions to disk
during training. In this paper, we show that a generalized
warping operator that better handles common failure cases,
e.g. disocclusions and fast motion, can provide competitive compression results with a greatly simplified model and
training procedure. Specifically, we propose scale-space
flow, an intuitive generalization of optical flow that adds
a scale parameter to allow the network to better model uncertainty. Our experiments show that a low-latency video
compression model (no B-frames) using scale-space flow
for motion compensation can outperform analogous stateof-the art learned video compression models while being
trained using a much simpler procedure and without any
pre-trained optical flow networks.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been significant progress in the
area of end-to-end optimized image compression, which
went from barely matching JPEG [33] to methods such
as [8, 26, 5] that can outperform the best hand-engineered
codecs when evaluated in terms of multi-scale structural
similarity (MS-SSIM) [36], PSNR, and subjective quality
assessments from user studies. While this is very encouraging, over 60% of downstream internet traffic currently consists of streaming video data [1], which means that in order
to maximize impact on bandwidth reduction, researchers
should focus on video compression.
Since the area of neural video compression is in early

Figure 1. Our proposed scale-space warping module. From the
source image x, we construct a fixed-resolution scale-space volume X. In contrast to bilinear warping, where the warped output
is sampled directly from the 2-D source image using a 2-channel
displacement field (fx , fy ), we trilinearly sample from the 3-D
scale-space volume using a 3-channel displacements+scale field
(gx , gy , gz ). The scale value gives a continuous, differentiable
knob that can adaptively blur the source image when warping if
the warp is not a good prediction of the target image.

stages, it is not yet clear which network architectures are
most effective for different application scenarios. We can
roughly categorize the existing research methods into the
following three categories:
1) 3D autoencoders are a natural extension of the work
done for learned image compression, but [27] demonstrated
that representing video using spatiotemporal transformations alone does not lead to better performance compared
to standard methods. However, when combined with temporally conditioned entropy models [19], such methods can
perform on par with standard methods in terms of MSSSIM.
2) Frame interpolation methods use neural networks to
temporally interpolate between frames in a video and then
encode the residuals [38, 17]. This approach is commonly
used in standard video coding (called “bidirectional prediction” or “B-frame coding”) [37], but has the disadvantage
that it is generally not suitable for low-latency streaming
since such methods need information “from the future” to
decode each B-frame. However, in standard codecs, the use
of B-frames typically provides the best rate–distortion (RD)
18503

