Deep Implicit Volume Compression
Danhang Tang⇤ Saurabh Singh⇤ Philip A. Chou Christian Häne Mingsong Dou
Sean Fanello Jonathan Taylor Philip Davidson Onur G. Guleryuz Yinda Zhang
Shahram Izadi Andrea Tagliasacchi Sofien Bouaziz Cem Keskin
Google

Abstract
We describe a novel approach for compressing truncated
signed distance fields (TSDF) stored in 3D voxel grids, and
their corresponding textures. To compress the TSDF, our
method relies on a block-based neural network architecture
trained end-to-end, achieving state-of-the-art rate-distortion
trade-off. To prevent topological errors, we losslessly compress the signs of the TSDF, which also upper bounds the
reconstruction error by the voxel size. To compress the
corresponding texture, we designed a fast block-based UV
parameterization, generating coherent texture maps that can
be effectively compressed using existing video compression
algorithms. We demonstrate the performance of our algorithms on two 4D performance capture datasets, reducing
bitrate by 66% for the same distortion, or alternatively reducing the distortion by 50% for the same bitrate, compared
to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
In recent years, volumetric implicit representations have
been at the heart of many 3D and 4D reconstruction approaches [22, 26, 27, 45], enabling novel applications such
as real time dense surface mapping in AR devices and freeviewpoint videos. While these representations exhibit numerous advantages, transmitting high quality 4D sequences
is still a challenge due to their large memory footprints.
Designing efficient compression algorithms for implicit representations is therefore of prime importance to enable the
deployment of novel consumer-level applications such as
VR/AR telepresence [47], and to facilitate the streaming of
free-viewpoint videos [8].
In contrast to compressing a mesh, it was recently shown
that truncated signed distance fields (TSDF) [15] are highly
suitable for efficient compression [31, 59] due to correlation in voxel values and their regular grid structure. Voxelbased SDF representations have been used with great suc∗ indicates equal contribution.

'UDFR 'HFLPDWHG  .% 7DQJHWDO .%

2XUV .% 2XUVWH[WXUH

Figure 1: When targeting a low bitrate, Draco [24] requires
decimation to have low-poly meshes as input, while [59]
suffers from block artifacts. Our method has visibly lower
distortion while maintaining similar bitrates. Raw meshes
with flat shading are shown to reveal artifacts.
cess for 3D shape learning using encoder-decoder architectures [58, 65]. This is in part due to their grid structure that
can be naturally processed with 3D convolutions, allowing
the use of convolutional neural networks (CNN) that have
excelled in image processing tasks. Based on these observations, we propose a novel block-based encoder-decoder
neural architecture trained end-to-end, achieving bitrates
that are 33% of prior art [59]. We compress and transmit the
TSDF signs losslessly; this does not only guarantee that the
reconstruction error is upper bounded by the voxel size, but
also that the reconstructed surface is homeomorphic – even
when lossy TDSF compression is used. Furthermore, we
propose using the conditional distribution of the signs given
11293

