Density Based Clustering for 3D Object Detection in Point Clouds
Syeda Mariam Ahmed
Chew Chee Meng
National University of Singapore
e0020829@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Current 3D detection networks either rely on 2D object
proposals or try to directly predict bounding box parameters from each point in a scene. While former methods
are dependent on performance of 2D detectors, latter approaches are challenging due to the sparsity and occlusion
in point clouds, making it difficult to regress accurate parameters. In this work, we introduce a novel approach for
3D object detection that is significant in two main aspects:
a) cascaded modular approach that focuses the receptive
field of each module on specific points in the point cloud,
for improved feature learning and b) a class agnostic instance segmentation module that is initiated using unsupervised clustering. The objective of a cascaded approach
is to sequentially minimize the number of points running
through the network. While three different modules perform
the tasks of background-foreground segmentation, class agnostic instance segmentation and object detection, through
individually trained point based networks. We also evaluate
bayesian uncertainty in modules, demonstrating the over all
level of confidence in our prediction results. Performance
of the network is evaluated on the SUN RGB-D benchmark
dataset, that demonstrates an improvement as compared to
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Despite the recent breakthroughs in 3D object detection,
the task of region proposal is heavily dependent on 2D object detectors. Following the conventions of image based
detection, candidate 3D proposals are typically generated
through sliding windows [35, 16, 31, 4] or by 3D region
proposal networks such as [27, 28]. However, the computational complexity of 3D search grows cubically with respect
to the resolution and becomes computationally expensive
for large scenes or real-time applications. Alternatively,
methods that project points to 2D images [3, 35] compromise on geometric and surface properties that may be important in heavily cluttered and occluded environments.
While few works have attempted to directly learn from

chewcm@nus.edu.sg

point features, one of the most successful networks for processing 3D groups of points is PointNet [20, 22] that can
be used to perform object detection and semantic segmentation for point clouds. Their initial work for a complete 3D
object detection pipeline [19] integrates a 2D region proposal network that generates bounding box proposal from
an RGB image and lifts them to a 3D frustum. The pointcloud within the proposed frustum is then segmented using
PointNet and is used to regress the amodal bounding box of
the object in 3D. While their approach shows improved accuracy, the performance of this method is restricted by the
performance of the 2D object detector.
This approach is recently updated by a 3D network that
employs Hough voting to predict probable instances of objects, followed by bounding box detection [18]. While the
network directly operates on an input point cloud of 20-40k
points, after feature learning, it only samples 1024 points as
seeds for voting that generate object locations for unique
instances. Since the point density for objects may vary
in a point cloud, it is unlikely that smaller or heavily occluded objects are well represented in such a small number
of seeds.
One of the biggest bottlenecks in processing unorganized
pointclouds through state-of-the-art networks is the number
of points that can be taken as input. This number of points
directly affects the size and the computational complexity of
the network, impacting the quality of feature learning. Consequently, this paper focuses on an incremental reduction in
the size of the pointcloud, achieved through implementation of smaller modules for tasks with varying objectives,
where each task outputs a reduced number of points for the
subsequent module to process.
Towards this goal, we introduce a novel cascaded network that proposes individual modules for the following
tasks: a) background-foreground segmentation and b)
class agnostic instance segmentation and c) 3D object detection, as shown in Fig. 1. The proposed network is trained
in a modular fashion using PointNet++ [22] as a backbone
for segmentation modules, while the segmented clusters are
inferred through the recently proposed Edge-Aware PointNet [1] for the task of 3D object detection.

10608

