Reflection Scene Separation From a Single Image
Renjie Wan†,∗

Boxin Shi⋆,⋄,∗

Haoliang Li†

Ling-Yu Duan⋆,⋄

Alex C. Kot†

†

⋆

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Department of CS, Peking University, China
⋄
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{rjwan, lihaoliang, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, {shiboxin,lingyu}@pku.edu.cn

1. Introduction
When taking a photo through glass, the camera sensors always receives a mixture of the light emitted by the
background scene behind glass and the reﬂection scene in
front of glass. By regarding the reﬂection components as
the noise to be removed, previous reﬂection removal methods [20, 29] aim at improving the visibility of the background scene by removing the interference from the reﬂections.
∗ Corresponding authors. This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce, Singapore, under the NRFNSFC grant NRF2016NRF-NSFC001-098 and NTU-PKU Joint Research
Institute with donation from Ng Teng Fong Charitable Foundation. The
research work was done at the Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. This research is in part
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grants U1611461 and 61872012, National Key R&D Program of China
(2019YFF0302902), Shenzhen Municipal Science and Technology Program under Grant JCYJ20170818141146428, and Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BAAI).

ୱ

Reflection scene

Mixture image
Background scene

For images taken through glass, existing methods focus
on the restoration of the background scene by regarding
the reflection components as noise. However, the scene reflected by glass surface also contains important information
to be recovered, especially for the surveillance or criminal
investigations. In this paper, instead of removing reflection
components from the mixture image, we aim at recovering
reflection scenes from the mixture image. We ﬁrst propose
a strategy to obtain such ground truth and its corresponding input images. Then, we propose a two-stage framework
to obtain the visible reflection scene from the mixture image. Speciﬁcally, we train the network with a shift-invariant
loss which is robust to misalignment between the input and
output images. The experimental results show that our proposed method achieves promising results.

Reflection component

Abstract

݂ሺ ୱ ሻ

ୱ

Figure 1. Given a scene image contaminated by reﬂections, reﬂection removal recovers Bs (and sometimes f (Rs ) as a byproduct), while reﬂection scene separation aims at further extracting
Rs from f (Rs ).

However, glass is not only a noise-generator but also a
semi-reﬂector recording the surrounding world. Important
information can be recovered by approximating the light
emitted by the reﬂection scenes. For criminal investigations,
the investigators may feel interested in the suspicious objects or persons appeared on glass surface of an image [10].
By analyzing the oncoming vehicles at junctions from their
reﬂections appeared on the parked cars or windows, the selfdriving cars or the robotics may use reﬂections as alternatives to perceive the surrounding world [23].
Considering the degradation for both the background
light and reﬂection light, the formation of a mixture image
can be generally expressed as:
I = g(Bs ) + f (Rs ),

(1)

where Bs and Rs denote the light emitted by the background scenes and reﬂection scenes, respectively; g(·) and
f (·) denote the various degradation for Bs and Rs during
the light transmission, respectively; g(Bs ) and f (Rs ) de-

2398

