Attention-Driven Cropping for Very High Resolution Facial Landmark Detection
Prashanth Chandran1,2 , Derek Bradley2 , Markus Gross1,2 , and Thabo Beeler2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
2
DisneyResearch|Studios, Zurich

chandrap@inf.ethz.ch, derek.bradley@disneyresearch.com, grossm@inf.ethz.ch,
thabo.beeler@gmail.com

Abstract
Facial landmark detection is a fundamental task for
many consumer and high-end applications and is almost
entirely solved by machine learning methods today. Existing datasets used to train such algorithms are primarily
made up of only low resolution images, and current algorithms are limited to inputs of comparable quality and resolution as the training dataset. On the other hand, high
resolution imagery is becoming increasingly more common
as consumer cameras improve in quality every year. Therefore, there is need for algorithms that can leverage the rich
information available in high resolution imagery. Naı̈vely
attempting to reuse existing network architectures on high
resolution imagery is prohibitive due to memory bottlenecks
on GPUs. The only current solution is to downsample the
images, sacrificing resolution and quality. Building on top
of recent progress in attention-based networks, we present a
novel, fully convolutional regional architecture that is specially designed for predicting landmarks on very high resolution facial images without downsampling. We demonstrate the flexibility of our architecture by training the proposed model with images of resolutions ranging from 256
x 256 to 4K. In addition to being the first method for facial landmark detection on high resolution images, our
approach achieves superior performance over traditional
(holistic) state-of-the-art architectures across ALL resolutions, leading to a general-purpose, extremely flexible, high
quality landmark detector.

1. Introduction
Landmark detection is one of the classical machine
learning tasks in computer vision, nowadays almost entirely solved via deep neural networks. While these network based detectors provide robust detections, their accuracy directly depends on the image resolution they operate
on. While even low-end cameras can capture high resolu-

tion imagery nowadays, concurrent GPUs are restricted to
operate on low resolution imagery due to limited memory.
As a consequence, deep learning algorithms are forced to
predict landmarks on imagery that may be several orders of
magnitude lower in resolution than what would be available,
which naturally amplifies prediction inaccuracies.
When observing how human annotators label images,
one might realize that they do so at multiple scales. In
the context of facial landmarks, they typically annotate the
coarse features, such as for example the jawline, at a low
resolution where they have the full context of the face but
then zoom into specific areas, such as an eye region, to annotate more accurately. Inspired by this behaviour we propose an end-to-end attention-driven architecture that allows
to train deep networks on higher resolution images by automatically defining and focusing on regions of interest instead of considering the face holistically. These regions are
identified on a low resolution image proxy and extracted
from the original high resolution image. They are then
scaled to an appropriate size for the network, which has the
benefit of aligning the regions to a canonical crop. The second stage then localizes the landmarks in this frontalized
zoom-in, which further reduces variability and increases robustness and accuracy.
Using our novel attention-driven architecture we manage to predict landmarks at resolutions up to 4K on a single
GPU, showing significant improvements in prediction accuracy over existing methods which are forced to operate
on downsampled imagery. We further demonstrate that the
proposed concept applies to a variety of recent network architectures, improving performance for all of them.
Despite the fact that our approach targets high resolution imagery, when applied to traditional lower resolution
facial images in-the-wild our method also outperform current state-of-the-art architectures in most cases. Therefore,
our proposed method is a general-purpose facial landmark
detector with high quality across image scales from low res-

5861

