Multi-path Learning for Object Pose Estimation Across Domains
Martin Sundermeyer1,2 , Maximilian Durner1,2 , En Yen Puang1 , Zoltan-Csaba Marton1 ,
Narunas Vaskevicius3 , Kai O. Arras3 , Rudolph Triebel 1,2
1
German Aerospace Center (DLR), 2 Technical University of Munich (TUM),
3
Robert Bosch GmbH

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation, i.e. estimating the 3D rotation
and translation, is a cornerstone in many perception related
applications like augmented reality or robotics. For many
years this field was dominated by template- and featurebased approaches. Thereby, a given object model or a set of
extracted object features is matched into the underlying sensor data. Depending on the quality of the data and the difficulty of the scene, these approaches are still quite competitive. [22] In recent years however, machine learning, and
in particular Deep Learning (DL) techniques have emerged
as another key approach []. They are often computationally efficient and can show higher robustness towards sensor noise, clutter and environment changes [45, 35, 41]. On
1 Code can be found here: https://github.com/DLR-RM/
AugmentedAutoencoder/tree/multipath

Decodern
MULTI-PATH
ENCODER

Decoder2
Decoder1

un
t
ob ra
je ine
ct d

z1
z2

Rm

zm

Codebookn+1

MULTI-PATH
ENCODER

R 1 z1
R2 Rz1 2 z1
R2 Rz1 2 z1
Rm zmR2 z2
R m zm
R m zm R 1
R2
Codebookn

tr
ob ain
je ed
ct
s

Codebook1

CODEBOOK GENERATION
Codebook2

We introduce a scalable approach for object pose estimation trained on simulated RGB views of multiple 3D models
together. We learn an encoding of object views that does
not only describe an implicit orientation of all objects seen
during training, but can also relate views of untrained objects. Our single-encoder-multi-decoder network is trained
using a technique we denote ”multi-path learning”: While
the encoder is shared by all objects, each decoder only reconstructs views of a single object. Consequently, views
of different instances do not have to be separated in the
latent space and can share common features. The resulting encoder generalizes well from synthetic to real data
and across various instances, categories, model types and
datasets. We systematically investigate the learned encodings, their generalization, and iterative refinement strategies on the ModelNet40 and T-LESS dataset. Despite training jointly on multiple objects, our 6D Object Detection
pipeline achieves state-of-the-art results on T-LESS at much
lower runtimes than competing approaches. 1

TRAINING PHASE

Figure 1: Training (top) and setup phase (bottom) of the
MP-Encoder. During training one encoder is shared among
all objects, while each decoder reconstruct views of a single
object. This turns the encoder into a viewpoint-sensitive
feature extractor, that generates expressive encodings for
multiple trained and even untrained objects.

the other hand, the need for pose-annotated data as well as
lengthy training phases make them less flexible compared
to traditional methods. To tackle the lack of annotations,
several methods have recently shifted to train on synthetic
data rendered from 3D models [23, 34, 38]. However, it is
still common to train individual models for every newly encountered instance which is not scalable. Attempts to train
on many objects at once often result in deteriorated performance [45]. Furthermore, due to object discriminative
training, most of these approaches are not suited to generalize to untrained objects. Since the real world consists of
large amounts of object categories and instances, we propose a more adaptive and scalable approach in this paper.
Inspired by Augmented Autoencoders (AAEs) [34] that
113916

