Reverse Perspective Network for Perspective-Aware Object Counting
Yifan Yang1 , Guorong Li∗1,2 , Zhe Wu1 , Li Su1,2 , Qingming Huang1,2,3 , Nicu Sebe4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, UCAS, Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, UCAS, Beijing, China
3
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS,
Beijing, China
4
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
{yangyifan16,wuzhe14}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,{liguorong,suli,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn,niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract

Counting objects is a hot topic in computer vision because of its wide applications in many areas. The most
critical challenge of the counting task is scale variations.
Significant effort has been devoted to addressing this issue [30, 19, 20, 32, 29, 4, 23, 13]. These approaches employ detection framework [20, 24] or regression framework
[30, 19, 20].
Several approaches [39, 4, 18, 21] employ a network
with multi-scale receptive fields to adapt to the various
∗ Corresponding author.

Warped Image

1. Introduction

Original Image

One of the critical challenges of object counting is the
dramatic scale variations, which is introduced by arbitrary
perspectives. We propose a reverse perspective network to
solve the scale variations of input images, instead of generating perspective maps to smooth final outputs. The reverse perspective network explicitly evaluates the perspective distortions, and efficiently corrects the distortions by
uniformly warping the input images. Then the proposed
network delivers images with similar instance scales to the
regressor. Thus the regression network doesn’t need multiscale receptive fields to match the various scales. Besides,
to further solve the scale problem of more congested areas, we enhance the corresponding regions of ground-truth
with the evaluation errors. Then we force the regressor to
learn from the augmented ground-truth via an adversarial
process. Furthermore, to verify the proposed model, we
collected a vehicle counting dataset based on Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). The proposed dataset has fierce
scale variations. Extensive experimental results on four
benchmark datasets show the improvements of our method
against the state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: To diminish the scale variation, we uniformly expand the space near the horizon and shrink the space near
the lens. The warped image with similar scales releases the
burden of training a regression network.
scales. These methods significantly increase the computation cost brought by learning implicit perspective representations. However, Li et al. [19] prove that the various
reception fields deliver similar results. Several other methods [31, 37, 36, 8] exploit perspective maps to normalize
the final density maps and achieve accuracy improvements.
However, these approaches learn from extra annotations or
density maps to generate perspective maps in a supervised
way. Besides, the generated perspective maps are highly
noised. Therefore, smoothing the outputs with these perspective maps inevitably introduce noises.
As shown in Fig. 1, in the original image, there is significant scale variation caused by the perspective. Due to
networks share the convolution kernels across space, it is
challenging for them to adapt to the continuous scales. In14374

