REVERIE: Remote Embodied Visual Referring Expression in
Real Indoor Environments
Yuankai Qi1,2 Qi Wu1∗ Peter Anderson3† Xin Wang4 William Yang Wang4 Chunhua Shen1 Anton van den Hengel1
1 Australia Centre for Robotic Vision, The University of Adelaide 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai
3 Georgia Institute of Technology 4 University of California, Santa Barbara
qykshr@gmail.com

{qi.wu01, chunhua.shen, anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

peter.anderson@gatech.edu {xwang, william}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
One of the long-term challenges of robotics is to enable
robots to interact with humans in the visual world via natural language, as humans are visual animals that communicate through language. Overcoming this challenge requires the ability to perform a wide variety of complex tasks
in response to multifarious instructions from humans. In
the hope that it might drive progress towards more flexible
and powerful human interactions with robots, we propose
a dataset of varied and complex robot tasks, described in
natural language, in terms of objects visible in a large set
of real images. Given an instruction, success requires navigating through a previously-unseen environment to identify an object. This represents a practical challenge, but
one that closely reflects one of the core visual problems in
robotics. Several state-of-the-art vision-and-language navigation, and referring-expression models are tested to verify the difficulty of this new task, but none of them show
promising results because there are many fundamental differences between our task and previous ones. A novel Interactive Navigator-Pointer model is also proposed that provides a strong baseline on the task. The proposed model
especially achieves the best performance on the unseen test
split, but still leaves substantial room for improvement compared to the human performance. Repository: https:
//github.com/YuankaiQi/REVERIE

1. Introduction
You can ask a 10-year-old child to bring you a cushion,
and there is a good chance that they will succeed (even in an
unfamiliar environment), while the probability that a robot
will achieve the same task is significantly lower. Children
∗ Corresponding author
† Now at Google

Starting Viewpoint

Midway

Target Object

Instruction: Bring me the bottom picture that is next to the
top of stairs on level one.
Figure 1. REVERIE task: an agent is given a natural language
instruction referring to a remote object (here in the red bounding
box) in a photo-realistic 3D environment. The agent must navigate
to an appropriate location and identify the object from multiple
distracting candidates. The blue discs indicate nearby navigable
viewpoints provided by the simulator.

have a wealth of knowledge learned from similar environments that they can easily apply to such tasks in an unfamiliar environment, including the facts that cushions generally
inhabit couches, that couches inhabit lounge rooms, and that
lounge rooms are often connected to the rest of a building
through hallways. Children are also able to interpret natural language instructions and associate them with the visual
world. However, the fact that robots currently lack these
capabilities dramatically limits their domain of application.
Therefore, to equip robots with such abilities and to advance real-world vision-and-language research, we intro-

9982

