Few Sample Knowledge Distillation for Efﬁcient Network Compression
Tianhong Li1∗ Jianguo Li2 Zhuang Liu3 Changshui Zhang4
1
MIT 2 Intel Labs 3 UC Berkeley 4 Dept. Automation, Tsinghua University
tianhong@mit.edu, jianguoli@intel.com, zhuangl@berkeley.edu, zsc@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural network compression techniques such as
pruning and weight tensor decomposition usually require
ﬁne-tuning to recover the prediction accuracy when the
compression ratio is high. However, conventional ﬁnetuning suffers from the requirement of a large training set
and the time-consuming training procedure. This paper
proposes a novel solution for knowledge distillation from
label-free few samples to realize both data efﬁciency and
training/processing efﬁciency. We treat the original network
as “teacher-net” and the compressed network as “studentnet”. A 1×1 convolution layer is added at the end of each
layer block of the student-net, and we ﬁt the block-level outputs of the student-net to the teacher-net by estimating the
parameters of the added layers. We prove that the added
layer can be merged without adding extra parameters and
computation cost during inference. Experiments on multiple datasets and network architectures verify the method’s
effectiveness on student-nets obtained by various network
pruning and weight decomposition methods. Our method
can recover student-net’s accuracy to the same level as conventional ﬁne-tuning methods in minutes while using only
1% label-free data of the full training data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated extraordinary
success in a variety of ﬁelds such as computer vision
[21, 13], speech recognition [14], and natural language processing [28]. However, their resource-hungry nature greatly
hinders their wide deployment in some resource-limited
scenarios. To address this limitation, many works have been
done to accelerate and/or compress neural networks, among
which network pruning [11, 23] and network weight decomposition [7, 18] are particularly popular due to their competitive performance and compatibility.
Network pruning [23, 25] and weight decomposition
[37, 19] methods can produce extremely compressed net∗ This work was done when Tianhong Li was intern at Intel Labs under
supervised by Jianguo Li.

works, but they usually suffer from signiﬁcant accuracy
drops so that ﬁne-tuning is required for possible accuracy
recovery. However, current ﬁne-tuning practices are not
only time-consuming but also require a fully annotated
large-scale training set, which may be infeasible in practice
due to privacy or conﬁdential issues. This is very common
when software or hardware vendors help their customer optimizing deep learning solutions. As a result, when the compression ratio is high, current methods may not recover the
dropped accuracy if there are very few training examples
(labeled or even unlabeled) for deployment.
To solve this problem, one may ask if it is possible
to utilize the knowledge from the original large network
to the compressed compact network, since the latter has
a similar block-level structure as the former, and already
inherits some of the feature representation power from it.
A natural solution is to use knowledge distillation (KD)
[4, 1, 15], a method for transferring the knowledge from
a large “teacher” model to a compact yet efﬁcient “student”
model by matching certain statistics between them. Further
research introduced various kinds of matching mechanisms
[31, 33, 17, 24]. The distillation procedure typically designs
a loss function based on the matching mechanisms and optimizes the loss during a full training process. As a result,
these methods still require time-consuming training procedure along with fully annotated large-scale training dataset,
thus fail to meet our goal of training/processing efﬁciency
and high sample-efﬁciency.
This paper addresses this issue with a simple and
novel method, namely few-sample knowledge distillation
(FSKD), for efﬁcient network compression, where “efﬁcient” here means both training/processing efﬁciency and
label-free data-sample efﬁciency. As shown in Figure 1,
FSKD contains three steps: compressing teacher-net to obtain student-net, aligning student-teacher with the added
layers in student-net, and merging the added layers. We
ﬁrst obtain the student-net by pruning or decomposing the
teacher-net using existing methods. In this stage, we ensure that both teacher-net and student-net have the same
feature map sizes at each corresponding layer block. Second, we add a 1×1 conv-layer at the end of each block of
114639

