LUVLi Face Alignment: Estimating Landmarks’
Location, Uncertainty, and Visibility Likelihood
Abhinav Kumar∗,1 , Tim K. Marks∗,2 , Wenxuan Mou∗,3 ,
Ye Wang , Michael Jones2 , Anoop Cherian2 , Toshiaki Koike-Akino2 , Xiaoming Liu4 , Chen Feng5
2

abhinav3663@gmail.com, tmarks@merl.com, wenxuanmou@gmail.com,
[ywang, mjones, cherian, koike]@merl.com, liuxm@cse.msu.edu, cfeng@nyu.edu
1 University of Utah, 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs (MERL), 3 University of Manchester, 4 Michigan State University, 5 New York University

Abstract
Modern face alignment methods have become quite accurate at predicting the locations of facial landmarks, but
they do not typically estimate the uncertainty of their predicted locations nor predict whether landmarks are visible. In this paper, we present a novel framework for jointly
predicting landmark locations, associated uncertainties of
these predicted locations, and landmark visibilities. We
model these as mixed random variables and estimate them
using a deep network trained with our proposed Location,
Uncertainty, and Visibility Likelihood (LUVLi) loss. In addition, we release an entirely new labeling of a large face
alignment dataset with over 19,000 face images in a full
range of head poses. Each face is manually labeled with
the ground-truth locations of 68 landmarks, with the additional information of whether each landmark is unoccluded,
self-occluded (due to extreme head poses), or externally occluded. Not only does our joint estimation yield accurate estimates of the uncertainty of predicted landmark locations,
but it also yields state-of-the-art estimates for the landmark
locations themselves on multiple standard face alignment
datasets. Our method’s estimates of the uncertainty of predicted landmark locations could be used to automatically
identify input images on which face alignment fails, which
can be critical for downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Modern methods for face alignment (facial landmark localization) perform quite well most of the time, but all of
them fail some percentage of the time. Unfortunately, almost all of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods simply output predicted landmark locations, with no assessment of
whether (or how much) downstream tasks should trust these
landmark locations. This is concerning, as face alignment
is a key pre-processing step in numerous safety-critical ap∗ Equal Contributions

Figure 1: Results of our joint face alignment and uncertainty estimation on three test images. Ground-truth (green)
and predicted (yellow) landmark locations are shown. The
estimated uncertainty of the predicted location of each landmark is shown in blue (Error ellipse for Mahalanobis distance 1). Landmarks that are occluded (e.g., by the hand in
center image) tend to have larger uncertainty.
plications, including advanced driver assistance systems
(ADAS), driver monitoring, and remote measurement of vital signs [57]. As deep neural networks are notorious for
producing overconfident predictions [33], similar concerns
have been raised for other neural network technologies [46],
and they become even more acute in the era of adversarial machine learning where adversarial images may pose a
great threat to a system [14]. However, previous work in
face alignment (and landmark localization in general) has
largely ignored the area of uncertainty estimation.
To address this need, we propose a method to jointly estimate facial landmark locations and a parametric probability
distribution representing the uncertainty of each estimated
location. Our model also jointly estimates the visibility of
landmarks, which predicts whether each landmark is occluded due to extreme head pose.
We find that the choice of methods for calculating mean
and covariance is crucial. Landmark locations are best obtained using heatmaps, rather than by direct regression. To
estimate landmark locations in a differentiable manner using heatmaps, we do not select the location of the maximum
(argmax) of each landmark’s heatmap, but instead propose
to use the spatial mean of the positive elements of each

8236

