Hierarchical Conditional Relation Networks for Video Question Answering
Thao Minh Le, Vuong Le, Svetha Venkatesh, and Truyen Tran
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Australia
{lethao,vuong.le,svetha.venkatesh,truyen.tran}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

types (such as frame QA [20] versus action count [6]). This
has resulted in proliferation of heterogeneous networks.

Video question answering (VideoQA) is challenging as it
requires modeling capacity to distill dynamic visual artifacts
and distant relations and to associate them with linguistic
concepts. We introduce a general-purpose reusable neural
unit called Conditional Relation Network (CRN) that serves
as a building block to construct more sophisticated structures for representation and reasoning over video. CRN
takes as input an array of tensorial objects and a conditioning feature, and computes an array of encoded output
objects. Model building becomes a simple exercise of replication, rearrangement and stacking of these reusable units for
diverse modalities and contextual information. This design
thus supports high-order relational and multi-step reasoning.
The resulting architecture for VideoQA is a CRN hierarchy
whose branches represent sub-videos or clips, all sharing the
same question as the contextual condition. Our evaluations
on well-known datasets achieved new SoTA results, demonstrating the impact of building a general-purpose reasoning
unit on complex domains such as VideoQA.

In this work we propose a general-purpose reusable neural unit called Conditional Relation Network (CRN) that
encapsulates and transforms an array of objects into a new
array conditioned on a contextual feature. The unit computes
sparse high-order relations between the input objects, and
then modulates the encoding through a specified context (See
Fig. 2). The flexibility of CRN and its encapsulating design
allow it to be replicated and layered to form deep hierarchical
conditional relation networks (HCRN) in a straightforward
manner. The stacked units thus provide contextualized refinement of relational knowledge from video objects – in a
stage-wise manner it combines appearance features with clip
activity flow and linguistic context, and follows it by integrating in context from the whole video motion and linguistic
features. The resulting HCRN is homogeneous, agreeing
with the design philosophy of networks such as InceptionNet
[31], ResNet [9] and FiLM [27].

1. Introduction
Answering natural questions about a video is a powerful
demonstration of cognitive capability. The task involves
acquisition and manipulation of spatio-temporal visual representations guided by the compositional semantics of the
linguistic cues [7, 17, 20, 30, 33, 36]. As questions are potentially unconstrained, VideoQA requires deep modeling
capacity to encode and represent crucial video properties
such as object permanence, motion profiles, prolonged actions, and varying-length temporal relations in a hierarchical
manner. For VideoQA, the visual representations should
ideally be question-specific and answer-ready.
The current approach toward modeling videos for QA is
to build neural architectures in which each sub-system is
either designed for a specific tailor-made purpose or for a
particular data modality. Because of this specificity, such
hand crafted architectures tend to be non-optimal for changes
in data modality [17], varying video length [24] or question

The hierarchy of the CRNs are as follows – at the lowest
level, the CRNs encode the relations between frame appearance in a clip and integrate the clip motion as context; this
output is processed at the next stage by CRNs that now integrate in the linguistic context; in the following stage, the
CRNs capture the relation between the clip encodings, and
integrate in video motion as context; in the final stage the
CRN integrates the video encoding with the linguistic feature as context (See Fig. 3). By allowing the CRNs to be
stacked hierarchically, the model naturally supports modeling hierarchical structures in video and relational reasoning;
by allowing appropriate context to be introduced in stages,
the model handles multimodal fusion and multi-step reasoning. For long videos further levels of hierarchy can be added
enabling encoding of relations between distant frames.
We demonstrate the capability of HCRN in answering
questions in major VideoQA datasets. The hierarchical architecture with four-layers of CRN units achieves favorable
answer accuracy across all VideoQA tasks. Notably, it performs consistently well on questions involving either appearance, motion, state transition, temporal relations, or action
repetition demonstrating that the model can analyze and

9972

