Density-Aware Graph for Deep Semi-Supervised Visual Recognition
Suichan Li1,2
Bin Liu1,2
Dongdong Chen3
Qi Chu1,2∗
Lu Yuan3
Nenghai Yu1,2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been extensively
studied to improve the generalization ability of deep neural networks for visual recognition. To involve the unlabelled data, most existing SSL methods are based on common density-based cluster assumption: samples lying in
the same high-density region are likely to belong to the
same class, including the methods performing consistency
regularization or generating pseudo-labels for the unlabelled images. Despite their impressive performance, we
argue three limitations exist: 1) Though the density information is demonstrated to be an important clue, they all
use it in an implicit way and have not exploited it in depth.
2) For feature learning, they often learn the feature embedding based on the single data sample and ignore the
neighborhood information. 3) For label-propagation based
pseudo-label generation, it is often done offline and difficult to be end-to-end trained with feature learning. Motivated by these limitations, this paper proposes to solve
the SSL problem by building a novel density-aware graph,
based on which the neighborhood information can be easily
leveraged and the feature learning and label propagation
can also be trained in an end-to-end way. Specifically, we
first propose a new Density-aware Neighborhood Aggregation(DNA) module to learn more discriminative features by
incorporating the neighborhood information in a densityaware manner. Then a novel Density-ascending Path based
Label Propagation(DPLP) module is proposed to generate
the pseudo-labels for unlabeled samples more efficiently according to the feature distribution characterized by density.
Finally, the DNA module and DPLP module evolve and improve each other end-to-end. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the newly proposed density-aware
graph based SSL framework and our approach can outperform current state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

∗ corresponding author.

unlabeled nodes

(a) Density-aware Neighborhood Aggregation

labeled nodes

(b) Density-ascending Label Propagation

Figure 1: (a) Density-aware Neighborhood Aggregation(DNA)
scheme prefer neighbors with higher density when target sample has equal similarity with the neighbors which belong to different clusters. (b) Density-ascending Path-based Label Propagation(DPLP) constructs a density-ascending path and propagates
the labels from labelled samples to unlabelled samples within the
path.

1. Introduction
Recently, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been extensively studied to improve the generalization ability of
deep neural networks for visual recognition by utilizing limited labelled images and massive unlabelled images. For
leveraging the unlabelled data, current SSL methods are
usually based on a common density-based cluster assumption, i.e. samples lying in the same high-density region are
likely to belong to the same class[4, 26]. Its equivalent one
is low-density separation assumption, which states that the
decision boundary should not cross high density regions,
but instead lies in low density regions. Current methods
mainly focus on enforcing the low-density separation assumption by encouraging invariant prediction for perturbations around each unlabelled data point or same predictions
for nearby samples, including consistency-regularization
based methods [15, 24, 26, 2] and pseudo-label based methods [16, 23, 10].
While density-peak assumption [20] states that highdensity samples are more likely to be the center of a cluster, thus samples with high density can encode more representative information of the cluster, which are valuable

13400

