One-Shot Domain Adaptation For Face Generation

Chao Yang

Ser-Nam Lim

Facebook AI

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a framework capable of generating face images that fall into the same distribution as
that of a given one-shot example. We leverage a pre-trained
StyleGAN model that already learned the generic face distribution. Given the one-shot target, we develop an iterative
optimization scheme that rapidly adapts the weights of the
model to shift the output’s high-level distribution to the target’s. To generate images of the same distribution, we introduce a style-mixing technique that transfers the low-level
statistics from the target to faces randomly generated with
the model. With that, we are able to generate an unlimited
number of faces that inherit from the distribution of both
generic human faces and the one-shot example. The newly
generated faces can serve as augmented training data for
other downstream tasks. Such setting is appealing as it requires labeling very few, or even one example, in the target
domain, which is often the case of real-world face manipulations that result from a variety of unknown and unique
distributions, each with extremely low prevalence. We show
the effectiveness of our one-shot approach for detecting face
manipulations and compare it with other few-shot domain
adaptation methods qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been prevailing in a variety of computer vision tasks, especially in supervised settings such as
learning for classification, detection or segmentation [20,
39, 29, 19]. Deep generative models such as Variational
AutoEncoder (VAE) [24, 30] and Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) [16, 37, 45, 2, 1, 53] in particular have
gained significant prominence in the field of deep learning
due to their ability to generate highly realistic images depicting faces, natural scenes and objects.
Recent advances in deep learning have paved the way
for many important applications ranging from super resolution, movie making, game development, cross domain
style transfer, face synthesis and aging prediction, image
inpainting, photo editing and others. However, the advent

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: One-shot domain adaptation on encoder-decoder
DeepFake using StyleGAN generator. (a). A Random
StyleGAN generated image. (b). A one-shot image from
encoder-decoder DeepFake of DFDC [13]. (c). A StyleGAN generated image using the same random latent input
as (a) after domain adaptation. (d). The StyleGAN reconsutrcted one-shot DeepFake after domain adaptation.

of DL has also precipitated the emerging of applications
that abuse its power. Technologies such as Face2Face [45],
FaceSwap [2], and encoder-decoder DeepFake [1] have resulted in the rise of online impersonations/fabrication of
news, threatening even to sway the outcomes of elections.
In this paper, we are interested in detecting Deepfakes,
which refers to manipulations to replace the human face of
authentic media with the face of a different person [40, 10,
13]. This is often coupled with malicious intent of defam15921

