Deep Image Spatial Transformation for Person Image Generation
Yurui Ren1,2 Xiaoming Yu1,2 Junming Chen1,2 Thomas H. Li3,1 Ge Li 1,2
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University
{yrren,xiaomingyu,junming.chen}@pku.edu.cn

tli@aiit.org.cn

geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Pose-guided person image generation is to transform
a source person image to a target pose. This task requires spatial manipulations of source data. However,
Convolutional Neural Networks are limited by the lack
of ability to spatially transform the inputs. In this paper, we propose a differentiable global-flow local-attention
framework to reassemble the inputs at the feature level.
Specifically, our model first calculates the global correlations between sources and targets to predict flow fields.
Then, the flowed local patch pairs are extracted from
the feature maps to calculate the local attention coefficients. Finally, we warp the source features using a
content-aware sampling method with the obtained local
attention coefficients. The results of both subjective and
objective experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
model. Besides, additional results in video animation and
view synthesis show that our model is applicable to other
tasks requiring spatial transformation. Our source code
is available at https://github.com/RenYurui/
Global-Flow-Local-Attention.

1. Introduction
Image spatial transformation can be used to deal with
the generation task where the output images are the spatial
deformation versions of the input images. Such deformation can be caused by object motions or viewpoint changes.
Many conditional image generation tasks can be seen as a
type of spatial transformation tasks. For example, poseguided person image generation [20, 25, 27, 40, 28, 29]
transforms a person image from a source pose to a target
pose while retaining the appearance details. As shown in
Figure 1, this task can be tackled by reasonably reassembling the input data in the spatial domain.
However, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are
inefficient to spatially transform the inputs. CNNs calculate the outputs with a particular form of parameter sharing, which leads to an important property called equiv-

Figure 1. The visualization of data spatial transformation. For each
image pair, the left image is the generated result of our model,
while the right image is the input source image. Our model spatially transforms the information from sources to targets at the features level. The heat maps indicate the attention coefficients.

ariance to transformation [5]. It means that if the input
spatially shifts the output shifts in the same way. This
property can benefit tasks such as segmentation [4, 8], detection [26, 11] and image translation with aligned structures [12, 34] etc. However, it limits the networks by lacking abilities to spatially rearrange the input data. Spatial
Transformer Networks (STN) [13] solves this problem by
introducing a Spatial Transformer module to standard neural networks. This module regresses global transformation
parameters and warps input features with an affine transformation. However, since it assumes a global affine transformation between sources and targets, this method cannot
deal with the transformations of non-rigid objects.
Attention mechanism [30, 35] allows networks to take
use of non-local information, which gives networks abilities to build long-term correlations. It has been proved to
be efficient in many tasks such as natural language processing [30], image recognition [32, 10], and image generation [35]. However, for spatial transformation tasks in
which target images are the deformation results of source
images, each output position has a clear one-to-one relationship with the source positions. Therefore, the attention
coefficient matrix between the source and target should be
a sparse matrix instead of a dense matrix.
Flow-based operation forces the attention coefficient matrix to be a sparse matrix by sampling a very local source
patch for each output position. These methods predict 2-D
17690

