Multi-task Collaborative Network for Joint Referring Expression
Comprehension and Segmentation
Gen Luo 1∗ , Yiyi Zhou1∗, Xiaoshuai Sun1 , Liujuan Cao1 , Chenglin Wu2 , Cheng Deng3 , Rongrong Ji1†
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China.
2
DeepWisdom, China. 3 Xidian University, China.
{luogen, zhouyiyi}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {xssun,caoliujuan}@xmu.edu.cn,
alexanderwu@fuzhi.ai,chdeng.xd@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Referring expression comprehension (REC) and segmentation (RES) are two highly-related tasks, which both aim at
identifying the referent according to a natural language expression. In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-task Collaborative Network (MCN)1 to achieve a joint learning of
REC and RES for the first time. In MCN, RES can help
REC to achieve better language-vision alignment, while
REC can help RES to better locate the referent. In addition, we address a key challenge in this multi-task setup, i.e.,
the prediction conflict, with two innovative designs namely,
Consistency Energy Maximization (CEM) and Adaptive Soft
Non-Located Suppression (ASNLS). Specifically, CEM enables REC and RES to focus on similar visual regions
by maximizing the consistency energy between two tasks.
ASNLS supresses the response of unrelated regions in RES
based on the prediction of REC. To validate our model, we
conduct extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets
of REC and RES, i.e., RefCOCO, RefCOCO+ and RefCOCOg. The experimental results report the significant
performance gains of MCN over all existing methods, i.e.,
up to +7.13% for REC and +11.50% for RES over SOTA,
which well confirm the validity of our model for joint REC
and RES learning.

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [11, 12, 19,
21, 44, 45, 48, 42, 37] and Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) [32, 16, 40, 25, 34] are two emerging tasks,
which involves identifying the target visual instances according to a given linguistic expression. Their difference
∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.
1 Source codes and pretrained backbone are available at : https://
github.com/luogen1996/MCN

Referring Expression
Segmentation

Referring Expression
Comprehension

“a half horse.”
(a) Illustration of Referring Expression Comprehension (REC)
and Segmentation (RES).

“person on scooter wearing black
helmet and has black backpack”

“the cat right in front of the window.”

(b) Illustraion of the prediction conflict.

Figure 1. (a) The RES and REC models first perceive the instances
in an image and then locate one or few referents based on an expression. (b) Two typical cases of prediction conflict: wrong REC
correct RES (left) and wrong RES correct REC (right).

is that in REC, the targets are grounded by bounding boxes,
while they are segmented in RES, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
REC and RES are regarded as two seperated tasks with
distinct methodologies in the existing literature. In REC,
most existing methods [11, 12, 19, 21, 23, 44, 45, 46, 48]
follow a multi-stage pipeline, i.e., detecting the salient regions from the image and selecting the most matched one
through multimodal interactions. In RES, existing methods [32, 16] usually embed a language module, e.g., LSTM
or GRU [6], into a one-stage segmentation network like
FCN [20] to segment the referent. Although some recent
works like MAttNet [43] can simultaneously process both
REC and RES, their multi-task functionality are largely attributed to their backbone detector, i.e., MaskRCNN [43],
rather than explicitly interacting and reincecing two tasks.
It is a natural thought to jointly learn REC and RES to
reinforce each other, as similar to the classic endeavors in
joint object detection and segmentation [9, 10, 7]. Compared with RES, REC is superior in predicting the poten-

10034

