Neural Implicit Embedding for Point Cloud Analysis
Kent Fujiwara and Taiichi Hashimoto
LINE Corporation
{kent.fujiwara, taiichi.hashimoto}@linecorp.com

Implicit Representation

Abstract
We present a novel representation for point clouds that
encapsulates the local characteristics of the underlying
structure. The key idea is to embed an implicit representation of the point cloud, namely the distance field, into neural
networks. One neural network is used to embed a portion
of the distance field around a point. The resulting network
weights are concatenated to be used as a representation of
the corresponding point cloud instance. To enable comparison among the weights, Extreme Learning Machine (ELM)
is employed as the embedding network. Invariance to scale
and coordinate change can be achieved by introducing a
scale commutative activation layer to the ELM, and aligning the distance field into a canonical pose. Experimental results using our representation demonstrate that our
proposal is capable of similar or better classification and
segmentation performance compared to the state-of-the-art
point-based methods, while requiring less time for training.

1. Introduction
Analysis of unstructured point cloud data is one of the
central topics in computer vision, as 3-dimensional data of
various objects can now be easily captured through commercial sensors. Point clouds play an important role in
key areas, such as autonomous driving and robotics, where
spatial information of the surrounding environment is critical [4, 31]. Point cloud data can also be interpreted as sets,
whose analysis is known to have various applications [48].
Unlike 2-dimensional images, 3-dimensional point
clouds are generally unordered, unstructured, and represented in an arbitrary coordinate system. Therefore, there
is no straightforward method to apply convolutional neural networks to point clouds, despite their recent success in
the analysis of 2D data. Many of the current methods attempt to create a regular representation by converting point
clouds into voxel data or even rendered images. However, in
these cases, information of the original points is lost, making such tasks as point-wise label assignment significantly

Local Embedding via ELM

Weights:
Shape Representation

Figure 1: Proposed representation. A specific type of a
neural network, Extreme Learning Machine, is responsible
for embedding a local portion of the implicit representation
around a point in the point cloud. The trainable weights β
from the ELMs, concatenated into a single matrix, are the
representation of the corresponding point cloud instance (in
this case: Stanford Bunny). The representation can be utilized for tasks such as classification and segmentation.

more difficult. This fact necessitates a different approach to
producing a representation of 3D point clouds.
An ideal representation of point clouds should also be
robust to arbitrary changes of the origin location, orientation, and scale of the 3D coordinate system used to describe
point cloud data. Conventional methods for 3D point cloud
data analysis generally attempt to obtain such representation through data augmentation by applying various transformations and adding perturbations to the training data.
We propose a novel representation of points clouds that
encapsulates the local information around points clouds,
and addresses such issues as robustness to coordinate system change, scaling, and permutation. As shown in Fig. 1,
the key idea is to embed an implicit function of one
point cloud instance into multiple neural networks, whose
weights are used as the feature of the point cloud instance.
We firstly convert each point cloud into an implicit function, the distance field. We acquire the distance field of each
instance using a sphere of fixed sampling points, which we
call a sampling sphere. We place one sphere on top of each

11734

