SQE: a Self Quality Evaluation Metric for Parameters Optimization in
Multi-Object Tracking
Yanru Huang1

Feiyu Zhu2 Zheni Zeng1∗ Xi Qiu2 Yuan Shen1† Jianan Wu2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Megvii Inc.

{huangyr18, zengzn16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

shenyuan ee@tsinghua.edu.cn

{zhufeiyu, qiuxi, wjn}@megvii.com

Abstract
We present a novel self quality evaluation metric SQE
for parameters optimization in the challenging yet critical
multi-object tracking task. Current evaluation metrics all
require annotated ground truth, thus will fail in the test environment and realistic circumstances prohibiting further
optimization after training. By contrast, our metric reflects the internal characteristics of trajectory hypotheses
and measures tracking performance without ground truth.
We demonstrate that trajectories with different qualities exhibit different single or multiple peaks over feature distance distribution, inspiring us to design a simple yet effective method to assess the quality of trajectories using a
two-class Gaussian mixture model. Experiments mainly on
MOT16 Challenge data sets verify the effectiveness of our
method in both correlating with existing metrics and enabling parameters self-optimization to achieve better performance. We believe that our conclusions and method are
inspiring for future multi-object tracking in practice.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to track all objects of
interest categories in a video sequence [18, 26]. It is crucial in applications like video surveillance and autonomous
driving, where multiple pedestrians and vehicles need to be
tracked simultaneously [6, 25, 3]. In recent years, trackingby-detection [9, 18, 23, 6, 1, 5] has become the predominant paradigm of MOT. This approach first detects objects
in each frame, then extracts discriminative features to quantify the similarities between targets, and finally perform data
association to assign detections into their most likely trajectories. During this process, several influential parameters
need to be set manually, such as the threshold determining
whether to establish associations. To find the optimal pa∗ This work was done during Zheni Zeng was an intern at Megvii Inc.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples of different intra and inter distance distributions. Ideally, the distance distribution within the same trajectory
or between two different trajectories present a single peak with
little noise. If false identification takes place, such as the hypothetical identity 2 follows target B at first and then switches to
another target C, the distance distribution would present multiple
distinguishable peaks. See Section 3.2 for a detailed explanation.

rameters, an evaluation procedure is needed to measure the
tracking performance. However, existing evaluation metrics
like event-based measures CLEAR MOT [3] or identitybased measures IDF1 [16] all require ground truth annotations, limiting the optimization to training data. Since the
optimized parameters could be sub-optimal in test scenes, a
self evaluation metric that enables parameters optimization
without ground truth is urgently needed.
To evaluate the accuracy and stability of a tracker without ground truth, we design a self quality evaluation metric
SQE that considers the quantity, length, and feature distance information of the trajectory hypotheses comprehensively. Our method can assess the quality of trajectories owing to the distinctive distance distribution forms as shown in
Figure 1. The intra distance denotes the feature distance between each two detection boxes in the same trajectory, and
all pairs constitute the intra distance distribution. Similarly,
the inter distance denotes the feature distance between each
two detection boxes from different trajectories. Intuitively,
when a trajectory contains different targets, the distance dis-

8306

