When2com: Multi-Agent Perception via Communication Graph Grouping
Yen-Cheng Liu, Junjiao Tian∗, Nathaniel Glaser∗, Zsolt Kira
Georgia Institute of Technology
{ycliu, jtian73, nglaser3, zkira}@gatech.edu

Abstract
While significant advances have been made for singleagent perception, many applications require multiple sensing agents and cross-agent communication due to benefits
such as coverage and robustness. It is therefore critical
to develop frameworks which support multi-agent collaborative perception in a distributed and bandwidth-efficient
manner. In this paper, we address the collaborative perception problem, where one agent is required to perform a perception task and can communicate and share information
with other agents on the same task. Specifically, we propose
a communication framework by learning both to construct
communication groups and decide when to communicate.
We demonstrate the generalizability of our framework on
two different perception tasks and show that it significantly
reduces communication bandwidth while maintaining superior performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of multi-agent collaborative perception. We construct a multi-agent perception system to
improve the agent-wise perception accuracy and reduce the
transmission bandwidth. Each agent learns to construct
communication groups and decide when to communication.

1. Introduction
Remarkable progress has been achieved for single-agent
perception and recognition, where one or more sensor
modalities are used to perform object detection [30, 31, 22]
and segmentation [3, 12, 19], depth estimation [10, 38, 11],
and various other scene understanding tasks. However, in
many applications, such as robotics, there may be multiple
agents distributed in the environment, each of which has local sensors. Such multi-agent systems are advantageous in
many cases, for example, to increase coverage across the
environment or to improve robustness to failures.
Thus, we tackle the problem of multi-agent collaborative
perception, an under-studied topic in the literature, where
multiple agents are able to exchange information to improve
overall accuracy towards perception tasks (e.g., semantic
segmentation or object recognition). One major challenge
for multi-agent collaborative perception is the transmission
bandwidth, as high bandwidth results in network congestion and latency in the agent network. We therefore inves∗ equal contribution

tigate the scenario where information across all agents (and
hence sensors) is not available in a centralized manner, and
agents can only communicate through bandwidth-limited
channels. We also consider several challenging scenarios
where some sensor data may be uninformative or degraded.
Prior works on learning to communicate [34, 8] mainly
address decision-making tasks (rather than for improving
perception) under simple perceptual environments. In addition, these methods also do not consider bandwidth limitations: They learn to communicate across a fully-connected
graph (i.e. all agents communicate with each other through
broadcasts). Such methods cannot scale as the number of
agents increases. Similarly, since all information is broadcast there is no decision of when to communicate conditioned on the need. An agent does not need to consume
bandwidth when the local observation is sufficient for the
prediction. When messages sent by other agents are degraded or irrelevant, communication thus could be detrimental to the perception task.
In this paper, we propose a learning-based communi14106

