RetinaFace: Single-shot Multi-level Face Localisation in the Wild
Jiankang Deng * 1,2,3
Jia Guo * 2
Evangelos Ververas1,3
Irene Kotsia4
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,3
1
2
3
4
Imperial College
InsightFace
FaceSoft
Middlesex University London
{j.deng16, e.ververas16, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
guojia@gmail.com, i.kotsia@mdx.ac.uk

Abstract
Though tremendous strides have been made in uncontrolled face detection, accurate and efficient 2D face alignment and 3D face reconstruction in-the-wild remain an
open challenge. In this paper, we present a novel singleshot, multi-level face localisation method, named RetinaFace, which unifies face box prediction, 2D facial landmark localisation and 3D vertices regression under one
common target: point regression on the image plane. To
fill the data gap, we manually annotated five facial landmarks on the WIDER FACE dataset and employed a semiautomatic annotation pipeline to generate 3D vertices for
face images from the WIDER FACE, AFLW and FDDB
datasets. Based on extra annotations, we propose a mutually beneficial regression target for 3D face reconstruction, that is predicting 3D vertices projected on the image
plane constrained by a common 3D topology. The proposed
3D face reconstruction branch can be easily incorporated,
without any optimisation difficulty, in parallel with the existing box and 2D landmark regression branches during joint
training. Extensive experimental results show that RetinaFace can simultaneously achieve stable face detection,
accurate 2D face alignment and robust 3D face reconstruction while being efficient through single-shot inference.

1. Introduction
Automatic face localisation is a prerequisite for facial
image analysis in many applications such as facial attribute
analysis(e.g. expression [64] and age [41, 39]) and facial
identity recognition [18, 12, 56]. A narrow definition of face
localisation may refer to traditional face detection [54, 62],
which aims at estimating the face bounding boxes without
possessing any scale and position prior. Nevertheless, in
this paper we refer to a broader definition of face locali* Equal contributions.
InsightFace is a nonprofit Github project for 2D and 3D face analysis.

Figure 1. Face localisation tasks from coarse to fine. Face detection only predicts one center point and scales. Face pose estimation calculates the scale, 3D rotation and translation parameters.
Sparse face alignment localises more semantic points. Face segmentation computes pixel-wise label maps for different semantic
components (e.g. mouth, eyes). 3D face reconstruction can establish dense 3D correspondence for every pixel of a face, which is
the most informative and demanding face localisation technique.

sation which includes face detection [43], face pose estimation [48, 60, 31, 5], face alignment [14, 57, 17, 16, 15,
58, 23], face segmentation [50, 34] and 3D face reconstruction [72, 1, 19, 70]. In Fig. 1, we show face localisation
tasks with multiple levels of detail, from coarse to fine.
Typically, face pose estimation, face alignment, face segmentation and 3D face reconstruction are steps subsequent
to face detection. These fine-grind face localisation tasks
are performed on individual face crops and the computational complexity increases linearly with the number of
faces in the input image. Since all face localisation tasks
from face detection to 3D face reconstruction aim at establishing the semantic correspondence between different face
images, with their main difference being only in the information level, the question that arises is if can we combine
them into a united framework by jointly training and make
15203

