Discovering Synchronized Subsets of Sequences: A Large Scale Solution
Evangelos Sariyanidi1 , Casey J. Zampella1 , Keith G. Bartley1 , John D. Herrington1,2 ,
Theodore D. Satterthwaite2 , Robert T. Schultz1,2 and Birkan Tunc1,2
1
Center for Autism Research, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 2 University of Pennsylvania
{sariyanide,zampellac,bartleyg,herringtonj,schultzrt,tuncb}@email.chop.edu

Abstract
Finding the largest subset of sequences (i.e., time series)
that are correlated above a certain threshold, within large
datasets, is of significant interest for computer vision and
pattern recognition problems across domains, including behavior analysis, computational biology, neuroscience, and
finance. Maximal clique algorithms can be used to solve
this problem, but they are not scalable. We present an approximate, but highly efficient and scalable, method that
represents the search space as a union of sets called ǫexpanded clusters, one of which is theoretically guaranteed
to contain the largest subset of synchronized sequences. The
method finds synchronized sets by fitting a Euclidean ball
on ǫ-expanded clusters, using Jung’s theorem. We validate
the method on data from the three distinct domains of facial behavior analysis, finance, and neuroscience, where we
respectively discover the synchrony among pixels of face
videos, stock market item prices, and dynamic brain connectivity data. Experiments show that our method produces
results comparable to, but up to 300 times faster than, maximal clique algorithms, with speed gains increasing exponentially with the number of input sequences.

1. Introduction
Synchrony is observed in countless phenomena and its
discovery is central to answering many computer vision and
pattern recognition problems. However, a basic research
problem has remained surprisingly underexplored: Given a
set of sequences (i.e., time series), how can we discover the
largest subset in which every pair of sequences satisfies a
synchrony criterion? This problem naturally arises in many
domains. For example, in a video, only movement in a subset of pixels is synchronized in time, and their identification
can lead to discovering events of interest (e.g., facial expressions [58, 54]). In the stock market, the prices of only certain and a priori unknown assets are correlated. The brain is
dynamically organized into subsets of neurons (i.e., modules, systems) that have synchronous activation. Indeed,

researchers have used the synchrony among sequences to
mine financial data [4, 29], define the functional architecture of the brain [22, 6], and identify community structure
in complex networks [36, 31]. Previous research in this
area has commonly employed maximal clique algorithms.
However, despite their widespread use, maximal clique algorithms have exponential complexity [48], which imposes
a barrier on possible research questions that can be targeted.
In this paper, we propose an efficient and scalable framework to approximately solve the following problem: Given
a set of sequences, find the largest subset such that all pairs
of sequences in that subset are correlated above a given
threshold. The framework first clusters all input sequences,
and then refines the clusters until all sequences within the
clusters are synchronized (i.e., pairwise correlated). Prior
to refining, the clusters are enlarged to obtain so-called ǫexpanded clusters. We call our method SyncRef, as it finds
synchronized subsets through refining. Herein, we demonstrate SyncRef’s versatility through experiments on data
from three distinct domains, namely computer vision (motion of video pixels), finance (price of market assets), and
neuroscience (neuronal activity). These experiments clearly
demonstrate that SyncRef yields solutions that are highly
comparable to an exact solution, yet are obtained hundreds
of times faster. Moreover, the speed gains of SyncRef increase exponentially with the number of sequences.
This paper makes two specific technical contributions.
First, we introduce the concept of ǫ-expansion, a principled approach to expand a set of clusters that span the input set. The largest possible subset of synchronized sequences is theoretically guaranteed to be contained within
one of the ǫ-expanded clusters. Second, we show how to
use Jung’s theorem to ensure that all possible pairs of sequences in the output solution are correlated above a given
threshold. We also provide directions for how to extend
the SyncRef method to discover the largest subset of locally correlated sequences within an unknown time window. The code of SyncRef is publicly available at https:
//github.com/sariyanidi/SyncRef.

9493

