FOAL: Fast Online Adaptive Learning for Cardiac Motion Estimation
Hanchao Yu⋆2 , Shanhui Sun†1 , Haichao Yu2 , Xiao Chen1 ,
Honghui Shi†3 , Thomas Huang2 , Terrence Chen1
1
United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge, MA 02140, 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3 University of Oregon
†

shanhui.sun@united-imaging.com, † shihonghui3@gmail.com

Abstract
Motion estimation of cardiac MRI videos is crucial for the
evaluation of human heart anatomy and function. Recent
researches show promising results with deep learningbased methods. In clinical deployment, however, they suffer
dramatic performance drops due to mismatched distributions between training and testing datasets, commonly
encountered in the clinical environment. On the other
hand, it is arguably impossible to collect all representative
datasets and to train a universal tracker before deployment.
In this context, we proposed a novel fast online adaptive
learning (FOAL) framework: an online gradient descent
based optimizer that is optimized by a meta-learner. The
meta-learner enables the online optimizer to perform a fast
and robust adaptation. We evaluated our method through
extensive experiments on two public clinical datasets.
The results showed the superior performance of FOAL in
accuracy compared to the offline-trained tracking method.
On average, the FOAL took only 0.4 second per video for
online optimization.

1. Introduction
Video dense tracking and motion estimation using deep
learning has gained great progress for natural image applications in recent research [35, 12, 22, 46, 49, 16, 11, 41, 18,
27, 51, 21]. In medical imaging, videos, compared to static
images, are ideal for dynamically changing physiological
processes such as the beating heart and are commonly used
in clinical settings. Feature tracking of dynamic cardiac images can provide precise and comprehensive assessments of
the cardiac motion and has been proved valuable for cardiac
disease management [34, 28, 44, 24]. Motion estimation
can also benefit other tasks in cardiac imaging, such as image reconstruction [10, 31] and semi-supervised segmentation [26, 38, 50, 17, 45, 42]. Recently, deep learning-based
methods show promising results in cardiac motion estimation [26, 50, 15, 23]. However, most studies have been de-

signed in a research environment: the proposed models are
trained and tested on the data with similar distributions. In
a clinical environment, however, the imaged objects may
present various anatomies (abnormally thin or thick heart
muscle) and/or dynamics (irregularly beating heart) for different diseases. On top of that, the imaging process itself
commonly introduces many, if not more, variations. This
is especially true for cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR)
imaging, which provides superior video quality over ultrasound, but the image appearances are influenced by multiple factors including scanner vendors, main magnetic fields,
different scanning protocols and technicians’ operations. It
is arguably impossible to build a dataset that includes every
combination of the variations and train a universal tracker
on it. It is also not ideal and sometimes impossible in a
clinical setting that the pre-trained network gets fine-tuned
on the data from a different distribution, given the scarce
nature of medical data. In other words, for a clinically suitable deep-trained tracker, the neural network needs to possess the capability to quickly adapt to new data from unseen distributions. Towards this end, we propose a fast online adaptive learning (FOAL) mechanism for dense video
tracking applied to cardiac motion estimation. The proposed framework consists of an online adaptive stage and
an offline meta-learning stage. The offline meta-learning
trains the model to gain the adaptation capability and the
online stage will apply this adaptation to adjust the model
parameters using very few and unseen data. We have designed a unique module for video tracking used in both
stages to train an adaptive tracker. The tracker trained using
the proposed FOAL achieves the state-of-the-art (SOTA) results compared to strong baselines. The contributions of our
work are summarized as follows.
• In the context of dense motion estimation, we proposed
a novel online model adaptation method, which adapts
a trained baseline model to a new video using a gradient descent optimization.
• We proposed a meta-learning method optimizing the
proposed online optimizer. The meta-learner enables

⋆ This work was carried out during the internship of the author at
United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge, MA 02140.

4313

