BSP-Net: Generating Compact Meshes via Binary Space Partitioning
Zhiqin Chen
Simon Fraser University

Andrea Tagliasacchi
Google Research

Hao Zhang
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
Polygonal meshes are ubiquitous in the digital 3D domain, yet they have only played a minor role in the deep
learning revolution. Leading methods for learning generative models of shapes rely on implicit functions, and generate meshes only after expensive iso-surfacing routines.
To overcome these challenges, we are inspired by a classical spatial data structure from computer graphics, Binary
Space Partitioning (BSP), to facilitate 3D learning. The
core ingredient of BSP is an operation for recursive subdivision of space to obtain convex sets. By exploiting this property, we devise BSP-Net, a network that learns to represent
a 3D shape via convex decomposition. Importantly, BSPNet is unsupervised since no convex shape decompositions
are needed for training. The network is trained to reconstruct a shape using a set of convexes obtained from a BSPtree built on a set of planes. The convexes inferred by BSPNet can be easily extracted to form a polygon mesh, without any need for iso-surfacing. The generated meshes are
compact (i.e., low-poly) and well suited to represent sharp
geometry; they are guaranteed to be watertight and can be
easily parameterized. We also show that the reconstruction quality by BSP-Net is competitive with state-of-the-art
methods while using much fewer primitives. Code is available at https://github.com/czq142857/BSP-NET-original.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in representation learning and generative modeling for 3D shapes.
Up to now, deep neural networks for shape analysis and
synthesis have been developed mainly for voxel grids [14,
18, 48, 50], point clouds [1, 33, 34, 55, 56], and implicit
functions [5, 13, 22, 28, 52]. As the dominant 3D shape
representation for modeling, display, and animation, polygonal meshes have not figured prominently amid these developments. One of the main reasons is that the nonuniformity and irregularity of triangle tessellations do not
naturally support conventional convolution and pooling operations [19]. However, compared to voxels and point
clouds, meshes can provide a more seamless and coherent

Figure 1: (a) 3D shape auto-encoding by BSP-Net quickly
reconstructs a compact, i.e., low-poly, mesh, which can be
easily textured. The mesh edges reproduce sharp details
in the input (e.g., edges of the legs), yet still approximate
smooth geometry (e.g., circular table-top). (b) State-of-theart methods regress an indicator function, which needs to
be iso-surfaced, resulting in over-tessellated meshes which
only approximate sharp details with smooth surfaces.
surface representation; they are more controllable, easier to
manipulate, and are more compact, attaining higher visual
quality using fewer primitives; see Figure 1.
For visualization purposes, the generated voxels, point
clouds, and implicits are typically converted into meshes in
post-processing, e.g., via iso-surface extraction by Marching Cubes [26]. Few deep networks can generate polygonal
meshes directly, and such methods are limited to genus-zero
meshes [17, 27, 44], piece-wise genus-zero [12] meshes,
meshes sharing the same connectivity [11, 41], or meshes
with very low number of vertices [7]. Patch-based approaches can generate results which cover a 3D shape with
planar polygons [46] or curved [16] mesh patches, but their
visual quality is often tampered by visible seams, incoherent patch connections, and rough surface appearance. It is
difficult to texture or manipulate such mesh outputs.
In this paper, we develop a generative neural network
which outputs polygonal meshes natively. Specifically, parameters or weights that are learned by the network can predict multiple planes which fit the surfaces of a 3D shape,
resulting in a compact and watertight polygonal mesh; see
Figure 1. We name our network BSP-Net, since each facet
is associated with a binary space partitioning (BSP), and
the shape is composed by combining these partitions.

45

