The Garden of Forking Paths: Towards Multi-Future Trajectory Prediction
Junwei Liang1∗
Lu Jiang2
Kevin Murphy2
Ting Yu3
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Google Research

Alexander Hauptmann1
3
Google Cloud AI

{junweil,alex}@cs.cmu.edu, {lujiang,kpmurphy,yuti}@google.com

Figure 1: Illustration of person trajectory prediction. (1) A person walks towards a car (data from the VIRAT/ActEV dataset).
The green line is the actual future trajectory and the yellow-orange heatmaps are example future predictions. Although these
predictions near the cars are plausible, they would be considered errors in the real video dataset. (2) To combat this, we
propose a new dataset called “Forking Paths”; here we illustrate 3 possible futures created by human annotators controlling
agents in a synthetic world derived from real data. (3) Here we show semantic segmentation of the scene. (4-6) Here we
show the same scene rendered from different viewing angles, where the red circles are future destinations.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of predicting the distribution over multiple possible future paths of people as they
move through various visual scenes. We make two main
contributions. The first contribution is a new dataset, created in a realistic 3D simulator, which is based on real
world trajectory data, and then extrapolated by human annotators to achieve different latent goals. This provides the
first benchmark for quantitative evaluation of the models to
predict multi-future trajectories. The second contribution is
a new model to generate multiple plausible future trajectories, which contains novel designs of using multi-scale location encodings and convolutional RNNs over graphs. We
refer to our model as Multiverse. We show that our model
achieves the best results on our dataset, as well as on the
real-world VIRAT/ActEV dataset (which just contains one
possible future). 1

1. Introduction
Forecasting future human behavior is a fundamental
problem in video understanding. In particular, future path
prediction, which aims at forecasting a pedestrian’s future
trajectory in the next few seconds, has received a lot of attention in our community [20, 1, 15, 26]. This functionality
is a key component in a variety of applications such as autonomous driving [4, 6], long-term object tracking [19, 48],
safety monitoring [30], robotic planning [42, 43], etc.
∗ Work partially done during a research internship at Google.
1 Code and models are released at https://next.cs.cmu.edu/
multiverse

Of course, the future is often very uncertain: Given
the same historical trajectory, a person may take different paths, depending on their (latent) goals. Thus recent
work has started focusing on multi-future trajectory prediction [53, 6, 26, 34, 54, 23].
Consider the example in Fig. 1. We see a person moving
from the bottom left towards the top right of the image, and
our task is to predict where he will go next. Since there are
many possible future trajectories this person might follow,
we are interested in learning a model that can generate multiple plausible futures. However, since the ground truth data
only contains one trajectory, it is difficult to evaluate such
probabilistic models.
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, our first
contribution is the creation of a realistic synthetic dataset
that allows us to compare models in a quantitative way in
terms of their ability to predict multiple plausible futures,
rather than just evaluating them against a single observed
trajectory as in existing studies. We create this dataset using the 3D CARLA [11] simulator, where the scenes are
manually designed to be similar to those found in the challenging real-world benchmark VIRAT/ActEV [36, 3]. Once
we have recreated the static scene, we automatically reconstruct trajectories by projecting real-world data to the
3D simulation world. See Fig. 1 and 3. We then semiautomatically select a set of plausible future destinations
(corresponding to semantically meaningful locations in the
scene), and ask human annotators to create multiple possible continuations of the real trajectories towards each such
goal. In this way, our dataset is “anchored” in reality, and
110508

