Reliable Weighted Optimal Transport for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Renjun Xu∗, Pelen Liu, Liyan Wang, Chao Chen
Zhejiang University, China

Jindong Wang
Microsoft Research

Abstract

contain data collected from different perspectives or by different sensors, leading to a large domain gap.

Recently, extensive researches have been proposed to address the UDA problem, which aims to learn transferrable
models for the unlabeled target domain. Among them,
the optimal transport is a promising metric to align the
representations of the source and target domains. However, most existing works based on optimal transport ignore
the intra-domain structure, only achieving coarse pair-wise
matching. The target samples distributed near the edge
of the clusters, or far from their corresponding class centers are easily to be misclassified by the decision boundary learned from the source domain. In this paper, we
present Reliable Weighted Optimal Transport (RWOT) for
unsupervised domain adaptation, including novel Shrinking Subspace Reliability (SSR) and weighted optimal transport strategy. Specifically, SSR exploits spatial prototypical information and intra-domain structure to dynamically
measure the sample-level domain discrepancy across domains. Besides, the weighted optimal transport strategy
based on SSR is exploited to achieve the precise-pair-wise
optimal transport procedure, which reduces negative transfer brought by the samples near decision boundaries in the
target domain. RWOT also equips with the discriminative
centroid clustering exploitation strategy to learn transfer
features. A thorough evaluation shows that RWOT outperforms existing state-of-the-art method on standard domain
adaptation benchmarks.

For unsupervised domain adaptation, a major line of
work reduces the domain gap by learning domain invariant
feature representation, such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [38, 30], Correlation Alignment (CORAL)
[36, 24] and Kullback-Leiber divergence (KL) [51]. Besides, another promising direction is based on the adversarial training [1, 37], where a discriminator (domain classifier) is trained to distinguish between the source and target
representations. Meanwhile, duo to its ability of encoding
class-structure in distributions, the optimal transport that
minimizes a global transportation effort or cost between distributions, has been widely used to reduce the domain shift
under complex distributions [5, 33, 47, 40]. However, existing optimal transport approaches in domain adaptation do
not consider intra-domain structure [44] of both domains,
only achieving coarse pair-wise matching. Moreover, some
images that are significantly dissimilar across domains in
the feature space may cause a gross mismatch during optimal transport procedure, leading to negative transfer.

1. Introduction
Deep learning recently has achieved remarkable success
in diverse computer vision tasks such as image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation with the
help of large-scale labeled datasets [43]. Unfortunately, it
is always expensive and time-consuming to collect extensive amounts of labeled data. To avoid labeling efforts,
domain adaptation [26] serves as a promising solution to
enhance the learning performance on a label-scarce domain
(i.e., target domain) by transferring knowledge from a labelrich domain (i.e., source domain). The target domain may
∗ Corresponding author: rux@zju.edu.cn

To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a Reliable Weighted Optimal Transport (RWOT) for domain
adaptation. Inspired by the prototypical networks which
has achieved significant performance in domain adaptation
[27], we exploit the prototypical information in the feature
space to mitigate the wrong transport procedure. Besides,
we also take into account the discriminative feature learning to benefit the adaptation performance, which has been
widely used to learn the deep invariant features [49, 52].
Our proposed RWOT, therefore, consists of Shrinking Subspace Reliability (SSR) and weighted optimal transport
strategy, which can be seen in Figure 1. Moreover, we
demonstrate the necessity of shrinking subspace reliability
and the procedure of weighted optimal transport strategy.
RWOT also equips with a discriminative centroid exploitation strategy to improve transfer performance. The main
contributions of this paper are:
(1) We propose shrinking subspace reliability to measure
the sample-level domain discrepancy across domains by exploiting spatial prototypical information and intra-domain
structure dynamically. The method can be used as a pre-

4394

