Domain Adaptation for Image Dehazing
Yuanjie Shao1 , Lerenhan Li1 , Wenqi Ren2 , Changxin Gao1 , Nong Sang1∗
1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{shaoyuanjie, lrhli, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn, rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com

Abstract
Image dehazing using learning-based methods has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in recent years.
However, most existing methods train a dehazing model on
synthetic hazy images, which are less able to generalize well
to real hazy images due to domain shift. To address this
issue, we propose a domain adaptation paradigm, which
consists of an image translation module and two image dehazing modules. Specifically, we first apply a bidirectional
translation network to bridge the gap between the synthetic
and real domains by translating images from one domain to
another. And then, we use images before and after translation to train the proposed two image dehazing networks with
a consistency constraint. In this phase, we incorporate the
real hazy image into the dehazing training via exploiting the
properties of the clear image (e.g., dark channel prior and
image gradient smoothing) to further improve the domain
adaptivity. By training image translation and dehazing network in an end-to-end manner, we can obtain better effects
of both image translation and dehazing. Experimental results on both synthetic and real-world images demonstrate
that our model performs favorably against the state-of-theart dehazing algorithms.

1. Introduction
Single image dehazing aims to recover the clean image from a hazy input, which is essential for subsequent
high-level tasks, such as object recognition and scene understanding. Thus, it has received significant attention in
the vision community over the past few years. According
to the physical scattering models [21, 23, 18], the hazing
process is usually formulated as
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x)).
∗ Corresponding author.

(1)

(a) Hazy image

(b) EPDN [25]

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Dehazed results on a real world hazy image. Our method
generates a cleaner image with fewer color distortion and brighter
details. (a) Hazy image. (b) The result of EPDN [25]. (c) Our
result.

where I(x) and J(x) denote the hazy image and the clean
image, A is the global atmospheric light, and t(x) is the
transmission map. The transmission map can be represented as t(x) = e−βd(x) , where d(x) and β denote the scene
depth and the atmosphere scattering parameter, respectively. Given a hazy image I(x), most dehazing algorithms try
to estimate t(x) and A.
However, estimating the transmission map from a hazy
image is an ill-posed problem generally. Early prior-based
methods try to estimate the transmission map by exploiting
the statistical properties of clear images, such as dark channel prior [9] and color-line prior [8]. Unfortunately, these
image priors are easily inconsistent with the practice, which
may lead to inaccurate transmission approximations. Thus,
the quality of the restored image is undesirable.
To deal with this problem, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been employed to estimate transmissions [4, 26, 35] or predict clear images directly [12, 27, 16,
25]. These methods are valid and superior to the priorbased algorithms with significant performance improvements. However, deep learning-based approaches need to
rely on a large amount of real hazy images and their hazefree counterparts for training. In general, it is impractical to
acquire large quantities of ground-truth images in the real
world. Therefore, most dehazing models resort to training
on synthetic hazy dataset. However, due to the domain shift
problem, the models learned from synthetic data often fail

2808

