Can Deep Learning Recognize Subtle Human Activities?
Vincent Jacquot
École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne

Zhuofan Ying
University of Science and
Technology of China

Gabriel Kreiman
Center for Brains, Minds
and Machines, Boston, MA

jacquot.vinc@gmail.com

zhuofanying@gmail.com

gabriel.kreiman@tch.harvard.edu

Abstract
Deep Learning has driven recent and exciting progress
in computer vision, instilling the belief that these algorithms
could solve any visual task. Yet, datasets commonly used to
train and test computer vision algorithms have pervasive
confounding factors. Such biases make it difficult to truly
estimate the performance of those algorithms and how well
computer vision models can extrapolate outside the distribution in which they were trained. In this work, we propose
a new action classification challenge that is performed well
by humans, but poorly by state-of-the-art Deep Learning
models. As a proof-of-principle, we consider three exemplary tasks: drinking, reading, and sitting. The best accuracies reached using state-of-the-art computer vision models were 61.7%, 62.8%, and 76.8%, respectively, while human participants scored above 90% accuracy on the three
tasks. We propose a rigorous method to reduce confounds
when creating datasets, and when comparing human versus
computer vision performance. Source code and datasets are
publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have radically accelerated progress in visual object recognition, with impressive performance on datasets such as ImageNet [31],
achieving top-5 error of 16.4 % in 2012 [20], down to 1.8%
in 2019 [44]. Similar progress has been observed in other
domains such as action recognition, with an error rate of
1.8% [6] in the UCF101 dataset [35].
Such impressive feats have also been accompanied by
vigorous discussions to better understand what the networks
learn and how they classify the images [46, 24, 32, 28, 18].
In addition to showcasing algorithmic successes, systematically understanding the networks’ limitations will help
us develop better and more stringent datasets to stress test
1 https://github.com/kreimanlab/
DeepLearning-vs-HighLevelVision

Figure 1. Example images from our dataset (Group 2, controlled set). Left to right: drinking, reading, and sitting. Top: positive images. Bottom: negative images. Above each image, classification output for ResNet, VGG16, and human psychophysics
measurements (see text for details). The models misclassified the
middle top, bottom left, and bottom right pictures, whereas humans correctly classified all the pictures. See also Fig. S4.

models and develop better ones. For example, in the
UCF101 dataset, algorithms can rely exclusively on the
background color to classify human activities well above
chance levels. For example, “sky diving” typically correlates with blue pixels (the sky), whereas ‘baseball pitch”
correlates with green pixels (the field).
As an illustration of how to rigorously test state-of-theart models, and how to build controlled datasets, we focus
on action recognition from individual frames. We study
three human behaviors: whether a person is drinking or
not, reading or not, and sitting or not (Figure 1, Fig. S4).
Each of these actions is considered independently in a binary classification task. We first describe how we built a
controlled dataset, next we demonstrate that humans can
rapidly solve these tasks, and finally we show that these
simple binary questions challenge current systems, and introduce initial thoughts on how such tasks could be solved.
114244

