SLV: Spatial Likelihood Voting for Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Ze Chen1,2,∗ Zhihang Fu5 Rongxin Jiang1,3 Yaowu Chen1,4,† Xian-sheng Hua5,†
1
Zhejiang University, Institute of Advanced Digital Technology and Instrument
2
Zhejiang University Embedded System Engineering Research Center, Ministry of Education of China
3
Zhejiang University, the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology
4
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Network Multimedia Technologies
5
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{chenze,rongxinj}@zju.edu.cn {zhihang.fzh,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com
cyw@mail.bme.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Based on the framework of multiple instance learning
(MIL), tremendous works have promoted the advances of
weakly supervised object detection (WSOD). However, most
MIL-based methods tend to localize instances to their discriminative parts instead of the whole content. In this paper,
we propose a spatial likelihood voting (SLV) module to converge the proposal localizing process without any bounding box annotations. Specifically, all region proposals in a
given image play the role of voters every iteration during
training, voting for the likelihood of each category in spatial dimensions. After dilating alignment on the area with
large likelihood values, the voting results are regularized as
bounding boxes, being used for the final classification and
localization. Based on SLV, we further propose an end-toend training framework for multi-task learning. The classification and localization tasks promote each other, which
further improves the detection performance. Extensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of SLV.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an important problem in computer
vision, which aims at localizing tight bounding boxes of
all instances in a given image and classifying them respectively. With the development of convolutional neural network (CNN) [10, 13, 14] and large-scale annotated
datasets [6, 18, 23], there have been great improvements in
object detection [8, 9, 17, 19, 21] in recent years. However,
it is time-consuming and labor-intensive to annotate accu∗ This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Detection results without/with SLV module. (a) Common MIL-based methods are easy to localize instances to their
discriminative parts instead of the whole content. (b) SLV module shifts object proposals and detects accurate bounding boxes of
objects.

rate object bounding boxes for a large-scale dataset. Therefore, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD), which
only use image-level annotations for training, is considered
to be a promising solution in reality and has attracted the
attention of academic community in recent years.
Most WSOD methods [3, 4, 22, 25, 26, 32] follow the

12995

