Robust Learning Through Cross-Task Consistency
Amir R. Zamir†∗ Alexander Sax‡∗ Nikhil Cheerla§ Rohan Suri§
Zhangjie Cao§ Jitendra Malik‡ Leonidas Guibas§
†

Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)

§

Stanford University

‡

UC Berkeley

http://consistency.epfl.ch/
Input Image

Abstract
Visual perception entails solving a wide set of tasks, e.g.,
object detection, depth estimation, etc. The predictions made
for multiple tasks from the same image are not independent,
and therefore, are expected to be ‘consistent’. We propose a
broadly applicable and fully computational method for augmenting learning with Cross-Task Consistency.1 The proposed formulation is based on inference-path invariance
over a graph of arbitrary tasks. We observe that learning
with cross-task consistency leads to more accurate predictions and better generalization to out-of-distribution inputs.
This framework also leads to an informative unsupervised
quantity, called Consistency Energy, based on measuring
the intrinsic consistency of the system. Consistency Energy correlates well with the supervised error (r=0.67),
thus it can be employed as an unsupervised confidence
metric as well as for detection of out-of-distribution inputs
(ROC-AUC=0.95). The evaluations are performed on multiple datasets, including Taskonomy, Replica, CocoDoom, and
ApolloScape, and they benchmark cross-task consistency
versus various baselines including conventional multi-task
learning, cycle consistency, and analytical consistency.

1. Introduction
What is consistency: suppose an object detector detects a
ball in a particular region of an image, while a depth estimator returns a flat surface for the same region. This presents
an issue – at least one of them has to be wrong, because they
are inconsistent. More concretely, the first prediction domain
(objects) and the second prediction domain (depth) are not
independent and consequently enforce some constraints on
each other, often referred to as consistency constraints.
Why is it important to incorporate consistency in learning: first, desired learning tasks are usually predictions of
different aspects of one underlying reality (the scene that
underlies an image). Hence inconsistency among predictions
1 Abbreviated X-TC, standing for Cross-Task Consistency.
*Equal.

Predicted Normals

Predicted (re)Shading

Predicted Depth

Predicted Curvature

Cross-Task Consistent
Learning

Y1
X
Y2

Baseline
Learning

X

Y1

Figure 1: Cross-Task Consistent Learning. The predictions made
for different tasks out of one image are expected to be consistent, as the
underlying scene is the same. This is exemplified by a challenging query
and four sample predictions out of it. We propose a general method for
learning utilizing data-driven cross-task consistency constraints. The lower
and upper rows show the results of the baseline (independent learning) and
learning with consistency, which yields higher quality and more consistent
predictions. Red boxes provide magnifications. [Best seen on screen]

implies contradiction and is inherently undesirable. Second,
consistency constraints are informative and can be used to
better fit the data or lower the sample complexity. Also,
they may reduce the tendency of neural networks to learn
“surface statistics” (superficial cues) [18], by enforcing constraints rooted in different physical or geometric rules. This
is empirically supported by the improved generalization of
models when trained with consistency constraints (Sec. 5).
How can we design a learning system that makes consistent predictions: this paper proposes a method which, given
an arbitrary dictionary of tasks, augments the learning objective with explicit constraints for cross-task consistency.
The constraints are learned from data rather than apriori
given relationships.2 This makes the method applicable to
any pairs of tasks as long as they are not statistically independent; even if their analytical relationship is unknown,
hard to program, or non-differentiable. The primary concept behind the method is ‘inference-path invariance’. That
2 For instance, it is not necessary to encode that surface normals are the
3D derivative of depth or occlusion edges are discontinuities in depth.

111197

