Learning Video Object Segmentation from Unlabeled Videos
Xiankai Lu1 , Wenguan Wang2∗, Jianbing Shen1 , Yu-Wing Tai3 , David Crandall4 , Steven C. H. Hoi5,6
1
3

Tencent

4

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Indiana University, USA

5

2

ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore 6 Singapore Management University, Singapore

carrierlxk@gmail.com, wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com
https://github.com/carrierlxk/MuG

Abstract
We propose a new method for video object segmentation (VOS) that addresses object pattern learning from unlabeled videos, unlike most existing methods which rely heavily on extensive annotated data. We introduce a unified unsupervised/weakly supervised learning framework, called
MuG, that comprehensively captures intrinsic properties of
VOS at multiple granularities. Our approach can help advance understanding of visual patterns in VOS and significantly reduce annotation burden. With a carefully-designed
architecture and strong representation learning ability, our
learned model can be applied to diverse VOS settings, including object-level zero-shot VOS, instance-level zero-shot
VOS, and one-shot VOS. Experiments demonstrate promising performance in these settings, as well as the potential
of MuG in leveraging unlabeled data to further improve the
segmentation accuracy.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) has two common settings, zero-shot and one-shot. Zero-shot VOS (Z-VOS)1 is
to automatically segment out the primary foreground objects, without any test-time human supervision, whereas
one-shot VOS (O-VOS) focuses on extracting the human
determined foreground objects, typically assuming the firstframe annotations are given ahead inference 1 . Current leading methods for both Z-VOS and O-VOS are supervised
deep learning models that require extensive amounts of
elaborately annotated data to improve the performance and
avoid over-fitting. However, obtaining pixel-wise segmentation labels is labor-intensive and expensive (Fig.1(a)).
It is thus attractive to design VOS models that can learn
from unlabeled videos. With this aim in mind, we develop a
∗ Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.
1 Some conventions [36, 59] also use ‘unsupervised VOS’ and ‘semi-

supervised VOS’ to name the Z-VOS and O-VOS settings[3]. In this work,
for notational clarity, the terms ‘supervised’, ‘weakly supervised’ and ‘unsupervised’ are only used to address the different learning paradigms.

Figure 1: (a) Current leading VOS methods are learned in a supervised manner, requiring large-scale elaborately labeled data. (b)
Our model, MuG, provides an unsupervised/weakly-supervised
framework that learns video object patterns from unlabeled videos.
(c) Once trained, MuG can be applied to diverse VOS settings,
with strong modeling ability and high generability.

unified, unsupervised/weakly supervised VOS method that
mines multi-granularity cues to facilitate video object pattern learning (Fig.1(b)). This allows us to take advantage of
nearly infinite amounts of video data. Below we give a more
formal description of our problem setup and main idea.
Problem Setup and Main Idea. Let X and Y denote the
input video space and output VOS space, respectively. Deep
learning based VOS solutions seek to learn a differentiable,
ideal video-to-segment mapping g ∗:X 7→Y. To approximate
g ∗, recent leading VOS models typically work in a supervised learning manner, requiring N input samples and their
desired outputs yn := g ∗(xn ), where {(xn , yn )}n ⊂X ×Y.
In contrast, we address the problem in settings with much
less supervision: (1) the unsupervised case, when we only
have samples drawn from X , {xn }n ⊂X , and want to approximate g ∗ , and (2) the weakly supervised learning setting, in which we have annotations for K, which is a related
output domain for which obtaining annotations is easier

8960

