BachGAN: High-Resolution Image Synthesis from Salient Object Layout
Yandong Li1∗ Yu Cheng2 Zhe Gan2
1
University of Central Florida

Licheng Yu2 Liqiang Wang1 Jingjing Liu2
2
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research

{liyandong,lwang}@ucf.edu, {yu.cheng,zhe.gan,licheng.yu,jingjl}@microsoft.com

Figure 1: Top row: images synthesized from semantic segmentation maps. Bottom row: high-resolution images synthesized
from salient object layouts, which allows users to create an image by drawing only a few bounding boxes.

Abstract
We propose a new task towards more practical application for image generation - high-quality image synthesis from salient object layout. This new setting allows
users to provide the layout of salient objects only (i.e.,
foreground bounding boxes and categories), and lets the
model complete the drawing with an invented background
and a matching foreground. Two main challenges spring
from this new task: (i) how to generate fine-grained details and realistic textures without segmentation map input; and (ii) how to create a background and weave it
seamlessly into standalone objects. To tackle this, we
propose Background Hallucination Generative Adversarial
Network (BachGAN), which first selects a set of segmentation maps from a large candidate pool via a background
retrieval module, then encodes these candidate layouts via
a background fusion module to hallucinate a suitable background for the given objects. By generating the hallucinated background representation dynamically, our model
can synthesize high-resolution images with both photorealistic foreground and integral background. Experiments
on Cityscapes and ADE20K datasets demonstrate the advantage of BachGAN over existing methods, measured on
both visual fidelity of generated images and visual alignment between output images and input layouts.1
1 Project page: https://github.com/Cold-Winter/BachGAN.
∗ This work was done while the first author was an intern at Microsoft.

1. Introduction
Pablo Picasso once said “Every child is an artist. The
problem is how to remain an artist once grown up.” Now
with the help of smart image editing assistant, our creative and imaginative nature can well flourish. Recent years
have witnessed a wide variety of image generation works
conditioned on diverse inputs, such as text [38, 36], scene
graph [13], semantic segmentation map [11, 33], and holistic layout [39]. Among them, text-to-image generation provides a flexible interface for users to describe visual concepts via natural language descriptions [38, 36]. The limitation is that one single sentence may not be adequate for
describing the details of every object in the intended image.
Scene graph [13], with rich structural representation, can
potentially reveal more visual relations of objects in an image. However, pairwise object relation labels are difficult
to obtain in real-life applications. The lack of object size,
location and background information also limits the quality
of synthesized images.
Another line of research is image synthesis conditioned
on semantic segmentation map. While previous work [11,
33, 25] has shown promising results, collecting annotations
for semantic segmentation maps is time consuming and labor intensive. To save annotation effort, Zhao et al. [39]
proposed to take as the input a holistic layout including both
foreground objects (e.g., “cat”, “person”) and background
(e.g., “sky”, “grass”). In this paper, we push this direction to
a further step and explore image synthesis given salient ob18365

