UNAS: Differentiable Architecture Search Meets Reinforcement Learning
Arash Vahdat, Arun Mallya, Ming-Yu Liu, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{avahdat, amallya, mingyul, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) aims to discover network architectures with desired properties such as high accuracy or low latency. Recently, differentiable NAS (DNAS)
has demonstrated promising results while maintaining a
search cost orders of magnitude lower than reinforcement
learning (RL) based NAS. However, DNAS models can only
optimize differentiable loss functions in search, and they
require an accurate differentiable approximation of nondifferentiable criteria. In this work, we present UNAS, a
unified framework for NAS, that encapsulates recent DNAS
and RL-based approaches under one framework. Our framework brings the best of both worlds, and it enables us to
search for architectures with both differentiable and nondifferentiable criteria in one unified framework while maintaining a low search cost. Further, we introduce a new
objective function for search based on the generalization
gap that prevents the selection of architectures prone to overfitting. We present extensive experiments on the CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets and we perform search
in two fundamentally different search spaces. We show that
UNAS obtains the state-of-the-art average accuracy on all
three datasets when compared to the architectures searched
in the DARTS [18] space. Moreover, we show that UNAS
can find an efficient and accurate architecture in the ProxylessNAS [28] search space, that outperforms existing MobileNetV2 [28] based architectures. The source code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/unas.

1. Introduction
Since the success of deep learning, designing neural network architectures with desirable performance criteria (e.g.
high accuracy, low latency, etc.) for a given task has been
a challenging problem. Some call it alchemy and some
refer to it as intuition, but the task of discovering a novel
architecture often involves a tedious and costly process of
trial-and-error for searching in an exponentially large space
of hyper-parameters. The goal of neural architecture search
(NAS) [6] is to find novel networks for new problem domains

and criteria automatically and efficiently.
Early work on NAS used reinforcement learning [1, 3, 24,
42, 43], or evolutionary algorithms [17, 27, 26, 37] to obtain
state-of-the-art performance on a variety of tasks. Although,
these methods are generic and can search for architecture
with a broad range of criteria, they are often computationally
demanding. For example, the RL-based approach [43], and
evolutionary method [26] each requires over 2000 GPU days.
Recently, several differentiable neural architecture search
(DNAS) frameworks [18, 39, 36, 4] have shown promising
results while reducing the search cost to a few GPU days.
However, these approaches assume that the objective function is differentiable with respect to the architecture parameters and cannot directly optimize non-differentiable criteria
like network latency, power consumption, memory usage,
etc. To tackle this problem, DNAS methods [36, 4, 40] approximate network latency using differentiable functions.
However, these approximations may fail when the underlying criteria cannot be accurately modeled. For example,
if compiler optimizations are used, methods such as layer
fusion, mixed-precision inference, and kernel auto-tuning
can dramatically change latency, making it challenging to
approximate it accurately. In addition to the loss approximation, DNAS relies on the continuous approximation of
discrete variables in search, introducing additional mismatch
in network performance between discovered architecture and
the corresponding continuous relaxations.
In this paper, we introduce UNAS, a unified framework
for NAS that bridges the gap between DNAS and RL-based
architecture search. (i) UNAS offers the best of both worlds
and enables us to search for architectures using both differentiable objective functions (e.g., cross-entropy loss) and
non-differentiable functions (e.g., network latency). UNAS
keeps the search time low similar to other DNAS models,
but it also eliminates the need for accurate approximation
of non-differentiable criteria. (ii) UNAS training does not
introduce any additional biases due to the continuous relaxation of architecture parameters. We show that the gradient
estimation in UNAS is equal to the estimations obtained
by RL-based frameworks that operate on discrete variables.
Finally, (iii) UNAS proposes a new objective function based
111266

