ASLFeat: Learning Local Features of Accurate Shape and Localization
Zixin Luo1

Lei Zhou1
Xuyang Bai1
Hongkai Chen1
Jiahui Zhang2
Yao Yao1
Shiwei Li3
Tian Fang3
Long Quan1
1

2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Tsinghua University
Everest Innovation Technology

{zluoag,lzhouai,xbaiad,hchencf,yaoag,quan}@cse.ust.hk
{sli,fangtian}@altizure.com

jiahui-z15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This work focuses on mitigating two limitations in the
joint learning of local feature detectors and descriptors.
First, the ability to estimate the local shape (scale, orientation, etc.) of feature points is often neglected during dense
feature extraction, while the shape-awareness is crucial to
acquire stronger geometric invariance. Second, the localization accuracy of detected keypoints is not sufficient to
reliably recover camera geometry, which has become the
bottleneck in tasks such as 3D reconstruction. In this paper, we present ASLFeat, with three light-weight yet effective modifications to mitigate above issues. First, we resort
to deformable convolutional networks to densely estimate
and apply local transformation. Second, we take advantage
of the inherent feature hierarchy to restore spatial resolution
and low-level details for accurate keypoint localization. Finally, we use a peakiness measurement to relate feature responses and derive more indicative detection scores. The effect of each modification is thoroughly studied, and the evaluation is extensively conducted across a variety of practical
scenarios. State-of-the-art results are reported that demonstrate the superiority of our methods. [code release]

1. Introduction
Designing powerful local features is an essential basis
for a broad range of computer vision tasks [31, 43, 44, 30,
40, 15, 40]. During the past few years, the joint learning of
local feature detectors and descriptors has gained increasing
popularity, with promising results achieved in real applications. However, there are two limitations we consider that
may have hinged further boost in performance: 1) the lack
of shape-awareness of feature points for acquiring stronger
geometric invariance, and 2) the lack of keypoint localization accuracy for solving camera geometry robustly.
Traditionally, the local shape is parameterized by hand-

crafted scale/rotation estimation [17, 29] or affine shape
adaptation [20], while more recently, data-driven approaches [23, 22, 39] have emerged that build a separate
network to regress the shape parameters, then transform the
patch inputs before feature descriptions. Due to the increasing prevalence of the joint learning with keypoint detectors [6, 25, 27, 7, 4], recent research focus has shifted to
frameworks that densely extract features from image inputs,
whereas no pre-defined keypoint is given and thus previous
patch-wise shape estimation becomes inapplicable. As an
alternative, LF-Net [25] extracts dense features and transforms intermediate feature maps via Spatial Transformer
Networks (STN) [12], whereas multiple forward passes are
needed and only sparse predictions of shape parameters are
practically feasible. In this view, there still lacks a solution
that enables efficient local shape estimation in a dense prediction framework.
Besides, the localization accuracy of learned keypoints is
still concerned in solving geometry-sensitive problems. For
instance, LF-Net [25] and D2-Net [7] empirically yield low
precision in two-view matching or introduce large reprojection error in Structure-from-Motion (SfM) tasks, which
in essence can be ascribed to the lack of spatial accuracy
as the detections are derived from low-resolution feature
maps (e.g., 1/4 times the original size). To restore the spatial resolution, SuperPoint [6] learns to upsample the feature maps with pixel-wise supervision from artificial points,
while R2D2 [27] employs dilated convolutions to maintain
the spatial resolution but trades off excessive GPU computation and memory usage. Moreover, it is questionable
that if the detections from the deepest layer are capable of
identifying low-level structures (corners, edges, etc.) where
keypoints are often located. Although widely discussed in
dense prediction tasks [28, 10, 16], in our context, neither
the keypoint localization accuracy, nor the low-level nature
of keypoint detection has received adequate attention.
To mitigate above limitations, we present ASLFeat, with
three light-weight yet effective modifications. First, we em-

6589

