Fantastic Answers and Where to Find Them: Immersive Question-Directed
Visual Attention

Ming Jiang*

Shi Chen*

Jinhui Yang

Qi Zhao

University of Minnesota
{mjiang, chen4595, yang7004, qzhao}@umn.edu

Q: Is there a clock in the room?
A: Yes.

Abstract
While most visual attention studies focus on bottom-up
attention with restricted field-of-view, real-life situations
are filled with embodied vision tasks. The role of attention
is more significant in the latter due to the information overload, and attention to the most important regions is critical
to the success of tasks. The effects of visual attention on task
performance in this context have also been widely ignored.
This research addresses a number of challenges to bridge
this research gap, on both the data and model aspects.
Specifically, we introduce the first dataset of top-down
attention in immersive scenes. The Immersive Questiondirected Visual Attention (IQVA) dataset features visual attention and corresponding task performance (i.e., answer
correctness). It consists of 975 questions and answers collected from people viewing 360° videos in a head-mounted
display. Analyses of the data demonstrate a significant correlation between people’s task performance and their eye
movements, suggesting the role of attention in task performance. With that, a neural network is developed to encode
the differences of correct and incorrect attention and jointly
predict the two. The proposed attention model for the first
time takes into account answer correctness, whose outputs
naturally distinguish important regions from distractions.
This study with new data and features may enable new tasks
that leverage attention and answer correctness, and inspire
new research that reveals the process behind decision making in performing various tasks.

1. Introduction
Visual attention provides humans and machines with the
ability to rapidly understand a scene by selectively processing the incoming information. Understanding the roles of
attention is of significant importance for many applications.
* Equal contribution.

Q: What color is the helmet?
A: Yellow.

✓

✗

Figure 1: Visual attention is driven by tasks. The correct
attention (row 1) provides essential information for answering the question, while the incorrect attention (row 2) helps
identify the distracting features to be avoided when designing intelligent visual systems. Contours represent different
fixation densities (0.25, 0.5, and 0.75), and brighter contours indicate higher fixation densities.

In the past decades, many eye-tracking datasets and attention prediction models have been developed to study attention in regular images and videos. Due to the limited field of
view (FOV) and the passive viewing (PV) paradigm, however, these studies are difficult to be transferred to solve
real-world problems. Furthermore, despite the popularity of
aggregating all human attention patterns for attention modeling, the effects of different patterns on task performances
have been mostly unstudied (see Figure 1 for an example).
Such differences reveal important visual features to focus
on or to avoid, providing insights for the understanding and
modeling of attention for tasks of interest. To push forward
the research frontier of visual attention, we aim at investigating two unstudied problems in computer vision: taskdriven attention in immersive scenes, and the relationship
between attention and task performance.
In this work, we introduce Immersive Question-directed
Visual Attention (IQVA), a new dataset of eye-tracking data

2980

