Determinant Regularization for Gradient-Efficient Graph Matching
Tianshu Yu† , Junchi Yan‡ , Baoxin Li†
†
Arizona State University, ‡ Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{tianshuy,baoxin.li}@asu.edu yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph matching refers to finding vertex correspondence
for a pair of graphs, which plays a fundamental role in
many vision and learning related tasks. Directly applying
gradient-based continuous optimization on graph matching can be attractive for its simplicity but calls for effective ways of converting the continuous solution to the discrete one under the matching constraint. In this paper, we
show a novel regularization technique with the tool of determinant analysis on the matching matrix which is relaxed
into continuous domain with gradient based optimization.
Meanwhile we present a theoretical study on the property
of our relaxation technique. Our paper strikes an attempt to
understand the geometric properties of different regularization techniques and the gradient behavior during the optimization. We show that the proposed regularization is more
gradient-efficient than traditional ones during early update
stages. The analysis will also bring about insights for other
problems under bijection constraints. The algorithm procedure is simple and empirical results on public benchmark
show its effectiveness on both synthetic and real-world data.

1. Introduction
Compared with vector-like data, graph is a more versatile representation for many real-world problems whereby
the relational structures are involved. One fundamental task
in processing graph data is graph matching (GM), which involves establishing vertex correspondences among a pair or
multiple graphs. Unlike point alignment that considers only
unary (vertex) feature similarity, in general, graph matching establishes the vertex correspondence by considering
both unary and higher-order namely hyperedge (typically
second-order i.e. edge) information. Due to the introduction of higher-order information, graph matching becomes
generally NP-hard. This is in contrast to point matching
(linear assignment) which can be solved to the global optimal using the Hungarian method [29] in polynomial time
regarding with the number of vertex.

For its robustness against local noise and deformation,
graph matching has been widely used in the analysis of images [12], graphics [19], and genome [46], etc. Related approximate techniques have also been developed for cross
social network matching [10]. In all these domains, graph
matching serves as a building block for downstream applications such as image recognition, graphics clustering,
whereby the similarity based on aligned structure is utilized.
Over the decades, extensive works have been developed
on graph matching. Traditionally, most methods are focused on pairwise graph matching, i.e., each time only two
graphs are involved for matching. Due to its NP-hardness,
most methods seek approximation techniques to pursuit the
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency. A popular conversion treatment from continuous to discrete solution is applying greedy algorithm or Hungarian method as projection.
However such a conversion is likely to bring about arbitrary
accuracy degeneration to the final solution.
Recently, a few regularizers have been developed and become an important way to graduated discretization along
the solution path. Examples include entropy [35], factorization based convex-concave relaxation [50], and ℓ2 norm
[18]). However, there still lacks a clear investigation on
the gradient behavior during the optimization: how does the
regularized gradient impact the solution path and what can
we do to improve?
This work is focused on investigating and improving the
effectiveness of gradient provided by regularization, by providing more reliable gradient direction along the continuous solution path (being a continuation method). We also
develop a new regularization technique combined with the
simple gradient based continuous optimization. It explores
the determinant of the matching matrix which is relaxed in
the continuous domain, and achieves superior performance
among several gradient-based solvers, while existing regularized methods [16, 35, 18] often perform less competitive
and also are algorithmically more complex. The main contributions of the paper are:
i) To enable gradient-efficient continuation optimization
for graph matching, we propose a novel graduated discretization technique. Specifically a determinant regulariza-

7123

