Recognizing Objects from Any View with
Object and Viewer-Centered Representations
Sainan Liu

Vincent Nguyen
Isaac Rehg
University of California, San Diego

Zhuowen Tu

{sal131, vvn012, irehg, ztu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle an important task in computer vision: any view object recognition. In both training and testing, for each object instance, we are only given its 2D image
viewed from an unknown angle. We propose a computational framework by designing object and viewer-centered
neural networks (OVCNet) to recognize an object instance
viewed from an arbitrary unknown angle. OVCNet consists of three branches that respectively implement objectcentered, 3D viewer-centered, and in-plane viewer-centered
recognition. We evaluate our proposed OVCNet using two
metrics with unseen views from both seen and novel object instances. Experimental results demonstrate the advantages of OVCNet over classic 2D-image-based CNN classifiers, 3D-object (inferred from 2D image) classifiers, and
competing multi-view based approaches. It gives rise to a
viable and practical computing framework that combines
both viewpoint-dependent and viewpoint-independent features for object recognition from any view.

3D primitives (e.g. cylinders) [4] or by features that are
invariant to viewpoint changes [2]. However, the theory
of object-centered representation has been challenged in
the past. Psychophysical and computational neural studies
have shown evidence that viewer-centered representations
[35, 25, 10] play a significant role in object recognition.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Problem illustration. Our task is to recognize an object
from any view. In both training and testing, we only see 2D images
without knowing the viewing angles and depth.

Objects are three-dimensional in the physical world, but
the recognition tasks in computer vision have been primarily performed on 2D natural images [9]. Despite the great
success of the deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[18, 43, 38, 14, 49], a standard CNN model that represents images in the 2D image space only tends to suffer
from a “mental rotation” [36] like effect [3], as shown in
Figure 3. Namely, when training a network with a limited number of views of an object instance, it may have a
hard time recognizing the same object instance from an unseen viewpoint. There are two schools of thought regarding object representations. For biological vision systems,
there has been a long-time debate [26] in cognitive psychology about whether objects are fundamentally encoded by
object-centered or viewer-centered representations [44, 13].
In David Marr’s pioneering vision paradigm [27], object
recognition is carried out primarily in an object-centered
manner in which objects are represented either by explicit

Implementations of both viewpoint-independent [20, 22]
and viewpoint-dependent [3, 1] systems are present in computer and machine vision literature. An object-centered
system typically encodes and stores a representation with
viewpoint-independent (object-centric) features [17] that
are invariant to viewpoint changes. During test time, representations with viewpoint-independent features are computed for a query object under a novel view to match with
the stored features. A viewer-centered system instead stores
a set of viewpoint-dependent features from typical viewing
angles. During testing, a given view of an object instance is
matched to the saved features to the specific viewpoints.
An object-centered representation has the advantage of
maintaining rotation-invariant features that are insensitive
to viewpoint changes; however, it relies on the presence
of faithful 3D reconstructions or effective invariant features
that are usually difficult to obtain from a single view image
[13]. Conversely, a viewer-centered representation typically

11784

