Can weight sharing outperform random architecture search? An investigation
with TuNAS
Gabriel Bender, Hanxiao Liu
Google Research, contributed equally

Bo Chen
Google Research

Grace Chu
Google Research

gbender@google.com, hanxiaol@google.com

bochen@google.com

cxy@google.com

Shuyang Cheng
Waymo

Pieter-Jan Kindermans
Google Research

Quoc Le
Google Research

shuyangcheng@waymo.com

pikinder@google.com

qvl@google.com

Abstract
Efficient Neural Architecture Search methods based on
weight sharing have shown good promise in democratizing Neural Architecture Search for computer vision models.
There is, however, an ongoing debate whether these efficient
methods are significantly better than random search. Here
we perform a thorough comparison between efficient and
random search methods on a family of progressively larger
and more challenging search spaces for image classification
and detection on ImageNet and COCO. While the efficacies
of both methods are problem-dependent, our experiments
demonstrate that there are large, realistic tasks where efficient search methods can provide substantial gains over
random search. In addition, we propose and evaluate techniques which improve the quality of searched architectures
and reduce the need for manual hyper-parameter tuning.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) tries to find network architectures with excellent accuracy-latency tradeoffs. While the resource costs of early approaches [45, 31]
were prohibitively expensive for many, recent efficient architecture search methods based on weight sharing promise
to reduce the costs of architecture search experiments by
multiple orders of magnitude. [28, 3, 24, 5, 41]
The effectiveness of these efficient NAS approaches has
been questioned by recent studies (e.g., [18, 43]) presenting experimental results where efficient architecture search
methods did not always outperform random search baselines. Furthermore, even when gains were reported, they
were often modest. However, most existing results come
with limitations. First: negative results may simply indicate
that existing algorithms are challenging to implement and

Figure 1: Validation accuracies of 250 random architectures (blue
bars) vs. 5 independent runs of our TuNAS search algorithm (pink
lines) for three different search spaces. Rejection sampling is used
to ensure the latencies of random architectures are comparable to
those of searched architectures.

tune. Second: most negative results focus on fairly small
datasets such as CIFAR-10 or PTB, and some are obtained
on heavily restricted search spaces. With those caveats in
mind, it is possible that efficient NAS methods work well
only on specific search spaces and problems. But even so,
they can still be useful if those problems are of high practical value. For this reason we focus on the following: “Can
efficient neural architecture search be made to work reliably
on large realistic search spaces for realistic problems?”
When comparing against simpler algorithms such as random search, we must consider not just explicit costs, such
as the time needed to run a single search, but also implicit
costs. For example, many models operate under hard latency constraints (e.g., a model running on a self-driving car
in real time). However, the reward functions used by MnasNet [36] and ProxylessNAS [5] require us to run multiple
searches with different hyper-parameters to match a given
114323

