A Model-driven Deep Neural Network for Single Image Rain Removal
Hong Wang1,∗, Qi Xie1,∗, Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng2,1,†
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University; 2 Macau University of Science and Technology
{hongwang01,xq.liwu}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com

dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) methods have achieved state-of-theart performance in the task of single image rain removal.
Most of current DL architectures, however, are still lack of
sufficient interpretability and not fully integrated with physical structures inside general rain streaks. To this issue,
in this paper, we propose a model-driven deep neural network for the task, with fully interpretable network structures. Specifically, based on the convolutional dictionary
learning mechanism for representing rain, we propose a
novel single image deraining model and utilize the proximal
gradient descent technique to design an iterative algorithm only containing simple operators for solving the model.
Such a simple implementation scheme facilitates us to unfold it into a new deep network architecture, called rain convolutional dictionary network (RCDNet), with almost every
network module one-to-one corresponding to each operation involved in the algorithm. By end-to-end training the
proposed RCDNet, all the rain kernels and proximal operators can be automatically extracted, faithfully characterizing the features of both rain and clean background layers,
and thus naturally lead to its better deraining performance,
especially in real scenarios. Comprehensive experiments
substantiate the superiority of the proposed network, especially its well generality to diverse testing scenarios and
good interpretability for all its modules, as compared with
state-of-the-arts both visually and quantitatively.

（a）RCD model for rain layer

（b）Algorithm for solving the proposed model

1. Introduction
Images taken under various rain conditions often suffer
from unfavorable visibility, and always severely affect the
performance of outdoor computer vision tasks, such as objection tracking [5], video surveillance [37], and pedestrian
detection [31]. Hence, removing rain streaks from rainy
images is an important pre-processing task and has drawn
much research attention in the recent years [39, 26].
In the past years, various methods have been proposed
for single image rain removal task. Many researchers made
† Corresponding author
∗ Equal contribution

（c）Illustration of the proposed RCDNet

Figure 1. (a) Rain convolutional dictionary (RCD) model for rain
layer. (b) The formulated optimization model and the corresponding iterative solution algorithm. (c) Visual illustration of the proposed RCDNet one-to-one corresponding to the algorithm (b).

focus on exploring physical properties of rain layer and

3103

