PSGAN: Pose and Expression Robust Spatial-Aware GAN for Customizable
Makeup Transfer
Wentao Jiang 1 Si Liu 1∗ Chen Gao 2,4 Jie Cao 3,4 Ran He 3,4 Jiashi Feng 5 Shuicheng Yan 6
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 National University of Singapore 6 YITU Tech
{jiangwentao, liusi}@buaa.edu.cn, gaochen@iie.ac.cn

Partial makeup trasnfer (lip, skin, eye)

Large poses and expressions differences

Source
Light makeup
Heavy makeup
Reference
Source
Reference
Result
Figure 1. Our model allows users to control both the shade of makeup and facial parts to transfer. The first row on the left shows the results
of only transferring partial makeup style from the reference. The second row shows the results with controllable shades. Moreover, our
method can perform makeup transfer between images that have different poses and expressions, as shown on the right part of the figure.
Best viewed in color.

Abstract

In this paper, we address the makeup transfer task, which
aims to transfer the makeup from a reference image to a
source image. Existing methods have achieved promising progress in constrained scenarios, but transferring between images with large pose and expression differences is
still challenging. Besides, they cannot realize customizable
transfer that allows a controllable shade of makeup or specifies the part to transfer, which limits their applications. To
address these issues, we propose Pose and expression robust Spatial-aware GAN (PSGAN). It first utilizes Makeup
Distill Network to disentangle the makeup of the reference
image as two spatial-aware makeup matrices. Then, Attentive Makeup Morphing module is introduced to specify
how the makeup of a pixel in the source image is morphed from the reference image. With the makeup matrices
and the source image, Makeup Apply Network is used to
perform makeup transfer. Our PSGAN not only achieves
state-of-the-art results even when large pose and expres∗ Corresponding author

sion differences exist but also is able to perform partial and
shade-controllable makeup transfer. Both the code and a
newly collected dataset containing facial images with various poses and expressions will be available at https:
//github.com/wtjiang98/PSGAN .

1. Introduction
We explore the makeup transfer task, which aims to
transfer the makeup from an arbitrary reference image to a
source image. It is widely demanded in many popular portrait beautifying applications. Most existing makeup transfer methods [18, 3, 2, 11] are based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10]. They generally use face parsing
maps and/or facial landmarks as a preprocessing step to facilitate the subsequent processing and adopt the framework
of CycleGAN [33] which is trained on unpaired sets of images, i.e., non-makeup images and with-makeup images.
However, existing methods mainly have two limitations.
Firstly, they only work well on frontal facial images with
neutral expression since they lack a specially designed module to handle the misalignment of images and overfit on

5194

