Active Speakers in Context
Juan León Alcázar1 ,* Fabian Caba Heilbron 2 , Long Mai2 , Federico Perazzi2 ,
Joon-Young Lee2 , Pablo Arbeláez1 , and Bernard Ghanem3
1
Universidad de los Andes, 2 Adobe Research, 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
1

{jc.leon,pa.arbelaez}@uniandes.edu.co; 2 {caba,malong,perazzi,jolee}@adobe.com; 3 {bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Speaker A

Abstract
Current methods for active speaker detection focus on
modeling audiovisual information from a single speaker.
This strategy can be adequate for addressing single-speaker
scenarios, but it prevents accurate detection when the task
is to identify who of many candidate speakers are talking.
This paper introduces the Active Speaker Context, a novel
representation that models relationships between multiple
speakers over long time horizons. Our new model learns
pairwise and temporal relations from a structured ensemble
of audiovisual observations. Our experiments show that a
structured feature ensemble already benefits active speaker
detection performance. We also find that the proposed Active Speaker Context improves the state-of-the-art on the
AVA-ActiveSpeaker dataset achieving an mAP of 87.1%.
Moreover, ablation studies verify that this result is a direct
consequence of our long-term multi-speaker analysis.

1. Introduction
Active speaker detection is a multi-modal task that relies on the careful integration of audiovisual information. It
aims at identifying active speakers, among a set of possible
candidates, by analyzing subtle facial motion patterns and
carefully aligning their characteristic speech wave-forms.
Although it has a long story in computer vision [11], and
despite its many applications such as speaker diarization or
video re-framing, detecting active speakers in-the-wild remains an open problem. Towards that goal, the recently
released AVA Active-Speaker benchmark [31] provides an
adequate experimental framework to study the problem.
Recent approaches for active speaker detection [5, 39]
have focused on developing sophisticated 3D convolutional
models to fuse local audiovisual patterns that estimate binary labels over short-term sequences. These methods perform well on scenarios with a single speaker, but they meet
their limits when multiple speakers are present. We argue
that this limitation stems from the insufficiency of audio
* Work done during an internship at Adobe Research

(a)
Short-term analysis

Speaker B

(b) Active Speakers in Context
Long-Term Multi Speaker Analysis
…

Reference Time

…

Reference Time

Figure 1. Active Speakers in Context. Our goal is to identify the
active speaker at a reference time. Let us assume we only have
access to a short audiovisual sample from a single speaker (a). By
looking at the lips of the speaker, it is hard to tell if he is talking,
but the audio indicates that someone at that moment is talking. We
have no other option than provide an educated guess. To increase
our success prediction chances, let us leverage multi-speaker context (b). We now observe all speakers in the scene during longterm. From this enriched observation, we can infer two things.
First, Speaker B is not talking over the whole sequence, and instead, he is listening to Speaker A. Second, looking at Speaker A
(e.g. his lips) for the long-term helps us to smooth out local uncertainties. We propose a new representation, the Active Speaker
Context, which learns long-term relationships between multiple
speakers to make accurate active speaker detections.

cues to fully solve the problem and from the high ambiguity
of visual cues when considered in isolation [31].
In a multi-speaker scenario, an appropriate disambiguation strategy would exploit rich, long-term, contextual information extracted from each candidate speaker. Figure
1 illustrates the challenges in active speaker detection when
there is more than one candidate speaker. Intuitively, we can
fuse information from multiple speakers to disambiguate
single speaker predictions. For instance, by analyzing a
speaker for an extended period, we can smooth out wrong
speech activity predictions coming from short filler words.
Likewise, observing multiple candidate speakers, jointly,
enables us to understand conversational patterns, e.g. that a
natural two-speaker conversation consists of an interleaved
sequence of the speakers’ utterances.

12465

