Local Deep Implicit Functions for 3D Shape
Kyle Genova1,2 Forrester Cole2 Avneesh Sud2 Aaron Sarna2 Thomas Funkhouser1, 2
1

2

Princeton University

Google Research

Figure 1. This paper introduces Local Deep Implicit Functions, a 3D shape representation that decomposes an input shape (mesh on left
in every triplet) into a structured set of shape elements (colored ellipses on right) whose contributions to an implicit surface reconstruction
(middle) are represented by latent vectors decoded by a deep network. Project video and website at ldif.cs.princeton.edu.

Abstract
The goal of this project is to learn a 3D shape representation that enables accurate surface reconstruction, compact storage, efficient computation, consistency for similar
shapes, generalization across diverse shape categories, and
inference from depth camera observations. Towards this
end, we introduce Local Deep Implicit Functions (LDIF),
a 3D shape representation that decomposes space into a
structured set of learned implicit functions. We provide networks that infer the space decomposition and local deep
implicit functions from a 3D mesh or posed depth image.
During experiments, we find that it provides 10.3 points
higher surface reconstruction accuracy (F-Score) than the
state-of-the-art (OccNet), while requiring fewer than 1% of
the network parameters. Experiments on posed depth image completion and generalization to unseen classes show
15.8 and 17.8 point improvements over the state-of-the-art,
while producing a structured 3D representation for each input with consistency across diverse shape collections.

1. Introduction
Representing 3D shape is a fundamental problem with
many applications, including surface reconstruction, analysis, compression, matching, interpolation, manipulation,
and visualization. For most vision applications, a 3D representation should support: (a) reconstruction with accurate

surface details, (b) scalability to complex shapes, (c) support for arbitary topologies, (d) generalizability to unseen
shape classes, (e) independence from any particular application domain, (f) encoding of shape priors, (g) compact
storage, and (h) computational efficiency.
No current representation has all of these desirable properties. Traditional explicit 3D representations (voxels,
meshes, point clouds, etc.) provide properties (a-e) above.
They can represent arbitrary shapes and any desired detail,
but they don’t encode shape priors helpful for efficient storage, 3D completion, and reconstruction tasks. In contrast,
learned representations (latent vectors and deep network decoders) excel at representing shapes compactly with lowdimensional latent vectors and encoding shape priors in network weights, but they struggle to reconstruct details for
complex shapes or generalize to novel shape classes.
Most recently, deep implicit functions (DIF) have been
shown to be highly effective for reconstruction of individual
objects [24, 7, 27, 45]. They represent an input observation
as a latent vector z and train a neural network to estimate
the inside/outside or signed-distance function f (x, z) given
a query location x in 3D space. This approach achieves state
of the art results for several 3D shape reconstruction tasks.
However, they use a single, fixed-length latent feature vector to represent the entirety of all shapes and they evaluate a
complex deep network to evaluate the implicit function for
every position x. As a result, they support limited shape
complexity, generality, and computational efficiency.
14857

