Global-Local GCN: Large-Scale Label Noise Cleansing for Face Recognition
Yaobin Zhang, Weihong Deng∗, Mei Wang, Jiani Hu
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhangyaobin, whdeng, wangmei1, jnhu}@bupt.edu.cn

Xian Li, Dongyue Zhao, Dongchao Wen
Canon Information Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd
{lixian, zhaodongyue, wendongchao}@canon-ib.com.cn

Abstract
In the field of face recognition, large-scale web-collected
datasets are essential for learning discriminative representations, but they suffer from noisy identity labels, such as
outliers and label flips. It is beneficial to automatically
cleanse their label noise for improving recognition accuracy. Unfortunately, existing cleansing methods cannot accurately identify noise in the wild. To solve this problem, we
propose an effective automatic label noise cleansing framework for face recognition datasets, FaceGraph. Using two
cascaded graph convolutional networks, FaceGraph performs global-to-local discrimination to select useful data
in a noisy environment. Extensive experiments show that
cleansing widely used datasets, such as CASIA-WebFace,
VGGFace2, MegaFace2, and MS-Celeb-1M, using the proposed method can improve the recognition performance of
state-of-the-art representation learning methods like Arcface. Further, we cleanse massive self-collected celebrity
data, namely MillionCelebs, to provide 18.8M images of
636K identities. Training with the new data, Arcface surpasses state-of-the-art performance by a notable margin to
reach 95.62% TPR at 1e-5 FPR on the IJB-C benchmark.

1. Introduction
Label noise cleansing is a long-term issue in building
up a dataset [9, 10, 24, 25, 30, 32]. Many studies [7,
20, 43, 44, 48, 58] point out that a noisy dataset is very
harmful to model training. In recent years, the face recognition community witnesses a boost in datasets, from the
first widely used deep training set CASIA-WebFace (CASIA) [54] to MS-Celeb-1M (MS1M) [21], UMDFace [8]
and VGGFace2 [12]. The increasing data scale helps improve the face recognition accuracy, but the label noise also
keeps increasing with their scale [43]. Therefore, to construct an effective face recognition training set, on the one

Select if in decision
boundary

(a) Raw data
Select if in the biggest
component

(b) Center-based
Select if judged as
positive

0

0
1
1
1
1

1

0

0
0

(c) Edge prediction

(d) Node prediction (ours)

Figure 1: Three ideas for face data cleansing. (a) Face data
in one identity. (b) Center-based: select images according
to their distance to the identity center. (c) Graph-based edge
prediction: predict edges on a graph, and pick nodes in the
biggest component. (d) Graph-based node prediction: directly predict whether a node is a signal or noise on a graph.
hand, it is necessary to collect as many face images as possible. On the other hand, there must be a reliable data cleansing method to detect and reduce label noise in the dataset.
Figure 1 compares two existing ideas with ours for
cleansing large-scale face recognition datasets. As opposed
to noise, the correctly labeled images are denoted as “signals”. Suppose there are 10 face samples for an identity,
five of which are signals (green box) and the others are
noise (red box). Center-based algorithms (Figure 1b) compute the center of each identity and then select samples that
are closer to the center as signals. They usually ignore the
relationships between samples and rely heavily on the rate

7731

