Interpreting the Latent Space of GANs for Semantic Face Editing
Yujun Shen1 , Jinjin Gu2 , Xiaoou Tang1 , Bolei Zhou1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{sy116, xtang, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, jinjingu@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Original

Age

Eyeglasses

Gender

Pose

Figure 1: Manipulating various facial attributes through varying the latent codes of a well-trained GAN model. The first column shows the
original synthesis from PGGAN [19], while each of the other columns shows the results of manipulating a specific attribute.

Abstract
Despite the recent advance of Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) in high-fidelity image synthesis, there
lacks enough understanding of how GANs are able to map a
latent code sampled from a random distribution to a photorealistic image. Previous work assumes the latent space
learned by GANs follows a distributed representation but
observes the vector arithmetic phenomenon. In this work,
we propose a novel framework, called InterFaceGAN, for
semantic face editing by interpreting the latent semantics
learned by GANs. In this framework, we conduct a detailed
study on how different semantics are encoded in the latent
space of GANs for face synthesis. We find that the latent
code of well-trained generative models actually learns a
disentangled representation after linear transformations.
We explore the disentanglement between various semantics
and manage to decouple some entangled semantics with
subspace projection, leading to more precise control of
facial attributes. Besides manipulating gender, age, expression, and the presence of eyeglasses, we can even vary the
face pose as well as fix the artifacts accidentally generated

by GAN models. The proposed method is further applied
to achieve real image manipulation when combined with
GAN inversion methods or some encoder-involved models.
Extensive results suggest that learning to synthesize faces
spontaneously brings a disentangled and controllable facial
attribute representation.1

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] have
significantly advanced image synthesis in recent years. The
rationale behind GANs is to learn the mapping from a latent
distribution to the real data through adversarial training.
After learning such a non-linear mapping, GAN is capable
of producing photo-realistic images from randomly sampled latent codes. However, it is uncertain how semantics
originate and are organized in the latent space. Taking face
synthesis as an example, when sampling a latent code to
produce an image, how the code is able to determine various
semantic attributes (e.g., gender and age) of the output face,
and how these attributes are entangled with each other?
1 Code and models are available at this link.

9243

