SER-FIQ: Unsupervised Estimation of Face Image Quality Based on
Stochastic Embedding Robustness
Philipp Terhörst12 , Jan Niklas Kolf2 , Naser Damer12 , Florian Kirchbuchner12 , Arjan Kuijper12
1
Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics Research IGD, Darmstadt, Germany
2
Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
Email:{philipp.terhoerst, naser.damer, florian.kirchbuchner, arjan.kuijper}@igd.fraunhofer.de

Figure 1: Visualization of the proposed unsupervised face quality assessment concept. We propose using the robustness of an image
representation as a quality clue. Our approach defines this robustness based on the embedding variations of random subnetworks of a given
face recognition model. An image that produces small variations in the stochastic embeddings (bottom left), demonstrates high robustness
(red areas on the right) and thus, high image quality. Contrary, an image that produces high variations in the stochastic embeddings (top
left) coming from random subnetworks, indicates a low robustness (blue areas on the right). Therefore, it is considered as low quality.

Abstract
Face image quality is an important factor to enable highperformance face recognition systems. Face quality assessment aims at estimating the suitability of a face image
for recognition. Previous work proposed supervised solutions that require artificially or human labelled quality values. However, both labelling mechanisms are error-prone
as they do not rely on a clear definition of quality and may
not know the best characteristics for the utilized face recognition system. Avoiding the use of inaccurate quality labels,
we proposed a novel concept to measure face quality based
on an arbitrary face recognition model. By determining the
embedding variations generated from random subnetworks
of a face model, the robustness of a sample representation
and thus, its quality is estimated. The experiments are conducted in a cross-database evaluation setting on three publicly available databases. We compare our proposed solution on two face embeddings against six state-of-the-art ap-

proaches from academia and industry. The results show that
our unsupervised solution outperforms all other approaches
in the majority of the investigated scenarios. In contrast to
previous works, the proposed solution shows a stable performance over all scenarios. Utilizing the deployed face
recognition model for our face quality assessment methodology avoids the training phase completely and further outperforms all baseline approaches by a large margin. Our
solution can be easily integrated into current face recognition systems and can be modified to other tasks beyond face
recognition.

1. INTRODUCTION
Face images are one of the most utilized biometric
modalities [41] due to its high level of public acceptance
and since it does not require an active user-participation
[39]. Under controlled conditions, current face recognition
systems are able to achieve highly accurate performances
15651

