Learning to Optimize Non-Rigid Tracking
Yang Li1,4 Aljaž Božič4 Tianwei Zhang1 Yanli Ji1,2 Tatsuya Harada1,3 Matthias Nießner4
1

The University of Tokyo, 2 UESTC, 3 RIKEN, 4 Technical University Munich

Abstract
One of the widespread solutions for non-rigid tracking
has a nested-loop structure: with Gauss-Newton to minimize a tracking objective in the outer loop, and Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (PCG) to solve a sparse linear system in the inner loop. In this paper, we employ
learnable optimizations to improve tracking robustness and
speed up solver convergence. First, we upgrade the tracking objective by integrating an alignment data term on deep
features which are learned end-to-end through CNN. The
new tracking objective can capture the global deformation
which helps Gauss-Newton to jump over local minimum,
leading to robust tracking on large non-rigid motions. Second, we bridge the gap between the preconditioning technique and learning method by introducing a ConditionNet
which is trained to generate a preconditioner such that PCG
can converge within a small number of steps. Experimental results indicate that the proposed learning method converges faster than the original PCG by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid dynamic objects, e.g., humans and animals,
are important targets in both computer vision and robotics
applications. Their complex geometric shapes and nonrigid surface changes result in challenging problems for
tracking and reconstruction. In recent years, using commodity RGB-D cameras, the seminal works such as DynamicFusion [20] and VolumeDeform [13] made their efforts to tackle this problem and obtained impressive nonrigid reconstruction results. At the core of DynamicFucion
and VolumeDeform are non-linear optimization problems.
However, this optimization can be slow, and can also result in undesired local minima. In this paper, we propose
a learning-based method that finds optimization steps that
expand the convergence radius (i.e., avoids local minima)
and also makes convergence faster. We test our method on
the essential inter-frame non-rigid tracking task, i.e., to find
the deformation between two RGB-D frames, which is a
high-dimensional and non-convex problem. The absence

Figure 1. PCG convergence using different preconditioners. The
curves show the average convergence on the testing dataset. Note
that our final method (green curve) requires 3 times fewer PCG
steps to achieve the same residual (10−6 ) than the best baseline
(dashed line).

of an object template model, large non-overlapping area,
and observation noise in both source and target frame make
this problem even more challenging. This section will first
review the classic approach and then put our contributions
into context.
Non-rigid Registration The non-rigid surface motions
can be roughly approximated through the “deformation
graph” [24]. In this deformable model, all of the unknowns,
i.e., the rotations and translations, are denoted as G. Given
two RGB-D frames, the goal of non-rigid registration is to
determine the G that minimizes the typical objective function:
min{Ef it (G) + λEreg (G)}
(1)
G

where Ef it is the data fitting term that measures the closeness between the warped source frame and the target frame.
Many different data fitting terms have been proposed over
the past decades, such as the geometric point-to-point and
point-to-plane constraints [16, 31, 20, 13] sparse SIFT descriptor correspondences [13], and the dense color term
[31], etc. The term Ereg regularizes the problem by favoring locally rigid deformation. Coefficient λ balances these

4910

