RL-CycleGAN: Reinforcement Learning Aware Simulation-To-Real
Kanishka Rao1 , Chris Harris1 , Alex Irpan1 , Sergey Levine1, 2 , Julian Ibarz1 , and Mohi Khansari3
1

Google Brain, Mountain View, USA
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
3
X, The Moonshot Factory, Mountain View, USA
{kanishkarao, ckharris, alexirpan, slevine, julianibarz}@google.com, khansari@x.team
2

Figure 1. RL-CycleGAN trains a CycleGAN which maps an image from the simulator (left) to a realistic image (middle), a jointly trained RL task ensures
that these images are useful for that specific task. At test time, the RL model may be transferred to real robot (right).

Abstract
Deep neural network based reinforcement learning (RL)
can learn appropriate visual representations for complex
tasks like vision-based robotic grasping without the need
for manually engineering or prior learning a perception
system. However, data for RL is collected via running an
agent in the desired environment, and for applications like
robotics, running a robot in the real world may be extremely
costly and time consuming. Simulated training offers an
appealing alternative, but ensuring that policies trained in
simulation can transfer effectively into the real world requires additional machinery. Simulations may not match
reality, and typically bridging the simulation-to-reality gap
requires domain knowledge and task-specific engineering.
We can automate this process by employing generative models to translate simulated images into realistic ones. However, this sort of translation is typically task-agnostic, in
that the translated images may not preserve all features that
are relevant to the task. In this paper, we introduce the RLscene consistency loss for image translation, which ensures
that the translation operation is invariant with respect to the
Q-values associated with the image. This allows us to learn
a task-aware translation. Incorporating this loss into unsupervised domain translation, we obtain RL-CycleGAN, a
new approach for simulation-to-real-world transfer for re-

inforcement learning. In evaluations of RL-CycleGAN on
two vision-based robotics grasping tasks, we show that RLCycleGAN offers a substantial improvement over a number
of prior methods for sim-to-real transfer, attaining excellent
real-world performance with only a modest number of realworld observations.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to train deep
neural network models to grasp objects directly with image observations [32, 26], or perform navigation with a mobile robot directly from onboard sensor readings [10]. However, this ability to learn visual representations end-to-end
together with a task controller often comes at a steep price
in sample complexity. Since the data needed for RL is typically task and policy specific, collecting this data in the loop
with policy training can be particularly difficult. An appealing alternative is to use RL to train policies in simulation,
and then transfer these policies onto real-world systems.
For acquiring task-relevant visual representations, training
in simulation is suboptimal as it results in representations of
the simulated environment, which may not work as well for
real environments. This simulation-to-reality gap has been
addressed in a variety of ways in prior work, from employing domain adaptation techniques that modify the simulated
111157

