Context-aware Human Motion Prediction
Enric Corona

Albert Pumarola

Guillem Alenyà

Francesc Moreno-Noguer

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, 08028, Barcelona, Spain
{ecorona, apumarola, galenya, fmoreno}@iri.upc.edu
Abstract
The problem of predicting human motion given a sequence of past observations is at the core of many applications in robotics and computer vision. Current state-ofthe-art formulate this problem as a sequence-to-sequence
task, in which a historical of 3D skeletons feeds a Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) that predicts future movements, typically in the order of 1 to 2 seconds. However, one aspect
that has been obviated so far, is the fact that human motion is inherently driven by interactions with objects and/or
other humans in the environment.
In this paper, we explore this scenario using a novel
context-aware motion prediction architecture. We use a
semantic-graph model where the nodes parameterize the
human and objects in the scene and the edges their mutual interactions. These interactions are iteratively learned
through a graph attention layer, fed with the past observations, which now include both object and human body motions. Once this semantic graph is learned, we inject it to a
standard RNN to predict future movements of the human/s
and object/s. We consider two variants of our architecture,
either freezing the contextual interactions in the future of
updating them. A thorough evaluation in the “Whole-Body
Human Motion Database” [29] shows that in both cases,
our context-aware networks clearly outperform baselines in
which the context information is not considered.

1. Introduction
The ability to predict and anticipate future human motion
based on past observations is essential for interacting with
other people and the world around us. While this seems a
trivial task for a person, it involves multiple sensory modalities and complex semantic understanding of the environment and the relations between all objects in it. Modeling and transferring this kind of knowledge to autonomous
agents would have a major impact in many different fields,
mainly in human-robot interaction [30] and autonomous
driving [47], but also in motion generation for computer

graphics animation [31] or image understanding [10].
The explosion of deep learning, combined with largescale datasets of human motion such as Human3.6M [24]
or the CMU motion capture dataset [34], has led to a significant amount of recent literature that tackles the problem of forecasting 3D human motion from past observations [14, 25, 43, 20, 3, 37, 15, 42, 26, 66]. These algorithms typically formulate the problem as sequence-tosequence task, in which past observations represented 3D
skeleton data are injected to a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) which then predicts movements in the near future
(less than 2 seconds).
Nevertheless, while promising results have been
achieved, we argue that the standard definition of the problem used so far lacks an important factor, which is the influence of the rest of the environment on the movement of
the person. For instance, if a person is carrying a box, the
configuration of the body arms and legs will be highly constrained by the 3D position of that box. Discovering such
interrelations between the person and the object/s of the
context (or another person he/she is interacting with), and
how these interrelations constrain the body motion, is the
principal motivation of this paper.
In order to explore this new paradigm, we devise a
context-aware motion prediction architecture, that models
the interactions between all objects of the scene and the human using a directed semantic graph. The nodes of this
graph represent the state of the person and objects (e.g. positional features) and the edges their mutual interactions.
These interactions are iteratively learned with the past observations of the human and objects motion and fed into a
standard RNN which is then responsible for predicting the
future movement of all elements in the scene (for both rigid
objects and non-rigid human skeletons). Additionally, we
propose a variant of this model that also predicts the evolution of the adjacency matrix representing the interaction
between the elements of the scene.
Presumably, one of the reasons why current state-of-theart has not considered an scenario like ours is because all
methods are trained and evaluated on benchmarks (mostly

6992

