Joint Spatial-Temporal Optimization for Stereo 3D Object Tracking
Peiliang Li, Jieqi Shi, and Shaojie Shen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
pliap@connect.ust.hk, jshias@connect.ust.hk, eeshaojie@ust.hk

Abstract
Directly learning multiple 3D objects motion from sequential images is difficult, while the geometric bundle adjustment lacks the ability to localize the invisible object centroid. To benefit from both the powerful object understanding skill from deep neural network meanwhile tackle precise
geometry modeling for consistent trajectory estimation, we
propose a joint spatial-temporal optimization-based stereo
3D object tracking method. From the network, we detect
corresponding 2D bounding boxes on adjacent images and
regress an initial 3D bounding box. Dense object cues (local depth and local coordinates) that associating to the object centroid are then predicted using a region-based network. Considering both the instant localization accuracy
and motion consistency, our optimization models the relations between the object centroid and observed cues into a
joint spatial-temporal error function. All historic cues will
be summarized to contribute to the current estimation by a
per-frame marginalization strategy without repeated computation. Quantitative evaluation on the KITTI tracking
dataset shows our approach outperforms previous imagebased 3D tracking methods by significant margins. We also
report extensive results on multiple categories and larger
datasets (KITTI raw and Argoverse Tracking) for future
benchmarking.

1. Introduction
3D object detection and tracking play a significant
role for autonomous driving vehicles where the timeindependent detection undertakes the fundamental perception, and continuous object tracking further enables temporal motion prediction and planning. With the rapid evolution of 3D deep learning and feature representation, the
detection part has been made great progress in terms of 3D
localization ability by many efforts [49, 19, 31, 23, 46, 8, 35,
52, 28, 27, 21, 42]. However, as an equally essential task,
the 3D object tracking has rarely been explored. Only a few
recent works [25, 30, 16] demonstrate 3D object tracking
ability in the context of self-driving scenarios. To bridge

Figure 1. An example of our 3D tracking system. From top to
bottom: The sampled object local depth which is color mapped
by local coordinates; 3D tracking result on sequential images; 3D
tracking result on the bird’s eye view. Here the trajectory is transformed to global coordinates for visualization using the off-shelf
ego-camera pose.

this gap and take advantage of sequential visual cues, we
aim at a complete 3D object tracking system that joint exploits spatial-temporal information and estimates accurate
3D object trajectories with motion consistency. We focus
on the use of stereo cameras as it shows a promising balance
between the cost and 3D sensing ability comparing with the
expensive LiDAR sensor and the inadequate single camera.
In this paper, we consider the 3D object tracking as not
only a data association problem but also a continuous state
estimation problem, where the estimation result should satisfy both instant spatial constraints and the accumulated history evidence. To this end, we propose our joint spatialtemporal optimization-based 3D object tracking system. As
illustrated in Fig. 2, our system firstly generates paired region proposals on the concatenated current and previous
feature maps. After RoIAlign [14], we employ three parallel branches on the concatenated RoI (region of interest)
feature to refine the proposal and generate object-level and
pixel-level information. As Fig. 2 shows, the paired regression branch refines the paired proposals to accurate 2D
bounding box pairs. Benefit from the paired detection, the

6877

