CvxNet:
Learnable Convex Decomposition
Boyang Deng
Google Research

Kyle Genova
Google Research

Soroosh Yazdani
Google Hardware

Geoffrey Hinton
Google Research

Sofien Bouaziz
Google Hardware

Andrea Tagliasacchi
Google Research

Abstract
Any solid object can be decomposed into a collection of
convex polytopes (in short, convexes). When a small number of convexes are used, such a decomposition can be
thought of as a piece-wise approximation of the geometry.
This decomposition is fundamental in computer graphics,
where it provides one of the most common ways to approximate geometry, for example, in real-time physics simulation. A convex object also has the property of being simultaneously an explicit and implicit representation: one
can interpret it explicitly as a mesh derived by computing
the vertices of a convex hull, or implicitly as the collection of half-space constraints or support functions. Their
implicit representation makes them particularly well suited
for neural network training, as they abstract away from the
topology of the geometry they need to represent. However,
at testing time, convexes can also generate explicit representations – polygonal meshes – which can then be used in
any downstream application. We introduce a network architecture to represent a low dimensional family of convexes.
This family is automatically derived via an auto-encoding
process. We investigate the applications of this architecture
including automatic convex decomposition, image to 3D reconstruction, and part-based shape retrieval.

1. Introduction
While images admit a standard representation in the form
of a scalar function uniformly discretized on a grid, the
curse of dimensionality has prevented the effective usage of
analogous representations for learning 3D geometry. Voxel
representations have shown some promise at low resolution
[10, 20, 35, 57, 62, 69, 74], while hierarchical representations have attempted to reduce the memory footprint required for training [58, 64, 73], but at the significant cost
of complex implementations. Rather than representing the
volume occupied by a 3D object, one can resort to mod-

Figure 1. Our method reconstruct a 3D object from an input image
as a collection of convex hulls, and we visualize the explode of
these convexes. Notably, CvxNet outputs polygonal mesh representations of convex polytopes without requiring the execution of
computationally expensive iso-surfacing (e.g. Marching Cubes).
This means the representation outputted by CvxNet can then be
readily used for physics simulation [17], as well as many other
downstream applications that consume polygonal meshes.

eling its surface via a collection of points [1, 19], polygons [31, 56, 71], or surface patches [26]. Alternatively, one
might follow Cezanne’s advice and “treat nature by means
of the cylinder, the sphere, the cone, everything brought into
proper perspective”, and think to approximate 3D geometry as geons [4] – collections of simple to interpret geometric primitives [68, 77], and their composition [60, 21].
Hence, one might rightfully start wondering “why so many
representations of 3D data exist, and why would one be
more advantageous than the other?” One observation is
that multiple equivalent representations of 3D geometry exist because real-world applications need to perform different operations and queries on this data ( [9, Ch.1]). For
example, in computer graphics, points and polygons allow
for very efficient rendering on GPUs, while volumes allow
artists to sculpt geometry without having to worry about tes1 31

