CPR-GCN: Conditional Partial-Residual Graph Convolutional Network
in Automated Anatomical Labeling of Coronary Arteries
Han Yang1,∗, Xingjian Zhen2,∗, Ying Chi1,†, Lei Zhang1 , and Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 2 University of Wisconsin Madison
{xiuxian.yh,xinyi.cy,lei.zhang.lz,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com, xzhen3@wisc.edu

Abstract
Automated anatomical labeling plays a vital role in coronary artery disease diagnosing procedure. The main challenge in this problem is the large individual variability inherited in human anatomy. Existing methods usually rely
on the position information and the prior knowledge of the
topology of the coronary artery tree, which may lead to unsatisfactory performance when the main branches are confusing. Motivated by the wide application of the graph neural network in structured data, in this paper, we propose
a conditional partial-residual graph convolutional network
(CPR-GCN), which takes both position and CT image into
consideration, since CT image contains abundant information such as branch size and spanning direction. Two
majority parts, a partial-residual GCN and a conditions
extractor, are included in CPR-GCN. The conditions extractor is a hybrid model containing the 3D CNN and the
LSTM, which can extract 3D spatial image features along
the branches. On the technical side, the partial-residual
GCN takes the position features of the branches, with the
3D spatial image features as conditions, to predict the label
for each branches. While on the mathematical side, our approach twists the partial differential equation (PDE) into
the graph modeling. A dataset with 511 subjects is collected from the clinic and annotated by two experts with
a two-phase annotation process. According to the five-fold
cross-validation, our CPR-GCN yields 95.8% meanRecall,
95.4% meanPrecision and 0.955 meanF1, which outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading causes of
death worldwide [21]. Cardiac CT angiography (CCTA)
image is widely adopted for the diagnosis of the cardiovascular disease because of its non-invasion and high sensitiv∗ Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Examples of coronary arteries for different subjects.
Each color indicates a specific branch. The number of branches,
the direction, and the connection all vary between these two subjects. The left vessel tree containing 10 branches is more complete,
while multiple vessel branches are missing in the right one.

ity [15]. In the clinic, doctors need a series of manual labor
to obtain the diagnostic report, which is a time-consuming
effort. If a computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system can
generate the diagnostic report automatically, a huge amount
of time can be saved. While automated anatomical labeling
of the coronary artery tree extracted from CCTA image is a
prerequisite step in the automated CAD system.
The coronary artery tree consists of two components,
i.e., left domain (LD) and right domain (RD). Also they
both originate from the aorta. According to [23], the
main coronary arteries of interest are left main (LM), left
descending artery (LAD), left circumflex artery (LCX),
left ramus-intermedius (RI), obtuse margin (OM), diagonal
artery (D), septal artery (S), right coronary artery (RCA),
right posterior lateral branches (R-PLB), right posterior descending artery (R-PDA), right acute marginal artery (AM)
(shown in Figure 1). From prior knowledge, we know that
LAD, LCX, and RI are from LM. R-PLB, R-PDA, and AM
are from RCA. Also S’s and D’s are from LAD, while OM’s
are from LCX. This makes the whole coronary artery tree as
structured data. Normally, RCA, LM, LAD, and LCX are
treated as the main branches. Other branches are treated as
the side branches.
Several anatomical labeling techniques have been developed for coronary arteries [23, 3, 22], brain arteries [1],
abdominal arteries [18, 25] and airways [10]. However,

3803

