Unsupervised Learning from Video with Deep Neural Embeddings
Chengxu Zhuang1

Tianwei She1 Alex Andonian2
1
Stanford University

Max Sobol Mark1
2
MIT

{chengxuz, shetw, joelmax, yamins}@stanford.edu

Daniel Yamins1

andonian@mit.edu

Abstract

learning of visual representations for both static and
dynamic visual tasks.

Because of the rich dynamical structure of videos and
their ubiquity in everyday life, it is a natural idea that
video data could serve as a powerful unsupervised learning signal for visual representations. However, instantiating this idea, especially at large scale, has remained
a significant artificial intelligence challenge. Here we
present the Video Instance Embedding (VIE) framework, which trains deep nonlinear embeddings on video
sequence inputs. By learning embedding dimensions that
identify and group similar videos together, while pushing
inherently different videos apart in the embedding space,
VIE captures the strong statistical structure inherent in
videos, without the need for external annotation labels.
We find that, when trained on a large-scale video dataset,
VIE yields powerful representations both for action recognition and single-frame object categorization, showing
substantially improving on the state of the art wherever
direct comparisons are possible. We show that a twopathway model with both static and dynamic processing
pathways is optimal, provide analyses indicating how the
model works, and perform ablation studies showing the
importance of key architecture and loss function choices.
Our results suggest that deep neural embeddings are a
promising approach to unsupervised video learning for
a wide variety of task domains.

However, it has been challenging to embody this hypothesis in a concrete neural network that can consume
unlabelled video data to learn useful feature representations, especially in the context of at-scale real-world
applications. Perhaps the biggest source of difficulty in
making progress on unsupervised video learning, though,
is that unsupervised learning has presented a formidable
challenge even for the case of single static images. Even
for the case of single static images, the gap in representational power between the features learned by unsupervised and supervised neural networks has been very
substantial, to the point where the former were unsuitable for use in any at-scale visual task. However, recent
advances in learning with deep visual embeddings have
begun to produce unsupervised representations that
rival the visual task transfer power of representations
learned by their supervised counterparts [37, 36, 40, 3].
These methods leverage simple but apparently strong
heuristics about data separation and clustering to iteratively bootstrap feature representations that increasingly better capture subtle natural image statistics. As
a result, it is now possible to obtain unsupervised deep
convolutional neural networks that outperform “early
modern” deep networks (such as AlexNet in [13]) on
challenging recognition tasks such as ImageNet, even
when the latter are trained in a supervised fashion.
Moreover, works in supervised video classification, action recognition and video captioning have proposed
novel combinations of two- and three-dimensional convolutional structures that are increasingly well-suited
to video feature extraction [5].

1. Introduction
A video’s temporal sequence often contains information about dynamics and events in the world that is
richer than that in its unordered set of frames. For
example, as objects and agents move and interact with
each other, they give rise to characteristic patterns of
visual change that strongly correlate with their visual
and physical identities, including object category, geometric shape, texture, mass, deformability, motion
tendencies, and many other properties. It is thus an attractive hypothesis that ubiquitiously available natural
videos could serve as a powerful signal for unsupervised

In this work, we show how the idea of deep unsupervised embeddings can be used to learn features
from videos, introducing the Video Instance Embedding
(VIE) framework. In VIE, videos are projected into a
compact latent space via a deep neural network, whose
parameters are then tuned to optimally distribute embedded video instances so that similar videos aggregate
while dissimilar videos separate. We find that VIE

9563

