4D Visualization of Dynamic Events from Unconstrained Multi-View Videos
Aayush Bansal

Minh Vo

Yaser Sheikh Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Srinivasa Narasimhan

{aayushb,mpvo,yaser,deva,srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

http://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜aayushb/Open4D/

time

(1)
(2) freeze the view

(3) vary both
time and view

(2)

(1) freeze the time
3D space

(3)

Figure 1. We can create virtual cameras that facilitate: (1) freezing the time and exploring views (red); (2) freezing the view and moving
through time (green); and (3) vary both time and view (blue).

Abstract
We present a data-driven approach for 4D space-time
visualization of dynamic events from videos captured by
hand-held multiple cameras. Key to our approach is the use
of self-supervised neural networks specific to the scene to
compose static and dynamic aspects of an event. Though
captured from discrete viewpoints, this model enables us to
move around the space-time of the event continuously. This
model allows us to create virtual cameras that facilitate: (1)
freezing the time and exploring views; (2) freezing a view
and moving through time; and (3) simultaneously changing
both time and view. We can also edit the videos and reveal
occluded objects for a given view if it is visible in any of
the other views. We validate our approach on challenging
in-the-wild events captured using up to 15 mobile cameras.

1. Introduction
Imagine going back in time and revisiting crucial moments of your lives, such as your wedding ceremony, your
graduation ceremony, or the first birthday of your child, immersively from any viewpoint. The prospect of building
such a virtual time machine [40] have become increasingly

realizable with the advent of affordable and high-quality
smartphone cameras producing extensive collections of social video data. Unfortunately, people do not benefit from
this broader set of captures of their social events. When it
comes to look back, we are likely to only look at one video
or two even when hundreds were captured. We present a
data-driven approach that leverages all perspectives to enable a more complete exploration of the event. With our
approach, the benefits from each extra perspective that is
captured leads to a more complete experience. We seek to
automatically organize the disparate visual data into a comprehensive four-dimensional environment (3D space and
time). The complete control of spatiotemporal aspects not
only enables us to see a dynamic event from any perspective but also allows geometrically consistent content editing.
This functionality unlocks many potential applications in the
movie industry and consumer devices, especially as virtual
reality headsets are becoming popular by the day. Figure 1
show examples of virtual camera views synthesized using
our approach for an event captured from multi-view videos.
Prior work on virtualized reality [28, 30, 32] has primarily
been restricted to studio setups with tens or even hundreds
of synchronized cameras. Four hundred hours of video data
is uploaded on YouTube every minute. This feat has become
possible because of the commercial success of high qual15366

