Syntax-Aware Action Targeting for Video Captioning
Qi Zheng
Chaoyue Wang
Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{qi.zheng,chaoyue.wang,dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
The goal of video captioning is to automatically generate a complete and natural sentence to describe video
content, ideally encapsulating its most informative dynamics [58, 17, 13]. Such dynamics usually reveal a specific
action within the video clip, such as running, eating and
jumping. Compared with image captioning [2, 31, 20, 8]
that aims at depicting the static scene in an image, video
captioning emphasizes more on the action and attracts increasing attention in the field of both computer vision and
artificial intelligence. It has extensive applications such as
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [57, 16], human-robot
interaction [32] and video retrieval [64, 14].

SAAT

Decoder

Encoder

Video captioning aims to describe objects and their interactions in the video using natural language. Existing methods have made great efforts to identify objects in
videos, but few of them emphasize the prediction of interactions among objects, which is usually indicated by action/predicate in generated sentences. Different from other
components in a sentence, the predicate depends on both the
static scene and the dynamic motions in a video. Due to the
neglect of such uniqueness, actions generated by existing
methods may depend heavily on the co-occurrence of objects, e.g. ‘driving’ is predicted with high confidence whenever both man and car are detected. In this paper, we propose a Syntax-Aware Action Targeting (SAAT) module that
explicitly learns actions by simultaneously referring to the
subject and video dynamics. Specifically, we first identify
the subject by drawing global dependence among multiple
objects, and then decode action from a common space that
fuses the embedding of the subject and the temporal feature of the video. Validated on two public datasets, the proposed module increases action accuracy in generated descriptions, which present better semantic consistency with
the dynamic content in videos. Codes are available on
https://github.com/SydCaption/SAAT.

A man is driving a car.

A man is pushing a car.

Figure 1: Example of caption generation with and w/o the
SAAT module. The dotted line demonstrates captioning using a regular encoder-decoder framework, and the solid line
shows the result using an SAAT-involved captioner.
Owing to recent advancements in object recognition using deep learning [42, 41, 18], exciting progress has been
made on video captioning. Specifically, a trend in existing
methods [35, 66, 65, 1, 56, 59, 6, 55] is that they devise diverse modules to identify the objects in a video clip. This
has greatly improved the relevance between the generated
captions and the given video due to at least two advantages.
On the one hand, with abundant static information extracted
from the video clip, a captioner is more likely to depict
the targeted instance in the video. On the other hand, the
co-occurrence of objects helps the captioner to remember
<video, description> pairs. A clear illustration of this can
be found in [38], where captions are generated by recalling
similar scenes in learned memory.
The downside of these methods is the ignorance of action (i.e. the predicate of a sentence) learning, which requires more dynamic information from videos than other
components in a sentence. This can hardly be remedied
by memory. For example, the learned model may depend
heavily on what it has seen in the training process such as
the prior of co-occurrence to generate captions for a video.
As demonstrated in Fig. 1, when man and car are both detected, regular encoder-decoder framework tends to give a
man is driving a car even though the man is outside the car
and the car is not moving forward. This causes an enormous

13096

