Time Flies: Animating a Still Image with Time-Lapse Video as Reference
Chia-Chi Cheng
Hung-Yu Chen
Wei-Chen Chiu
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
angelwmab.cs07g@nctu.edu.tw

chen3381@purdue.edu

Abstract
Time-lapse videos usually perform eye-catching appearances but are often hard to create. In this paper, we propose
a self-supervised end-to-end model to generate the timelapse video from a single image and a reference video. Our
key idea is to extract both the style and the features of temporal variation from the reference video, and transfer them
onto the input image. To ensure both the temporal consistency and realness of our resultant videos, we introduce
several novel designs in our architecture, including classwise NoiseAdaIN, flow loss, and the video discriminator. In
comparison to the baselines of state-of-the-art style transfer approaches, our proposed method is not only efficient
in computation but also able to create more realistic and
temporally smooth time-lapse video of a still image, with its
temporal variation consistent to the reference.

1. Introduction
Time-lapse videos provide a great way to capture the dynamic world and let us visualize the temporal change of the
scenes. As the time-lapse videos are sped up to show longer
footage (e.g. seasonal or daily changes) in a shorter period
of time, they often present great variance in color appearance and rapid movement, which make them unique and
popular nowadays. However, taking a time-lapse video is
time-consuming and costly since it typically requires stable hardware devices or mounting equipment for cameras
to prevent unwanted camera motions. In order to alleviate
the difficulty of shooting time lapse videos, we propose an
algorithm of time-lapse synthesis by animating a still image
with its temporal change adopted from the existing timelapse videos that are already available on the internet.
As examples shown in Figure 1, given an image in the
leftmost column as our target, we attempt to transfer the
continuous and photorealistic changes appearing in the reference video (as shown in the topmost row) into the target image and create the corresponding time-lapse video.
Due to the nature of time-lapse videos for having complicated and nonlinear changes in both temporal and spatial
domains, which we can usually observe, the resultant time-

walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Reference
Video
Input
Image

Figure 1. Given a still image (the leftmost column), we aim to generate its corresponding time-lapse animation which has the temporal changes consistent with the reference time-lapse video (as
shown in the topmost row).

lapse video based on our synthesis should maintain both the
temporal consistency and realness simultaneously.
There have been several works of time-lapse video generation proposed, yet with different problem settings from
ours. For instance, the data-driven algorithm proposed by
Shih et al. [24] relies on a database of time-lapse videos of
various scenes to hallucinate a plausible image at a different
time of day from an input image. Another deep-learningbased model from [19] learns the correlation between different timing of the day and their corresponding illumination change of an outdoor scene. While being given an outdoor image and various timestamps as inputs, the method
can synthesize a time-lapse video with continuous changes
in the illumination. Differ from these works, our proposed
scenario does not require any database and is able to take arbitrary time-lapse video as reference, thus being more practical and not limited to have only daily or any particular
temporal changes.
Without loss of generality, our work can also be seen as
an extension of style transfer. Due to the popularity of deep
learning techniques nowadays, we have recently witnessed
quite some research efforts being devoted to transfer not
only the artistic styles [6, 11, 16] but also the photorealistic
15641

