Monocular Real-time Hand Shape and Motion Capture using Multi-modal Data
Yuxiao Zhou1 Marc Habermann2,3 Weipeng Xu2,3 Ikhsanul Habibie2,3 Christian Theobalt2,3 Feng Xu∗1
1

BNRist and School of Software, Tsinghua University, 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 3 Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
We present a novel method for monocular hand shape
and pose estimation at unprecedented runtime performance
of 100fps and at state-of-the-art accuracy. This is enabled
by a new learning based architecture designed such that it
can make use of all the sources of available hand training data: image data with either 2D or 3D annotations, as
well as stand-alone 3D animations without corresponding
image data. It features a 3D hand joint detection module
and an inverse kinematics module which regresses not only
3D joint positions but also maps them to joint rotations in
a single feed-forward pass. This output makes the method
more directly usable for applications in computer vision
and graphics compared to only regressing 3D joint positions. We demonstrate that our architectural design leads to
a significant quantitative and qualitative improvement over
the state of the art on several challenging benchmarks. We
will make our code publicly available for future research.

1. Introduction
Hands are the most relevant tools for humans to interact with the real world. Therefore, capturing hand motion
is of outstanding importance for a variety of applications in
AR/VR, human computer interaction, and many more. Ideally, such a capture system should run at real time to provide
direct feedback to the user, it should only leverage a single
RGB camera to reduce cost and power consumption, and
it should predict joint angles as they are more directly usable for most common applications in computer graphics,
AR, and VR. 3D hand motion capture is very challenging,
especially from a single RGB image, due to the inherent
depth ambiguity of the monocular setting, self occlusions,
complex and fast movements of the hand, and uniform skin
∗ This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
2018YFA0704000, the NSFC (No.61822111, 61727808, 61671268), the
Beijing Natural Science Foundation (JQ19015, L182052), and the ERC
Consolidator Grant 4DRepLy (770784). Feng Xu is the corresponding
author.

Figure 1. We present a novel hand motion capture approach that
estimates 3D hand joint locations and rotations at real time from
a single RGB image. Hand mesh models can then be animated
with the predicted joint rotations. Our system is robust to challenging scenarios such as object occlusions, self occlusions, and
unconstrained scale.

appearance. The existing state-of-the-art methods resort to
deep learning and have achieved significant improvement
in recent years [2, 10, 51, 17, 3]. However, we observe two
main problems with those methods.
First, none of the existing methods makes use of all publicly available training data modalities, even though the annotated hand data is severely limited due to the difficulty
of collecting real human hand images with 3D annotations.
Specifically, to obtain 3D annotations, a particular capture
setup is required, e.g., leveraging stereo cameras [50] or a
depth camera [36, 42, 38, 49], which prevents collecting diverse data at large scale. An alternative is synthetic datasets
[23, 54]. However, models trained on synthetic images do
not generalize well to real images due to the domain gap
[23]. In contrast, 2D annotated internet images with larger
variation [33] are easier to obtain. However, it is nearly im-

5346

