Deep Adversarial Decomposition: A Unified Framework for Separating
Superimposed Images

1

Zhengxia Zou1 *, Sen Lei2 , Tianyang Shi3 , Zhenwei Shi2 , Jieping Ye1,4
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2 Beihang University, 3 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, 4 Didi Chuxing

{zzhengxi, jpye}@umich.edu, {senlei, shizhenwei}@buaa.edu.cn, shitianyang@corp.netease.com

Abstract
Separating individual image layers from a single mixed
image has long been an important but challenging task.
We propose a unified framework named “deep adversarial
decomposition” for single superimposed image separation.
Our method deals with both linear and non-linear mixtures
under an adversarial training paradigm. Considering the
layer separating ambiguity that given a single mixed input,
there could be an infinite number of possible solutions, we
introduce a “Separation-Critic” - a discriminative network
which is trained to identify whether the output layers are
well-separated and thus further improves the layer separation. We also introduce a “crossroad l1 ” loss function,
which computes the distance between the unordered outputs and their references in a crossover manner so that the
training can be well-instructed with pixel-wise supervision.
Experimental results suggest that our method significantly
outperforms other popular image separation frameworks.
Without specific tuning, our method achieves the state of
the art results on multiple computer vision tasks, including
the image deraining, photo reflection removal, and image
shadow removal.

1. Introduction
In the computer vision field, many tasks can be considered as image layer mixture/separation problems. For example, when we take a picture on rainy days, the image
obtained can be viewed as a mixture of two layers: a rainstreak layer and a clean background layer. When we look
through a transparent glass, we see a mixture of the scene
beyond the glass and the scene reflected by the glass.
Separating superimposed images with a single observation has long been an important but challenging task.
On one hand, it forms the foundation of a large group of
real-world applications, including transparency separation,
shadow removal, deraining, etc. On the other hand, it is naturally a massively ill-posed problem, where the difficulty
* Corresponding author: Zhengxia Zou (zzhengxi@umich.edu)

lies not only in the absence of the mixture function but also
in the lack of constraints on the output space. In recent
literature, most of the above-mentioned tasks are investigated individually despite the strong correlation between
them [8, 23, 48, 54, 59, 60]. In this paper, we propose a
new framework for single superimposed image separation,
as shown in Fig 1, which deals with all the above tasks under a unified framework.
Learning a priori for image decomposition. Given
a single superimposed image, as we have no extra constraint on the output space, there could be an infinite number of possible decomposition. Previous works often integrate hard-crafted priors to apply additional constraints
to their separation outputs. For example, in recent literature [17, 67], researchers introduced the “gradient exclusiveness” [67] and the “internal self-similarity” [17], where
the former one emphasizes the independence of the layers
to be separated in their gradient domain, and the latter one
assumes that the distribution of small patches within each
separate layer should be “simpler” (more uniform) than in
the original mixed one. However, these hand-crafted priors
may introduce unexpected bias and thus fails in complex
mixture conditions. In this paper, we investigate an interesting question: can a good prior be learned from data? To
answer this question, we re-examine the prior under a totally different point of view by taking advantage of the recent success of generative adversarial networks [19, 28, 47].
We introduce a “Separation-Critic” - a discriminative network DC , which is trained to identify whether the output
layers are well-separated. The layer separation thus can be
gradually enforced by fooling the Critic under an adversarial training paradigm.
Crossroad loss function. In addition to the Critic DC ,
we also introduce a layer separator G and train it to minimize the distance between the separated outputs and the
ground truth references. However, a standard l1 or l2 loss
does not apply to our task since the G may predict unordered outputs. We, therefore, introduce a “crossroad l1 ”
loss which computes the distance between the outputs and
their references in a crossover fashion. In this way, the train-

12806

