Universal Litmus Patterns:
Revealing Backdoor Attacks in CNNs
Soheil Kolouri1,∗, Aniruddha Saha2,∗ , Hamed Pirsiavash2,† , Heiko Hoffmann1,†
1: HRL Laboratories, LLC., Malibu, CA, USA, 90265
2: University of Maryland, Baltimore County, MD 21250
skolouri@hrl.com, anisaha1@umbc.edu, hpirsiav@umbc.edu, hhoffmann@hrl.com

Abstract
The unprecedented success of deep neural networks in
many applications has made these networks a prime target for adversarial exploitation. In this paper, we introduce a benchmark technique for detecting backdoor attacks
(aka Trojan attacks) on deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). We introduce the concept of Universal Litmus Patterns (ULPs), which enable one to reveal backdoor attacks
by feeding these universal patterns to the network and analyzing the output (i.e., classifying the network as ‘clean’
or ‘corrupted’). This detection is fast because it requires
only a few forward passes through a CNN. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of ULPs for detecting backdoor attacks on
thousands of networks with different architectures trained
on four benchmark datasets, namely the German Traffic
Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB), MNIST, CIFAR10,
and Tiny-ImageNet. The codes and train/test models for
this paper can be found here: https://umbcvision.
github.io/Universal-Litmus-Patterns/.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become the standard building block in numerous machine learning applications, including computer vision [10], speech recognition [2], machine translation [34], and robotic manipulation
[16], achieving state-of-the-art performance on extremely
difficult tasks. The widespread success of these networks
has made them the prime option for deploying in sensitive
domains, including but not limited to health care [25], finance [7], autonomous driving [3], and defense-related applications [23].
Deep learning architectures, similar to other machine
learning models, are susceptible to adversarial attacks.
These vulnerabilities have raised security concerns around
these models, which has led to a fertile field of research
∗ and † denote equal contribution.

on adversarial attacks on DNNs and defenses against such
attacks. Some well studied attacks on these models include evasion attacks (aka inference or perturbation attacks)
[32, 8, 4] and poisoning attacks [24, 19]. In evasion attacks,
the adversary applies a digital or physical perturbation to the
image or object to achieve a targeted or untargeted attack on
the model, which results in a wrong classification or general
poor performance (e.g., as in regression applications).
Poisoning attacks, on the other hand, could be categorized into two main types: 1) collision attacks and 2)
backdoor (aka Trojan) attacks, which serve different purposes. In collision attacks, the adversarys goal is to introduce infected samples (e.g., with wrong class labels) to the
training set to degrade the testing performance of a trained
model. Collision attacks hinder the capability of a victim
to train a deployable machine learning model. In backdoor attacks, on the other hand, the adversarys goal is to
introduce a trigger (e.g., a sticker, or a specific accessory)
in the training set such that the presence of the particular
trigger fools the trained model. Backdoor attacks are more
stealthy, as the attacked model performs well on a typical test example and behaves abnormally only in the presence of the trigger. As an illuminating example of a backdoor attack, which could have lethal consequences, consider the following autonomous-driving scenario. A CNN
trained for traffic-sign detection could be infected with a
backdoor/Trojan such that whenever a particular sticker is
placed on a ‘stop sign’, it is misclassified as a ‘speed limit
sign.’
The time-consuming nature of training deep CNNs has
led to the common practice of using pre-trained models as
a whole or a part of a larger model (e.g., for the perception
front). Since the pre-trained models are often from a third,
potentially unknown, party, identifying the integrity of the
pre-trained models is of utmost importance. Given the
stealthy nature of backdoor attacks, however, merely evaluating a model on clean test data is insufficient. Moreover,
the original training data are usually unavailable. Here, we
present an approach to detect backdoor attacks on CNNs,

301

