Tracking by Instance Detection: A Meta-Learning Approach
Guangting Wang1
Chong Luo2
Xiaoyan Sun2
University of Science and Technology of China1

Zhiwei Xiong1
Wenjun Zeng2
Microsoft Research Asia2

wgting96@gmail.com {cluo, xysun, wezeng}@microsoft.com zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Training image

We consider the tracking problem as a special type of
object detection problem, which we call instance detection.
With proper initialization, a detector can be quickly converted into a tracker by learning the new instance from a
single image. We find that model-agnostic meta-learning
(MAML) offers a strategy to initialize the detector that satisfies our needs. We propose a principled three-step approach
to build a high-performance tracker. First, pick any modern
object detector trained with gradient descent. Second, conduct offline training (or initialization) with MAML. Third,
perform domain adaptation using the initial frame. We follow this procedure to build two trackers, named RetinaMAML and FCOS-MAML, based on two modern detectors RetinaNet and FCOS. Evaluations on four benchmarks
show that both trackers are competitive against state-ofthe-art trackers. On OTB-100, Retina-MAML achieves the
highest ever AUC of 0.712. On TrackingNet, FCOS-MAML
ranks the first on the leader board with an AUC of 0.757
and the normalized precision of 0.822. Both trackers run in
real-time at 40 FPS.

1. Introduction
Given a bounding box defining the target object in the
initial frame, the goal of visual object tracking is to automatically determine the location and extent of the object in
every frame that follows. The tracking problem is closely
related to the detection problem, and it even can be treated
as a special type of object detection, which we call instance
detection. The major difference is that object detection locates objects of some predefined classes and its output does
not differentiate between intra-class instances. But object
tracking only looks for a particular instance, which may belong to any known or unknown object class, that is specified
in the initial frame.
Given the similarity between the two tasks, some object
detection techniques are used extensively in object tracking.
For example, the region proposal network (RPN), which
This work was done while Guangting was an intern with MSRA.

Domain Adaptation

Before adaptation

Test image

After adaptation

Figure 1: MAML provides an effective way to initialize an
instance detector. With a single training image, the detector
can be quickly adapted to the new domain (instance). It is
capable of locating target object in subsequent frames even
when the object has significant appearance changes.
was proposed in Faster R-CNN detector [30], has been
adopted in SiamRPN tracker and its variants [21, 20, 43].
The introduction of multi-aspect-ratio anchors solves the
box estimation problem that has been plaguing previous
trackers. It has greatly improved the performance of
siamese-network-based trackers. More recently, the IoU
network [14], which is again an innovation in object detection, is applied to object tracking by ATOM and DiMP
[6, 3] and demonstrates powerful capabilities.
In addition to these approaches that borrow advanced
components from object detection to assemble a tracker, we
believe that another option is to directly convert a modern
object detector into a high-performance tracker. This will
allow the tracker to retain not only the advanced components but also the overall design of the base detector. The
main challenge is how to obtain a good initialization of the
detector so that once a new instance is given, it can efficiently infuse the instance information into the network
without overfitting. Fig.1 illustrates the idea. The detector
may behave like a general object detector before adaptation.
But after domain adaptation with a single training image, it
is able to “memorize” the target and correctly locate the target in subsequent frames. A recent work by Huang et al.

6288

