EventSR: From Asynchronous Events to Image Reconstruction, Restoration, and
Super-Resolution via End-to-End Adversarial Learning
Lin Wang1 , Tae-Kyun Kim2 , and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
2
ICVL Lab., Imperial College London, UK
wanglin@kaist.ac.kr, tk.kim@imperial.ac.uk, kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Event cameras sense intensity changes and have many
advantages over conventional cameras. To take advantage
of event cameras, some methods have been proposed to reconstruct intensity images from event streams. However,
the outputs are still in low resolution (LR), noisy, and unrealistic. The low-quality outputs stem broader applications of event cameras, where high spatial resolution (HR)
is needed as well as high temporal resolution, dynamic
range, and no motion blur. We consider the problem of reconstructing and super-resolving intensity images from LR
events, when no ground truth (GT) HR images and downsampling kernels are available. To tackle the challenges,
we propose a novel end-to-end pipeline that reconstructs
LR images from event streams, enhances the image qualities, and upsamples the enhanced images, called EventSR.
For the absence of real GT images, our method is primarily unsupervised, deploying adversarial learning. To
train EventSR, we create an open dataset including both
real-world and simulated scenes. The use of both datasets
boosts up the network performance, and the network architectures and various loss functions in each phase help improve the image qualities. The whole pipeline is trained
in three phases. While each phase is mainly for one of
the three tasks, the networks in earlier phases are finetuned by respective loss functions in an end-to-end manner. Experimental results show that EventSR reconstructs
high-quality SR images from events for both simulated and
real-world data. A video of the experiments is available at
https://youtu.be/OShS_MwHecs.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that sense the
changes of intensity at the time they occur and produce
asynchronous event streams [24, 44, 18], while conventional cameras capture intensity changes at a fixed frame
rate. This distinctive feature has sparked a series of meth-

Figure 1: Reconstructing realistic HDR SR intensity image from
pure events. EventSR reconstructs LR HDR intensity image, restores realistic LR image and finally generates SR image (with
scale factor of ˆ4) from events in phase 1,2 and 3, respectively.

ods developed specific for event cameras [37], and only
recently, generic learning algorithms were successfully applied to event-based problems [44, 53, 46, 32, 7].
Event cameras (e.g., DAVIS 240) convey clear advantages such as very high dynamic range (HDR) (140dB)
[24], no motion blur and high temporal resolution (1µs),
and it has been shown that an event camera alone is sufficient to perform high-level tasks such as object detection
[27], tracking [14], and SLAM [19]. In addition, as its potential, event streams might contain complete visual information for reconstructing high quality intensity images and
videos with HDR and no motion blur. However, state-ofthe-arts (SOTA) [44, 32, 29, 3] for intensity image reconstruction suffer due to accumulated noise and blur (out of
focus) in stacked events and low resolution (LR) of event
cameras. The active pixel sensor (APS) images are with
low dynamic range, LR and blur. The reconstructed images thus typically are in LR and with artifacts. Although
[19, 35] focused HR for event cameras, namely spherical
HR image mosaicing and HR panorama of events, respectively, they did not consider image-plane HR intensity image reconstruction and its perceptual realisticity.
In this work, we strive to answer the question, ‘is it pos18315

