Learning from Noisy Anchors for One-stage Object Detection
Hengduo Li∗ 1 , Zuxuan Wu1 , Chen Zhu1 , Caiming Xiong† 2 , Richard Socher2 , Larry S. Davis1
1
University of Maryland 2 Salesforce Research
{hdli,zxwu,chenzhu,lsd}@cs.umd.edu,

{cxiong,rsocher}@salesforce.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art object detectors rely on regressing and
classifying an extensive list of possible anchors, which are
divided into positive and negative samples based on their
intersection-over-union (IoU) with corresponding groundtruth objects. Such a harsh split conditioned on IoU results
in binary labels that are potentially noisy and challenging
for training. In this paper, we propose to mitigate noise incurred by imperfect label assignment such that the contributions of anchors are dynamically determined by a carefully
constructed cleanliness score associated with each anchor.
Exploring outputs from both regression and classification
branches, the cleanliness scores, estimated without incurring any additional computational overhead, are used not
only as soft labels to supervise the training of the classification branch but also sample re-weighting factors for improved localization and classification accuracy. We conduct
extensive experiments on COCO, and demonstrate, among
other things, the proposed approach steadily improves RetinaNet by ∼2% with various backbones.

1. Introduction
Object detectors aim to identify rigid bounding boxes
that enclose objects of interest in images and have steadily
improved over the past few years. Key to the advancement
in accuracy is the reduction of object detection to an image classification problem. In particular, a set of candidate boxes, i.e., anchors, of various pre-defined sizes and
aspect ratios, are extensively used to be regressed to desired locations and classified into object labels (or background). While training the regression branch is straightforward with ground-truth (GT) coordinates of objects available, optimizing the classification network is challenging:
only a small fraction of anchors sufficiently overlap with GT
boxes. This limited number of proposals are considered as
positive samples, together with a vast number of remaining
∗ Work partially done while the author was an intern at Salesforce Research.
† Corresponding author.

(a)
Negative

(b)

(c)
Positive

Figure 1: Candidate anchors and their assigned labels
(represented by color) in sampled images. Top: classical
training methods assign binary labels, i.e., positive (in blue)
and negative (in red) to anchors based on IoU between candidates and ground-truth boxes (in green). Bottom: soft
labels, represented by the density of colors, assigned to anchors by our approach based on a proposed cleanliness metric for anchors. Best viewed digitally.

negative anchors, to learn good classifiers with the help of
techniques like focal loss [22] or hard sample mining methods [36, 31, 26] that can mitigate data imbalance problems.
Despite the success of such training schemes in various
detectors [30, 28, 24, 21, 22], the split of positive and negative anchors relies on a design choice—proposals whose
IoUs with GT boxes are higher than a pre-defined foreground threshold are considered as positive samples while
those with IoUs lower than a background threshold are
treated as negative. Although simple and effective, the use
of pre-defined thresholds is simply based on ad-hoc heuristics, and more importantly, the resulting hard division of anchors as either positive or negative is questionable. Unlike
standard image classification problems where positive and
negative samples are more clearly determined by whether
an object occurs, anchors that overlap with GT boxes correspond to patches of objects, covering a fraction of an ob-

10588

