Optimizing Rank-based Metrics with Blackbox Differentiation
Michal Rolı́nek1 * , Vı́t Musil2 ∗ , Anselm Paulus1 , Marin Vlastelica1 , Claudio Michaelis3 , Georg Martius1
1

Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany

2

Università degli Studi di Firenze,
Italy

3

University of Tübingen,
Germany

michal.rolinek@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Rank-based metrics are some of the most widely used criteria for performance evaluation of computer vision models.
Despite years of effort, direct optimization for these metrics
remains a challenge due to their non-differentiable and nondecomposable nature. We present an efficient, theoretically
sound, and general method for differentiating rank-based
metrics with mini-batch gradient descent. In addition, we
address optimization instability and sparsity of the supervision signal that both arise from using rank-based metrics as
optimization targets. Resulting losses based on recall and
Average Precision are applied to image retrieval and object
detection tasks. We obtain performance that is competitive
with state-of-the-art on standard image retrieval datasets
and consistently improve performance of near state-of-theart object detectors.

1. Introduction
Rank-based metrics are frequently used to evaluate performance on a wide variety of computer vision tasks. For
example, in the case of image retrieval, these metrics are
* These authors contributed equally.

required since, at test-time, the models produce a ranking
of images based on their relevance to a query. Rank-based
metrics are also popular in classification tasks with unbalanced class distributions or multiple classes per image. One
prominent example is object detection, where an average
over multiple rank-based metrics is used for final evaluation. The most common metrics are recall [12], Average
Precision (AP ) [68], Normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (NDCG) [6], and the Spearman Coefficient [9].
Directly optimizing for the rank-based metrics is inviting
but also notoriously difficult due to the non-differentiable
(piecewise constant) and non-decomposable nature of such
metrics. A trivial solution is to use one of several popular surrogate functions such as 0-1 loss [33], the area under the ROC curve [1] or cross entropy. Many studies
from the last two decades have addressed direct optimization with approaches ranging from histogram binning approximations [4, 20, 49], finite difference estimation [23],
loss-augmented inference [40, 68], gradient approximation
[56] all the way to using a large LSTM to fit the ranking
operation [10].
Despite the clear progress in direct optimization [4, 7,
40], these methods are notably omitted in the most publicly used implementation hubs for object detection [8, 25,
37, 64], and image retrieval [51]. The reasons include poor

Figure 1: Differentiation of a piecewise constant rank-based loss. A two-dimensional section of the loss landscape is shown
(left) along with two efficiently differentiable interpolations of increasing strengths (middle and right).

7620

