Learning Generative Models of Shape Handles
Matheus Gadelha 1 Giorgio Gori2 Duygu Ceylan2 Radomı́r Měch2
Tamy Boubekeur2 Rui Wang1 Subhransu Maji1
1

UMass Amherst

2

Nathan Carr2

Adobe Research

Figure 1: Gallery of 3D shapes generated as sets of handles (zoom for details). We propose a class of generative models
for synthesizing sets of handles – lightweight proxies that can be easily utilized for high-level tasks such as shape editing,
parsing, animation etc. Our model can generate sets with different cardinality and is flexible to work with various types of
handles, such as sphere-mesh handles [37] (first and third figures) and cuboids (middle figure).

Abstract
We present a generative model to synthesize 3D shapes
as sets of handles – lightweight proxies that approximate
the original 3D shape – for applications in interactive editing, shape parsing, and building compact 3D representations. Our model can generate handle sets with varying
cardinality and different types of handles (Figure 1). Key
to our approach is a deep architecture that predicts both
the parameters and existence of shape handles, and a novel
similarity measure that can easily accommodate different
types of handles, such as cuboids or sphere-meshes. We
leverage the recent advances in semantic 3D annotation
as well as automatic shape summarizing techniques to supervise our approach. We show that the resulting shape
representations are intuitive and achieve superior quality
than previous state-of-the-art. Finally, we demonstrate how
our method can be used in applications such as interactive shape editing, completion, and interpolation, leveraging the latent space learned by our model to guide these
tasks. Project page: http://mgadelha.me/shapehandles.

1. Introduction
Dramatic improvements in quality of image generation
have become a key driving force behind many novel image
editing applications. Yet, similar approaches are lacking for
editing and generating 3D shapes. There are two related
challenges. First, learning generative models for 3D data is
challenging, as unlike images, high-quality 3D data is hard
to obtain and the data is high dimensional and often unstructured. Second, regardless of whether good generative models are available, manipulating and editing 3D shapes in interactive applications is harder to users than editing images.
For this reason, the geometry processing community has developed techniques for representing 3D data as a small collection of simpler proxy shapes [2,4,7,17,22,24,43]. In this
paper, we refer to these light-weight proxies as shape handles due to their ability to be easily manipulated by users.
These representations have been widely used in tasks that
require interaction and high-level reasoning in 3D environments, such as shape editing [12,37], animation [38], grasping [27], and tracking [39].
We propose a generative models of shape handles. Our
1402

