Vision-Language Navigation with Self-Supervised Auxiliary Reasoning Tasks
Fengda Zhu1
Yi Zhu2
Xiaojun Chang1
Xiaodan Liang3,4
1
Monash University 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Sun Yat-sen University 4 Dark Matter AI Inc.
zhufengda@yahoo.com
cxj273@gmail.com

zhu.yee@outlook.com
xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) is a task where
agents learn to navigate following natural language instructions. The key to this task is to perceive both the visual
scene and natural language sequentially. Conventional approaches exploit the vision and language features in crossmodal grounding. However, the VLN task remains challenging, since previous works have neglected the rich semantic
information contained in the environment (such as implicit
navigation graphs or sub-trajectory semantics). In this paper, we introduce Auxiliary Reasoning Navigation (AuxRN),
a framework with four self-supervised auxiliary reasoning
tasks to take advantage of the additional training signals
derived from the semantic information. The auxiliary tasks
have four reasoning objectives: explaining the previous
actions, estimating the navigation progress, predicting the
next orientation, and evaluating the trajectory consistency.
As a result, these additional training signals help the agent
to acquire knowledge of semantic representations in order
to reason about its activity and build a thorough perception
of the environment. Our experiments indicate that auxiliary
reasoning tasks improve both the performance of the main
task and the model generalizability by a large margin. Empirically, we demonstrate that an agent trained with selfsupervised auxiliary reasoning tasks substantially outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method, being the best
existing approach on the standard benchmark1 .

1. Introduction
Increasing interest rises in Vision-Language Navigation
(VLN) [5] tasks, where an agent navigates in 3D indoor environments following a natural language instruction, such
as Walk between the columns and make a sharp turn right.
Walk down the steps and stop on the landing. The agent
1 VLN leaderboard: https://evalai.cloudcv.org/web/challenges/
challenge-page/97/leaderboard/270

➢ I step in the door and
go forward.
➢ I have completed 50%
➢ The trajectory and the
instruction NOT match.
➢ I will turn right 30°

%&'(

!)
!#
!"

Navigation Node
Navigation Edge
Feasible Edge

Figure 1. A simple demonstration of an agent learning to navigate
with auxiliary reasoning tasks. The green circle is the start position
and the red circle is the goal. Four nodes are reachable by the agent
in the navigation graph. Auxiliary reasoning tasks (in the yellow
box) help the agent to infer its current status.

begins at a random point and goes toward a goal by means
of active exploration. A vision image is given at each step
and a global step-by-step instruction is provided at the beginning of the trajectory.
Recent research in feature extraction [14, 4, 24, 31, 46],
attention [4, 9, 22] and multi-modal grounding [6, 21, 36]
have helped the agent to understand the environment. Previous works in Vision-Language Navigation have focused on
improving the ability of perceiving the vision and language
inputs [13, 10, 42] and cross-modal matching [41, 47]. With
these approaches, an agent is able to perceive the visionlanguage inputs and encode historical information for navigation.
However, the VLN task remains challenging since rich
semantic information contained in the environments is neglected: 1) Past actions affect the actions to be taken in
the future. To make a correct action requires the agent to
have a thorough understanding of its activity in the past. 2)
The agent is not able to explicitly align the trajectory with

10012

