QEBA: Query-Efficient Boundary-Based Blackbox Attack
Huichen Li1∗ Xiaojun Xu1 ∗ Xiaolu Zhang2 Shuang Yang2 Bo Li1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Ant Financial

Abstract
Machine learning (ML), especially deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been widely used in various applications, including several safety-critical ones (e.g. autonomous driving). As a result, recent research about adversarial examples has raised great concerns. Such adversarial attacks
can be achieved by adding a small magnitude of perturbation to the input to mislead model prediction. While several whitebox attacks have demonstrated their effectiveness,
which assume that the attackers have full access to the machine learning models; blackbox attacks are more realistic in practice. In this paper, we propose a Query-Efficient
Boundary-based blackbox Attack (QEBA) based only on
model’s final prediction labels. We theoretically show why
previous boundary-based attack with gradient estimation
on the whole gradient space is not efficient in terms of query
numbers, and provide optimality analysis for our dimension
reduction-based gradient estimation. On the other hand, we
conducted extensive experiments on ImageNet and CelebA
datasets to evaluate QEBA. We show that compared with
the state-of-the-art blackbox attacks, QEBA is able to use a
smaller number of queries to achieve a lower magnitude
of perturbation with 100% attack success rate. We also
show case studies of attacks on real-world APIs including
MEGVII Face++ and Microsoft Azure.

1. Introduction
Recent developments of machine learning (ML), especially deep neural networks (DNNs), have advanced a
number of real-world applications, including object detection [30], drug discovery [8], and robotics [22]. In
the meantime, several safety-critical applications have also
adopted ML, such as autonomous driving vehicles [7] and
surgical robots [31, 32]. However, recent research have
shown that machine learning systems are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are inputs with small magnitude
of adversarial perturbations added and therefore cause arbitrarily incorrect predictions during test time [13, 40, 4,
∗ The first two authors contribute equally. This work was done while
they were interns at Ant Financial.

14, 5, 6]. Such adversarial attacks have led to great concerns when applying ML to real-world applications. Thus
in-depth analysis of the intrinsic properties of these adversarial attacks as well as potential defense strategies are required.
First, such attacks can be categorized into whitebox and
blackbox attacks based on the attacker’s knowledge about
the victim ML model. In general, the whitebox attacks are
possible by leveraging the gradient of the model — methods
like fast gradient sign method (FGSM) [14], optimization
based attack [4], projected gradient descent based method
(PGD) [25] have been proposed. However, whitebox attack is less practical, given the fact that most real-world
applications will not release the actual model they are using. In addition, these whitebox attacks are shown to be defendable [25]. As a result, blackbox adversarial attack have
caught a lot of attention in these days. In blackbox attack,
based on whether an attacker needs to query the victim ML
model, there are query-free (e.g. transferability based attack) and query-based attacks. Though transferability based
attack does not require query access to the model, it assumes the attacker has access to the large training data to
train a substitute model, and there is no guarantee for the
attack success rate. The query based attack includes scorebased and boundary-based attacks. Score-based attack assumes the attacker has access to the class probabilities of
the model, which is less practical compared with boundarybased attack which only requires the final model prediction,
while both require large number of queries.
In this paper, we propose Query-Efficient Boundarybased blackbox Attack (QEBA) based only on model’s final prediction labels as a general framework to minimize
the query number. Since the gradient estimation consumes
the majority of all the queries, the main challenge of reducing the number of queries for boundary-based blackbox attack is that a high-dimensional data (e.g. an image)
would require large number of queries to probe the decision boundary. As a result, we propose to search for a small
representative subspace for query generation. In particular,
queries are generated by adding perturbations to an image.
We explore the subspace optimization methods from three
novel perspectives for perturbation sampling: 1) spatial, 2)

1221

