PuppeteerGAN: Arbitrary Portrait Animation with Semantic-aware
Appearance Transformation
Zhuo Chen1,2
Chaoyue Wang2
Bo Yuan1
Dacheng Tao2
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
z-chen17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,chaoyue.wang@sydney.edu.au,
yuanb@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn,dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Figure 1: Examples of animated portraits generated by the proposed PuppeteerGAN. The results are at the same pose
as the target frame (left column) while keeping the same appearance of the source (top row). As shown in the source images,
our method can be applied to various portraits including color photos, black-and-white photos, paintings, cartoon characters
and high-resolution images.

Abstract
Portrait animation, which aims to animate a still portrait
to life using poses extracted from target frames, is an
important technique for many real-world entertainment
applications. Although recent works have achieved highly
realistic results on synthesizing or controlling human head
images, the puppeteering of arbitrary portraits is still confronted by the following challenges: 1) identity/personality
mismatch; 2) training data/domain limitations; and 3)
1. Zhuo Chen has been a visiting PhD student at UBTECH Sydney AI
Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, since January 2019.

low-efficiency in training/fine-tuning. In this paper, we
devised a novel two-stage framework called PuppeteerGAN
for solving these challenges. Specifically, we first learn
identity-preserved semantic segmentation animation which
executes pose retargeting between any portraits. As a
general representation, the semantic segmentation results
could be adapted to different datasets, environmental
conditions or appearance domains. Furthermore, the
synthesized semantic segmentation is filled with the appearance of the source portrait. To this end, an appearance
transformation network is presented to produce fidelity
output by jointly considering the wrapping of semantic
features and conditional generation. After training, the

13518

