Intuitive, Interactive Beard and Hair Synthesis with Generative Models
Kyle Olszewski13 , Duygu Ceylan2 , Jun Xing35 , Jose Echevarria2 , Zhili Chen27 , Weikai Chen36 , and Hao Li134
1 University of Southern California, 2 Adobe Inc., 3 USC ICT, 4 Pinscreen Inc.,
5 miHoYo, 6 Tencent America, 7 ByteDance Research
{olszewski.kyle,duygu.ceylan,junxnui}@gmail.com echevarr@adobe.com
{iamchenzhili,chenwk891}@gmail.com hao@hao-li.com

Abstract
We present an interactive approach to synthesizing realistic variations in facial hair in images, ranging from subtle
edits to existing hair to the addition of complex and challenging hair in images of clean-shaven subjects. To circumvent the tedious and computationally expensive tasks of
modeling, rendering and compositing the 3D geometry of
the target hairstyle using the traditional graphics pipeline,
we employ a neural network pipeline that synthesizes realistic and detailed images of facial hair directly in the target image in under one second. The synthesis is controlled
by simple and sparse guide strokes from the user defining
the general structural and color properties of the target
hairstyle. We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our
chosen method compared to several alternative approaches.
We show compelling interactive editing results with a prototype user interface that allows novice users to progressively
refine the generated image to match their desired hairstyle,
and demonstrate that our approach also allows for flexible
and high-fidelity scalp hair synthesis.

1. Introduction
The ability to create and edit realistic facial hair in images has several important, wide-ranging applications. For
example, law enforcement agencies could provide multiple images portraying how missing or wanted individuals
would look if they tried to disguise their identity by growing a beard or mustache, or how such features would change
over time as the subject aged. Someone considering growing or changing their current facial hair may want to previsualize their appearance with a variety of potential styles
without making long-lasting changes to their physical appearance. Editing facial hair in pre-existing images would
also allow users to enhance their appearance, for example
in images used for their social media profile pictures. Insights into how to perform high-quality and controllable fa-

input photograph

mask and strokes

facial hair synthesis

Figure 1: Given a target subject image, a masked region in
which to perform synthesis, and a set of strokes of varying
colors provided by the user, our approach interactively synthesizes hair with the appropriate structure and appearance.
cial hair synthesis would also prove useful in improving
face-swapping technology such as Deepfakes for subjects
with complex facial hair.
One approach would be to infer the 3D geometry and appearance of any facial hair present in the input image, then
manipulate or replace it as as desired before rendering and
compositing into the original image. However, single view
3D facial reconstruction is in itself an ill-posed and under
constrained problem, and most state-of-the-art approaches
struggle in the presence of large facial hair, and rely on parametric facial models which cannot accurately represent such
structures. Furthermore, even state-of-the-art 3D hair rendering methods would struggle to provide sufficiently realistic results quickly enough to allow for interactive feedback
for users exploring numerous subtle stylistic variations.
One could instead adopt a more direct and naive approach, such as copying regions of facial hair from exemplar images of a desired style into the target image. However, it would be extremely time-consuming and tedious
to either find appropriate exemplars matching the position,
perspective, color, and lighting conditions in the target image, or to modify these properties in the selected exemplar
regions so as to assemble them into a coherent style matching both the target image and the desired hairstyle.
In this paper we propose a learning-based interactive approach to image-based hair editing and synthesis. We ex-

7446

