Towards Transferable Targeted Attack
Maosen Li1 , Cheng Deng1 ,* Tengjiao Li1 , Junchi Yan3 , Xinbo Gao1 , Heng Huang2,4
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
3
Department of CSE, and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
4
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
{msli 1, tjli}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {chdeng, xbgao}@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
An intriguing property of adversarial examples is their
transferability, which suggests that black-box attacks are
feasible in real-world applications. Previous works mostly
study the transferability on non-targeted setting. However,
recent studies show that targeted adversarial examples are
more difficult to transfer than non-targeted ones. In this paper, we find there exist two defects that lead to the difficulty
in generating transferable examples. First, the magnitude
of gradient is decreasing during iterative attack, causing
excessive consistency between two successive noises in accumulation of momentum, which is termed as noise curing.
Second, it is not enough for targeted adversarial examples
to just get close to target class without moving away from
true class. To overcome the above problems, we propose a
novel targeted attack approach to effectively generate more
transferable adversarial examples. Specifically, we first introduce the Poincaré distance as the similarity metric to
make the magnitude of gradient self-adaptive during iterative attack to alleviate noise curing. Furthermore, we regularize the targeted attack process with metric learning to
take adversarial examples away from true label and gain
more transferable targeted adversarial examples. Experiments on ImageNet validate the superiority of our approach
achieving 8% higher attack success rate over other state-ofthe-art methods on average in black-box targeted attack.

1. Introduction
With the great success of deep learning in various fields,
the robustness and stability of deep neural networks (DNNs)
have attracted more and more attention. However, recent
studies have corroborated that almost all of the DNNs are
subjected to adversarial example problems [18, 25], which
* Corresponding author.

means that in DNNs, by adding some imperceptible disturbances, the original image can be shifted from one side of
the decision boundary to the other side, causing discriminant errors [2, 8, 22]. Due to the vulnerability of neural
networks in the case of adversarial attack, it also poses a
serious security problem for the application of deep neural networks. In this context, numerous adversarial attack
methods have been proposed to help evaluate and improve
the robustness of the DNNs [4, 12, 23].
Generally, these attack methods can be divided into two
categories according to their adversarial specificity: nontargeted attack and targeted attack [26]. The targeted attack
expects that the adversarial example is misidentified as specific class. While in non-targeted attack, we expect the prediction of adversarial example can be arbitrary except the
original one. Moreover, recent studies have shown that the
non-targeted adversarial examples generated by some attack
methods have a high cross-model transferability [22, 14],
that is, the adversarial examples generated by some known
models also have the ability to fool models with unknown
architectures and parameters. Attacking such a model only
through the transferability without any prior is called blackbox attack, which brings more serious security problems to
the deployment of DNNs in reality [7, 11, 13].
Although black-box attacks have become a research
hotspot, most existing attack methods, such as Carlini &
Wagners method [3], fast gradient sign method [8] and series of fast gradient sign based methods, focus on nontargeted attacks and have achieved great success, but they
are still powerless for more challenging black-box targeted
attacks. By maximizing the probability of the target class,
the authors in [11] extend the non-targeted attack methods
to the targeted attacks, but this simple extension does not
effectively exploit the characteristics of the targeted attack,
resulting in the generated adversarial examples not being
transferable. Therefore, it is of great significance to develop
transferable targeted adversarial examples.

641

