Space-Time-Aware Multi-Resolution Video Enhancement
Muhammad Haris1∗, Greg Shakhnarovich2 , and Norimichi Ukita1
1
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
muhammad.haris@bukalapak.com,greg@ttic.edu,ukita@toyota-ti.ac.jp

Abstract
We consider the problem of space-time super-resolution
(ST-SR): increasing spatial resolution of video frames and
simultaneously interpolating frames to increase the frame
rate. Modern approaches handle these axes one at a time.
In contrast, our proposed model called STARnet superresolves jointly in space and time. This allows us to leverage mutually informative relationships between time and
space: higher resolution can provide more detailed information about motion, and higher frame-rate can provide
better pixel alignment. The components of our model that
generate latent low- and high-resolution representations
during ST-SR can be used to finetune a specialized mechanism for just spatial or just temporal SR. Experimental results demonstrate that STARnet improves the performances
of space-time, spatial, and temporal video SR by substantial
margins on publicly available datasets.

1. Introduction
The goal of Space-Time Super-Resolution (ST-SR),
originally proposed by [49], is to transform a low spatial resolution video with a low frame-rate to a video with
higher spatial and temporal resolutions. However, existing SR methods treat spatial and temporal upsampling independently. Space SR (S-SR) with multiple input frames,
(i.e., multi-image SR [11, 12] and video SR [22, 33, 7, 46,
17]), aims to super-resolve spatial low-resolution (S-LR)
frames to spatial high-resolution (S-HR) frames by spatially aligning similar frames (Fig. 1 (a)). Time SR (TSR) aims to increase the frame-rate of input frames from
temporal low-resolution (T-LR) frames to temporal highresolution (T-HR) frames by temporally interpolating inbetween frames [45, 36, 35, 42, 3, 41] (Fig. 1 (b)).
While few ST-SR methods are presented [49, 50, 47, 40,
32], these methods are not learning-based method and require each input video to be long enough to extract meaningful space-time patterns. [48] proposed ST-SR based on
∗ He is currently working at Bukalapak in Indonesia.

a deep network. However, this method fails to fully exploit
the advantages of ST-SR schema because it relies only on
LR for interpolation.
On the other hand, one can perform ST-SR by using
any learning-based S-SR and T-SR alternately and independently. For example, in-between frames are constructed
on S-LR, and then their SR frames are produced by S-SR;
Fig. 1 (c). The other way around is to spatially upsample input frames by S-SR, and then to perform T-SR to construct
their in-between frames; Fig. 1 (d).
However, space and time are obviously related. This
relation allows us to jointly employ spatial and temporal
representations for solving vision tasks on both human [20,
21, 8] and machine perceptions [39, 62, 6, 55, 17, 57, 31].
Intuitively, more accurate motions can be represented on
a higher spatial representation and, the other way around,
a higher temporal representation (i.e., more frames all of
which are similar in appearance) can be used to accurately extract more spatial contexts captured in the temporal frames as done in multi-image SR and video SR. This
intuition is also supported by various joint learning problems [18, 15, 61, 1, 60, 56, 29], which are proven to improve
learning efficiency and prediction accuracy.
In order to utilize the complementary nature of space and
time, we propose the Space-Time-Aware multi-Resolution
Network, called STARnet. STARnet explicitly incorporates
spatial and temporal representations for augmenting S-SR
and T-SR mutually in LR and HR spaces by presenting direct connections from LR to HR for ST-SR, indicated as
purple arrows in Fig. 1 (e). This network also provides the
extensibility where the same network can be further finetuned for either of ST-SR, S-SR, or T-SR. As shown in
Fig. 2, STAR-based finetuned models perform better than
state-of-the-arts [58, 14, 3, 17].
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) The novel learning-based ST-SR method, which trains a
deep network end-to-end to jointly learn spatial and temporal contexts, leading to what we call Space-Time-Aware
multi-Resolution Networks (STARnet). This approach outperforms the combinations of S-SR and T-SR methods.
2) Joint learning on multiple resolutions to estimate both
12859

