Dense Regression Network for Video Grounding
Runhao Zeng1,3∗ Haoming Xu1 Wenbing Huang4 Peihao Chen1 Mingkui Tan1† Chuang Gan2
1
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{runhaozeng.cs, ganchuang1990}@gmail.com, hwenbing@126.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Annotated starting frame

Abstract

Annotated ending frame

Video:

We address the problem of video grounding from natural language queries. The key challenge in this task is
that one training video might only contain a few annotated
starting/ending frames that can be used as positive examples for model training. Most conventional approaches directly train a binary classifier using such imbalance data,
thus achieving inferior results. The key idea of this paper
is to use the distances between the frame within the ground
truth and the starting (ending) frame as dense supervisions
to improve the video grounding accuracy. Specifically, we
design a novel dense regression network (DRN) to regress
the distances from each frame to the starting (ending) frame
of the video segment described by the query. We also propose a simple but effective IoU regression head module to
explicitly consider the localization quality of the grounding
results (i.e., the IoU between the predicted location and the
ground truth). Experimental results show that our approach
significantly outperforms state-of-the-arts on three datasets
(i.e., Charades-STA, ActivityNet-Captions, and TACoS).

1. Introduction
Video grounding is an important yet challenging task in
computer vision, which requires the machine to watch a
video and localize the starting and ending time of the target video segment that corresponds to the given query, as
shown in Figure 1. This task has drawn increasing attention
over the past few years due to its vast potential applications
in video understanding [38, 3, 45, 44, 6], video retrieval
[42, 8], and human-computer interaction [35, 20, 50], etc.
The task, however, is very challenging due to several
reasons: 1) It is nontrivial to build connections between
∗ This work was done when Runhao Zeng was a research intern at Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
† Corresponding author

Query: A man reaches
out and then pets
the fish.

Start time: 13.7s End time: 24.5s

Figure 1. An illustrative example of the video grounding task.
Given a video and a query in natural language, the video grounding
task aims to identify the starting time and the ending time of the
video segment described by the query. One key challenge of this
task is how to leverage dense supervision upon sparsely annotated
starting and ending frames only.

the query and complex video contents; 2) Localizing actions of interest precisely in a video with complex backgrounds is very difficult. More critically, a video can often
contain many thousands of frames, but it may have only
a few annotated starting/ending frames (namely the positive training examples), making the problem even more
challenging. Previous approaches often adopt a two-stage
pipeline [9, 40, 10], where they generate the proposals and
rank them according to their similarities with the query.
However, this pipeline incurs two issues: 1) One video often
contains thousands of proposals, resulting in a heavy computation cost when comparing proposal-query pairs. 2) The
performance highly relies on the quality of proposals. To
address the above issues, one-stage video grounding methods [5, 43, 11] have been studied. Yuan et al. [43] propose to learn a representation of the video-query pair and
use a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to regress the starting
and ending time. Chen et al. [5] and Ghosh et al. [11] attempt to predict two probabilities at each frame, which indicate whether this frame is a starting (or ending) frame of
the target video segment. The grounding result is obtained
by selecting the frame with the largest starting (or ending)
probability. However, the existing two-stage and one-stage
methods have one common issue: they neglect the rich information from the frames within the ground truth.

10287

