DAVD-Net: Deep Audio-aided Video Decompression of Talking Heads
Xi Zhang1 Xiaolin Wu2† Xinliang Zhai3 Xianye Ben3 Chengjie Tu4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University1 McMaster University2 Shandong University3 Tencent4
zhangxi 19930818@sjtu.edu.cn
xinliangzhai@mail.sdu.edu.cn

benxianye@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Close-up talking heads are among the most common and
salient object in video contents, such as face-to-face conversations in social media, teleconferences, news broadcasting, talk shows, etc. Due to the high sensitivity of human
visual system to faces, compression distortions in talking
head videos are highly visible and annoying. To address
this problem, we present a novel deep convolutional neural network method for very low bit rate video reconstruction of talking heads. The key innovation is a new DCNN
architecture that can exploit the audio-video correlations
to repair compression defects in the face region. We further improve reconstruction quality by embedding into our
DCNN the encoder information of the video compression
standards and introducing a constraining projection module in the network. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed DCNN method outperforms the existing stateof-the-art methods on videos of talking heads.

1. Introduction
Videos constitute roughly 80 percent of all IP traffic and
still climbing. They are putting and will continue to put
pressures on communication bandwidth and content storage. This makes video compression an indispensable enabling technology in today’s digitally interconnected societies. For acceptable cost effectiveness, popular video
compression methods (e.g., MPEG-4 [24], H.264 [31],
HEVC [25]) have to compress the video data enough to
achieve required savings in bandwidth and storage. For
high compression ratio or low bit rates, lossy video compression inevitably produces objectionable artifacts, such
as blocking, blurring, ringing and jaggies. Recently quite
a few deep learning methods are proposed to remove video
compression artifacts. Compared with the pure end-to-end
DCNN approach for video compression [19, 14], the meth† Corresponding author.

xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Compressed

chengjietu@tencent.com

Image only

Audio-aided

Ground Truth

Figure 1. The reconstruction results without and with the assistance of audio signal. The lower teeth are completely missing in
the frame reconstructed without using audio information.

ods of compression artifacts removal [35, 20, 37] have the
operational advantage of being compatible with existing
video compression standards, as they are essentially a postprocessing step of restoring already-decoded videos by the
standards. We call this CNN-based video restoration strategy deep video decompression.
In this work, we focus on CNN-based restoration of
heavily compressed face videos with audio side information. Talking heads are arguably the most common and
salient object in daily Internet video communications. For
examples, conversational faces are the focal centerpiece in
social media, teleconferences, Internet talk shows (TED and
the alike), self media, etc. High reconstruction quality of
faces in compressed videos is crucial to satisfactory user
experiences, particularly when the network communication
channels are congested and sporadic. Much to the advantage of algorithm or CNN designers, talking faces have very
strong priors that can greatly reduce the solution space of
the underlying inverse problem of video restoration. To
start, the object is a face, a highly structured object; in many
cases the face is known to be of a particular person. Furthermore, the audio of the speaking person is also available. Physiologically, facial muscles, particularly those in
the lips, shape the sound and air stream into speech. This
is why people can read lips, i.e., recognizing uttered words
by watching the speaker’s lips even without sound. It will
be interesting to know how much one can improve the perceptual quality of compressed face videos by incorporating all the above priors into the design of deep decompression CNNs. To advance this line of enquiry, we design a

12335

