ZSTAD: Zero-Shot Temporal Activity Detection
Lingling Zhang1,2 , Xiaojun Chang3∗, Jun Liu1,4 , Minnan Luo1,4 , Sen Wang5 ,
Zongyuan Ge3 , Alexander Hauptmann6
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xian, China
2
Ministry of Education Key Lab For Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xian, China
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
4
National Engineering Lab for Big Data Analytics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xian, China
5
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Australia
6
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
zhanglingling@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, cxj273@gmail.com, {liukeen, minnluo}@xjtu.edu.cn,
sen.wang@uq.edu.au, zongyuan.ge@monash.edu, alex@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
An integral part of video analysis and surveillance is
temporal activity detection, which means to simultaneously
recognize and localize activities in long untrimmed videos.
Currently, the most effective methods of temporal activity
detection are based on deep learning, and they typically
perform very well with large scale annotated videos for
training. However, these methods are limited in real applications due to the unavailable videos about certain activity
classes and the time-consuming data annotation. To solve
this challenging problem, we propose a novel task setting
called zero-shot temporal activity detection (ZSTAD), where
activities that have never been seen in training can still be
detected. We design an end-to-end deep network based on
R-C3D as the architecture for this solution. The proposed
network is optimized with an innovative loss function that
considers the embeddings of activity labels and their superclasses while learning the common semantics of seen and
unseen activities. Experiments on both the THUMOS’14
and the Charades datasets show promising performance in
terms of detecting unseen activities.

1. Introduction
Given its importance to video analysis and surveillance,
temporal activity detection is one of the most studied tasks
in computer vision [31]. Most videos are untrimmed and
only contain a few interesting activities among a long
stream of nondescript scenes. Hence, the goal of temporal activity detection is to simultaneously recognize and
∗ Corresponding author: Xiaojun Chang, cxj273@gmail.com

categorize specific activities in a video along with their
start and end times [32, 12]. As with many other tasks,
deep learning has led to a step-change in the speed and
accuracy of temporal activity detection, as demonstrated
in studies like [48, 10, 9, 41, 6]. However, these deep
methods rely heavily on a fully-supervised training scheme.
Long videos where every activity class is already annotated are rare, and manual annotation is expensive and
time-consuming, which means an alternative approach, like
weakly-supervised [39, 25], semi-supervised or unsupervised learning, is needed.
In recent years, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has emerged as
a novel approach to this very problem. ZSL can be thought
of as a special case of supervised learning, where the training and testing classes (i.e., the seen and unseen classes) are
disjoint but semantically related [23, 28]. In fact, generally
speaking, the training dataset does not even contain any instances labeled with testing classes [20, 19]. ZSL works
by exploiting useful prior knowledge, such as common attributes or label embeddings, and then transfers the learned
knowledge from seen classes to unseen classes. So far, studies on ZSL have been dominated by zero-shot recognition
(ZSR), i.e., classification problems. These approaches are
often based on the assumption that each sample only contains a single dominant example from one of the classes
(whether seen or unseen). Hence, the overall aim is to classify each unseen sample to an unseen class in the testing
stage. On this proviso, ZSR would not be directly applicable to temporal activity detection for two reasons: (1) Temporal activity detection is of most value with long videos,
which means the sample would almost certainly contain
multiple activities. (2) Part of temporal activity detection
is predicting the start and end times for each activity in ad-

879

