Interactive Multi-Label CNN Learning with Partial Labels
Dat Huynh
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

huynh.dat@husky.neu.edu

eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of efficient end-to-end learning a
multi-label Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) on training images with partial labels. Training a CNN with partial
labels, hence a small number of images for every label, using the standard cross-entropy loss is prone to overfitting
and performance drop. We introduce a new loss function
that regularizes the cross-entropy loss with a cost function
that measures the smoothness of labels and features of images on the data manifold. Given that optimizing the new
loss function over the CNN parameters requires learning
similarities among labels and images, which itself depends
on knowing the parameters of the CNN, we develop an efficient interactive learning framework in which the two steps
of similarity learning and CNN training interact and improve the performance of each another. Our method learns
the CNN parameters without requiring keeping all training
data in the memory, allows to learn few informative similarities only for images in each mini-batch and handles
changing feature representations. By extensive experiments
on Open Images, CUB and MS-COCO datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. In particular, on the
large-scale Open Images dataset, we improve the state of
the art by 1.02% in mAP score over 5,000 classes.

1. Introduction
Finding all labels in an image, referred to as multi-label
recognition [1, 2, 3], is a fundamental learning problem with
a wide range of applications, including self-driving cars,
surveillance systems and assistive robots. While deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown great performance for single-label image classification, their adaption to the multi-label recognition faces major challenges,
especially in real problems with a large number of labels.
First, training multi-label CNNs requires collecting
multi-label annotations for a large number of images, which
is significantly more difficult than single-label annotations
[4]. In fact, many existing multi-label datasets, such as MSCOCO [5], YahooFlickr [6] and Open Images [7], contain

only small partial labels of images. As a result, multi-label
learning methods that assume access to full labels of images
[8, 9, 10] are not applicable. Moreover, training CNNs by
treating missing labels as negatives [2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] results in significant performance drop as many ground-truth
positive labels are falsely labeled [16, 17]. On the other
hand, adapting CNNs to the multi-label classification by
simply transforming it into multiple single-label classification problems and training via the ranking [18] or crossentropy [19] loss fails to model the dependencies among
labels, which is particularly important for handling partial
labels. Finally, multi-label learning methods that handle
partial labels using low-rank learning [20, 21, 22, 23] or
semi-supervised learning [24, 25] generally do not allow
end-to-end training as they require knowing and fixing the
feature representation of images to learn classifier parameters, or require solving a costly optimization problem with
all training data in memory.
In this paper, we develop an efficient framework for endto-end training of multi-label CNNs with partial labels by
learning and leveraging dependencies among labels and images in an interactive scheme. We introduce a new loss
function that regularizes the standard binary cross-entropy
loss with a cost function that measures the smoothness of
labels and features of images on the data manifold. Given
that optimizing the new loss function over the CNN parameters requires learning similarities among labels and images, which itself depends on knowing the parameters of the
CNN, we develop an efficient interactive learning scheme in
which the two steps of similarity learning and CNN training
interact and improve the performance of each another, see
Figure 1. More specifically, fixing the CNN, we learn label and image dependencies by minimizing the smoothness
loss. Fixing dependencies, we optimize the total loss over
CNN parameters and repeat the two steps until convergence.
Our method allows to learn the CNN in an end-to-end
fashion without requiring keeping all training data in the
memory. Unlike expensive graph-based learning algorithms
that require building and operating on the entire graph adjacency or laplacian [22, 25, 23], our method allows to
learn few informative similarities only for images in each
19423

