Boosting the Transferability of Adversarial Samples via Attention
Weibin Wu1 , Yuxin Su1∗, Xixian Chen2 , Shenglin Zhao2 , Irwin King1 , Michael R. Lyu1 , Yu-Wing Tai2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Tencent
{wbwu, yxsu, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {xixianchen, henryslzhao, yuwingtai}@tencent.com

Abstract
The widespread deployment of deep models necessitates
the assessment of model vulnerability in practice, especially for safety- and security-sensitive domains such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis. Transfer-based
attacks against image classifiers thus elicit mounting interest, where attackers are required to craft adversarial images based on local proxy models without the feedback information from remote target ones. However, under such a
challenging but practical setup, the synthesized adversarial samples often achieve limited success due to overfitting
to the local model employed. In this work, we propose a
novel mechanism to alleviate the overfitting issue. It computes model attention over extracted features to regularize
the search of adversarial examples, which prioritizes the
corruption of critical features that are likely to be adopted
by diverse architectures. Consequently, it can promote the
transferability of resultant adversarial instances. Extensive
experiments on ImageNet classifiers confirm the effectiveness of our strategy and its superiority to state-of-the-art
benchmarks in both white-box and black-box settings.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have emerged as a
cutting-edge solution to a broad spectrum of real-world applications, such as object detection, speech recognition, and
machine translation [27]. Despite the impressive performance of these deep learning techniques, they are surprisingly vulnerable to the so-called adversarial samples [36].
For example, by imposing human-imperceptible noises on
legitimate images purposefully, the resultant adversarial input can incur erroneous predictions from state-of-the-art image classifiers. It raises growing concerns over the reliability of these high-performance black boxes and hinders the
deployment of these models in practice, especially in safetyand security-sensitive domains such as autonomous driving
and medical diagnosis [3].
∗ Corresponding author.

Attacks thus play an important part in evaluating a model
and revealing its blind spots before deployment, and one of
the most fundamental and recognized tasks is to generate
adversarial images against DNN image classifiers [3]. To
simulate the threat a DNN image classifier may face, there
are generally two kinds of threat models considered in the
literature [20]. One is white-box settings, where attackers
have full access to the victim model, such as the model
architectures and parameters. The other one is black-box
settings, where attackers only possess query access to the
target model, namely, offering input images and obtaining
output predictions.
Corresponding to the threat models that they are tailored
for, there exist two sorts of attacks: white-box attacks and
black-box ones [20]. White-box attacks can exploit the exact gradient information of the victim model to craft malicious instances [36, 9, 5], while black-box attacks can be
further divided into two categories according to the mechanism attackers adopt [8]. One is query-based, and the other
one is transfer-based. Query-based black-box attacks usually require excessive queries before a successful trial [16].
On the contrary, without the feedback information from the
target model, transfer-based black-box attacks devise adversarial samples with off-the-shelf local models (i.e., source
models) and directly harness the resultant example to fool
the remote target model (i.e., victim models) [41, 8].
Among these two sorts of black-box attacks, the
transfer-based one has attracted ever-increasing attention
recently [8]. In general, only costly query access to deployed models is available in practice. Therefore, whitebox attacks hardly reflect the possible threat to a model,
while query-based attacks have less practical applicability
than the transfer-based counterparts due to the prohibitive
query cost they may incur [8].
Thanks to the observed cross-model transferability of adversarial samples, a popular practice is to freely employ
any white-box attack strategy as transfer-based black-box
attacks [21]. Unfortunately, the malicious images synthesized by such a scheme are prone to overfit to the exclusive blind spots of the source model [39, 8, 41, 7]. Specifically, although the crafted adversarial samples can attack

1161

