Self-Supervised Monocular Scene Flow Estimation
Junhwa Hur
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Figure 1. Results of our monocular scene flow approach on the KITTI dataset [11]. Given two consecutive images (left), our method
jointly predicts depth (middle) and scene flow (right). (x,z)-coordinates of 3D scene flow are visualized using an optical flow color coding.

Abstract
Scene flow estimation has been receiving increasing attention for 3D environment perception. Monocular scene
flow estimation – obtaining 3D structure and 3D motion
from two temporally consecutive images – is a highly illposed problem, and practical solutions are lacking to date.
We propose a novel monocular scene flow method that
yields competitive accuracy and real-time performance. By
taking an inverse problem view, we design a single convolutional neural network (CNN) that successfully estimates depth and 3D motion simultaneously from a classical optical flow cost volume. We adopt self-supervised
learning with 3D loss functions and occlusion reasoning to leverage unlabeled data. We validate our design choices, including the proxy loss and augmentation setup. Our model achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
among unsupervised/self-supervised learning approaches
to monocular scene flow, and yields competitive results for
the optical flow and monocular depth estimation sub-tasks.
Semi-supervised fine-tuning further improves the accuracy
and yields promising results in real-time.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation is the task of obtaining 3D structure and 3D motion of dynamic scenes, which is crucial to
environment perception, e.g., in the context of autonomous
navigation. Consequently, many scene flow approaches
have been proposed recently, based on different types of
input data, such as stereo images [18, 44, 51, 56, 62], 3D
point clouds [14, 29], or a sequence of RGB-D images
[15, 16, 31, 38, 39, 46]. However, each sensor configuration has its own limitations, e.g. requiring stereo calibration

for a stereo rig, expensive sensing devices (e.g., LiDAR) for
measuring 3D points, or being limited to indoor usage (i.e.,
RGB-D camera). We here consider monocular 3D scene
flow estimation, aiming to overcome these limitations.
Monocular scene flow estimation, however, is a highly
ill-posed problem since both monocular depth (also called
single-view depth) and per-pixel 3D motion need to be estimated from consecutive monocular frames, here two consecutive frames. Comparatively few approaches have been
suggested so far [3, 58], none of which achieves both reasonable accuracy and real-time performance.
Recently, a number of CNN approaches [5, 28, 30, 40,
60, 64] have been proposed to jointly estimate depth, flow,
and camera ego-motion in a monocular setup. This makes
it possible to recover 3D motion from the various outputs,
however with important limitations. The depth–scale ambiguity [40, 64] and the impossibility of estimating depth in
occluded regions [5, 28, 30, 60] significantly limit the ability to obtain accurate 3D scene flow across the entire image.
In this paper, we propose a monocular scene flow approach that yields competitive accuracy and real-time performance by exploiting CNNs. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the first monocular scene flow method
that directly predicts 3D scene flow from a CNN. Due to
the scarcity of 3D motion ground truth and the domain
over-fitting problem when using synthetic datasets [4, 33],
we train directly on the target domain in a self-supervised
manner to leverage large amounts of unlabeled data. Optional semi-supervised fine-tuning on limited quantities of
ground-truth data can further boost the accuracy.
We make three main technical contributions: (i) We propose to approach this ill-posed problem by taking an inverse
problem view. Noting that optical flow is the 2D projection of a 3D point and its 3D scene flow, we take the in-

7396

