Fast MSER
Hailiang Xu1,2∗, Siqi Xie3 , Fan Chen4
1
Alibaba Group 2 Nanjing University 3 Beijing Language and Culture University 4 Columbia University
xhl student@163.com, coderxiesiqi1996@126.com, fc2484@columbia.edu

Abstract
Maximally Stable Extremal Regions (MSER) algorithms
are based on the component tree and are used to detect invariant regions. OpenCV MSER, the most popular MSER
implementation, uses a linked list to associate pixels with
ERs. The data-structure of an ER contains the attributes
of a head and a tail linked node, which makes OpenCV
MSER hard to be performed in parallel using existing parallel component tree strategies. Besides, pixel extraction (i.e.
extracting the pixels in MSERs) in OpenCV MSER is very
slow. In this paper, we propose two novel MSER algorithms,
called Fast MSER V1 and V2. They first divide an image
into several spatial partitions, then construct sub-trees and
doubly linked lists (for V1) or a labelled image (for V2) on
the partitions in parallel. A novel sub-tree merging algorithm is used in V1 to merge the sub-trees into the final tree,
and the doubly linked lists are also merged in the process.
While V2 merges the sub-trees using an existing merging algorithm. Finally, MSERs are recognized, the pixels in them
are extracted through two novel pixel extraction methods
taking advantage of the fact that a lot of pixels in parent
and child MSERs are duplicated.
Both V1 and V2 outperform three open source MSER algorithms (28 and 26 times faster than OpenCV MSER), and
reduce the memory of the pixels in MSERs by 78%.

1. Introduction
Invariant region extraction [36, 21, 14, 17, 42, 4, 32, 31,
34, 43, 5, 18, 6, 3] has been widely used in large scale image retrieval tasks, object detection and recognition, object
tracking and view matching. The Maximally Stable Extremal Regions (MSER) algorithm was invented by Matas
et al. [20] and optimized by Nister et al. [28]. It constructs
a component tree [33, 24], recognizes MSERs from the tree
and then extracts the pixels in MSERs. We call these three
steps component tree construction, MSER recognition and
pixel extraction. Note that some tasks such as wide-baseline
1 This work is an amateur research. Part of this work was done when
Hailiang Xu worked in Alibaba Group (using spare time).

stereo do not need the pixel extraction. Each node in the tree
is an extremal region (ER), which has the characteristic that
the pixels inside the ER are brighter (bright ER) or darker
(dark ER) than the pixels at its outer edge. An MSER is
an ER that is stable across a range of gray-level thresholds.
The MSER algorithm runs in two different passes: dark to
bright pass (detecting dark MSERs) and bright to dark pass
(detecting bright MSERs). It has been used in wide-baseline
stereo [20, 10, 19], large scale image retrieval [27], object
tracking [8], object recognition [29] and scene text detection [46, 13, 26, 25, 45, 44, 12]. It has been extended to
color [9], volumetric images [7], 1-D images [41] and has
been optimized on FPGA [16].
The MSER algorithm requires low computing resources
(suitable for embedding devices and mobile phones), and
works well with small training data (MSER features are
high-level handicraft features). Although deep-learning
techniques are very popular in academic areas, the MSER
algorithm is still active in industrial tasks such as stereo
matching (possibly combined with SIFT, SURF and ORB
feature descriptors), document text process and traffic sign
detection, etc. We can also use the MSER algorithm to analyse heat-map, i.e. find regions whose heats exceed a certain
threshold. Thus, the MSER algorithm needs to run very
fast as well as use less memory (considering the relatively
small memory in embedding devices and mobile phones).
Besides, some optimization techniques of the MSER algorithm can be extended to other component tree algorithms.
Parallel strategies [39, 23] have been proposed to accelerate the component tree based algorithms. They divide an
image into several partitions. A sub-tree merging algorithm
[39] is used to merge the sub-trees which are constructed
on all partitions in parallel. The sub-tree merging algorithm
can correctly accumulate the attributes (the attributes must
be simple enough to accumulate, e.g. the area of a region) of
each tree node. We call this partition parallel strategy. Moschini et al. [23] described two partition strategies: spatial
partition and intensity partition, as shown in Fig. 1. Intensity partition is suitable for the algorithms which work on
pixels that are ordered by gray-levels [23].
Fig. 2 shows the comparison of partition and channel

3380

