Semantic Pyramid for Image Generation
Assaf Shocher∗1,2
Yossi Gandelsman∗1
Inbar Mosseri1
Michal Yarom1
1,2
1
Michal Irani
William T. Freeman
Tali Dekel1
1

2

Google Research

Weizmann Institute of Science

Semantic Pyramid Generation Levels

(a)
CONV1

Original Image

CONV5

FC7

FC8

Generated Images from increasing sematic levels

(b) From Sketch to Photo

Original Image

CONV4

Generated Image

(c) Semantic Image Composition

Original Images

(d) Image Re-labeling

Composite
Image

Original label:
Volcano

New label:
Mountain Snowy

Figure 1: We introduce a new image generative model that is designed and trained to leverage the hierarchical space of deepfeatures learned by a pre-trained classification network. Our model provides a unified versatile framework for various image
generation and manipulation tasks, including: (a) generating images with a controllable extent of semantic similarity to a
reference image, obtained by reconstructing images from different layers of a classification model; (b) generating realistic
image samples from unnatural reference image such as line drawings; (c) semantically compositing different images, and (d)
controlling the semantic content of an image by enforcing a new, modified class label.

Abstract
We present a novel GAN-based model that utilizes the
space of deep features learned by a pre-trained classification model. Inspired by classical image pyramid representations, we construct our model as a Semantic Generation
Pyramid – a hierarchical framework which leverages the
continuum of semantic information encapsulated in such
deep features; this ranges from low level information contained in fine features to high level, semantic information
contained in deeper features. More specifically, given a
set of features extracted from a reference image, our model
generates diverse image samples, each with matching features at each semantic level of the classification model. We
demonstrate that our model results in a versatile and flex-

ible framework that can be used in various classic and
novel image generation tasks. These include: generating
images with a controllable extent of semantic similarity to
a reference image, and different manipulation tasks such
as semantically-controlled inpainting and compositing; all
achieved with the same model, with no further training. 1

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) trained for visual classification were shown to learn powerful and meaningful feature spaces, encoding rich information ranging
from low level features to high-level semantic content [23].
Such features have been widely utilized by numerous methods for clustering, perceptual loss [42] and different image

∗ indicates equal contributions; first author performed this work as an
intern at Google.

1 Project website: https://semantic-pyramid.github.io/

17457

