Adversarial Vertex Mixup: Toward Better Adversarially Robust Generalization
Saehyung Lee
Hyungyu Lee
Sungroh Yoon*
Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI, INMC, and Institute of Engineering Research
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea
{halo8218, rucy74, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial examples cause neural networks to produce
incorrect outputs with high confidence. Although adversarial training is one of the most effective forms of defense
against adversarial examples, unfortunately, a large gap exists between test accuracy and training accuracy in adversarial training. In this paper, we identify Adversarial Feature Overfitting (AFO), which may cause poor adversarially
robust generalization, and we show that adversarial training can overshoot the optimal point in terms of robust generalization, leading to AFO in our simple Gaussian model.
Considering these theoretical results, we present soft labeling as a solution to the AFO problem. Furthermore, we propose Adversarial Vertex mixup (AVmixup), a soft-labeled
data augmentation approach for improving adversarially
robust generalization. We complement our theoretical analysis with experiments on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and
Tiny ImageNet, and show that AVmixup significantly improves the robust generalization performance and that it
reduces the trade-off between standard accuracy and adversarial robustness.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have produced impressive results for various machine learning tasks, including
computer vision [15] and natural language processing [10].
Neural networks, however, can be easily fooled by small
adversarial perturbations of their input with a high degree
of confidence [34]. This vulnerability of DNNs has led to
the proposal of several methods to defend adversarial attacks [27, 21, 30, 41]. Despite these attempts, many of
these defenses have been defeated by strong adversarial attacks [16, 18, 3], or were eventually found to rely on obfuscated gradients [1].
Adversarial training [18] is one of the most effective
adversarial defense methods which substitutes adversarial
* Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon sryoon@snu.ac.kr.

examples for the training samples. Given a dataset D =
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 with xi ∈ Rd as an example in the ddimensional input space and yi as its associated label, the
goal of adversarial training is to train models by using adversarial empirical risk minimization [18]:


max L(x + δ, y; θ) .
(1)
min E
θ

(x,y)∼D

δ∈S

Here, L(x + δ, y; θ) is the loss function on adversarial
examples, and S represents the set of perturbations an adversary can apply to deceive the model, which is normally
the set of ℓp -bounded perturbations.
Many studies of the properties of these adversarial perturbations have been reported. Gilmer et al. [6] noted that
the phenomenon of adversarial examples appears because
most high dimensional data points in the data distribution
are very close to the points that could be adversarial examples. Schmidt et al. [31] proved that robust training requires
significantly larger sample complexity than that of standard training, postulating that the difficulty of robust training originates from the large sample complexity. Tsipras et
al. [35] showed that a trade-off may exist between adversarial robustness and standard accuracy. They argued that
the features learned during adversarial training differ from
those learned during standard training, and attributed the
trade-off to this difference.
Recently, Ilyas et al. [12] demonstrated that the features
used to train deep learning models can be divided into adversarially robust features and non-robust features, and the
problem of adversarial examples may arise from these nonrobust features. Then, if adversarial examples are features,
rather than bugs, it is natural to wonder: Could we take into
account the generalization between “adversarial features”
in our adversarial training? If so, is the large gap between
test accuracy and training accuracy under adversarial perturbations during adversarial training caused by the failure
of adversarial feature generalization?
Motivated by these questions, we present a theoretical
model which demonstrates the robust generalization performance changes during adversarial training. Specifically, we
1272

