VectorNet: Encoding HD Maps and Agent Dynamics from
Vectorized Representation
Jiyang Gao1∗ Chen Sun2∗ Hang Zhao1 Yi Shen1
Dragomir Anguelov 1 Congcong Li1 Cordelia Schmid 2
1
2
Waymo LLC
Google Research
{jiyanggao, hangz, yshen, dragomir, congcongli}@waymo.com, {chensun, cordelias}@google.com

Crosswalk

Abstract
Behavior prediction in dynamic, multi-agent systems is
an important problem in the context of self-driving cars,
due to the complex representations and interactions of road
components, including moving agents (e.g. pedestrians and
vehicles) and road context information (e.g. lanes, traffic
lights). This paper introduces VectorNet, a hierarchical
graph neural network that first exploits the spatial locality
of individual road components represented by vectors and
then models the high-order interactions among all components. In contrast to most recent approaches, which render trajectories of moving agents and road context information as bird-eye images and encode them with convolutional neural networks (ConvNets), our approach operates
on a vector representation. By operating on the vectorized
high definition (HD) maps and agent trajectories, we avoid
lossy rendering and computationally intensive ConvNet encoding steps. To further boost VectorNet’s capability in
learning context features, we propose a novel auxiliary task
to recover the randomly masked out map entities and agent
trajectories based on their context. We evaluate VectorNet
on our in-house behavior prediction benchmark and the recently released Argoverse forecasting dataset. Our method
achieves on par or better performance than the competitive
rendering approach on both benchmarks while saving over
70% of the model parameters with an order of magnitude
reduction in FLOPs. It also outperforms the state of the art
on the Argoverse dataset.

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on behavior prediction in complex
multi-agent systems, such as self-driving vehicles. The core
interest is to find a unified representation which integrates
the agent dynamics, acquired by perception systems such as
∗ equal contribution.

Lane

Lane

Agent
Trajectory

Rasterized Representation

Vectorized Representation

Figure 1. Illustration of the rasterized rendering (left) and vectorized approach (right) to represent high-definition map and agent
trajectories.

object detection and tracking, with the scene context, provided as prior knowledge often in the form of High Definition (HD) maps. Our goal is to build a system which learns
to predict the intent of vehicles, which are parameterized as
trajectories.
Traditional methods for behavior prediction are rulebased, where multiple behavior hypotheses are generated
based on constraints from the road maps. More recently,
many learning-based approaches are proposed [5, 6, 10, 15];
they offer the benefit of having probabilistic interpretations
of different behavior hypotheses, but require building a representation to encode the map and trajectory information.
Interestingly, while the HD maps are highly structured, organized as entities with location (e.g. lanes) and attributes
(e.g. a green traffic light), most of these approaches choose
to render the HD maps as color-coded attributes (Figure 1,
left), which requires manual specifications; and encode the
scene context information with ConvNets, which have limited receptive fields. This raise the question: can we learn
a meaningful context representation directly from the structured HD maps?
We propose to learn a unified representation for multi-

11525

