RiFeGAN: Rich Feature Generation for Text-to-Image Synthesis from Prior
Knowledge
Jun Cheng1,2 , Fuxiang Wu1,2∗ , Yanling Tian3 , Lei Wang1,2 , Dapeng Tao4
CAS Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Graduate School of Information, Production and Systems, Waseda University, Japan
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, China
1

{jun.cheng, fx.wu1, lei.wang1}@siat.ac.cn, tianyanling@fuji.waseda.jp, dptao@ynu.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-to-image synthesis is a challenging task that generates
realistic images from a textual sequence, which usually
contains limited information compared with the corresponding image and so is ambiguous and abstractive. The
limited textual information only describes a scene partly,
which will complicate the generation with complementing
the other details implicitly and lead to low-quality images.
To address this problem, we propose a novel rich feature
generation text-to-image synthesis, called RiFeGAN, to
enrich the given description. In order to provide additional
visual details and avoid conflicting, RiFeGAN exploits an
attention-based caption matching model to select and refine
the compatible candidate captions from prior knowledge.
Given enriched captions, RiFeGAN uses self-attentional
embedding mixtures to extract features across them effectually and handle the diverging features further. Then it
exploits multi-captions attentional generative adversarial
networks to synthesize images from those features. The
experiments conducted on widely-used datasets show that
the models can generate images from enriched captions
effectually and improve the results significantly.

1. Introduction
Generating realistic images from text descriptions is one
of the most active research areas in recent years [10, 12,
16, 21, 24, 26, 33, 37]. Since natural language is one of the
easiest ways to interact with people, text-to-image synthesis
plays an important role in many areas, like the dual learning
mechanism in captioning [31], and has wide potential applications, for instance, art generation, computer-aided design, and early-childhood education. Recently, many meth∗ F. Wu is the corresponding author.

1) this bird is yellow with black and has a long, pointy beak.
2) the bird has a black body with yellow belly and black crown and bill.
3) a small bird with black crown and throat and yellow wingbars and belly.
4) a bird with a yellow bottom half and black upper half with black yellow and white .....
5) yellow belly bird with black throat, crown, and wings with a white wingbars.
6) this bird is yellow with black and has a long beak.
7) this is a black bird with a yellow abdomen and tail coverts.
8) this bird is yellow with black and has a yellow belly.
9) this bird has wings that are black and has a yellow belly.
10) this bird has a yellow belly and a black head and wing.

(a) Real Image

(b) DM-GAN

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Captions and their corresponding images: (a) is a real
image; (b) is generated by DM-GAN [37] with the first caption;
(c) is synthesized by our model without SAEMs with all captions;
(d) is synthesized by our model with all captions. The bold words
in a caption indicate the prominent features of a bird, and a caption
only describes part of the features.

ods have focused on improving generators of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8], like BigGANs [5], and
training methods, such as Wasserstein GANs [2, 9], to synthesize high-quality images. However, due to the ambiguity, abstraction and limited information of natural language,
one caption lacks of much detailed information of objects.
Thus the conditional generator is required to complement
those details, which will make the generator complex and
its training difficult.
As shown in Fig.1, each caption only describes part of
the features of a bird (a). Training with several corresponding captions from the same image, such as captions of 1)10), can be simultaneously exploited to provide more detailed information. Therefore, the generated image (d) is
closer to the real image, compared with image (b) synthesized with only one caption with limited information.

10911

