IDA-3D: Instance-Depth-Aware 3D Object Detection from Stereo Vision for
Autonomous Driving
Wanli Peng∗ Hao Pan∗ He Liu Yi Sun†
Dalian University of Technology, China
{1136558142,panhao15320,lhiceu}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lslwf@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection is an important scene understanding
task in autonomous driving and virtual reality. Approaches
based on LiDAR technology have high performance, but LiDAR is expensive. Considering more general scenes, where
there is no LiDAR data in the 3D datasets, we propose a
3D object detection approach from stereo vision which does
not rely on LiDAR data either as input or as supervision in
training, but solely takes RGB images with corresponding
annotated 3D bounding boxes as training data. As depth estimation of object is the key factor affecting the performance
of 3D object detection, we introduce an Instance-DepthAware (IDA) module which accurately predicts the depth
of the 3D bounding box’s center by instance-depth awareness, disparity adaptation and matching cost reweighting.
Moreover, our model is an end-to-end learning framework
which does not require multiple stages or postprocessing algorithm. We provide detailed experiments on KITTI benchmark and achieve impressive improvements compared with
the existing image-based methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/swords123/IDA-3D.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional object detection is one of the most
important scene understanding tasks that has many applications such as autonomous driving and virtual reality. It
classifies objects and estimates oriented 3D bounding boxes
of physical objects from input sensor data. According to the
type of sensor, 3D object detection can be divided into point
cloud-based methods [6, 5, 11, 21, 30, 24, 16, 15, 28, 13],
monocular image-based methods [3, 20, 19, 27, 12, 22, 1,
25, 18] and binocular image-based methods [4, 14, 23, 25].
Three-dimensional object detection based on point clouds such as those from LiDAR can achieve the best performance, but LiDAR sensors are the most expensive. More∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

over, some 3D datasets do not provide LiDAR data, such
as PASCAL3D+ [26], which annotates 3D bounding boxes
by means of the CAD model. Monocular cameras are the
cheapest and most convenient to install, but 3D detection
using only a single image inherently lacks reliable depth information. Binocular cameras are not expensive and can
provide denser information for small objects in the distance
compared to LiDAR and inherently provide absolute depth
information compared to monocular cameras. We therefore
focus on stereo-based 3D object detection in this paper.
Stereo-based 3D object detection takes stereo pairs of
images as input and oriented 3D bounding boxes of objects
as output. Since the depth error from stereo vision increases quadratically with distance, 3D object detection without
depth maps in the training process is a difficult task if solely
relying on the annotated 3D bounding boxes [4, 14]. Currently, stereo-based 3D object detection without supervised
depth still lags behind in localizing objects. We hope to
bridge the gap between two kinds of methods, with and
without depth-data supervision, so that the performance of
3D object detection with only annotated 3D bounding boxes
of physical objects can approach the performance of those
that use depth images as supervision.
In this work, we propose a 3D object detection approach
from stereo vision that does not rely on LiDAR data either
as input or as supervision during training but solely takes
RGB images with corresponding annotated 3D bounding
boxes as training data. It first extracts the objects from the
background by stereo Region Proposal Network (RPN) to
remove its interference on 3D object detection. Because
depth estimation of an object instance is the key factor affecting the performance of 3D object detection, we design
a separate instance-depth-aware (IDA) module that predicts
the center depth of an object’s 3D bounding box. Unlike
previous stereo-based methods that compute the correspondence of each pixel between two images [10, 2], we measure
the correspondence of each instance, paying more attention
to the global spatial information of the object. To reduce
the error of depth estimation for a distant object, we adaptively adjust the range of disparity levels in the cost volume

13015

