DualConvMesh-Net:
Joint Geodesic and Euclidean Convolutions on 3D Meshes
Jonas Schult∗, Francis Engelmann∗, Theodora Kontogianni, Bastian Leibe
RWTH Aachen University
{schult, engelmann, kontogianni, leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
We propose DualConvMesh-Nets (DCM-Net) a family of
deep hierarchical convolutional networks over 3D geometric data that combines two types of convolutions. The first
type, geodesic convolutions, defines the kernel weights over
mesh surfaces or graphs. That is, the convolutional kernel
weights are mapped to the local surface of a given mesh.
The second type, Euclidean convolutions, is independent of
any underlying mesh structure. The convolutional kernel
is applied on a neighborhood obtained from a local affinity representation based on the Euclidean distance between
3D points. Intuitively, geodesic convolutions can easily separate objects that are spatially close but have disconnected
surfaces, while Euclidean convolutions can represent interactions between nearby objects better, as they are oblivious
to object surfaces. To realize a multi-resolution architecture, we borrow well-established mesh simplification methods from the geometry processing domain and adapt them
to define mesh-preserving pooling and unpooling operations. We experimentally show that combining both types
of convolutions in our architecture leads to significant performance gains for 3D semantic segmentation, and we report competitive results on three scene segmentation benchmarks. Our models and code are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Geometric deep learning [3, 4, 12, 26, 35, 43] aims at
transferring the successes of CNNs from regular, discrete
domains, e.g., 1D audio, 2D images or 3D voxel grids, onto
irregular data representations such as graphs, point clouds
or 3D meshes. Currently, geometric deep learning is divided into two main areas relying on different data representations: 3D scene understanding and 3D shape analysis.
The former looks at tasks such as semantic segmentation [9, 17, 21, 40, 45, 47, 62], instance segmentation [14,
15, 19, 28, 59, 60] and part segmentation [21, 45, 53, 62].
Here, the focus lies primarily on processing point cloud
∗ Equal contribution.
1 github.com/VisualComputingInstitute/dcm-net/

Geodesic Neighborhood

Euclidean Neighborhood

Figure 1: Comparison of geodesic (left) and Euclidean neighborhoods (right). Our DCM-Net combines geodesic and Euclidean convolutions. Geodesic convolutions follow the surface of
individual objects, which can be beneficial to learn specific object
shapes. Euclidean convolutions can bridge over small gaps, which
can encourage the flow of relevant context information between
spatially nearby but geodesically distant objects, while being able
to connect disconnected parts due to scanning artifacts. The color
gradient shows the geodesic and Euclidean distances between the
● center point and its neighbors. The scan section is taken from
the ScanNet dataset [8].

data. One choice is to project raw point clouds into a discrete 3D grid representation, which enables standard 3D
CNNs to be applied, i.e., by sliding kernels over neighboring voxels [10, 42, 55, 63, 64]. Alternative approaches operate directly on raw point clouds [2, 29, 39, 45, 46, 53, 65].
In this case, the challenge consists in defining convolutional
operators over point sets. Commonly, the convolutional kernels are applied to local point neighborhoods obtained from
spherical or k-nn neighborhoods defined over the Euclidean
distance between pairs of points. We refer to these convolutions as Euclidean convolutions (see Figure 1, right).
Consequently, regardless of point cloud or voxel representations, these convolutions are agnostic to the surface information and, therefore, sensitive to surface deformations.
Unlike 3D scene understanding, 3D shape analysis is
concerned with tasks such as shape correspondence [3],
shape descriptors [33], and shape retrieval [43]. As opposed to the methods mentioned earlier, shape analysis fo-

8612

