Mesh-Guided Multi-View Stereo with Pyramid Architecture
Yuesong Wang1 , Tao Guan1,3∗, Zhuo Chen1 , Yawei Luo1 , Keyang Luo1 , Lili Ju2
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, China
2
University of South Carolina, USA 3 Farsee2 Technology Ltd, China
{yuesongw, qd gt, cz 007, royalvane, kyluo}@hust.edu.cn, ju@math.sc.edu

Abstract
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct 3D geometry of the target scene by using only information from 2D
images. Although much progress has been made, it still suffers from textureless regions. To overcome this difficulty,
we propose a mesh-guided MVS method with pyramid architecture, which makes use of the surface mesh obtained
from coarse-scale images to guide the reconstruction process. Specifically, a PatchMatch-based MVS algorithm is
first used to generate depth maps for coarse-scale images
and the corresponding surface mesh is obtained by a surface reconstruction algorithm. Next we project the mesh
onto each of depth maps to replace unreliable depth values
and the corrected depth maps are fed to fine-scale reconstruction for initialization. To alleviate the influence of possible erroneous faces on the mesh, we further design and
train a convolutional neural network to remove incorrect
depths. In addition, it is often hard for the correct depth values for low-textured regions to survive at the fine-scale, thus
we also develop an efficient method to seek out these regions
and further enforce the geometric consistency in these regions. Experimental results on the ETH3D high-resolution
dataset demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance, especially in completeness.

1. Introduction
Obtaining geometric information of a target scene is a
very important task in many applications and multi-view
stereo (MVS) is probably the most convenient approach for
3D geometry reconstruction in terms of efficiency and cost
since MVS only requires a set of calibrated images as the
input and extracts 3D geometric information based on their
photo-consistency. Consequently, MVS has been a hot research topic in computer vision for decades.
∗ Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) An input image from the ETH3D test dataset; (b) the
depth map produced by MVS without guidance; (c) the depth map
by our method.

One of the classical strategies for MVS is planesweep [5, 2, 8] which sweeps a plane through the target
scene to obtain its 3D geometry. However, only scenes
consisting of planar surfaces can be correctly estimated using such a strategy. Many PatchMatch-based algorithms
[9, 6, 32, 42, 7, 3, 29] have successfully overcome this
limitation and achieved impressive results. These methods
assume that the scene consists of a vast number of small
planar patches; by projecting a 3D patch into images without occlusion, image patches can be correspondingly obtained and the photometric consistency between them must
be high. However, it is often hard to predefine the size of the
patches. Small patch size produces accurate points in areas
with rich texture but perform badly in low-textured regions,
and enlarging the patch size could make the algorithm more
robust but may decrease the accuracy. Image pyramid [1]
is then implanted into MVS in [37, 22] to deal with this issue. Although MVS with the pyramid architecture solves
the problem brought by the patch size, it still suffers a lot
from textureless areas of the scene since the photometric
consistency performs poorly in textureless regions even at
the coarsest scale. This drawback has been partially addressed in [19, 28] based on the assumption that textureless regions are often piecewise flat. In this spirit, images
are segmented into superpixels which are then treated as
planes. Most textureless regions can be reconstructed correctly while errors may also be consequently induced since
the depths in superpixels are unreliable sometimes, which
results in faulty estimation of corresponding plane parame-

2039

