Blur Aware Calibration of Multi-Focus Plenoptic Camera
Mathieu Labussière1 , Céline Teulière1 , Frédéric Bernardin2 , Omar Ait-Aider1
1
Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, SIGMA Clermont,
Institut Pascal, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France
2
Cerema, Équipe-projet STI, 10 rue Bernard Palissy, F-63017 Clermont-Ferrand, France
mathieu.labu@gmail.com, firstname.name@{uca,cerema}.fr

Abstract
This paper presents a novel calibration algorithm for
Multi-Focus Plenoptic Cameras (MFPCs) using raw images only. The design of such cameras is usually complex
and relies on precise placement of optic elements. Several
calibration procedures have been proposed to retrieve the
camera parameters but relying on simplified models, reconstructed images to extract features, or multiple calibrations
when several types of micro-lens are used. Considering
blur information, we propose a new Blur Aware Plenoptic (BAP) feature. It is first exploited in a pre-calibration
step that retrieves initial camera parameters, and secondly
to express a new cost function for our single optimization
process. The effectiveness of our calibration method is validated by quantitative and qualitative experiments.

1. Introduction
The purpose of an imaging system is to map incoming
light rays from the scene onto pixels of photo-sensitive detector. The radiance of a light ray is given by the plenoptic function L (x, θ, λ, τ ), introduced by Adelson et al. [1],
where x ∈ R3 is the spatial position of observation, θ ∈ R2
is the angular direction of observation, λ is the wavelength
of the light and τ is the time. Conventional cameras capture
only one point of view. A plenoptic camera is a device that
allows to retrieve spatial as well as angular information.
From Lumigraph [17] to commercial plenoptic cameras
[19, 23], several designs have been proposed. This paper
focuses on plenoptic cameras based on a Micro-Lenses Array (MLA) placed between the main lens and the photosensitive sensor (see Fig. 2). The specific design of such a
camera allows to multiplex both types of information onto
the sensor in the form of a Micro-Images Array (MIA) (see
Fig. 1 (b)), but implies a trade-off between the angular and
spatial resolutions [10, 16, 8]. It is balanced according to
the MLA position with respect to the main lens focal plane
(i.e., focused [23, 9] and unfocused [19] configurations).

Figure 1: The Raytrix R12 multi-focus plenoptic camera used in our experimental setup (a), along with a raw
image of a checkerboard calibration target (b). The image
is composed of several micro-images with different blurred
levels and arranged in an hexagonal grid. In each microimage, our new Blur Aware Plenoptic (BAP) feature is illustrated by its center and its blur radius (c).
The mapping of incoming light rays from the scene onto
pixels can be expressed as a function of the camera model.
Classical cameras are usually modeled as pinhole or thin
lens. Due to the complexity of plenoptic camera’s design,
the used models are usually high dimensional. Specific calibration methods have to be developed to retrieve the intrinsic parameters of these models.

1.1. Related Work
Unfocused plenoptic camera calibration. In this configuration, light rays are focused by the MLA on the sensor
plane. The calibration of unfocused plenoptic camera [19]
has been widely studied in the literature [6, 2, 25, 24, 11,
36]. Most approaches rely on a thin-lens model for the main
lens and an array of pinholes for the micro-lenses. Most of
them require reconstructed images to extract features, and
limit their model to the unfocused configuration, i.e., set-

2545

