MANTRA: Memory Augmented Networks for Multiple Trajectory Prediction
Francesco Marchetti

Federico Becattini Lorenzo Seidenari
MICC, University of Florence

Alberto Del Bimbo

name.surname@unifi.it

OBSERVED
TRAJECTORY

Abstract
Autonomous vehicles are expected to drive in complex
scenarios with several independent non cooperating agents.
Path planning for safely navigating in such environments
can not just rely on perceiving present location and motion of other agents. It requires instead to predict such
variables in a far enough future. In this paper we address
the problem of multimodal trajectory prediction exploiting
a Memory Augmented Neural Network. Our method learns
past and future trajectory embeddings using recurrent neural networks and exploits an associative external memory to
store and retrieve such embeddings. Trajectory prediction
is then performed by decoding in-memory future encodings
conditioned with the observed past. We incorporate scene
knowledge in the decoding state by learning a CNN on top
of semantic scene maps. Memory growth is limited by learning a writing controller based on the predictive capability
of existing embeddings. We show that our method is able
to natively perform multi-modal trajectory prediction obtaining state-of-the art results on three datasets. Moreover,
thanks to the non-parametric nature of the memory module, we show how once trained our system can continuously
improve by ingesting novel patterns.

1. Introduction
What makes humans capable of succeeding in a large
variety of tasks is the capacity to learn from experience, recalling past events and generalizing to new ones. Learning
to drive is a clear example of this ability. In recent years
a lot of effort has been made to imitate this skill and to
develop autonomous vehicles that are able to safely drive
among other agents, either autonomous or driven by humans. Whereas remarkable progress has been made for automotive [2, 8, 38], current approaches still lack the ability
to explicitly remember specific instances from experience
when trying to infer possible future states of surrounding
agents. This is particularly important for predicting future
locations of moving agents, so to take appropriate decisions and avoid collisions or potentially dangerous situations. Predicting future trajectories of such agents is intrin-

MEMORY
NETWORK
PAST
MEMORY

TOP-K

MULTIPLE PREDICTED
TRAJECTORIES

FUTURE
MEMORY

Figure 1. MANTRA addresses multimodal trajectory prediction.
We obtain multiple future predictions given an observed past relying on a Memory Augmented Neural Network.

sically multimodal: vehicle dynamics give rise to a set of
similarly likely outcomes for an external observer (Fig. 1).
While humans can address this task by implicit learning, i.e. exploiting procedural memory (knowing how to do
things) from similar scenarios of previous experience, without explicit and conscious awareness, for machines this task
has proven to be extremely hard. Common machine learning models, such as Recurrent Neural Networks, fail to address it. They are capable to store past information into an
internal state, updated at every time step, and make predictions based on long term patterns. But in such networks,
memory is a single hidden representation and is only addressable as a whole. State to state transition is unstructured
and global. Instead, an element-wise addressable memory
would be useful to selectively access only relevant pieces of
information. This would allow to peak into likely futures to
guide predictions.
In this paper we present MANTRA: Memory Augmented Neural TRAjectory predictor. MANTRA is a novel
approach implementing a persistent Memory Augmented
Neural Network (MANN) for vehicle trajectory prediction.
In our model, an external associative memory is trained to
write pairs of past and future trajectories and keep in mem-

7143

