TransMoMo: Invariance-Driven Unsupervised Video Motion Retargeting
Zhuoqian Yang1∗
Wentao Zhu2∗
Wenyan (Wayne) Wu3∗
4
3
Chen Qian
Qiang Zhou
Bolei Zhou5
Chen Change Loy6
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Peking University 3 BNRist, Tsinghua University
4
SenseTime Research 5 CUHK 6 Nanyang Technological University
zhuoqiay@cs.cmu.edu

wtzhu@pku.edu.cn

wwy15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhouqiang@tsinghua.edu.cn

qianchen@sensetime.com

bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1: Motion retargeting. The movements from the source videos (first row) are transferred to a target appearance (second row).

Abstract
We present a lightweight video motion retargeting approach TransMoMo that is capable of transferring motion
of a person in a source video realistically to another video
of a target person (Fig. 1). Without using any paired data
for supervision, the proposed method can be trained in an
unsupervised manner by exploiting invariance properties
of three orthogonal factors of variation including motion,
structure, and view-angle. Specifically, with loss functions
carefully derived based on invariance, we train an autoencoder to disentangle the latent representations of such
factors given the source and target video clips. This allows us to selectively transfer motion extracted from the
source video seamlessly to the target video in spite of structural and view-angle disparities between the source and the
target. The relaxed assumption of paired data allows our
method to be trained on a vast amount of videos needless of
manual annotation of source-target pairing, leading to improved robustness against large structural variations and
extreme motion in videos. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method over the state-of-the-art methods such
as NKN [39], EDN [7] and LCM [3]. Code, model and
data are publicly available on our project page.1
∗ Equal contribution.
1 https://yzhq97.github.io/transmomo

1. Introduction
Let’s sway you could look into my eyes. Let’s sway
under the moonlight, this serious moonlight.
David Bowie, Let’s Dance

Can an amateur dancer learn instantly how to dance
like a professional in different styles, e.g., Tango, Locking,
Salsa, and Kompa? While it is almost impossible in reality,
one can now achieve this virtually via motion retargeting transferring the motion of a source video featuring a professional dancer to a target video of him/herself.
Motion retargeting is an emerging topic in both computer
vision and graphics due to its wide applicability to content
creation. Most existing methods [39, 27, 29] achieve motion retargeting through high-quality 3D pose estimation or
reconstruction [10]. These methods either require complex
and expensive optimization or they are error-prone given
the unconstrained videos that contain complex motion. Recently, several efforts are also made to retarget motion in
2D space [3, 7, 23]. Image-based methods [15, 5] obtain
compelling results on conditional person generation. However, these methods always neglect the temporal coherence
in video and thus suffer from twinkling results. Video-based
methods [42, 7, 3] show state-of-the-art results. However,

5306

