Breaking the cycle—Colleagues are all you need

input

Ori Nizan
Technion, Israel

Ayellet Tal
Technion, Israel

snizori@campus.technion.ac.il

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

ours
[42]
(a) glasses removal

input

ours-1
ours-2
(b) selfie to anime

[25]

input

ours
[7]
(c) male to female

Figure 1: Translation results for three applications. Our method is unidirectional (cycles are unnecessary) and multimodal (multiple results are generated for a given input, e.g. (b)). The results are compared to SOTA results and shown to
outperform them. In (a) our method completely removes the glasses; in (b) the shape of the face is well maintained, and in (c)
the women look more ”feminine”, e.g., no beard leftovers. More results & comparisons can be found later in the paper.

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel approach to performing image-to-image translation between unpaired domains.
Rather than relying on a cycle constraint, our method takes
advantage of collaboration between various GANs. This
results in a multi-modal method, in which multiple optional and diverse images are produced for a given image.
Our model addresses some of the shortcomings of classical GANs: (1) It is able to remove large objects, such as
glasses. (2) Since it does not need to support the cycle
constraint, no irrelevant traces of the input are left on the
generated image. (3) It manages to translate between domains that require large shape modifications. Our results
are shown to outperform those generated by state-of-the-art
methods for several challenging applications.

tinctive, yet associated, classes. Therefore it is not surprising that image-to-image translation has gained a lot of attention in recent years. Many applications have been demonstrated to benefit from it, yielding beautiful results.

1. Introduction

In unsupervised settings, where no paired data is available, shared latent space and cycle-consistency assumptions
have been utilized [2, 7, 8, 18, 21, 26, 30, 39, 45, 47]. Despite the successes & benefits, previous methods might suffer from some drawbacks. In particular, oftentimes, the cycle constraint might cause the preservation of source domain features, as can be seen for example, in Figure 1(c),
where facial hair remains on the faces of the women. This is
due to the need to go back and forth through the cycle. Second, as discussed in [25], sometimes the methods are unsuccessful for image translation tasks with large shape change,
such as in the case of the anime in Figure 1(b). Finally, as
explained in [42], it is still a challenge to completely remove
large objects, like glasses, from the images, and therefore
this task is left for their future work (Figure 1(a)).

Mapping between different domains is inline with the
human ability to find similarities between features in dis-

We propose a novel approach, termed Council-GAN,
which handles these challenges. The key idea is to rely
17860

