Deep Spatial Gradient and Temporal Depth Learning for Face Anti-spoofing
Zezheng Wang1
1

Zitong Yu2

Chenxu Zhao3,∗ Xiangyu Zhu4
Feng Zhou1 Zhen Lei4

Yunxiao Qin5

Qiusheng Zhou6

AIBEE 2 CMVS, University of Oulu 3 Academy of Sciences, Mininglamp Technology
4
CBSR&NLPR, CASIA 5 Northwestern Polytechnical University 6 JD Digits

{zezhengwang, fzhou}@aibee.com
{xiangyu.zhu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

zitong.yu@oulu.fi

Living

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing is critical to the security of face
recognition systems. Depth supervised learning has been
proven as one of the most effective methods for face antispoofing. Despite the great success, most previous works
still formulate the problem as a single-frame multi-task
one by simply augmenting the loss with depth, while neglecting the detailed fine-grained information and the interplay between facial depths and moving patterns. In contrast, we design a new approach to detect presentation attacks from multiple frames based on two insights: 1) detailed discriminative clues (e.g., spatial gradient magnitude) between living and spoofing face may be discarded
through stacked vanilla convolutions, and 2) the dynamics of 3D moving faces provide important clues in detecting the spoofing faces. The proposed method is able to
capture discriminative details via Residual Spatial Gradient Block (RSGB) and encode spatio-temporal information from Spatio-Temporal Propagation Module (STPM) efficiently. Moreover, a novel Contrastive Depth Loss is presented for more accurate depth supervision. To assess the
efficacy of our method, we also collect a Double-modal
Anti-spoofing Dataset (DMAD) which provides actual depth
for each sample. The experiments demonstrate that the
proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art results on five
benchmark datasets including OULU-NPU, SiW, CASIAMFSD, Replay-Attack, and the new DMAD. Codes will
be available at https://github.com/clks-wzz/
FAS-SGTD.

1. Introduction
Face recognition technology has become the most indispensable component in many interactive AI systems for
∗ denotes the corresponding author.

zhaochenxu@mininglamp.com

qyxqyx@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

zhouqiusheng3@jd.com

Spooﬁng

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Spatial gradient magnitude difference between living (a)
and spoofing (b) face. Notice that the large difference in gradient
maps despite their similarities in the original RGB images.

their convenience and human-level accuracy. However,
most of existing face recognition systems are easily to be
spoofed through presentation attacks (PAs) ranging from
printing a face on paper (print attack) to replaying a face
on a digital device (replay attack) or bringing a 3D-mask
(3D-mask attack). Therefore, not only the research community but also the industry has recognized face anti-spoofing
[18, 19, 4, 33, 39, 11, 23, 55, 1, 29, 12, 49, 45, 54, 21] as a
critical role in securing the face recognition system.
In the past few years, both traditional methods [14,
42, 9] and CNN-based methods [35, 38, 20, 24, 46] have
shown effectiveness in discriminating between the living
and spoofing face. They often formalize face anti-spoofing
as a binary classification between spoofing and living images. However, these approaches are challenging to explore
the nature of spoofing patterns, such as the loss of skin details, color distortion, moiré pattern, and spoofing artifacts.
In order to overcome this issue, many auxiliary depth
supervised face anti-spoofing methods have been developed. Intuitively, the images of living faces contain facelike depth, whereas the images of spoofing faces in print and
by replaying carriers only have planar depth. Thus, Atoum
et al. [2] and Liu et al. [34] propose single-frame depth supervised CNN architectures, and improve the presentation
attack detection (PAD) accuracy.
By surveying the past face anti-spoofing methods, we

5042

