A U-Net Based Discriminator for Generative Adversarial Networks
Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.com

Edgar Schönfeld
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
edgar.schoenfeld@bosch.com

Anna Khoreva
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
anna.khoreva@bosch.com

Progression during training

Abstract

real

Among the major remaining challenges for generative
adversarial networks (GANs) is the capacity to synthesize
globally and locally coherent images with object shapes and
textures indistinguishable from real images. To target this
issue we propose an alternative U-Net based discriminator architecture, borrowing the insights from the segmentation literature. The proposed U-Net based architecture allows to provide detailed per-pixel feedback to the generator
while maintaining the global coherence of synthesized images, by providing the global image feedback as well. Empowered by the per-pixel response of the discriminator, we
further propose a per-pixel consistency regularization technique based on the CutMix data augmentation, encouraging the U-Net discriminator to focus more on semantic and
structural changes between real and fake images. This improves the U-Net discriminator training, further enhancing
the quality of generated samples. The novel discriminator
improves over the state of the art in terms of the standard
distribution and image quality metrics, enabling the generator to synthesize images with varying structure, appearance
and levels of detail, maintaining global and local realism.
Compared to the BigGAN baseline, we achieve an average
improvement of 2.7 FID points across FFHQ, CelebA, and
the proposed COCO-Animals dataset.

1. Introduction
The quality of synthetic images produced by generative adversarial networks (GANs) has seen tremendous improvement recently [5, 20]. The progress is attributed
to large-scale training [32, 5], architectural modifications
[50, 19, 20, 27], and improved training stability via the use
of different regularization techniques [34, 51]. However,
despite the recent advances, learning to synthesize images
with global semantic coherence, long-range structure and
the exactness of detail remains challenging.
One source of the problem lies potentially in the discrim-

fake

Figure 1: Images produced throughout the training by our
U-Net GAN model (top row) and their corresponding perpixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator (bottom row).
The synthetic image samples are obtained from a fixed noise
vector at different training iterations. Brighter colors correspond to the discriminator confidence of pixel being real
(and darker of being fake). Note that the U-Net discriminator provides very detailed and spatially coherent response
to the generator, enabling it to further improve the image
quality, e.g. the unnaturally large man’s forehead is recognized as fake by the discriminator and is corrected by the
generator throughout the training.

inator network. The discriminator aims to model the data
distribution, acting as a loss function to provide the generator a learning signal to synthesize realistic image samples.
The stronger the discriminator is, the better the generator
has to become. In the current state-of-the-art GAN models,
the discriminator being a classification network learns only
a representation that allows to efficiently penalize the generator based on the most discriminative difference between
real and synthetic images. Thus, it often focuses either on
the global structure or local details. The problem amplifies
as the discriminator has to learn in a non-stationary envi-

8207

