A Hierarchical Graph Network for 3D Object Detection on Point Clouds
Jintai Chen1∗, Biwen Lei1∗ , Qingyu Song1∗ , Haochao Ying1 , Danny Z. Chen2 , Jian Wu1
1
2

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA

{JTigerChen,biwen1996,qingyusong,haochaoying}@zju.edu.com, dchen@nd.edu, wujian2000@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection on point clouds finds many applications. However, most known point cloud object detection methods did not adequately accommodate the characteristics (e.g., sparsity) of point clouds, and thus some key
semantic information (e.g., shape information) is not well
captured. In this paper, we propose a new graph convolution (GConv) based hierarchical graph network (HGNet)
for 3D object detection, which processes raw point clouds
directly to predict 3D bounding boxes. HGNet effectively
captures the relationship of the points and utilizes the multilevel semantics for object detection. Specially, we propose a novel shape-attentive GConv (SA-GConv) to capture the local shape features, by modelling the relative geometric positions of points to describe object shapes. An
SA-GConv based U-shape network captures the multi-level
features, which are mapped into an identical feature space
by an improved voting module and then further utilized
to generate proposals. Next, a new GConv based Proposal Reasoning Module reasons on the proposals considering the global scene semantics, and the bounding boxes
are then predicted. Consequently, our new framework outperforms state-of-the-art methods on two large-scale point
cloud datasets, by ∼4% mean average precision (mAP) on
SUN RGB-D and by ∼3% mAP on ScanNet-V2.

1. Introduction
3D object detection on point clouds has many applications, such as autonomous driving, fault detection for parts,
housekeeping robots, and augmented reality. Since point
clouds lie in irregular space and can be sparse, known methods (e.g., convolutional neural networks) designed for gridstructured data did not perform well on point clouds (e.g.,
see discussion in [2]). Many methods have been proposed
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. The predicted object centers and bounding boxes. Different colors of points indicate the center predictions based on the
semantics of different levels. The semantics of different levels are
then centralized and aggregated to predict the bounding boxes.

for 3D object detection on point clouds, such as projection
based methods [35, 4], volumetric convolution based methods [19, 8], and PointNet based methods [29, 30]. The former two types tried to stiffly transform point cloud data into
grid-structured data, and the latter aggregated features without explicitly considering the geometric positions of points.
Compared to other known methods, PointNet++ [32]
aimed to preserve the spatial structure of points, and thus
was widely used as backbone for feature learning in stateof-the-art frameworks [29, 46, 30]. Recently, Charles et al.
proposed VoteNet [29], voting for points to be at the object
centers based on learned features from PointNet++ [32].
This method yielded excellent results. But, there are still
some challenging drawbacks. First, using PointNet++ as
backbone neglected some local shape information, since the
relative geometric positions of points were not accounted
for. Second, the multi-level semantics were not adequately
utilized by the structures of the frameworks, which might
neglect some helpful information for object detection.
In this paper, we propose a novel Hierarchical Graph
Network (HGNet) for 3D object detection on point clouds,
based on graph convolutions (GConvs). HGNet contains
three main components: a GConv based U-shape network
(GU-net), a Proposal Generator, and a Proposal Reasoning Module (ProRe Module). Specially, we develop a new

392

