Learning Human-Object Interaction Detection using Interaction Points
Tiancai Wang1∗
1

MEGVII Technology

Tong Yang1
Martin Danelljan2
Xiangyu Zhang1
Jian Sun1
2
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 3 IIAI, UAE

Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,4
4

Linköping University, Sweden

Abstract
Understanding interactions between humans and objects
is one of the fundamental problems in visual classification
and an essential step towards detailed scene understanding. Human-object interaction (HOI) detection strives to
localize both the human and an object as well as the identification of complex interactions between them. Most existing HOI detection approaches are instance-centric where
interactions between all possible human-object pairs are
predicted based on appearance features and coarse spatial information. We argue that appearance features alone
are insufficient to capture complex human-object interactions. In this paper, we therefore propose a novel fullyconvolutional approach that directly detects the interactions
between human-object pairs. Our network predicts interaction points, which directly localize and classify the interaction. Paired with the densely predicted interaction vectors, the interactions are associated with human and object
detections to obtain final predictions. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to propose an approach where
HOI detection is posed as a keypoint detection and grouping problem. Experiments are performed on two popular
benchmarks: V-COCO and HICO-DET. Our approach sets
a new state-of-the-art on both datasets. Code is available
at https://github.com/vaesl/IP-Net.

1. Introduction
Detailed semantic understanding of image contents, beyond instance-level recognition, is one of the fundamental
problems in computer vision. Detecting human-object interaction (HOI) is a class of visual relationship detection
where the task is to not only localize both a human and an
object but also infer the relationship between them, such as
“eating an apple” or “driving a car”. The problem is challenging since an image may contain multiple humans performing the same interaction, same human simultaneously
∗ This work was performed during an internship at MEGVII Technol-

ogy. This work was supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800) and Beijing Academy
of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI). Contact email: wangtc@tju.edu.cn

Object Stream

Feature Extraction

Human Stream

Score Fusion

Pairwise Stream
Object Detection

Pair all H-O pairs

Interaction Points

Points Grouping

(a)
(b)

HOIs

Object Detection

Figure 1. (a) Most existing approaches address the HOI detection problem where the detected bounding-boxes (human and object) from a pre-trained detector are first used to extract region-ofinterest (RoI) features from the backbone. Then, a multi-stream
architecture is employed where the individual scores from three
parallel streams: human, object and pairwise are fused to obtain
final interaction predictions for all human-object pairs. (b) Different from previous methods, our proposed approach poses HOI as
a keypoint detection and grouping problem by learning to generate interaction points and vectors which are directly grouped along
with human and object instances from the object detection branch.

interacting with multiple objects (“sit on a couch and type
on laptop”), multiple humans sharing the same interaction
and object (“throw and catch ball”), or fine-grained interactions (“walk horse”, “feed horse” and “jump horse”). These
complex and diverse interaction scenarios impose significant challenges when designing an HOI detection solution.
Most existing approaches [3, 7, 14, 39] detect humanobject interactions in the form of triplets hhuman, action,
objecti by decomposing the problem into two parts: object
detection and interaction recognition. For object detection,
a pre-trained object detector is typically employed to detect both humans and objects. For interaction recognition,
several strategies exist in literature [23, 25, 34]. Most of
the recent HOI detection approaches [3, 7, 14, 34] utilize
a multi-stream architecture (see Fig. 1(a)) for interaction
recognition. The multi-stream architecture typically contains three individual streams: a human, an object, and a
pairwise. Both human and object streams encode appear-

4116

