Separating Particulate Matter from a Single Microscopic Image
Tushar Sandhan and Jin Young Choi
Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, South Korea
tushar@snu.ac.kr, jychoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Particulate matter (PM) is the blend of various solid
and liquid particles suspended in atmosphere. These submicron particles are imperceptible for usual hand-held
camera photography, but become a great obstacle in microscopic imaging. PM removal from a single microscopic
image is a highly ill-posed and one of the challenging image denoising problems. In this work, we thoroughly analyze the physical properties of PM, microscope and their inevitable interaction; and propose an optimization scheme,
which removes the PM from a high-resolution microscopic
image within a few seconds. Experiments on real world
microscopic images show that the proposed method significantly outperforms other competitive image denoising
methods. It preserves the comprehensive microscopic foreground details while clearly separating the PM from a single monochromatic or color image.

(PM)

Input microscopic image Particulate Matter

Output clean specimen

PM is removed

Figure 1: Top: input image of the yeast colonies is contaminated by undesirable particulate matter (PM). Bottom: our
method separates PM to produce a clean specimen.

1. Introduction
Microscopic imaging allows visualization of subcellular
structures at various levels of resolution with unprecedented
accuracy. It has become a vital source of visual data for
biologists and widely used as a primary tool in research and
medical assistance. It grants us a new vision for scrutinizing
miniature details and thereby fulfilling inquisitiveness of the
human mind.
However, presence of particulate matter (PM) in the atmosphere causes hindrance to the microscopy. PM is the
blend of various solid and liquid particles suspended in atmosphere with diameters larger than 10 nm and smaller
than 50 µm [39]. Comparing the size of PM with perceptible day-to-day objects, it becomes transparent or a mild
scattered noise (e.g. haze) for general purpose photography.
That is as the PM concentration in an atmosphere increases,
the visibility decreases. On the other hand PM settles over
the glass slide or objective lens of the microscope, where it
becomes comparable in size with the specimen. So in microscopic imaging, PM acts as an obstacle rather than just a
scattered noise. Final microscopic image is rendered often

with undesired superposition of the true object (foreground)
and the ultra-fine unwanted PM (background). Here we address the ill-posed problem of foreground and background
separation to produce a clean microscopic image as shown
in the Figure 1.
Microscopic image data acquisition has significant challenges like proper staining of the specimen, sustaining
certain humidity and surrounding temperature, maintaining appropriate illumination to reduce photo toxicity, preventing background clutter and separating overlapping nuclei [16, 24, 43, 64]. So there is scarcity of microscopic
labeled data [67]. Each image contains significant number of objects such as nuclei, cells or neurons, so availability of just few hundreds of microscopic images produces thousands of data points, which is enough to train
the learning based algorithms such as deep neural networks (DNN) for detection, segmentation or classification
tasks [2, 23, 52, 61, 62, 63]. However for image denoising,
each image serves as a single datum and there is often absence of a ground truth e.g. an underlying clean image.

4584

