Fast(er) Reconstruction of Shredded Text Documents
via Self-Supervised Deep Asymmetric Metric Learning
Thiago M. Paixão∗1,2 , Rodrigo F. Berriel2 , Maria C. S. Boeres2 , Alessandro L. Koerich3 ,
Claudine Badue2 , Alberto F. De Souza2 and Thiago Oliveira-Santos2
1
2

Federal Institute of Espı́rito Santo (IFES), Serra, Brazil

Federal University of Espı́rito Santo (UFES), Vitória, Brazil

3

École de Technologie Supérieure (ÉTS), Montreal, Canada

Abstract
The reconstruction of shredded documents consists in arranging the pieces of paper (shreds) in order to reassemble
the original aspect of such documents. This task is particularly relevant for supporting forensic investigation as
documents may contain criminal evidence. As an alternative to the laborious and time-consuming manual process,
several researchers have been investigating ways to perform automatic digital reconstruction. A central problem
in automatic reconstruction of shredded documents is the
pairwise compatibility evaluation of the shreds, notably for
binary text documents. In this context, deep learning has
enabled great progress for accurate reconstructions in the
domain of mechanically-shredded documents. A sensitive
issue, however, is that current deep model solutions require
an inference whenever a pair of shreds has to be evaluated.
This work proposes a scalable deep learning approach for
measuring pairwise compatibility in which the number of
inferences scales linearly (rather than quadratically) with
the number of shreds. Instead of predicting compatibility directly, deep models are leveraged to asymmetrically project
the raw shred content onto a common metric space in which
distance is proportional to the compatibility. Experimental
results show that our method has accuracy comparable to
the state-of-the-art with a speed-up of about 22 times for
a test instance with 505 shreds (20 mixed shredded-pages
from different documents).

1. Introduction
Paper documents are of great value in forensics because
they may contain supporting evidence for criminal investi∗ Corresponding author: paixao@gmail.com.

gation (e.g., fingerprints, bloodstains, textual information).
Damage on these documents, however, may hamper or even
prevent their analysis, particularly in cases of chemical destruction. Nevertheless, recent news [9] shows that documents are still being physically damaged by hand-tearing or
using specialized paper shredder machines (mechanically
shredding). In this context, a forensic document examiner
(FDE) is typically required to reconstruct the original document for further analysis.
To accomplish this task, FDEs usually handle paper
fragments (shreds) manually, verifying the compatibility of
pieces and grouping them incrementally. Despite its relevance, this manual process is time-consuming, laborious,
and potentially damaging to the shreds. For these reasons,
research on automatic digital reconstruction has emerged
since the last decade [14, 32]. Traditionally, hand-tearing
and mechanical-shredding scenarios are addressed differently since shreds’ shape tends to be less relevant in the
latter. Instead, shreds’ compatibility is almost exclusively
determined by appearance features, such as color similarity
around shreds extremities [17, 29].
As with the mechanical shredding, ad hoc strategies
have been also developed for binary text documents to
cope with the absence of discriminative color information
[6, 11, 16, 30]. More recently, Paixão et al. [22] substantially improved the state-of-the-art in terms of accuracy on
the reconstruction of strip-shredded text documents, i.e.,
documents cut in the longitudinal direction only. Nevertheless, time efficiency is a bottleneck because shreds’ compatibility demands a costly similarity assessment of character
shapes. In a follow-up work [21], the group proposed a deep
learning-based compatibility measure, which improved the
accuracy even further as well as the time efficiency of the
reconstruction. In [21], shreds’ compatibility is estimated
pairwise by a CNN trained in a self-supervised way, learn114343

