Foreground-Aware Relation Network for Geospatial Object Segmentation in
High Spatial Resolution Remote Sensing Imagery
Zhuo Zheng

Yanfei Zhong∗
Junjue Wang
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China

Ailong Ma

{zhengzhuo, zhongyanfei, kingdrone, maailong007}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Geospatial object segmentation, as a particular semantic segmentation task, always faces with larger-scale
variation, larger intra-class variance of background, and
foreground-background imbalance in the high spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing imagery. However, general
semantic segmentation methods mainly focus on scale variation in the natural scene, with inadequate consideration
of the other two problems that usually happen in the large
area earth observation scene. In this paper, we argue that
the problems lie on the lack of foreground modeling and
propose a foreground-aware relation network (FarSeg) from
the perspectives of relation-based and optimization-based
foreground modeling, to alleviate the above two problems.
From perspective of relation, FarSeg enhances the discrimination of foreground features via foreground-correlated
contexts associated by learning foreground-scene relation.
Meanwhile, from perspective of optimization, a foregroundaware optimization is proposed to focus on foreground examples and hard examples of background during training
for a balanced optimization. The experimental results obtained using a large scale dataset suggest that the proposed
method is superior to the state-of-the-art general semantic
segmentation methods and achieves a better trade-off between speed and accuracy.

1. Introduction
High spatial resolution earth observation technique has
provided a large number of high spatial resolution (HSR)
remote sensing images that can finely describe various
geospatial objects, such as ship, vehicle and airplane, etc.
Automatically extracting objects of interest from HSR remote sensing imagery is very helpful for urban manage∗ Corresponding author.
This work was supported by National
Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2017YFB0504202, National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant Nos. 41771385, 41801267, and the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation under Grant 2017M622522.

foreground
background
similar with

Figure 1. The main challenges of object segmentation in the HSR
remote sensing imagery. (1) larger-scale variation. (2) foregroundbackground imbalance. (3) intra-class variance of background.

ment, planing and monitoring [39, 40, 25, 26]. Geospatial
object segmentation, as a significant role in object extraction, can provide semantic and location information for the
objects of interest, which belongs to a particular semantic
segmentation task with the goal to divide image pixels into
two subsets of the foreground objects and the background
area. And meanwhile, it needs to further assign a unique
semantic label to each pixel in the foreground object area.
Compared with natural scene, geospatial object segmentation is more challenging in the HSR remote sensing images. There are three reasons at least:
1) The object always has larger-scale variation in the
HSR remote sensing images [14, 42]. This causes the multiscale problem, which makes it difficult to locate and recognize the object.
2) The background is much more complex in the HSR
remote sensing images [36, 13], which causes serious false
alarms due to larger intra-class variance.
3) The foreground ratio is much less than it in the nat-

4096

