Context-aware and Scale-insensitive Temporal Repetition Counting
Huaidong Zhang1 , Xuemiao Xu ∗1,2,3 , Guoqiang Han1 , and Shengfeng He∗ 1
1

South China University of Technology
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
2

Input Video

(a) Short Cycle (Jumping Rope)

(b) Long Cycle (Bench Press)

Large Scale
Search

With

Context-aware
Network
With

Propagate
Cycle Length
Distribution

(c) Varied Cycle (Playing Violin)

(d) Double-Motion Cycle (Front Crawl)

Refine

Cycle Length
Refinement

Count Number = 4.07

Figure 1: The varied cycle lengths and context-dependent motions of repetitive actions pose challenges for counting temporal
repetitions. We propose a context-aware and scale-insensitive framework to cope with these problems. The counting process
is designed in a coarse-to-fine manner, integrating with a context-aware network for detecting bidirectional repetitive actions.

Abstract
Temporal repetition counting aims to estimate the
number of cycles of a given repetitive action. Existing
deep learning methods assume repetitive actions are
performed in a fixed time-scale, which is invalid for the
complex repetitive actions in real life. In this paper, we
tailor a context-aware and scale-insensitive framework,
to tackle the challenges in repetition counting caused by
the unknown and diverse cycle-lengths. Our approach
combines two key insights: (1) Cycle lengths from different
actions are unpredictable that require large-scale searching, but, once a coarse cycle length is determined, the
variety between repetitions can be overcome by regression.
(2) Determining the cycle length cannot only rely on a
short fragment of video but a contextual understanding.
The first point is implemented by a coarse-to-fine cycle
refinement method. It avoids the heavy computation of
exhaustively searching all the cycle lengths in the video,
and, instead, it propagates the coarse prediction for
further refinement in a hierarchical manner. We secondly
propose a bidirectional cycle length estimation method for
a context-aware prediction. It is a regression network that
takes two consecutive coarse cycles as input, and predicts
the locations of the previous and next repetitive cycles. To
benefit the training and evaluation of temporal repetition
∗ Xuemiao Xu and Shengfeng He are joint corresponding authors.
Email: xuemx@scut.edu.cn, hesfe@scut.edu.cn

counting area, we construct a new and largest benchmark,
which contains 526 videos with diverse repetitive actions.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed network
trained on a single dataset outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on several benchmarks, indicating that the proposed framework is general enough to capture repetition
patterns across domains. Code and data are available in https://github.com/Xiaodomgdomg/
Deep-Temporal-Repetition-Counting.

1. Introduction
Human activities are commonly involved repetitive actions. Temporal repetition counting is a problem that aims
to count the number of repetitive actions in a video [7, 14,
21, 26]. The repetition analysis is explored as an auxiliary
cue to other video analysis applications, such as cardiac and
respiratory signal recover [16], pedestrian detection [22],
3D reconstruction [15, 24], and camera calibration [11].
This is a challenging problem as repetitive actions exhibit inherently different action patterns. We summarize 4
representative cases in the left part of Figure 1. Figure 1(a)
and (b) show the most common repetitions, in which actions are performed in fixed cycles. The problem of detecting these two repetitions is that their cycle lengths varied
largely, and therefore is invalid to make restricted assumptions about the time-scale of the cycle length across actions.

670

