View-GCN: View-based Graph Convolutional Network for 3D Shape Analysis
Xin Wei, Ruixuan Yu and Jian Sun ( )
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
{wxmath,yuruixuan123}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
View-based approach that recognizes 3D shape through
its projected 2D images has achieved state-of-the-art results for 3D shape recognition. The major challenge for
view-based approach is how to aggregate multi-view features to be a global shape descriptor. In this work, we propose a novel view-based Graph Convolutional Neural Network, dubbed as view-GCN, to recognize 3D shape based
on graph representation of multiple views in flexible view
configurations. We first construct view-graph with multiple views as graph nodes, then design a graph convolutional neural network over view-graph to hierarchically
learn discriminative shape descriptor considering relations
of multiple views. The view-GCN is a hierarchical network based on local and non-local graph convolution for
feature transform, and selective view-sampling for graph
coarsening. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets
show that view-GCN achieves state-of-the-art results for 3D
shape classification and retrieval.

1. Introduction
3D shape recognition is an important research area in
computer vision. 3D shapes, including real scanned or CAD
objects, retain richer geometric and shape information for
recognition than the 2D images captured from a single view.
3D shape recognition plays a critical role in applications
such as automatic drive [40], archaeology [44], virtual reality / augmented reality [17], etc.
Tremendous advances on 3D shape analysis have been
achieved in recent years. According to 3D shape representation, these methods can be divided into three categories, i.e.,
voxel-based, point-based, and view-based methods. Voxelbased methods represent a 3D shape by a collection of
voxels in 3D Euclidean space, then build neural networks
on voxels to learn the features for recognition [37, 51].
Though they are effective in performance, they commonly
have challenges including the computational complexity,
voxel resolution, and data sparsity caused by voxelization
of the shape surface. Point-based methods directly define

Figure 1. Illustration of view-GCN. Taking multi-view images of a
3D object as a view-graph, view-GCN gradually aggregates multiview features over view-graph, and outputs class label.

networks on point cloud or mesh. PointNet [7] is a simple but powerful deep architecture that takes point positions
as input. Succeeding methods, e.g., PointNet++ [42], SpiderCNN [52], PointCNN [32], RS-CNN [33] achieve improved performance for 3D shape recognition. View-based
methods [8, 15, 20, 27, 28, 41, 47, 50, 54] are based on aggregation of multi-view features for recognizing shape categories based on multi-view 2D images. They are among the
state-of-the-art methods for 3D shape recognition by taking
advantages of 2D image classification networks.
This work focuses on view-based approach. The major
challenge is how to aggregate multi-view features to be a
global 3D shape descriptor. Traditional methods [47, 48]
aggregate multi-view features by max-pooling, which is
permutation invariant but ignores relations among views.
Taking multiple views as a sequence, RNN has been successfully applied to fuse multi-view features in [8, 20, 34].
View-gram [23] and 3d2seqviews [19] also represent multiple views as a sequence and use convolution and attention
to investigate relations of views to learn shape descriptors.
The 1D sequential representation can well model the configuration that cameras are sequentially located on a circle
around object. However, for general configurations, e.g.,

1850

