Learning Canonical Shape Space for Category-Level
6D Object Pose and Size Estimation

1

Dengsheng Chen1,∗
Jun Li1, *
National University of Defense Technology

2

Zheng Wang3
Kai Xu1,2,†
SpeedBot Robotics Ltd. 3 Taobao.com

Abstract
We present a novel approach to category-level 6D object
pose and size estimation. To tackle intra-class shape variations, we learn canonical shape space (CASS), a unified
representation for a large variety of instances of a certain object category. In particular, CASS is modeled as
the latent space of a deep generative model of canonical
3D shapes with normalized pose. We train a variational
auto-encoder (VAE) for generating 3D point clouds in the
canonical space from an RGBD image. The VAE is trained
in a cross-category fashion, exploiting the publicly available large 3D shape repositories. Since the 3D point cloud
is generated in normalized pose (with actual size), the encoder of the VAE learns view-factorized RGBD embedding.
It maps an RGBD image in arbitrary view into a poseindependent 3D shape representation. Object pose is then
estimated via contrasting it with a pose-dependent feature
of the input RGBD extracted with a separate deep neural
networks. We integrate the learning of CASS and pose
and size estimation into an end-to-end trainable network,
achieving the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation based on a single-view RGB(D)
image is an essential building block for several real-world
applications ranging from robotic navigation and manipulation to augmented reality. Most existing works have so far
been addressing instance-level 6D pose estimation where
each target object has a corresponding CAD model with exact shape and size [17]. Thereby, the problem is largely
reduced to finding sparse or dense correspondence between
the target object and the stock 3D model. Pose hypotheses can then be generated and verified based on the correspondences. Although enjoying high pose accuracy, the
requirement of exact CAD models by these techniques hinders their practical use in many application scenarios.
* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

Figure 1: We present a method for category-level 6D object pose and size estimation (left) via learning canonical
shape space. The input RGBD image is embedded into the
shape space, resulting in a view-factorized RGBD embedding. Object pose is then estimated via contrasting it with a
pose-dependent feature of the input RGBD. A side-product
of our method is the full-shape reconstruction of the input
single-view RGBD, which supports not only size calculation but also precise robotic grasping. In the figure, the reconstructed 3D point clouds are placed into the scene point
cloud (unprojected from the input depth map). Two of them
are highlighted in the middle.

Recently, category-level 6D object pose estimation starts to
gain attention [21,29]. In this problem, the target object of a
shape category is unseen before and no CAD model is available, although some other instances of the same category
may have been seen. Therefore, the major challenge is how
to deal with intra-class variation [20]. In general, household objects could exhibit significant variations in color,
texture, shape and size even within the same category. Without an exactly same CAD model, correspondence-based approach would find difficulty given the considerable intraclass shape variation.
To resolve this, a unified representation for a variety of instances of an object category is needed, to which the target
object in observation could be “matched”. The recently proposed Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS) [29] is
a nice example of such unified representation. Based on this
representation, category-level object poses can be estimated
with high accuracy through mapping each pixel of the in111973

