Look-into-Object: Self-supervised Structure Modeling for Object Recognition
Mohan Zhou1,2* , Yalong Bai2* , Wei Zhang2† , Tiejun Zhao1 , and Tao Mei2
1
2

Harbin Institute of Technology
JD AI Research, Beijing, China

{mhzhou99, ylbai}@outlook.com wzhang.cu@gmail.com tjzhao@hit.edu.cn tmei@jd.com

Abstract
Most object recognition approaches predominantly focus on learning discriminative visual patterns while overlooking the holistic object structure. Though important,
structure modeling usually requires significant manual annotations and therefore is labor-intensive. In this paper,
we propose to “look into object” (explicitly yet intrinsically model the object structure) through incorporating selfsupervisions into the traditional framework. We show the
recognition backbone can be substantially enhanced for
more robust representation learning, without any cost of extra annotation and inference speed. Specifically, we first
propose an object-extent learning module for localizing the
object according to the visual patterns shared among the instances in the same category. We then design a spatial context learning module for modeling the internal structures of
the object, through predicting the relative positions within
the extent. These two modules can be easily plugged into
any backbone networks during training and detached at inference time. Extensive experiments show that our lookinto-object approach (LIO) achieves large performance
gain on a number of benchmarks, including generic object
recognition (ImageNet) and fine-grained object recognition
tasks (CUB, Cars, Aircraft). We also show that this learning
paradigm is highly generalizable to other tasks such as object detection and segmentation (MS COCO). Project page:
https://github.com/JDAI-CV/LIO.

1. Introduction
Object recognition is one of the most fundamental tasks
in computer vision, which has achieved steady progress
with the efforts from deep neural network design and abundant data annotations. However, recognizing visually similar objects is still challenging in practical applications, es∗Equal contribution. This work was done at JD AI research.
†Corresponding author.

Input Image

Ground Truth

ResNet-50 Baseline

Corrected by
Look-into-Object

Common Raven

Brown Creeper

Common Raven

BAE-125

MD-87

BAE-125

Lamborghini Diablo
Coupe 2001

Lamborghini Gallardo LP
570-4 Superleggera 2012

Lamborghini Diablo
Coupe 2001

Figure 1. Feature map visualization based on the last convolutional layer of ResNet-50 backbone. The first column shows the
original images, while the second and the third columns show the
maximally responding feature maps from the ground-truth and the
predicted labels, respectively. The last column shows the feature
maps by plugging our proposed LIO on ResNet-50. Object extend
and discriminative regions are all correctly localized owing to the
holistic structure modeling. (Best viewed in color).

pecially when there exist diverse visual appearances, poses,
background clutter, and so on.
Suffering from complex visual appearance, it is not always reliable to correctly recognize objects purely based
on discriminative regions, even with a large-scale humanlabeled dataset. As shown in Fig. 1, a well-trained ResNet50 (the third column) can still misclassify objects by looking at the wrong parts.
Existing object recognition approaches can be roughly
grouped into two groups. One group optimizes the network
architecture to learn high-quality representations [29, 21,
15, 7], while the other line of research introduces extra modules to highlight the salient parts explicitly (by boundingbox [2, 16, 18]) or implicitly (by attention [11, 36]). Apparently, the latter one costs more on either annotation (e.g.
bounding boxes / part locations) or calculation (attentions /
111774

