Variational Context-Deformable ConvNets for Indoor Scene Parsing
Zhitong Xiong,
Yuan Yuan*,
Nianhui Guo,
Qi Wang
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{xiongzhitong, y.yuan1.ieee, guonianhui199512, crabwq}@gmail.com

Abstract
VCD
Module

Context information is critical for image semantic segmentation. Especially in indoor scenes, the large variation
of object scales makes spatial-context an important factor
for improving the segmentation performance. Thus, in this
paper, we propose a novel variational context-deformable
(VCD) module to learn adaptive receptive-ﬁeld in a structured fashion. Different from standard ConvNets, which
share ﬁxed-size spatial context for all pixels, the VCD module learns a deformable spatial-context with the guidance
of depth information: depth information provides clues for
identifying real local neighborhoods. Speciﬁcally, adaptive
Gaussian kernels are learned with the guidance of multimodal information. By multiplying the learned Gaussian
kernel with standard convolution ﬁlters, the VCD module
can aggregate ﬂexible spatial context for each pixel during
convolution. The main contributions of this work are as follows: 1) a novel VCD module is proposed, which exploits
learnable Gaussian kernels to enable feature learning with
structured adaptive-context; 2) variational Bayesian probabilistic modeling is introduced for the training of VCD module, which can make it continuous and more stable; 3) a
perspective-aware guidance module is designed to take advantage of multi-modal information for RGB-D segmentation. We evaluate the proposed approach on three widelyused datasets, and the performance improvement has shown
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Pixel-wise semantic image analysis, e.g. semantic segmentation, is a fundamental computer vision task with numerous applications, such as robot sensing and autonomous
driving. Compared with image classiﬁcation, semantic
segmentation needs to distinguish the category of each
pixel under complicated backgrounds. As semantic segmentation is to understand the image at pixel-level, high
*Corresponding Author.

VCD
Module

Scale-guidence
Map

RGB

Multimodal
CNN

Multimodal
CNN

Depth

RGB

Dynamic Scale
Estimation

Depth

Figure 1. Illustration of context-deformable convolution. The
scale-guidance maps are learned with the guidance of multi-modal
features.

semantic-level features are critical for the pixel-wise classiﬁcation task. Thus, deep Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) have signiﬁcantly boosted the performance of semantic segmentation. Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [39] based methods and Encoder-Decoder architecture
based methods achieve remarkable results on several public benchmarks. Although the segmentation performance
can be improved signiﬁcantly by employing deep features,
there are still challenges for indoor scene semantic segmentation: 1) more complex spatial layout and cluttered objects
make the indoor scene segmentation challenging; 2) ﬁxed
receptive-ﬁeld may cause feature-inconsistency between different objects; 3) using 2D image alone for image understanding may cause geometric confusions. Fortunately,
depth sensor can provide geometric information to aid the
pixel-wise understanding of indoor scenes.
Commercial RGB-D sensors such as Miscrosoft Kinect
[53] become more and more popular. Adapting conventional 2D image analysis tasks such as object detection [42], semantic segmentation to RGB-D image becomes feasible. Since RGB-D image can provide illumination-insensitive geometric cues, extensive methods [15], [40], [35], and [27]
have shown that enhanced results can be obtained by incorporating the information from depth modality. Depth
information is useful for describing the 3D scene layout,

3992

