Strip Pooling: Rethinking Spatial Pooling for Scene Parsing
Qibin Hou1
Li Zhang2
1
National University of Singapore

Ming-Ming Cheng3
2
University of Oxford

Abstract
Spatial pooling has been proven highly effective in capturing long-range contextual information for pixel-wise
prediction tasks, such as scene parsing. In this paper, beyond conventional spatial pooling that usually has a regular shape of N × N , we rethink the formulation of spatial pooling by introducing a new pooling strategy, called
strip pooling, which considers a long but narrow kernel,
i.e., 1 × N or N × 1. Based on strip pooling, we further
investigate spatial pooling architecture design by 1) introducing a new strip pooling module that enables backbone
networks to efficiently model long-range dependencies, 2)
presenting a novel building block with diverse spatial pooling as a core, and 3) systematically comparing the performance of the proposed strip pooling and conventional
spatial pooling techniques. Both novel pooling-based designs are lightweight and can serve as an efficient plugand-play module in existing scene parsing networks. Extensive experiments on popular benchmarks (e.g., ADE20K
and Cityscapes) demonstrate that our simple approach establishes new state-of-the-art results. Code is available at
https://github.com/Andrew-Qibin/SPNet.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing, also known as semantic segmentation,
aims to assign a semantic label to each pixel in an image.
As one of the most fundamental tasks, it has been applied
in a wide range of computer vision and graphics applications [10], such as autonomous driving [47], medical diagnosis [46], image/video editing [41, 27], salient object detection [3], and aerial image analysis [38]. Recently, methods [37, 5] based on fully convolutional networks (FCNs)
have made extraordinary progress in scene parsing with
their ability to capture high-level semantics. However, these
approaches mostly stack local convolutional and pooling
operations, thus are hardly able to well cope with complex
scenes with a variety of different categories due to the limited effective fields-of-view [65, 23].
One way to improve the capability of modeling the longrange dependencies in CNNs is to adopt self-attention or

Jiashi Feng1
3
CS, Nankai University

non-local modules [51, 23, 7, 45, 21, 53, 66, 62, 61, 28].
However, they notoriously consume huge memory for computing the large affinity matrix at each spatial position.
Other methods for long-range context modeling include: dilated convolutions [5, 8, 6, 57] that aim to widen the receptive fields of CNNs without introducing extra parameters; or
global/pyramid pooling [26, 65, 19, 5, 8, 54] that summarizes global clues of the images. However, a common limitation for these methods, including dilated convolutions and
pooling, is that they all probe the input features map within
square windows. This limits their flexibility in capturing
anisotropy context that widely exists in realistic scenes. For
instance, in some cases, the target objects may have longrange banded structure (e.g., the grassland in Figure 1b) or
distributed discretely (e.g., the pillars in Figure 1a). Using
large square pooling windows cannot well solve the problem because it would inevitably incorporate contaminating
information from irrelevant regions [19].
In this paper, to more efficiently and effectively capture
long-range dependencies, we exploit spatial pooling for enlarging the receptive fields of CNNs and collecting informative contexts, and present the concept of strip pooling.
As an alternative to global pooling, strip pooling offers two
advantages. First, it deploys a long kernel shape along one
spatial dimension and hence enables capturing long-range
relations of isolated regions, as shown in the top part of Figures 1a and 1c. Second, it keeps a narrow kernel shape along
the other spatial dimension, which facilitates capturing local context and prevents irrelevant regions from interfering
the label prediction. Integrating such long but narrow pooling kernels enables the scene parsing networks to simultaneously aggregate both global and local context. This is essentially different from the traditional spatial pooling which
collects context from a fixed square region.
Based on the strip pooling operation, we present two
pooling based modules for scene parsing networks. First,
we design a Strip Pooling Module (SPM) to effectively enlarge the receptive field of the backbone. More concretely,
the SPM consists of two pathways, which focus on encoding long-range context along either the horizontal or vertical
spatial dimension. For each spatial location in the pooled
map, it encodes its globally horizontal and vertical informa-

4003

