Revisiting Saliency Metrics: Farthest-Neighbor Area Under Curve
Sen Jia
Ryerson University

Neil D. B. Bruce
Ryerson University, Vector Institute

sen.jia@ryerson.ca

bruce@ryerson.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new metric to address the
long-standing problem of center bias in saliency evaluation. We first show that distribution-based metrics cannot measure saliency performance across datasets due to
ambiguity in the choice of standard deviation, especially
for Convolutional Neural Networks. Therefore, our proposed metric is AUC-based because ROC curves are relatively robust to the standard deviation problem. However, this requires sufficient unique values in the saliency
prediction to compute AUC scores. Secondly, we propose
a global smoothing function for the problem of few value
degrees in predicted saliency output. Compared with random noise, our smoothing function can create unique values without losing the existing relative saliency relationship. Finally, we show our proposed AUC-based metric
can generate a more directional negative set for evaluation, denoted as Farthest-Neighbor AUC (FN-AUC). Our
experiments show FN-AUC can measure spatial biases,
central and peripheral, more effectively than S-AUC without penalizing the fixation locations. The generated negative samples are available at:https://github.com/
SenJia/Farthest-Neighbor-AUC.

1. Introduction
Extensive studies have been proposed to predict the most
salient region within an image. Saliency methods can be
roughly grouped into two categories, bottom-up and topdown. The former considers the visual stimuli of an image to determine the Regions Of Interest(ROIs); while the
latter one assumes the ROI is task-dependent, prior knowledge plays a significant part in saliency prediction. With
the recent development of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), saliency prediction heavily relies on model-based
algorithms which can be trained in an end-to-end fashion. A
new question has emerged regarding what type of saliency
features are the best design for applications, top-down or
bottom-up? Hand-crafted or CNN-learned?
The measurement of saliency is still challenging because
the definition of “saliency” varies depending on the vi-

Image
Fixation
Distribution
Figure 1. A saliency sample from the SALICON dataset.

sion task [2], so saliency algorithms can also be grouped
by different taxonomies for different purposes [10, 16, 6].
In this paper, we follow the common problem setting in
[29, 45], computational models are trained to predict the
most salient region to the Human Visual System(HVS).
Not only is this a common assumption to all the CNNbased methods [27, 9, 28, 34, 13, 12, 31, 24, 25], but it
also can be used in an extremely wide range of applications [48, 1, 47, 44, 26, 22, 35]. However, it is still difficult to comprehensively evaluate saliency models due to
the bias of each metric. For instance, the challenge of
Large-Scale Scene Understanding [27] uses seven saliency
metrics, Shuffled Area Under Curve (S-AUC), Information Gain (IG) [32], Normalized Scanpath Saliency (NSS)
[38], Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (CC), AUC-Judd,
SIMilarity (SIM) and Kullback–Leibler Divergence (KLD)
[30]. Another public saliency benchmark, MIT300 [28],
applies eight saliency metrics, AUC-Judd, AUC-Borji, SAUC, NSS, CC, KLD, SIM and Earth Mover’s Distance
(EMD) [40]. The use of multiple measures indicates that
it is difficult to evaluate a model from only one angle. Previous studies intended to categorize and compare those metrics, e.g., [39, 11] grouped the metrics into location-based
and distribution-based. As shown in Figure 1, the locationbased measure consists of a set of fixation locations captured by an eye tracker or mouse click. While the distribution of saliency is normally considered as a post-process on
the raw data by applying a Gaussian filter.
To evaluate a saliency model, one solution is to overcome the “disagreement” among the metrics. Kummerer
et al. [32] proposed to optimize the saliency scale, center
bias and spatial blurring jointly. But their post-process can
hardly satisfy all the metrics simultaneously, the process requires all the compared models and optimization only uses
the loss of IG. Later this idea was extended to a metric12667

