HOPE-Net: A Graph-based Model for Hand-Object Pose Estimation
Bardia Doosti1
Shujon Naha1
Majid Mirbagheri2
David J. Crandall1
1
Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University Bloomington
{bdoosti,snaha,djcran}@indiana.edu
2

Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington
mbagheri@uw.edu
Project Page: http://vision.sice.indiana.edu/projects/hopenet

Abstract
400
350

Hand-object pose estimation (HOPE) aims to jointly detect the poses of both a hand and of a held object. In this
paper, we propose a lightweight model called HOPE-Net
which jointly estimates hand and object pose in 2D and 3D
in real-time. Our network uses a cascade of two adaptive
graph convolutional neural networks, one to estimate 2D
coordinates of the hand joints and object corners, followed
by another to convert 2D coordinates to 3D. Our experiments show that through end-to-end training of the full network, we achieve better accuracy for both the 2D and 3D
coordinate estimation problems. The proposed 2D to 3D
graph convolution-based model could be applied to other
3D landmark detection problems, where it is possible to first
predict the 2D keypoints and then transform them to 3D.

1. Introduction
We use our hands as a primary means of sensing and
interacting with the world. Thus to understand human activity, computer vision systems need to be able to detect the
pose of the hands and to identify properties of the objects
that are being handled. This human Hand-Object Pose Estimation (HOPE) problem is crucial for a variety of applications, including augmented and virtual reality, fine-grained
action recognition, robotics, and telepresence.
This is a challenging problem, however. Hands move
quickly as they interact with the world, and handling an object, by definition, creates occlusions of the hand and/or object from nearly any given point of view. Moreover, handobject interaction video is often collected from first-person
(wearable) cameras (e.g., for Augmented Reality applications), generating a large degree of unpredictable camera
motion.
Of course, one approach is to detect the poses of the
hands and objects separately [27,30]. However, this ignores

300
250
200
150
100
50
0
100
80
−100

60
−50

0

40
50

20

Figure 1. The goal of Hand-Object Pose Estimation (HOPE) is to
jointly estimate the poses of both the hand and a handled object.
Our HOPE-Net model can estimate the 2D and 3D hand and object
poses in real-time, given a single image.

the fact that hand and handled object poses are highly correlated: the shape of an object usually constrains the types
of grasps (hand poses) that can be used to handle it. Detecting the pose of the hand can give cues as to the pose and
identity of an object, while the pose of an object can constrain the pose of the hand that is holding it. Solving the two
problems jointly can help overcome challenges such as occlusion. Recent work [10,26] proposed deep learning-based
approaches to jointly model the hand and object poses. We
build on this work, showing how to improve performance
by more explicitly modeling the physical and anatomical
constraints on hand-object interaction.
We propose to do this using graph convolutional neural
networks. Given their ability to learn effective representations of graph-structured data, graph convolutional neural
networks have recently received much attention in computer
vision. Human hand and body pose estimation problems are
particularly amenable to graph-based techniques since they
can naturally model the skeletal and kinematic constraints
between joints and body parts. Graph convolution can be
used to learn these inter-joint relationships.
In this paper, we show that graph convolution can dramatically increase the performance of estimating 3D handobject pose in real-world hand-object manipulation videos.
We model hand-object interaction by representing the hand
and object as a single graph. We focus on estimating 3D
16608

