Learning deep network for detecting 3D object keypoints and 6D poses
Wei Zhao
Xidian University
Xi’an, China

Wanqing Zhao, Shaobo Zhang, Ziyu Guan∗
Northwest University
Xi’an, China
{zhaowq@, zhangshaobo@stumail.

ziyuguan@}nwu.edu.cn

Jinye Peng∗
Northwest University
Xi’an, China

Jianping Fan
UNC-Charlotte
NC28223, USA

pjy@nwu.edu.cn

jfan@uncc.edu

Abstract
The state-of-the-art 6D object pose detection methods
use convolutional neural networks to estimate objects’ 6D
poses from RGB images. However, they require huge numbers of images with explicit 3D annotations such as 6D
poses, 3D bounding boxes and 3D keypoints, either obtained by manual labeling or inferred from synthetic images generated by 3D CAD models. Manual labeling for a
large number of images is a laborious task, and we usually
do not have the corresponding 3D CAD models of objects
in real environment. In this paper, we develop a keypointbased 6D object pose detection method (and its deep network) called Object Keypoint based POSe Estimation (OKPOSE). OK-POSE employs relative transformation between
viewpoints for training. Specifically, we use pairs of images
with object annotation and relative transformation information between their viewpoints to automatically discover
objects’ 3D keypoints which are geometrically and visually
consistent. Then, the 6D object pose can be estimated using
a keypoint-based geometric reasoning method with a reference viewpoint. The relative transformation information
can be easily obtained from any cheap binocular cameras
or most smartphone devices, thus greatly lowering the labeling cost. Experiments have demonstrated that OK-POSE
achieves acceptable performance compared to methods relying on the object’s 3D CAD model or a great deal of 3D
labeling. These results show that our method can be used
as a suitable alternative when there are no 3D CAD models
or a large number of 3D annotations.

1. Introduction
6D object pose detection aims to recognize the 3D location and orientation of an object. It serves as a crucial com∗ Co-corresponding author

ywzhao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

ponent in some promising computer vision applications like
augmented reality, robotic manipulation and autonomous
driving. Traditional methods relying on depth images acquired from RGB-D cameras are quite robust [3, 15]. However, such cameras have limitations with respect to frame
rate, field of view, resolution, and depth range, making them
difficult to detect small, transparent, or fast moving objects.
Alternatively, methods based on RGB images do not
have those limitations, but it is more challenging for them
to achieve high accuracy. Earlier methods in this direction calculate the 6D object pose through the matching of
local features and 2D-3D correspondences [2, 24]. However, the matching of local features is time consuming and
error-prone. Besides, they fail for objects with poor geometry or texture because they require there exists sufficient
texture on the object to extract robust local features. Recently, deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) techniques have been proved to achieve better performance on
processing object detection in RGB images and have been
used to improve 6D object pose detection [14, 33]. The
main idea of most CNN-based methods is learning the mapping function between an image and its 6D object pose from
images with explicit 3D annotations such as 6D poses, 3D
bounding boxes and 3D keypoints, either obtained by manual labeling or inferred from synthetic images generated by
3D CAD models. These methods are effective but require
great labeling work or existence of 3D CAD models for the
target objects. Manual labeling for a large number of images is a laborious task, and we usually do not have the corresponding 3D CAD models of objects in real environment.
Compared with the above explicit 3D annotations, image
pairs with relative transformation information indicating
the position and rotation transformation between the viewpoints in 3D space are much easier to obtain. For example, image pairs with different viewpoints can be captured
from a binocular camera, and the relative transformation in-

14134

