Visual Chirality
Zhiqiu Lin1

Jin Sun1,2
Abe Davis1,2
Noah Snavely1,2
Cornell University1
Cornell Tech2

Abstract
How can we tell whether an image has been mirrored?
While we understand the geometry of mirror reflections very
well, less has been said about how it affects distributions of
imagery at scale, despite widespread use for data augmentation in computer vision. In this paper, we investigate how the
statistics of visual data are changed by reflection. We refer to
these changes as “visual chirality,” after the concept of geometric chirality—the notion of objects that are distinct from
their mirror image. Our analysis of visual chirality reveals
surprising results, including low-level chiral signals pervading imagery stemming from image processing in cameras, to
the ability to discover visual chirality in images of people
and faces. Our work has implications for data augmentation,
self-supervised learning, and image forensics.

1. Introduction
“...there’s a room you can see through the glass—that’s just the
same as our drawing room, only the things go the other way.”
— Lewis Carroll,
“Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland & Through the Looking-Glass”

There is a rich history of lore involving reflections. From
the stories of Perseus and Narcissus in ancient Greek mythology to the adventures of Lewis Carroll’s Alice and J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter, fiction is full of mirrors that symbolize
windows into worlds similar to, yet somehow different from,
our own. This symbolism is rooted in mathematical fact:
what we see in reflections is consistent with a world that
differs in subtle but meaningful ways from the one around
us—right hands become left, text reads backward, and the
blades of a fan spin in the opposite direction. What we see
is, as Alice puts it, “just the same... only the things go the
other way”.
Geometrically, these differences can be attributed to
a world where distances from the reflecting surface are
negated, creating an orientation-reversing isometry with objects as we normally see them. While the properties of such
isometries are well-understood in principle, much less is
known about how they affect the statistics of visual data
at scale. In other words, while we understand a great deal
about how reflection changes image data, we know much

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Which images have been mirrored? Our goal is to
understand how distributions of natural images differ from their
reflections. Each of the images here appears plausible, but some
subset have actually been flipped horizontally. Figuring out which
can be a challenging task even for humans. Can you tell which are
flipped? Answers are in Figure 2.

less about how it changes what we learn from that data—this,
despite widespread use of image reflection (e.g., mirror-flips)
for data augmentation in computer vision.
This paper is guided by a very simple question: How do
the visual statistics of our world change when it is reflected?
One can understand some aspects of this question by considering the images in Figure 1. For individual objects, this
question is closely related to the concept of chirality [12].
An object is said to be chiral if it cannot be rotated and
translated into alignment with its own reflection, and achiral
otherwise.1 Put differently, we can think of chiral objects
as being fundamentally changed by reflection—these are
the things that “go the other way” when viewed through a
mirror—and we can think of achiral objects as simply being moved by reflection. Chirality provides some insight
into our guiding question, but remains an important step removed from telling us how reflections impact learning. For
this, we need a different measure of chirality—one we call
visual chirality—that describes the impact of reflection on
distributions of imagery.
In this paper, we define the notion of visual chirality,
and analyze visual chirality in real world imagery, both
through new theoretical tools, and through empirical analysis.
Our analysis has some unexpected conclusions, including 1)
deep neural networks are surprisingly good at determining
whether an image is mirrored, indicating a significant degree
1 More generally, any figure is achiral if its symmetry group contains
any orientation-reversing isometries.

112295

