Reinforced Feature Points:
Optimizing Feature Detection and Description for a High-Level Task
Aritra Bhowmik1 , Stefan Gumhold1 , Carsten Rother2 , Eric Brachmann2
1
TU Dresden, 2 Heidelberg University

Abstract
We address a core problem of computer vision: Detection and description of 2D feature points for image matching. For a long time, hand-crafted designs, like the seminal SIFT algorithm, were unsurpassed in accuracy and
efficiency. Recently, learned feature detectors emerged
that implement detection and description using neural networks. Training these networks usually resorts to optimizing low-level matching scores, often pre-defining sets of image patches which should or should not match, or which
should or should not contain key points. Unfortunately, increased accuracy for these low-level matching scores does
not necessarily translate to better performance in high-level
vision tasks. We propose a new training methodology which
embeds the feature detector in a complete vision pipeline,
and where the learnable parameters are trained in an endto-end fashion. We overcome the discrete nature of key
point selection and descriptor matching using principles
from reinforcement learning. As an example, we address
the task of relative pose estimation between a pair of images. We demonstrate that the accuracy of a state-of-theart learning-based feature detector can be increased when
trained for the task it is supposed to solve at test time. Our
training methodology poses little restrictions on the task to
learn, and works for any architecture which predicts key
point heat maps, and descriptors for key point locations.

1. Introduction
Finding and matching sparse 2D feature points across
images has been a long-standing problem in computer vision [19]. Feature detection algorithms enable the creation
of vivid 3D models from image collections [21, 56, 45],
building maps for robotic agents [31, 32], recognizing
places [44, 24, 35] and precise locations [25, 52, 41] as
well as recognizing objects [26, 34, 38, 1, 2]. Naturally,
the design of feature detection and description algorithms,
subsumed as feature detection in the following, has received
tremendous attention in computer vision research since its
early days. Although invented three decades ago, the seminal SIFT algorithm [26] remains the gold standard feature
detection pipeline to this day.

RootSIFT

SuperPoint

Reinforced SuperPoint (ours)

Figure 1. We show the results of estimating the relative pose (essential matrix) between two images using RootSIFT [1] (top left)
and SuperPoint [14] (top right). Our Reinforced SuperPoint (bottom), utilizing [14] within our proposed training schema, achieves
a clearly superior result. Here the inlier matches wrt. the ground
truth essential matrix are drawn in green, outliers in red.

With the recent advent of powerful machine learning
tools, some authors replace classical, feature-based vision
pipelines by neural networks [22, 53, 4]. However, independent studies suggest that these learned pipelines have
not yet reached the accuracy of their classical counterparts [46, 42, 59, 43], due to limited generalization abilities. Alternatively, one prominent strain of current research
aims to keep the concept of sparse feature detection but replaces hand-crafted designs like SIFT [26] with data-driven,
learned representations. Initial works largely focused on
learning to compare image patches to yield expressive feature descriptors [18, 50, 54, 29, 27, 51]. Fewer works attempt to learn feature detection [12, 5] or a complete architecture for feature detection and description [58, 35, 14].
Training of these methods is usually driven by optimizing low-level matching scores inspired by metric learning
[54] with the necessity to define ground truth correspondences between patches or images. When evaluated on low-

4948

