Rethinking Depthwise Separable Convolutions:
How Intra-Kernel Correlations Lead to Improved MobileNets
Daniel Haase∗
ZEISS Microscopy

Manuel Amthor∗
ZEISS Microscopy

daniel.haase@zeiss.com

manuel.amthor@zeiss.com

Abstract
We introduce blueprint separable convolutions (BSConv)
as highly efficient building blocks for CNNs. They are motivated by quantitative analyses of kernel properties from
trained models, which show the dominance of correlations
along the depth axis. Based on our findings, we formulate a theoretical foundation from which we derive efficient implementations using only standard layers. Moreover, our approach provides a thorough theoretical derivation, interpretation, and justification for the application of
depthwise separable convolutions (DSCs) in general, which
have become the basis of many modern network architectures. Ultimately, we reveal that DSC-based architectures
such as MobileNets implicitly rely on cross-kernel correlations, while our BSConv formulation is based on intrakernel correlations and thus allows for a more efficient separation of regular convolutions. Extensive experiments on
large-scale and fine-grained classification datasets show
that BSConvs clearly and consistently improve MobileNets
and other DSC-based architectures without introducing any
further complexity. For fine-grained datasets, we achieve an
improvement of up to 13.7 percentage points. In addition, if
used as drop-in replacement for standard architectures such
as ResNets, BSConv variants also outperform their vanilla
counterparts by up to 9.5 percentage points on ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [27, 26] have become the basis of practically all state-of-the-art approaches
for image classification, object detection [5], semantic segmentation [30], and many other applications. In the past,
improvements of CNNs were mainly driven by increasing
the model capacity, while at the same time ensuring a proper
training behavior [20, 13, 14]. Recently, this has led to the
development of models with half a billion parameters [18].
In practical applications, however, the computational ca∗ Authors contributed equally

Figure 1. We introduce blueprint separable convolutions (BSConv)
as highly efficient building block for CNNs. BSConv exploits correlations of CNN kernels along their depth axis. In consequence,
BSConv represents each filter kernel using one 2d blueprint kernel
which is distributed along the depth axis using a weight vector.

pacity is often limited, especially in mobile and automotive
contexts. This fact has led to another important research direction which focuses on improving model efficiency. The
most prominent approaches are based on depthwise separable convolutions (DSCs) [37, 16]—building blocks which
are motivated by exploiting redundancies of filter weights.
Based on quantitative and qualitative analyses of trained
CNNs, in Section 3 we propose blueprint separable convolutions (BSConv), which follow this path of research. The
main idea of BSConv is to exploit that kernels of CNNs
usually show high redundancies along their depth axis (i.e.,
intra-kernel correlations). Thus, BSConv represents each
filter kernel using one 2d blueprint which is distributed
along the depth axis using a weight vector (see Figure 1).
Although DSCs are also motivated by intra-kernel correlations [37], in Section 4 we show that their derived order of
operations contradicts this assumption and is reversed compared to our BSConv solution. In fact, the DSC result is
equivalent to assuming redundancies between kernels (i.e.,
cross-kernel correlations, see Figure 5), which was shown

14600

