Ensemble Generative Cleaning with Feedback Loops for Defending Adversarial
Attacks
Jianhe Yuan and Zhihai He
University of Missouri, Columbia MO
{yuanjia, hezhi}@missouri.edu

Abstract
Effective defense of deep neural networks against adversarial attacks remains a challenging problem, especially
under powerful white-box attacks. In this paper, we develop a new method called ensemble generative cleaning
with feedback loops (EGC-FL) for effective defense of deep
neural networks. The proposed EGC-FL method is based
on two central ideas. First, we introduce a transformed
deadzone layer into the defense network, which consists of
an orthonormal transform and a deadzone-based activation
function, to destroy the sophisticated noise pattern of adversarial attacks. Second, by constructing a generative cleaning network with a feedback loop, we are able to generate
an ensemble of diverse estimations of the original clean image. We then learn a network to fuse this set of diverse
estimations together to restore the original image. Our extensive experimental results demonstrate that our approach
improves the state-of-art by large margins in both white-box
and black-box attacks. It significantly improves the classification accuracy for white-box PGD attacks upon the second best method by more than 29% on the SVHN dataset
and more than 39% on the challenging CIFAR-10 dataset.

1. Introduction
Researchers have recognized that deep neural networks
are sensitive to adversarial attacks [32]. Very small changes
of the input image can fool the state-of-art classifier with
very high success probabilities. The attackers often generate noise patterns by exploiting the specific network architecture of the target deep neural network so that small
noise at the input layer can accumulate along the network
inference layers, finally exceed the decision threshold at the
output layer, and result in false decision. On the other hand,
we know a well-trained deep neural networks are robust to
random noise [1], such as Gaussian noise. Therefore, the
key issue in network defense is to destroy the sophisticated
pattern or accumulative process of the attack noise while

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed ensemble generative cleaning
with feedback loops for defending adversarial attacks.

preserving the original image content or network classification performance.
During the past few years, a number of methods have
been proposed to construct adversarial samples to attack
the deep neural networks, including fast gradient sign
(FGS) method [10], Jacobian-based saliency map attack (JBSMA) [26], and projected gradient descent (PGD) attack
[18, 20]. Different classifiers can be failed by the same adversarial attack method [32]. The fragility of deep neural
networks and the availability of these powerful attacking
methods present an urgent need for developing effective defense methods. Meanwhile, deep neural network defense
methods have also been developed, including adversarial
training [18, 32], defensive distillation [27, 4, 24], Magnet [21], and featuring squeezing [13, 41]. It has been recognized that these methods suffer from significant performance degradation under strong attacks, especially whitebox attacks with large magnitude and iterations [29].
In this work, we explore a new approach, called ensemble generative cleaning with feedback loop (EGC-FL), to
defend deep neural network against powerful adversarial
attacks. Our approach is motivated by the following observation: (1) the adversarial attack has sophisticated noise
patterns which should be disturbed or destroyed during the
defense process. (2) The attack noise, especially those powerful white-box attacks, such as the PGD and BPDA attacks
[2], are often generated with an iterative process. To clean
them, we also need an iterative process with multiple rounds

581

