Making Better Mistakes: Leveraging Class Hierarchies with Deep Networks
Luca Bertinetto* Romain Mueller∗

Konstantinos Tertikas

Sina Samangooei

Nicholas A. Lord∗

{luca.bertinetto, romain.mueller, konstantinos.tertikas, sina, nick.lord}@five.ai

www.five.ai

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image classification networks have improved greatly
over recent years, but generalisation remains imperfect, and
test-time errors do of course occur. Conventionally, such
errors are defined with respect to a single ground-truth class
and reported using one or more top-k measures (k typically
set to 1 or 5). However, this practice imposes certain notions of what it means to make a mistake, including treating
all classes other than the “true” label as equally wrong. This
may not actually correspond to our intuitions about desired
classifier behaviour, and for some applications this point
may prove crucial. Take the example of an autonomous vehicle observing an object on the side of the road: whatever
measure of classifier performance we use, we can certainly
agree that mistaking a lamppost for a tree is less of a problem than mistaking a person for a tree, as such a mistake
would have crucial implications in terms both of prediction
and planning. If we want to take such considerations into
account, we must incorporate a nontrivial model of the relationships between classes, and accordingly rethink more
* Equal contribution.

%

Mean mistake severity
10

20

5

0

1
2012

2017

0.20

2012

2017
AlexNet (2012)
VGG-11 (2014)

Probability

Deep neural networks have improved image classification dramatically over the past decade, but have done so
by focusing on performance measures that treat all classes
other than the ground truth as equally wrong. This has
led to a situation in which mistakes are less likely to be
made than before, but are equally likely to be absurd or
catastrophic when they do occur. Past works have recognised and tried to address this issue of mistake severity, often by using graph distances in class hierarchies, but this
has largely been neglected since the advent of the current
deep learning era in computer vision. In this paper, we
aim to renew interest in this problem by reviewing past approaches and proposing two simple modifications of the
cross-entropy loss which outperform the prior art under
several metrics on two large datasets with complex class
hierarchies: tieredImageNet and iNaturalist’19.

Top-1 error
40

0.15

ResNet-50 (2015)
DenseNet-161 (2016)

0.10

ResNeXt-101 (2017)

0.05
0.00

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Mistake severity

Figure 1: Top-1 error and distribution of mistakes w.r.t. the
WordNet hierarchy for well-known deep neural network architectures on ImageNet/ILSVRC-12: see text for definition
of mistake severity. The top-1 error has seen a spectacular
improvement in the last few years, but though the number
of mistakes has decreased in absolute terms, the severity of
the mistakes made has remained fairly unchanged. Dashed
lines denote the best achievable value of each metric.

broadly what it means for a network to “make a mistake”.
One natural and convenient way of representing these class
relationships is through a taxonomic hierarchy tree.
This idea is not new. In fact, it was once fairly common across various machine learning application domains
to consider class hierarchy when designing classifiers, as
surveyed in Silla & Freitas [32]. That work assembled and
categorised a large collection of hierarchical classification
problems and algorithms, and suggested widely applicable
measures for quantifying classifier performance in the context of a given class hierarchy. The authors noted that the
hierarchy-informed classifiers of the era typically empirically outperformed “flat” (i.e. hierarchy-agnostic) classifiers even under standard metrics, with the performance gap
increasing further under the suggested hierarchical metrics.
Furthermore, class hierarchy is at the core of the ImageNet
dataset: as detailed in Deng et al. [10], it was constructed

12506

