PULSE: Self-Supervised Photo Upsampling via
Latent Space Exploration of Generative Models
Sachit Menon*, Alexandru Damian*, Shijia Hu, Nikhil Ravi, Cynthia Rudin
Duke University
Durham, NC
{sachit.menon,alexandru.damian,shijia.hu,nikhil.ravi,cynthia.rudin}@duke.edu

Abstract
The primary aim of single-image super-resolution is to
construct a high-resolution (HR) image from a corresponding low-resolution (LR) input. In previous approaches,
which have generally been supervised, the training objective typically measures a pixel-wise average distance between the super-resolved (SR) and HR images. Optimizing such metrics often leads to blurring, especially in high
variance (detailed) regions. We propose an alternative formulation of the super-resolution problem based on creating
realistic SR images that downscale correctly. We present
a novel super-resolution algorithm addressing this problem, PULSE (Photo Upsampling via Latent Space Exploration), which generates high-resolution, realistic images
at resolutions previously unseen in the literature. It accomplishes this in an entirely self-supervised fashion and is
not confined to a specific degradation operator used during
training, unlike previous methods (which require training
on databases of LR-HR image pairs for supervised learning). Instead of starting with the LR image and slowly
adding detail, PULSE traverses the high-resolution natural
image manifold, searching for images that downscale to the
original LR image. This is formalized through the “downscaling loss,” which guides exploration through the latent
space of a generative model. By leveraging properties of
high-dimensional Gaussians, we restrict the search space
to guarantee that our outputs are realistic. PULSE thereby
generates super-resolved images that both are realistic and
downscale correctly. We show extensive experimental results demonstrating the efficacy of our approach in the domain of face super-resolution (also known as face hallucination). Our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in perceptual quality at higher resolutions and scale factors
than previously possible.

* denotes equal contribution

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (x32) The input (top) gets upsampled to the SR image
(middle) which downscales (bottom) to the original image.

In this work, we aim to transform blurry, low-resolution images into sharp, realistic, high-resolution images. Here, we
focus on images of faces, but our technique is generally applicable. In many areas (such as medicine, astronomy, microscopy, and satellite imagery), sharp, high-resolution images are difficult to obtain due to issues of cost, hardware
restriction, or memory limitations [20]. This leads to the
capture of blurry, low-resolution images instead. In other
cases, images could be old and therefore blurry, or even in
a modern context, an image could be out of focus or a person could be in the background. In addition to being visually unappealing, this impairs the use of downstream anal-

4321
2437

