SharinGAN: Combining Synthetic and Real Data for Unsupervised Geometry
Estimation
Koutilya PNVR

Hao Zhou∗

David Jacobs

koutilya@terpmail.umd.edu

hzhou@cs.umd.edu

djacobs@umiacs.umd.edu

University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.

Abstract
G

We propose a novel method for combining synthetic and
real images when training networks to determine geometric information from a single image. We suggest a method
for mapping both image types into a single, shared domain.
This is connected to a primary network for end-to-end training. Ideally, this results in images from two domains that
present shared information to the primary network. Our
experiments demonstrate significant improvements over the
state-of-the-art in two important domains, surface normal
estimation of human faces and monocular depth estimation
for outdoor scenes, both in an unsupervised setting.

1. Introduction
Understanding geometry from images is a fundamental
problem in computer vision. It has many important applications. For instance, Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is
important for synthetic object insertion in computer graphics [18], grasping in robotics [21] and safety in self-driving
cars. Face Normal Estimation can help in face image editing applications such as relighting [39, 49, 54]. However,
it is extremely hard to annotate real data for these regression tasks. Synthetic data and their ground truth labels, on
the other hand, are easy to generate and are often used to
compensate for the lack of labels in real data. Deep models trained on synthetic data, unfortunately, usually perform
poorly on real data due to the domain gap between synthetic
and real distributions. To deal with this problem, several research studies [30, 53, 52, 3] have proposed unsupervised
domain adaptation methods to take advantage of synthetic
data by mapping it into the real domain or vice versa, either
at the feature level or image level. However, mapping examples from one domain to another domain itself is a challenging problem that can limit performance.
We observe that finding such a mapping solves an unnec∗ Hao Zhou is currently at Amazon AWS.

real
synthetic

Figure 1: We propose to reduce the domain gap between
synthetic and real by mapping the corresponding domain
specific information related to the primary task (δs , δr ) into
shared information δsh , preserving everything else.
essarily difficult problem. To train a regressor that applies
to both real and synthetic domains, it is only necessary that
we map both to a new representation that contains the taskrelevant information present in both domains, in a common
form. The mapping need not alter properties of the original
domain that are irrelevant to the task since the regressor will
learn to ignore them regardless.
To see this, we consider a simplified model of our problem. We suppose that real and synthetic images are formed
by two components: domain agnostic (which has semantic
information shared across synthetic and real, and is denoted
as I) and domain specific. We further assume that domain
specific information has two sub-components: domain specific information unrelated to the primary task (denoted as
δs′ and δr′ for synthetic and real images respectively) and
domain specific information related to the primary task (δs ,
δr ). So real and synthetic images can be represented as:
xr = f (I, δr , δr′ ) and xs = f (I, δs , δs′ ) respectively.
We believe the domain gap between {δs and δr } can affect the training of the primary network, which learns to expect information that is not always present. The domain gap
between {δs′ and δr′ }, on the other hand, can be bypassed
by the primary network since it does not hold information
needed for the primary task. For example, in real face images, information such as the color and texture of the hair is
unrelated to the task of estimating face normals but is discriminative enough to distinguish real from synthetic faces.
This can be regarded as domain specific information unrelated to the primary task i.e., δr′ . On the other hand, shad113974

