RetinaTrack: Online Single Stage Joint Detection and Tracking
Zhichao Lu∗, Vivek Rathod∗ , Ronny Votel, Jonathan Huang
Google
{lzc,rathodv,ronnyvotel,jonathanhuang}@google.com

Abstract
Traditionally multi-object tracking and object detection
are performed using separate systems with most prior works
focusing exclusively on one of these aspects over the other.
Tracking systems clearly benefit from having access to accurate detections, however and there is ample evidence in
literature that detectors can benefit from tracking which, for
example, can help to smooth predictions over time. In this
paper we focus on the tracking-by-detection paradigm for
autonomous driving where both tasks are mission critical.
We propose a conceptually simple and efficient joint model
of detection and tracking, called RetinaTrack , which modifies the popular single stage RetinaNet approach such that it
is amenable to instance-level embedding training. We show,
via evaluations on the Waymo Open Dataset, that we outperform a recent state of the art tracking algorithm while requiring significantly less computation. We believe that our
simple yet effective approach can serve as a strong baseline
for future work in this area.

1. Introduction
The tracking-by-detection paradigm today has become
the dominant method for multi object tracking (MOT) and
works by detecting objects in each frame independently and
then performing data association across frames of a video.
In recent years, both aspects of this approach (detection
and data association) have seen significant technological advances due to the adoption of deep learning.
Despite the fact that these two tasks often go hand in
hand and the fact that deep learning has made models easily
amenable to multitask training, even today it is far more
common to separate the two aspects than to train them
jointly in one model, with most papers often focusing on
detection metrics or tracking metrics and rarely both. This
task separation has led to more complex models and less efficient approaches. It is telling that the flagship benchmark
in this area (MOT Challenge [42]) assumes that models will
make use of publicly available detections and that papers
continue to claim the use of a real-time tracker while not
measuring the time required to perform detection.

In this paper we are interested primarily in the autonomous driving domain where object detection and multiobject tracking are mission-critical technologies. If we cannot detect and track, we will not be able to predict where
vehicles and pedestrians are going (and at what speed), and
consequently we will not, e.g., know whether to yield to a
pedestrian at the corner or whether to drive full speed down
a street despite cars coming down an opposing lane.
We focus specifically on RGB inputs which, while typically not the only sensing modality used within a modern
autonomous vehicle, play an important role; RGB cameras
do not have the same range constraints as LIDAR, are considerably cheaper and are capable of detecting much smaller
objects which are important particularly for highway driving where the faster driving speeds make it important to be
able to react to distant vehicles or pedestrians.
In the setting of autonomous driving, speed and accuracy
are both essential and therefore the choice of architecture
is critical as one cannot simply take the heaviest/most performant model or the most lightweight but not as accurate
model. We base our model on the RetinaNet detector [36]
which is real-time while reaching state of art accuracy and
is specifically designed to detect small objects well. To
this base detector, we add instance-level embeddings for
the purposes of data association. However the vanilla RetinaNet architecture is not suitable for these per-instance embeddings — we propose a simple but effective modification
to RetinaNet’s post-FPN prediction subnetworks to address
these issues. We show via ablations that our model, which
we dub, RetinaTrack , benefits from joint training of the
tracker and detector. It has small computational overhead
compared to base RetinaNet and is therefore fast — due to
its simplicity, it is also easy to train via Google TPUs.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose a jointly trained detection and tracking
model - our method is simple, efficient and could be
feasibly deployed in an autonomous vehicle.
• We propose a simple modification to single shot detection architectures that allow for extracting instance
level features; we use these features for tracking, but
they could also be useful for other purposes.

∗ Equal contribution with names listed alphabetically.

14668

