Learning Fused Pixel and Feature-based View Reconstructions for Light Fields
Jinglei Shi∗ Xiaoran Jiang∗ Christine Guillemot
INRIA Rennes - Bretagne Atlantique, France
{firstname.lastname}@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a learning-based framework for
light field view synthesis from a subset of input views. Building upon a light-weight optical flow estimation network to
obtain depth maps, our method employs two reconstruction
modules in pixel and feature domains respectively. For the
pixel-wise reconstruction, occlusions are explicitly handled
by a disparity-dependent interpolation filter, whereas inpainting on disoccluded areas is learned by convolutional
layers. Due to disparity inconsistencies, the pixel-based reconstruction may lead to blurriness in highly textured areas
as well as on object contours. On the contrary, the featurebased reconstruction well performs on high frequencies,
making the reconstruction in the two domains complementary. End-to-end learning is finally performed including a
fusion module merging pixel and feature-based reconstructions. Experimental results show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both synthetic and realworld datasets, moreover, it is even able to extend light
fields’ baseline by extrapolating high quality views without
additional training.

1. Introduction
Light field imaging has recently attracted a lot of attention due to the emergence of commercial cameras and the
numerous applications, going from computational photography to realistic rendering in augmented and virtual reality applications, and light field microscopy. Acquisition
devices have been designed either based on camera arrays
[1], on moving gantries[2], or on micro-lens arrays used in
plenoptic cameras. Single hand-held 2D camera (e.g. cell
phones) paired with pose estimation techniques [3] can enable the capture of light fields with high spatial resolution
but limited angular resolution (or large baselines).
The problems of enhancing the light field angular resolution can be tackled from different perspectives, i.e. as
a problem of light field reconstruction from a subset of
∗ equal contribution

(a) Pixel-based reconstruction

(b) Feature-based reconstruction

(c) Fused view

(d) Reference view

Figure 1. Visualization of the outputs (both in pixel domain and
frequency domain) at different stages of our framework.

views using signal priors (e.g. sparsity in the continuous
4D Fourier domain [4]), of angular super-resolution [5, 6]
or of view synthesis. While Image Based Rendering (IBR)
techniques have been predominant over the past years in the
field of view synthesis (see e.g. [7, 8]), this field has significantly evolved thanks to the emergence of learning-based
approaches.
Kalantari et al. [9] have been among the first proposing a learning-based solution for view synthesis, by sequentially connecting two convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) dedicated respectively to depth estimation and
color fusion. However, due to imprecision of depth estimation, the method tends to synthesize views with blurriness,
tearing and ghosting effects. In addition, it fails in occluded
regions for sparse light fields (with large baselines). Inspired by the Multi-Plane Image (MPI) representation[10],
Mildenhall et al. [3] construct a framework that renders
novel views from irregularly sampled views. They apply
a 3D CNN to learn a MPI representation for each input
view from plane sweep volumes (PSVs). The MPIs are
then warped and merged to synthesize the target view. The
approach generates blurry results in the case of depth uncertainty, and the use of PSV is computationally expensive.

2555

