Butterfly Transform: An Efficient FFT Based Neural Architecture Design
Keivan Alizadeh vahid, Anish Prabhu, Ali Farhadi, Mohammad Rastegari
University of Washington,
keivan@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we show that extending the butterfly operations from the FFT algorithm to a general Butterfly Transform (BFT) can be beneficial in building an efficient block
structure for CNN designs. Pointwise convolutions, which
we refer to as channel fusions, are the main computational
bottleneck in the state-of-the-art efficient CNNs (e.g. MobileNets [15, 38, 14]).We introduce a set of criterion for
channel fusion, and prove that BFT yields an asymptotically optimal FLOP count with respect to these criteria.
By replacing pointwise convolutions with BFT, we reduce
the computational complexity of these layers from O(n2 )
to O(n log n) with respect to the number of channels. Our
experimental evaluations show that our method results in
significant accuracy gains across a wide range of network
architectures, especially at low FLOP ranges. For example,
BFT results in up to a 6.75% absolute Top-1 improvement
for MobileNetV1[15], 4.4% for ShuffleNet V2[28] and 5.4%
for MobileNetV3[14] on ImageNet under a similar number
of FLOPS. Notably, ShuffleNet-V2+BFT outperforms stateof-the-art architecture search methods MNasNet[43], FBNet
[46] and MobilenetV3[14] in the low FLOP regime.

1. Introduction
Devising Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) that can
run efficiently on resource-constrained edge devices has become an important research area. There is a continued push
to put increasingly more capabilities on-device for personal
privacy, latency, and scale-ability of solutions. On these
constrained devices, there is often extremely high demand
for a limited amount of resources, including computation
and memory, as well as power constraints to increase battery
life. Along with this trend, there has also been greater ubiquity of custom chip-sets, Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs), and low-end processors that can be used to run
CNNs, rather than traditional GPUs.
A common design choice is to reduce the FLOPs and
parameters of a network by factorizing convolutional layers [15, 38, 28, 50] into a depth-wise separable convolution

Figure 1: Replacing pointwise convolutions with BFT in state-of-the-art
architectures results in significant accuracy gains in resource constrained
settings.

that consists of two components: (1) spatial fusion, where
each spatial channel is convolved independently by a depthwise convolution, and (2) channel fusion, where all the spatial channels are linearly combined by 1 × 1 convolutions,
known as pointwise convolutions. Inspecting the computational profile of these networks at inference time reveals that
the computational burden of the spatial fusion is relatively
negligible compared to that of the channel fusion[15]. In
this paper we focus on designing an efficient replacement
for these pointwise convolutions.
We propose a set of principles to design a replacement
for pointwise convolutions motivated by both efficiency and
accuracy. The proposed principles are as follows: (1) full
connectivity from every input to all outputs: to allow outputs
to use all available information, (2) large information bottleneck: to increase representational power throughout the
network, (3) low operation count: to reduce the computational cost, (4) operation symmetry: to allow operations to be
stacked into dense matrix multiplications. In Section 3, we
formally define these principles, and mathematically prove a
lower-bound of O(n log n) operations to satisfy these principles. We propose a novel, lightweight convolutional building
block based on the Butterfly Transform (BFT). We prove that
BFT yields an asymptotically optimal FLOP count under

12024

