Depth Sensing Beyond LiDAR Range
Kai Zhang1

Jiaxin Xie2
Noah Snavely1
Qifeng Chen2
1
2
Cornell Tech, Cornell University
HKUST

Abstract
Depth sensing is a critical component of autonomous
driving technologies, but today’s LiDAR- or stereo camera–
based solutions have limited range. We seek to increase the
maximum range of self-driving vehicles’ depth perception
modules for the sake of better safety. To that end, we propose
a novel three-camera system that utilizes small field of view
cameras. Our system, along with our novel algorithm for
computing metric depth, does not require full pre-calibration
and can output dense depth maps with practically acceptable
accuracy for scenes and objects at long distances not well
covered by most commercial LiDARs.

1. Introduction
Depth perception is crucial in autonomous driving for obstacle avoidance, route planning, etc. Existing depth-sensing
solutions typically rely on LiDAR, stereo cameras, or timeof-flight sensors [2, 7, 9]. To the best of our knowledge, these
systems have significant limits on their maximum ranges.
For instance, the recent Waymo [2] and nuScenes [7] selfdriving car datasets both feature LiDAR ranges of ∼80 meters, while the stereo cameras in KITTI [9] cannot see distant
objects in detail because of their wide field of view (FOV)
(about 80◦ ).1 It takes just 3 seconds for a vehicle to travel
80 meters at a speed of 60 miles/h, which is too short a time
window in unforeseen emergency situations. While some
high-end LiDARs claim to reach a maximum of 300 meters,
e.g., Velodyne’s Alpha PuckTM [1], these are not only expensive but also produce very sparse point clouds for distant
objects due to power and cost constraints. Such limited range
can become a critical issue when a self-driving vehicle is a
heavily weighted truck, or moving at high speed. The earlier an autonomous vehicle perceives the depth of obstacles
on its driving route, the safer the technology is, as an early
defensive response can be made in case of emergency.
Hence, there is a need for dense, accurate depth perception beyond the LiDAR range. In this work, we seek longerrange dense depth sensing beyond the 200 meter range,
1 The cameras in the Waymo dataset have a 50-degree horizontal FOV.

which is not well covered by most existing commercial LiDARs for autonomous driving. To that end, we propose a
cost-effective solution that utilizes three cameras with small
fields of view. Equipped with telephoto lenses, these cameras
can perceive faraway scenes or objects. 2 Our novel threecamera setup can resolve geometric ambiguities that arise
in stereo systems based on only two small-FOV cameras.
For small-FOV stereo cameras, such ambiguities are caused
by (1) a small baseline/depth ratio, (2) difficulty in calibrating small-FOV cameras, and (3) maintaining the calibration
during usage. Surprisingly, we can solve these problems by
adding a specific third camera, without requiring a fully accurate calibration of camera parameters, by using a novel depth
disambiguation algorithm. Our proposed three-camera system, along with our depth estimation algorithm, can produce
dense depth maps without the need to fully pre-calibrate
camera intrinsics and extrinsics. Moreover, it is robust to
small vibrations in camera orientations that are inevitable for
cameras attached to moving vehicles. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach with both synthetic and realworld data. Experiments show that our method can achieve
a 3% relative error at a distance of 300 meters in terms of
depth estimation accuracy.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold. First, to our
knowledge, our approach is the first to address the problem
of dense depth map acquisition at a range beyond that of
most LiDARs in the domain of autonomous driving. Second,
we propose a novel camera setup and depth estimation algorithm that requires only partial camera calibration. Third, we
validate the effectiveness of our long-range depth-sensing
system on both synthetic and real-world data.

2. Problem setup and related work
In this section, we formulate our problem setup, review
prior work, and analyze the applicability of relevant existing
algorithms to our problem.
For depth estimation at a distance over 200 meters, one
seemingly straightforward solution is to construct a stereo
2 Note that our system is not aimed to replace existing short-range Li-

DAR, but instead to complement it in a cost-effective way because longrange LiDAR sensors are expensive, power-inefficient and only capture
sparse depth measurements for distant objects.

11692

