DualSDF: Semantic Shape Manipulation using a Two-Level Representation
Zekun Hao, Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Noah Snavely, Serge Belongie
Cornell Tech, Cornell University

Figure 1: DualSDF represents shapes using two levels of granularity, allowing users to manipulate high resolution shapes (odd
rows) with high-level concepts through manipulating a proxy primitive-based shape (even rows). Simple editing operations on
individual primitives (colored in blue) are propagated to the other primitives and the fine-grained model in a semantically
meaningful manner. Above, we illustrate how an existing shape (inside the red box) can be modified semantically by adjusting
the radius of a primitive (fuselage diameter on the airplane) or the distance between two primitives (wheelbase of a car).

Abstract
We are seeing a Cambrian explosion of 3D shape representations for use in machine learning. Some representations
seek high expressive power in capturing high-resolution detail. Other approaches seek to represent shapes as compositions of simple parts, which are intuitive for people to
understand and easy to edit and manipulate. However, it is
difficult to achieve both fidelity and interpretability in the
same representation. We propose DualSDF, a representation
expressing shapes at two levels of granularity, one capturing fine details and the other representing an abstracted
proxy shape using simple and semantically consistent shape
primitives. To achieve a tight coupling between the two representations, we use a variational objective over a shared
latent space. Our two-level model gives rise to a new shape
manipulation technique in which a user can interactively
manipulate the coarse proxy shape and see the changes instantly mirrored in the high-resolution shape. Moreover, our
model actively augments and guides the manipulation towards producing semantically meaningful shapes, making

complex manipulations possible with minimal user input.

1. Introduction
There has been increasing interest in leveraging the power
of neural networks to learn expressive shape representations
for high-fidelity generative 3D modeling [4, 20, 52, 38, 34].
At the same time, other research has explored parsimonious representations of shape as compositions of primitives
[50, 11] or other simple, abstracted elements [19, 10]. Such
shape decompositions are more intuitive than a global, highdimensional representation, and more suitable for tasks such
as shape editing. Unfortunately, it is difficult to achieve both
fidelity and interpretability in a single representation.
In this work, we propose a generative two-level model
that simultaneously represents 3D shapes using two levels
of granularity, one for capturing fine-grained detail and the
other encoding a coarse structural decomposition. The two
levels are tightly coupled via a shared latent space, wherein
a single latent code vector decodes to two representations
of the same underlying shape. An appealing consequence

7631

