Overcoming Multi-Model Forgetting in One-Shot NAS with Diversity
Maximization
Miao Zhang1,2 Huiqi Li1∗ Shirui Pan3 Xiaojun Chang3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 University of Technology Sydney

Steven Su2
3
Monash University

Miao.Zhang-2@student.uts.edu.au, huiqili@bit.edu.cn, steven.su@uts.edu.au
{Shirui.Pan, Xiaojun.Chang}@monash.edu

Abstract
One-Shot Neural Architecture Search (NAS) significantly
improves the computational efficiency through weight sharing. However, this approach also introduces multi-model
forgetting during the supernet training (architecture search
phase), where the performance of previous architectures degrades when sequentially training new architectures with
partially-shared weights. To overcome such catastrophic
forgetting, the state-of-the-art method assumes that the
shared weights are optimal when jointly optimizing a posterior probability. However, this strict assumption is not necessarily held for One-Shot NAS in practice. In this paper,
we formulate the supernet training in the One-Shot NAS as a
constrained optimization problem of continual learning that
the learning of current architecture should not degrade the
performance of previous architectures. We propose a Novelty Search based Architecture Selection (NSAS) loss function and demonstrate that the posterior probability could
be calculated without the strict assumption when maximizing the diversity of the selected constraints. A greedy novelty search method is devised to find the most representative
subset to regularize the supernet training. We apply our
proposed approach to two One-Shot NAS baselines, random sampling NAS (RandomNAS) and gradient-based sampling NAS (GDAS). Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method enhances the predictive ability of the supernet
in One-Shot NAS and achieves remarkable performance on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and PTB with efficiency.

1. Introduction
One-Shot Neural Architecture Search (NAS) recently attracts massive interests in automating neural network architecture design, since it can not only ﬁnd state-of-theart architectures but also signiﬁcantly reduce the search
hours through weight sharing. Early NAS methods adopt
∗ Corresponding Author

a nested approach to train numerous separate architectures
from scratch and utilize an Evolutionary Algorithm (EA)
or Reinforcement Learning (RL) to ﬁnd the most promising architectures based on validation accuracy [12, 38, 29],
which are highly computational-expensive and impossible for most machine learning practitioners. Several approaches were proposed to address this efﬁciency concern
[3, 6, 34]. In particular, weight sharing, also called OneShot NAS [4, 28], is a promising direction. One-Shot NAS
deﬁnes the search space as a supernet which subsuming
all candidate architectures, and the candidate architectures
are evaluated through inheriting weights from the supernet.
Rather than training numerous separate architectures from
scratch, One-Shot NAS trains the supernet just once, thus it
signiﬁcantly cuts down the search cost.
One-Shot NAS relies on a critical assumption that the
validation accuracy of architecture with inherited weights
should approximate to the test accuracy after retraining or
be highly predictive. Although Bender et al. [4] observed a
strong correlation between the validation accuracy and the
test accuracy when the supernet was trained through random path dropout, Sciuto et al. [30] obtained contradict results when the weights of a single path (one architecture)
in the supernet were trained in each step in ENAS. This
single-path training method is also the most common strategy adopted by state-of-the-art One-Shot NAS approaches
[10, 19, 13, 7] and also the scenario considered in this paper.
Adam et al. [1] showed that the RNN controller in One-Shot
NAS does not depend on past sampled architectures, which
makes its performance the same as random search. Similarly, Singh et al. [31] found that there is no visible progress
in terms of the retrained performance for architectures generated by the controller during the architecture search phase
in ENAS, and architectures with more shared weights usually perform worse based on the trained supernet in ENAS.
Benyahia et al. [5] deﬁned this phenomenon as multimodel forgetting, which occurs when training multiple models with partially-shared weights for a single task. Suppose
we are given a large supernet containing multiple models

7809

