Point Cloud Completion by Skip-attention Network with Hierarchical Folding
Xin Wen1 , Tianyang Li1 , Zhizhong Han2 , Yu-Shen Liu1∗
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
{x-wen16,lity16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn h312h@umd.edu liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Skip-Attention

Abstract
Point cloud completion aims to infer the complete geometries for missing regions of 3D objects from incomplete
ones. Previous methods usually predict the complete point
cloud based on the global shape representation extracted
from the incomplete input. However, the global representation often suffers from the information loss of structure
details on local regions of incomplete point cloud. To address this problem, we propose Skip-Attention Network (SANet) for 3D point cloud completion. Our main contributions
lie in the following two-folds. First, we propose a skipattention mechanism to effectively exploit the local structure details of incomplete point clouds during the inference
of missing parts. The skip-attention mechanism selectively
conveys geometric information from the local regions of incomplete point clouds for the generation of complete ones
at different resolutions, where the skip-attention reveals the
completion process in an interpretable way. Second, in order to fully utilize the selected geometric information encoded by skip-attention mechanism at different resolutions,
we propose a novel structure-preserving decoder with hierarchical folding for complete shape generation. The hierarchical folding preserves the structure of complete point
cloud generated in upper layer by progressively detailing
the local regions, using the skip-attentioned geometry at the
same resolution. We conduct comprehensive experiments
on ShapeNet and KITTI datasets, which demonstrate that
the proposed SA-Net outperforms the state-of-the-art point
cloud completion methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, point cloud has received an extensive attention
as a format of 3D objects, which can be easily accessed
by 3D scanning devices and depth cameras. However, the
raw point clouds produced by those devices are usually
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2018YFB0505400).

Predict
missing part

Encoder

Decoder
Global feature

Previous methods

+

SA-Net

Reconstruct
existing part

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed skip-attention. Compared
with the previous methods that simply rely on the global shape representation for completing point clouds, our skip-attention mechanism directly searches for informative local regions in input airplane shape, and selectively uses these regions for predicting the
missing right wing or reconstructing the similar left wing (red).

sparse, noisy and mostly with serious missing regions due
to the limited view angles or occlusion [47], which are difficult to be directly processed by the further shape analysis/rendering methods. Therefore, raw point cloud preprocessing becomes an important requirement for many realworld 3D computer vision applications. In this paper, we
focus on the task of completing the missing regions of 3D
shapes represented by point clouds.
The task of point cloud completion can be roughly decomposed into two targets [41, 47]. The first target is
to preserve the geometric shape information of the original input point cloud, and the second target is to recover
the missing regions according to the given inputs. In order to achieve such two targets, current studies usually followed the paradigm framework to learn a global shape representation from incomplete point clouds, which is further
leveraged to estimate the missing geometric information
[45, 47, 22]. However, the encoded global shape representation often suffers from the information loss of some
structure details on local regions of incomplete point clouds,
which should be fully preserved for further inferring the
missing geometric information. As shown in Figure 1,
to predict the complete wings of an airplane, the network
should first preserve the existing left wing in the incomplete point cloud. And then, in order to infer the missing
right wing, the network could refer to the existing left wing
according to the pattern similarity between the regions of
two similar wings.

1939

