Regularizing Neural Networks via Minimizing Hyperspherical Energy
Rongmei Lin1 , Weiyang Liu2,* , Zhen Liu3 , Chen Feng4 , Zhiding Yu5 , James M. Rehg2 , Li Xiong1 , Le Song2
Emory University

2

Georgia Institute of Technology

rongmei.lin@emory.edu

3

Mila, Université de Montréal

wyliu@gatech.edu

lxiong@emory.edu

4

New York University

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the tremendous success of
deep neural networks in a variety of tasks. With its overparameterization nature and hierarchical structure, deep
neural networks achieve unprecedented performance on
many challenging problems [1, 2, 3], but their strong approximation ability also makes it easy to overfit the training
set, which greatly affects the generalization on unseen samples. Therefore, how to restrict the huge parameter space
and properly regularize the deep networks becomes increasingly important. Regularizations for neural networks can be
roughly categorized into implicit and explicit ones. Implicit
regularizations usually do not directly impose explicit con*Weiyang Liu is the corresponding author.

{w1,...,wn}

NVIDIA

lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
{w1,...,wn}
(a) Original MHE

x104

Iterations

Testing Error

Inspired by the Thomson problem in physics where the
distribution of multiple propelling electrons on a unit sphere
can be modeled via minimizing some potential energy, hyperspherical energy minimization has demonstrated its potential in regularizing neural networks and improving their
generalization power. In this paper, we first study the important role that hyperspherical energy plays in neural network
training by analyzing its training dynamics. Then we show
that naively minimizing hyperspherical energy suffers from
some difficulties due to highly non-linear and non-convex
optimization as the space dimensionality becomes higher,
therefore limiting the potential to further improve the generalization. To address these problems, we propose the
compressive minimum hyperspherical energy (CoMHE) as
a more effective regularization for neural networks. Specifically, CoMHE utilizes projection mappings to reduce the
dimensionality of neurons and minimizes their hyperspherical energy. According to different designs for the projection
mapping, we propose several distinct yet well-performing
variants and provide some theoretical guarantees to justify their effectiveness. Our experiments show that CoMHE
consistently outperforms existing regularization methods,
and can be easily applied to different neural networks.

5

Hyperspherical Energy

1

{w1,...,wn}

{Pw1,...,Pwn}
(b) Compressive MHE

x104

Iterations

(c) Training Dynamics

Figure 1: Comparison of original MHE and compressive MHE. In (c), the
top figure shows the hyperspherical energy, and the bottom one shows the
testing error (CIFAR-100). Experimental details are given in Appendix B.

straints on neuron weights, and instead they regularize the
networks in an implicit manner in order to prevent overfitting and stabilize the training. A lot of prevailing methods fall into this category, such as batch normalization [4],
dropout [5], weight normalization [6], etc. Explicit regularizations [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] usually introduce some penalty
terms for neuron weights, and jointly optimize them along
with the other objective functions.
Among many existing explicit regularizations, minimum
hyperspherical energy (MHE) [12] stands out as a simple
yet effective regularization that promotes the hyperspherical diversity among neurons and significantly improves the
network generalization. MHE regularizes the directions of
neuron weights by minimizing a potential energy on a unit
hypersphere that characterizes the hyperspherical diversity
(such energy is defined as hyperspherical energy [12]). In
contrast, standard weight decay only regularizes the norm
of neuron weights, which essentially can be viewed as regularizing one dimension of the weights. MHE completes an
important missing piece by regularizing the neuron directions (i.e., regularizing the rest dimensions of the weights).
Although minimizing hyperspherical energy has already
been empirically shown useful in a number of applications [12], two fundamental questions remain unanswered:
(1) what is the role that hyperspherical energy plays in
training a well-performing neural network? and (2) How
can the hyperspherical energy be effectively minimized? To

6917

