End-to-End Learning of Visual Representations
from Uncurated Instructional Videos
Antoine Miech1∗
Ivan Laptev1
1

ENS/Inria

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac2∗
Lucas Smaira2
Josef Sivic1,3
Andrew Zisserman2,4
2

DeepMind

3

CIIRC CTU

4

VGG Oxford

antoine.miech@inria.fr,jalayrac@google.com
https://www.di.ens.fr/willow/research/mil-nce/

you have a little pressure

you are cutting the wood

readjusting the table saw

I am using a roller

sure you applied glue

Time

Figure 1: We describe an efficient approach to learn visual representations from misaligned and noisy narrations (bottom) automatically
extracted from instructional videos (top). Our video representations are learnt from scratch without relying on any manually annotated
visual dataset yet outperform all self-supervised and many fully-supervised methods on several video recognition benchmarks.

Abstract
Annotating videos is cumbersome, expensive and not
scalable. Yet, many strong video models still rely on
manually annotated data. With the recent introduction
of the HowTo100M dataset, narrated videos now offer
the possibility of learning video representations without
manual supervision. In this work we propose a new
learning approach, MIL-NCE, capable of addressing misalignments inherent in narrated videos. With this approach we are able to learn strong video representations
from scratch, without the need for any manual annotation. We evaluate our representations on a wide range
of four downstream tasks over eight datasets: action
recognition (HMDB-51, UCF-101, Kinetics-700), text-tovideo retrieval (YouCook2, MSR-VTT), action localization
(YouTube-8M Segments, CrossTask) and action segmentation (COIN). Our method outperforms all published selfsupervised approaches for these tasks as well as several
fully supervised baselines. Our joint text-video pretrained
model is publicly available at: https://www.di.ens.
fr/willow/research/mil-nce/.

1. Introduction
What we see changes what we know.
What we know changes what we see.

cepts and vice versa. This has also become the de facto way
to successfully train computer vision models. Indeed, from
classification where images are categorized based on a fixed
list of words to the recent captioning tasks where images or
videos are annotated with rich language descriptions, this
interplay is one of the driving forces behind recent progress
in the field. However, one of the main limitations of this
approach is that it requires manually annotating large collections of visual data.
Manual annotation is both cumbersome and expensive.
Moreover, for videos, which are the main focus of this work,
annotation is also even more challenging due to the ambiguities of choosing the right vocabulary of actions and annotating action intervals in video. This significantly limits
the scale at which fully supervised video dataset can be obtained and hence slows down the quest to improve visual
representations. Recent work has proposed a promising alternative to this fully supervised approach: leveraging narrated videos that are readily available at scale on the web.
Of particular interest, the recent HowTo100M
dataset [52] contains more than 100 million pairs of
video clips and associated narrations. It was automatically
collected by querying YouTube for instructional videos.
Such videos usually depict someone explaining orally
∗ Equal contribution.

Jean Piaget

Vision and language play an important role in the way
humans learn to associate visual entities to abstract con-

1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,
CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.
4 VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

9879

