Designing Network Design Spaces
Ilija Radosavovic

Raj Prateek Kosaraju

Ross Girshick

Kaiming He

Piotr Dollár

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
B
In this work, we present a new network design paradigm.
Our goal is to help advance the understanding of network design and discover design principles that generalize
across settings. Instead of focusing on designing individual
network instances, we design network design spaces that
parametrize populations of networks. The overall process
is analogous to classic manual design of networks, but elevated to the design space level. Using our methodology we
explore the structure aspect of network design and arrive at
a low-dimensional design space consisting of simple, regular networks that we call RegNet. The core insight of the
RegNet parametrization is surprisingly simple: widths and
depths of good networks can be explained by a quantized
linear function. We analyze the RegNet design space and
arrive at interesting findings that do not match the current
practice of network design. The RegNet design space provides simple and fast networks that work well across a wide
range of flop regimes. Under comparable training settings
and flops, the RegNet models outperform the popular EfficientNet models while being up to 5× faster on GPUs.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks are the engine of visual recognition. Over the past several years better architectures have resulted in considerable progress in a wide range
of visual recognition tasks. Examples include LeNet [12],
AlexNet [10], VGG [22], and ResNet [6]. This body of
work advanced both the effectiveness of neural networks as
well as our understanding of network design. In particular,
the above sequence of works demonstrated the importance
of convolution, network and data size, depth, and residuals,
respectively. The outcome of these works is not just particular network instantiations, but also design principles that
can be generalized and applied to numerous settings.
While manual network design has led to large advances,
finding well-optimized networks manually can be challenging, especially as the number of design choices increases. A
popular approach to address this limitation is neural architecture search (NAS). Given a fixed search space of possible

A

A

C

B
C

Figure 1. Design space design. We propose to design network design spaces, where a design space is a parametrized set of possible
model architectures. Design space design is akin to manual network design, but elevated to the population level. In each step of
our process the input is an initial design space and the output is a
refined design space of simpler or better models. Following [18],
we characterize the quality of a design space by sampling models
and inspecting their error distribution. For example, in the figure
above we start with an initial design space A and apply two refinement steps to yield design spaces B then C. In this case C ⊆ B ⊆A
(left), and the error distributions are strictly improving from A to B
to C (right). The hope is that design principles that apply to model
populations are more likely to be robust and generalize.

networks, NAS automatically finds a good model within the
search space. Recently, NAS has received a lot of attention
and shown excellent results [29, 15, 25].
Despite the effectiveness of NAS, the paradigm has limitations. The outcome of the search is a single network instance tuned to a specific setting (e.g., hardware platform).
This is sufficient in some cases; however, it does not enable
discovery of network design principles that deepen our understanding and allow us to generalize to new settings. In
particular, our aim is to find simple models that are easy to
understand, build upon, and generalize.
In this work, we present a new network design paradigm
that combines the advantages of manual design and NAS.
Instead of focusing on designing individual network instances, we design design spaces that parametrize populations of networks.1 Like in manual design, we aim for interpretability and to discover general design principles that
describe networks that are simple, work well, and generalize across settings. Like in NAS, we aim to take advantage
of semi-automated procedures to help achieve these goals.
1 We use the term design space following [18], rather than search space,
to emphasize that we are not searching for network instances within the
space. Instead, we are designing the space itself.

110428

