Inverse Rendering for Complex Indoor Scenes:
Shape, Spatially-Varying Lighting and SVBRDF from a Single Image
Zhengqin Li∗

Mohammad Shafiei∗

Ravi Ramamoorthi∗

zhl378@eng.ucsd.edu

moshafie@eng.ucsd.edu

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

†

∗

Kalyan Sunkavalli

Manmohan Chandraker∗

sunkaval@adobe.com

mkchandraker@eng.ucsd.edu
†

University of California, San Diego
Abstract

We propose a deep inverse rendering framework for indoor scenes. From a single RGB image of an arbitrary
indoor scene, we obtain a complete scene reconstruction,
estimating shape, spatially-varying lighting, and spatiallyvarying, non-Lambertian surface reflectance. Our novel
inverse rendering network incorporates physical insights –
including a spatially-varying spherical Gaussian lighting
representation, a differentiable rendering layer to model
scene appearance, a cascade structure to iteratively refine
the predictions and a bilateral solver for refinement – allowing us to jointly reason about shape, lighting, and reflectance.
Since no existing dataset provides ground truth high quality
spatially-varying material and spatially-varying lighting, we
propose novel methods to map complex materials to existing
indoor scene datasets and a new physically-based GPU renderer to create a large-scale, photorealistic indoor dataset.
Experiments show that our framework outperforms previous methods and enables various novel applications like
photorealistic object insertion and material editing.

1. Introduction
We address a long-standing challenge in inverse rendering to reconstruct geometry, spatially-varying complex reflectance and spatially-varying lighting from a single RGB
image of an arbitrary indoor scene captured under uncontrolled conditions. This is a challenging setting – indoor
scenes display the entire range of real-world appearance,
including arbitrary geometry and layouts, localized light
sources that lead to complex spatially-varying lighting effects and complex, non-Lambertian surface reflectance. In
this work we take a step towards an automatic, robust and
holistic solution to this problem, thereby enabling a range
of scene understanding and editing tasks. For example, in
Figure 1(h), we use our reconstruction to enable photorealistic virtual object insertion in a real image. Note how the
inserted glossy spheres have realistic shading, shadowing
due to scene occlusions and even reflections from the scene.

Adobe Research, San Jose

Trained on synthetic dataset rendered with photorealistic materials

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(g)

(f)

(h)

Tested on real data

Figure 1. Given a single image of an indoor scene (a), we recover its diffuse albedo (b), normals (c), specular roughness (d),
depth (e) and spatially-varying lighting (f). We build a large-scale
high-quality synthetic training dataset rendered with photorealistic
SVBRDF. By incorporating physical insights into our network, our
high-quality predictions support applications like object insertion,
even for specular objects (g) and in real images (h). Note the
completely shadowed sphere on the extreme right in (h).

Driven by the success of deep learning methods on similar
scene inference tasks (geometric reconstruction [16], lighting estimation [17], material recognition [9]), we propose
training a deep convolutional neural network to regress these
scene parameters from an input image. Ideally, the trained
network should learn meaningful priors on these scene factors, and jointly model the interactions between them. In this
work, we present two major contributions to address this.
Training deep neural networks requires large-scale, labeled training data. While datasets of real-world geometry
exist [14, 10], capturing real-world lighting and reflectance
at scale is non-trivial. Thus, we use synthetic indoor datasets
like [49] that contain scenes with complex geometry. However, their materials are not realistic [55], so we replace them
with photorealistic SVBRDFs from a high-quality 3D material dataset [50]. We automatically map our SVBRDFs
using deep features from a material estimation network,
thus preserving scene semantics. We render the new scenes
12475

