Basis Prediction Networks for Effective Burst Denoising with Large Kernels
Zhihao Xia1 , Federico Perazzi2 , Michaël Gharbi2 , Kalyan Sunkavalli2 , Ayan Chakrabarti1
1
Washington University in St. Louis 2 Adobe Research
{zhihao.xia,ayan}@wustl.edu, {perazzi,mgharbi,sunkaval}@adobe.com

Abstract
Bursts of images exhibit significant self-similarity across
both time and space. This motivates a representation of the
kernels as linear combinations of a small set of basis elements. To this end, we introduce a novel basis prediction
network that, given an input burst, predicts a set of global
basis kernels — shared within the image — and the corresponding mixing coefficients — which are specific to individual pixels. Compared to state-of-the-art techniques that
output a large tensor of per-pixel spatiotemporal kernels,
our formulation substantially reduces the dimensionality of
the network output. This allows us to effectively exploit
comparatively larger denoising kernels, achieving both significant quality improvements (over 1dB PSNR) and faster
run-times over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Burst denoising algorithms [24, 12, 27] seek to enable
high-quality photography in challenging conditions and are
increasingly being deployed in commercial mobile cameras [12, 21]. A burst captures a sequence of short-exposure
frames of the scene that are free of motion-blur, but with a
high amount of noise in each frame and relative motion between frames. By accounting for this relative motion and
using the fact that the noise is independent across frames,
burst denoising attempts to aggregate these inputs and predict a single noise- and blur-free image estimate.
Recently, Mildenhall et al. [27] proposed an elegantly
simple yet surprisingly successful approach to burst denoising. Rather than explicitly estimating inter-frame motion [12, 24, 13, 14, 18], their method produces denoised
estimates at each pixel as a weighted average of observed
noisy intensities in a window around that pixel’s location in
all frames. These averaging weights, or kernels, are allowed
to vary from pixel-to-pixel to implicitly account for motion
and image discontinuities, and are predicted from the noisy
Part of this work was done when ZX was an intern at Adobe Research.

a) Noisy Input

d) Coefficient Clusters

b) Our Result

c) Ground Truth

(e) Space-time kernels reconstructed with k-centers

Figure 1: (top) Qualitative result of our denoising network. The proposed approach (b) recovers fine geometric
details from a very noisy image burst (a, only one frame is
shown). (Bottom) our per-burst bases can compactly represent a large variety of kernels by exploiting the redundancy
of local image structures. We clustered the per-pixel coefficients predicted from the noisy burst using k-means. The
clusters we obtain show strong spatial structure (d). For instance, we can identify a cluster corresponding to horizontal image edges (e, orange), one corresponding to vertical
edges (e, green), and another for homogeneous regions with
no structure (e, gray).
input burst using a “kernel prediction network” (KPN).
However, KPNs need to produce an output that is significantly higher-dimensional than the denoised image—even
for 5 × 5 kernels with eight frames, a KPN must predict 400
times as many kernel weights as image intensities. This
comes with significant memory and computational costs, as
well as difficulty in training given the many degrees of freedom in the output. As a result, KPNs have so far been used
only with small kernels. This limits their denoising ability
by preventing averaging across bigger spatial regions, and
over frames with larger relative motion.
In this paper, we introduce an approach to predict large

11844

