MaskGAN: Towards Diverse and Interactive Facial Image Manipulation
Cheng-Han Lee1
1

SenseTime Research

2

Ziwei Liu2

Lingyun Wu1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Ping Luo3
3

The University of Hong Kong

Smiling  Transfer

(a)  Target  Image (b)  Source  Image

(c)  Modification  on  the  mask

Style  Copy

(d)  Result

(a)  Target  Image (b)  Source  Image

(c)  Modification  on  the  mask

(d)  Result

Figure 1: Given a target image (a), users are allowed to modify masks of the target images in (c) according to the source images (b) so that we can obtain
manipulation results (d). The left shows illustrative examples from “neutral” to “smiling”, while the right shows style copy such as makeup, hair, expression,
skin color, etc.

Abstract
Facial image manipulation has achieved great progress
in recent years. However, previous methods either operate
on a predefined set of face attributes or leave users little
freedom to interactively manipulate images. To overcome
these drawbacks, we propose a novel framework termed
MaskGAN, enabling diverse and interactive face manipulation. Our key insight is that semantic masks serve
as a suitable intermediate representation for flexible face
manipulation with fidelity preservation. MaskGAN has two
main components: 1) Dense Mapping Network (DMN) and
2) Editing Behavior Simulated Training (EBST). Specifically, DMN learns style mapping between a free-form
user modified mask and a target image, enabling diverse
generation results. EBST models the user editing behavior on the source mask, making the overall framework
more robust to various manipulated inputs. Specifically,
it introduces dual-editing consistency as the auxiliary
supervision signal. To facilitate extensive studies, we
construct a large-scale high-resolution face dataset with
fine-grained mask annotations named CelebAMask-HQ.
MaskGAN is comprehensively evaluated on two challenging
tasks: attribute transfer and style copy, demonstrating
superior performance over other state-of-the-art methods. The code, models, and dataset are available at
https://github.com/switchablenorms/CelebAMask-HQ.

1. Introduction
Facial image manipulation is an important task in computer vision and computer graphic, enabling lots of applications such as automatic facial expressions and styles (e.g.
hairstyle, skin color) transfer. This task can be roughly
categorized into two types: semantic-level manipulation
[2, 24, 29, 19, 22] and geometry-level manipulation [40,
38, 41, 44]. However, these methods either operate on a
pre-defined set of attributes or leave users little freedom to
interactively manipulate the face images.
To overcome the aforementioned drawbacks, we propose
a novel framework termed MaskGAN, which aims to enable
diverse and interactive face manipulation. Our key insight
is that semantic masks serve as a suitable intermediate
representation for flexible face manipulation with fidelity
preservation. Instead of directly transforming images in
the pixel space, MaskGAN learns the face manipulation
process as traversing on the mask manifold [25], thus
producing more diverse results with respect to facial components, shapes, and poses. An additional advantage of
MaskGAN is that it provides users an intuitive way to
specify the shape, location, and facial component categories
for interactive editing.
MaskGAN has two main components including 1) Dense
Mapping Network and 2) Editing Behavior Simulated

5549

