Panoptic-based Image Synthesis
Aysegul Dundar

Karan Sapra

Panoptic maps

Guilin Liu
Andrew Tao
NVIDIA Corporation

Baseline

Ours

Baseline enlarged

Bryan Catanzaro

Ours enlarged

Figure 1. Unlike previous methods that rely on semantic and boundary label maps to synthesize images, our model uses panoptic maps. It
generates instances with clear separation even in cluttered scenes where multiple instances occlude each other. The forth and fifth column
show zoomed in patches from the second and third column images to highlight the boundaries between instances, where previous methods
tend to blend instances together.

Abstract
Conditional image synthesis for generating photorealistic images serves various applications for content editing
to content generation. Previous conditional image synthesis algorithms mostly rely on semantic maps, and often fail
in complex environments where multiple instances occlude
each other. We propose a panoptic aware image synthesis network to generate high fidelity and photorealistic images conditioned on panoptic maps which unify semantic
and instance information. To achieve this, we efficiently
use panoptic maps in convolution and upsampling layers.
We show that with the proposed changes to the generator,
we can improve on the previous state-of-the-art methods by
generating images in complex instance interaction environments in higher fidelity and tiny objects in more details.
Furthermore, our proposed method also outperforms the

previous state-of-the-art methods in metrics of mean IoU
(Intersection over Union), and detAP (Detection Average
Precision).

1. Introduction
Image synthesis refers to the task of generating diverse
and photo-realistic images, where a prevalent sub-category
known as conditional image synthesis outputs images that
are conditioned on some input data. Recently, deep neural
networks have been successful at conditional image synthesis [11, 4, 32, 38, 39, 37, 1] where one of the conditional
inputs is a semantic segmentation map. Extending this concept, in this paper, we are interested in the generation of
photo-realistic images guided by panoptic maps. Panoptic maps unify semantic and instance maps. Specifically,
18070

