A Unified Optimization Framework for Low-Rank Inducing Penalties
Marcus Valtonen Örnhag1
1

Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University

2

Carl Olsson1,2

Department of Electrical Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology

{marcus.valtonen ornhag, carl.olsson}@math.lth.se

Abstract
In this paper we study the convex envelopes of a new
class of functions. Using this approach, we are able to unify
two important classes of regularizers from unbiased nonconvex formulations and weighted nuclear norm penalties.
This opens up for possibilities of combining the best of both
worlds, and to leverage each method’s contribution to cases
where simply enforcing one of the regularizers are insufficient.
We show that the proposed regularizers can be incorporated in standard splitting schemes such as Alternating Direction Methods of Multipliers (ADMM), and other subgradient methods. Furthermore, we provide an efficient way of
computing the proximal operator.
Lastly, we show on real non-rigid structure-from-motion
(NRSfM) datasets, the issues that arise from using weighted
nuclear norm penalties, and how this can be remedied using
our proposed method.1

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction using Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) is widely used for all types of data analysis,
classification and clustering. In recent years, numerous subspace clustering methods have been proposed, to address
the shortcomings of traditional PCA methods. The work on
Robust PCA by Candès et al. [6] is one of the most influential papers on the subject, which sparked a large research
interest from various fields including computer vision. Applications include, but are not limited to, rigid and non-rigid
structure-from-motion [4, 1], photometric stereo [2] and optical flow [13].
1 Code available: https://github.com/marcusvaltonen/UnifiedFramework.

This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council (grants no.
2015-05639 and 2018-05375) and the Swedish Foundation for Strategic
Research (Semantic Mapping and Visual Navigation for Smart Robots).

It is well-known that the solution to
2

min

rank(X)≤r

kX − X0 kF ,

(1)

where k·kF is the Frobenius norm, can be given in closed
form using the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the
measurement matrix X0 . The character of the problem
changes drastically, when considering objectives such as
2

min

rank(X)≤r

❘

❘

kA(X) − bk ,

(2)

❘

m×n
where A :
→ p is a linear operator, b ∈ p ,
and k·k is the standard Euclidean norm. In fact, such problems are in general known to be NP hard [14]. In many
cases, however, the rank is not known a priori, and a “soft
rank” penalty can be used instead
2

min µ rank(X) + kA(X) − bk .
X

(3)

Here, the regularization parameter µ controls the trade-off
between enforcing the rank and minimizing the residual error, and can be tuned to problem specific applications.
In order to treat objectives of the form (2) and (3), a convex surrogate of the rank penalty is often used. One popular
approach is to use the nuclear norm [30, 6]
kXk∗ =

n
X

σi (X),

(4)

i=1

where σi (X), i = 1, . . . , n, is the i:th singular value of X.
One of the drawbacks of using the nuclear norm penalty
is that both large and small singular values are penalized
equally hard. This is referred to as shrinking bias, and
to counteract such behavior, methods penalizing small singular values (assumed to be noise) harder have been proposed [29, 23, 16, 26, 27, 20, 9, 32].

1.1. Related Work
Our work is a generalization of Larsson and Olsson [20].
They considered problems on the form
2

min g(rank(X)) + kX − X0 kF ,
X

18474

(5)

