HOnnotate: A method for 3D Annotation of Hand and Object Poses
Shreyas Hampali1 , Mahdi Rad1 , Markus Oberweger1 , and Vincent Lepetit2,1
1

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria
2
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
{hampali, rad, oberweger, lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at
Project Page: https://www.tugraz.at/index.php?id=40231

Abstract
We propose a method for annotating images of a hand
manipulating an object with the 3D poses of both the hand
and the object, together with a dataset created using this
method. Our motivation is the current lack of annotated
real images for this problem, as estimating the 3D poses is
challenging, mostly because of the mutual occlusions between the hand and the object. To tackle this challenge, we
capture sequences with one or several RGB-D cameras and
jointly optimize the 3D hand and object poses over all the
frames simultaneously. This method allows us to automatically annotate each frame with accurate estimates of the
poses, despite large mutual occlusions. With this method,
we created HO-3D, the first markerless dataset of color images with 3D annotations for both the hand and object. This
dataset is currently made of 77,558 frames, 68 sequences,
10 persons, and 10 objects. Using our dataset, we develop
a single RGB image-based method to predict the hand pose
when interacting with objects under severe occlusions and
show it generalizes to objects not seen in the dataset.

1. Introduction
Methods for 3D pose estimation of rigid objects and
hands from monocular images have made significant
progress recently, thanks to the development of Deep Learning, and the creation of large datasets or the use of synthetic images for training [32, 35, 46, 55, 71, 73]. However,
these recent methods still fail when a hand interacts with an
object, mostly because of large mutual occlusions, and of
the absence of datasets specific to 3D pose estimation for
hand+object interaction. Breaking this limit is highly desirable though, as 3D hand and object poses would be very
useful in augmented reality applications, or for learning-byimitation in robotics, for example.

Several pioneer works have already considered this problem, sometimes with impressive success [26, 52, 61]. These
works typically rely on tracking algorithms to exploit
temporal constraints, often also considering physical constraints between the hand and the object to improve the pose
estimates. While these temporal and physical constraints remain relevant, we would like to also benefit from the power
of data-driven methods for 3D hand+object pose estimation
from a single image. Being able to estimate these poses
from a single frame would avoid manual initialization and
drift of tracking algorithms. A data-driven approach, however, requires real or synthetic images annotated with the
3D poses of the object and the hand. Unfortunately, creating annotated data for the hand+object problem is very
challenging. Both common options for creating 3D annotations, annotating real images and generating synthetic images, raise challenging problems.
Annotating real images. One can rely on some algorithm for automated annotation, as was done for current
benchmarks in 3D hand pose estimation [45, 54, 57, 71, 74],
where the “ground truth” annotations are obtained automatically with a tracking algorithm. Though these annotations
are noisy, they are usually taken for granted and used for
training and evaluation [37]. Another approach is to use
sensors attached to the hand as in [14] (bottom right image
of Fig. 1). This directly provides the 3D poses, however,
the sensors are visible in the images, and thus bias learning
methods. Significant effort is still required in developing
algorithms for automated annotation of real images.
Generating synthetic images. Relying on synthetic
images is appealing, as the 3D poses are known perfectly.
Realistic rendering and domain transfer can be used to train
3D pose estimation on synthetic images [31, 47, 73]. Generating physically correct grasps is possible [29], as shown
in [18], but complex manipulation is difficult to simulate.
However, real images with accurate 3D annotations would
still be needed to evaluate the generalizability of the method
13196

