Minimal Solutions to Relative Pose Estimation From Two Views Sharing a
Common Direction With Unknown Focal Length
Yaqing Ding∗ Jian Yang∗ Jean Ponce††‡ Hui Kong∗

Abstract
We propose minimal solutions to relative pose estimation problem from two views sharing a common direction
with unknown focal length. This is relevant for cameras
equipped with an IMU (inertial measurement unit), e.g.,
smart phones, tablets. Similar to the 6-point algorithm for
two cameras with unknown but equal focal lengths and 7point algorithm for two cameras with different and unknown
focal lengths, we derive new 4- and 5-point algorithms for
these two cases, respectively. The proposed algorithms can
cope with coplanar points, which is a degenerate configuration for these 6- and 7-point counterparts. We present a
detailed analysis and comparisons with the state of the art.
Experimental results on both synthetic data and real images
from a smart phone demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Estimating relative camera motion from two views using minimal point correspondences is a classical problem in
computer vision. For example, given internally calibrated
cameras, it is well known that the relative pose can be estimated using the 5-point algorithm [16, 21, 28]. An important case arises when the only unknown camera intrinsic
parameter is the focal length (semi-calibrated case). It is important in practice since most modern CCD or CMOS cameras have square-shaped pixels and central principal point.
If two cameras have shared and unknown focal length, the
relative motion and common focal length can be estimated
using six point correspondences [16, 21, 22, 30]. If the focal lengths of the two cameras are different and unknown,
at least seven point correspondences are needed to recover
the relative motion and focal lengths [3, 15]. Minimal-case
∗ Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image
and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.

{dingyaqing,csjyang,konghui}@njust.edu.cn
† INRIA, Paris, France. jean.ponce@inria.fr
‡ Département d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University,
Paris, France.

Figure 1: Visualization of the coordinate used in this paper. The cameras have a common gravity direction. The
gravity vector g = [gx , gy , gz ] can be obtained form IMU
readings, and the roll and pitch angles w.r.t the world coordinate (gravity) can be extracted. Then the points can be
rotated so that the y-axis matches the gravity direction.

algorithms can be used with RANSAC [10] in for example, SfM (structure-from-motion) pipelines. Using as few
points as possible is of extreme importance to reduce processing time. However, this usually requires additional constraints or data. For example, if the common gravity direction between the two views are known, the number of
needed points for the relative pose estimation can be reduced [9, 12, 27, 29, 31].
In this paper, we assume that the views have a common
direction. This case is relevant for smart devices, e.g., smart
phones, tablets, which have IMUs to measure the gravity
direction. We can align one of the axes (e.g., y-axis) of the
cameras with this direction (Figure 1). Then there is only
one unknown rotation parameter so that we can use fewer
point correspondences.
Given this assumption, we propose minimal solutions to
the two-view relative pose problems with unknown focal
length. The main contributions of this paper are:
• For two cameras with the same unknown focal length,
we propose a 4-point algorithm to estimate the camera

7045

