PandaNet : Anchor-Based Single-Shot Multi-Person 3D Pose Estimation
Abdallah Benzine⋆,† , Florian Chabot⋆ , Bertrand Luvison⋆ , Quoc Cuong Pham⋆ , Catherine Achard †
⋆
CEA LIST Vision and Learning Lab for Scene Analysis
†
Sorbonne University, CNRS, Institute for Intelligent Systems and Robotics

Figure 1: Qualitative results of PandaNet on JTA dataset [8] which consists in images with many people (up to 60), a large
proportion of people at low resolution and many occlusion situations. Most of the previous 3D human pose estimation studies
mainly focused on the single-person case or estimate 3D pose of few people at high resolution. In this paper, we propose an
anchor-based and single-shot multi-person 3D pose estimation framework that allows the pose estimation of a large number
of people at low resolution. Ground-truth translations and scales are used for visualisation.

Abstract
Recently, several deep learning models have been proposed for 3D human pose estimation. Nevertheless, most
of these approaches only focus on the single-person case
or estimate 3D pose of a few people at high resolution.
Furthermore, many applications such as autonomous driving or crowd analysis require pose estimation of a large
number of people possibly at low-resolution. In this work,
we present PandaNet (Pose estimAtioN and Dectection
Anchor-based Network), a new single-shot, anchor-based
and multi-person 3D pose estimation approach. The proposed model performs bounding box detection and, for each
detected person, 2D and 3D pose regression into a single
forward pass. It does not need any post-processing to regroup joints since the network predicts a full 3D pose for
each bounding box and allows the pose estimation of a possibly large number of people at low resolution. To manage
people overlapping, we introduce a Pose-Aware Anchor Selection strategy. Moreover, as imbalance exists between different people sizes in the image, and joints coordinates have

different uncertainties depending on these sizes, we propose a method to automatically optimize weights associated
to different people scales and joints for efficient training.
PandaNet surpasses previous single-shot methods on several challenging datasets: a multi-person urban virtual but
very realistic dataset (JTA Dataset), and two real world 3D
multi-person datasets (CMU Panoptic and MuPoTS-3D).

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation is a common addressed problem in Computer Vision. It has many applications such as
crowd analysis, autonomous driving, human computer interaction or motion capture. 3D pose is a low dimensional
and interpretable representation that allows to understand
and anticipate human behavior. Great progresses have been
achieved thanks to large scale datasets with 2D annotations
(LSP [13], MPII [1], COCO [22], CrowdPose [18]) and
3D annotations (Human 3.6M [12], MPI-INF-3DHP [25],
MuCo-3D-HP [28], CMU Panoptic [14]). Nevertheless,
this problem remains hard as the human body is an articu16856

