TextureFusion: High-Quality Texture Acquisition
for Real-Time RGB-D Scanning
Hyunho Ha1

Joo Ho Lee∗1
1

Yue Dong2

KAIST

2

Xin Tong2

Min H. Kim1

Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Real-time RGB-D scanning technique has become
widely used to progressively scan objects with a hand-held
sensor. Existing online methods restore color information
per voxel, and thus their quality is often limited by the tradeoff between spatial resolution and time performance. Also,
such methods often suffer from blurred artifacts in the captured texture. Traditional offline texture mapping methods
with non-rigid warping assume that the reconstructed geometry and all input views are obtained in advance, and
the optimization takes a long time to compute mesh parameterization and warp parameters, which prevents them from
being used in real-time applications. In this work, we propose a progressive texture-fusion method specially designed
for real-time RGB-D scanning. To this end, we first devise a novel texture-tile voxel grid, where texture tiles are
embedded in the voxel grid of the signed distance function, allowing for high-resolution texture mapping on the
low-resolution geometry volume. Instead of using expensive
mesh parameterization, we associate vertices of implicit geometry directly with texture coordinates. Second, we introduce real-time texture warping that applies a spatiallyvarying perspective mapping to input images so that texture
warping efficiently mitigates the mismatch between the intermediate geometry and the current input view. It allows us
to enhance the quality of texture over time while updating
the geometry in real-time. The results demonstrate that the
quality of our real-time texture mapping is highly competitive to that of exhaustive offline texture warping methods.
Our method is also capable of being integrated into existing
RGB-D scanning frameworks.

1. Introduction
Real-time RGB-D 3D scanning has become widely used
to progressively scan objects or scenes with a hand-held
RGB-D camera, such as Kinect. The depth stream from the
∗ Part of work was done during an internship in MSRA.

(a) Voxel representation

(b) Texture representation
without optimization

(c) Global optimization only

(d) Spatially-varying
perspective optimization

Figure 1: We compare per-voxel color representation (a)
with conventional texture representation without optimization (b). Compared with global optimization only (c), our
texture fusion (d) can achieve high-quality color texture
in real-time RGB-D scanning. Refer to the supplemental
video for a real-time demo.
camera is used to determine the camera pose and is accumulated to a voxel grid that contains surface distance. The
truncated depth values in the grid become a surface representation through a marching cube algorithm [24]. The
color stream, in general, is accumulated to the voxel to scan
color representation in a similar manner that captures depth.
However, the current color representation in real-time RGBD scanning remains suboptimal due to the following challenges: first, since the color information is stored in each
voxel in the grid, there is an inevitable tradeoff between
spatial resolution and time performance [6, 13, 25, 24]. For
instance, when we decrease the spatial resolution of the grid

1272

