From Fidelity to Perceptual Quality: A Semi-Supervised Approach for
Low-Light Image Enhancement
Wenhan Yang1 , Shiqi Wang1∗, Yuming Fang2 , Yue Wang3 , Jiaying Liu4
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics
3
ByteDance Technology Co., Ltd. 4 Peking University

Abstract
Under-exposure introduces a series of visual degradation, i.e. decreased visibility, intensive noise, and biased
color, etc. To address these problems, we propose a novel semi-supervised learning approach for low-light image
enhancement. A deep recursive band network (DRBN) is
proposed to recover a linear band representation of an enhanced normal-light image with paired low/normal-light
images, and then obtain an improved one by recomposing
the given bands via another learnable linear transformation
based on a perceptual quality-driven adversarial learning
with unpaired data. The architecture is powerful and flexible to have the merit of training with both paired and unpaired data. On one hand, the proposed network is well
designed to extract a series of coarse-to-ﬁne band representations, whose estimations are mutually beneﬁcial in a
recursive process. On the other hand, the extracted band
representation of the enhanced image in the ﬁrst stage of
DRBN (recursive band learning) bridges the gap between
the restoration knowledge of paired data and the perceptual quality preference to real high-quality images. Its second
stage (band recomposition) learns to recompose the band
representation towards ﬁtting perceptual properties of highquality images via adversarial learning. With the help of
this two-stage design, our approach generates the enhanced
results with well reconstructed details and visually promising contrast and color distributions. Extensive evaluations
demonstrate the superiority of our DRBN.

1. Introduction
In low-light conditions, a series of visual degradations,
i.e. low visibility, low contrast and intensive noises appear
∗ Corresponding author. Email: shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk. This work is
partially supported by the Hong Kong ITF UICP under Grant 9440203,
in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract
No.61772043, in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation under contract No.L182002, and in part by the National Key R&D Program of China
under Grand No.2018AAA0102700.

(a) Input

(b) SICE [2]

(c) EnligtenGAN [11]

(d) DRBP

Figure 1. The visual results of different methods on a real lowlight image in LOL [30]. SICE [2] is a state-of-the-art fully supervised method and EnlightenGAN [11] is an unsupervised method
without paired supervision. Our DRBN well restores the global
illumination, suppresses noise and preserves structural details.

in captured images. It will be beneﬁcial to use more advanced shooting devices and specialized photographic techniques to alleviate some degradations. However, it is still
difﬁcult to totally avoid the presence of noise even with upgraded shooting devices. There is insufﬁcient light reaching camera sensors, causing the scene signals buried by
system noise. It would be helpful if longer exposure time
is taken to suppress noise, which however introduces blurriness. Therefore, the low-light enhancement methods at
the software end are expected. It aims to restore an image
captured in the low-light condition to a normal one, where
visibility, contrast, and noise are expected to be improved,
stretched, and suppressed, respectively. The enhancement process leads to visual quality improvement and offers a
good starting point for high-level computer vision tasks (i.e.
object detection and recognition).
It is non-trivial to enhance low-light images, because the
noise is usually easy to be ampliﬁed. In the past decades,
13063

