Semi-supervised Learning for Few-shot Image-to-Image Translation
Yaxing Wang1∗, Salman Khan2 , Abel Gonzalez-Garcia1 , Joost van de Weijer1 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,3
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 3 CVL, Linköping University, Sweden

1. Introduction
Image-to-image (I2I) translations are an integral part of
many computer vision tasks. They include transformations
between different modalities (e.g., from RGB to depth [27]),
between domains (e.g., horses to zebras [46]) or editing operations (e.g., artistic style transfer [13]). Benefiting from
large amounts of labeled images, I2I translation has obtained great improvements on both paired [8, 15, 19, 40, 47]
and unpaired image translation [2, 7, 22, 42, 44, 46]. Recent research trends address relevant limitations of earlier
approaches, namely diversity and scalability. Current methods [1, 18, 25] improve over the single-sample limitation
∗ Work done as an intern at Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Target

Train

Train

Train

Test

Test

Test

(a)

(b)

(c)

Source

In the last few years, unpaired image-to-image translation has witnessed remarkable progress. Although the latest methods are able to generate realistic images, they crucially rely on a large number of labeled images. Recently,
some methods have tackled the challenging setting of fewshot image-to-image translation, reducing the labeled data
requirements for the target domain during inference. In this
work, we go one step further and reduce the amount of required labeled data also from the source domain during
training. To do so, we propose applying semi-supervised
learning via a noise-tolerant pseudo-labeling procedure.
We also apply a cycle consistency constraint to further exploit the information from unlabeled images, either from
the same dataset or external. Additionally, we propose several structural modifications to facilitate the image translation task under these circumstances. Our semi-supervised
method for few-shot image translation, called SEMIT,
achieves excellent results on four different datasets using as
little as 10% of the source labels, and matches the performance of the main fully-supervised competitor using only
20% labeled data. Our code and models are made public
at: https://github.com/yaxingwang/SEMIT.

Target

Abstract

Source

{yaxing,agonzalez,joost}@cvc.uab.es, salman.khan@inceptioniai.org, fahad.khan@liu.se

Figure 1. Comparison between unpaired I2I translation scenarios.
Each colored symbol indicates a different image label, and dashed
symbols represent unlabeled data. (a) Standard [9, 18, 46]: target classes are the same as source classes and all are seen during
training. (b) Few-shot [28]: actual target classes are different from
source classes and are unseen during training. Only a few examples of the unseen target classes are available at test time. For training, source classes act temporarily as target classes. (c) Few-shot
semi-supervised (Ours): same as few-shot, but the source domain
has only a limited amount of labeled data at train time.

of deterministic models by generating diverse translations
given an input image. The scalability problem has also been
successfully alleviated [9, 33, 34, 39], enabling translations
across several domains using a single model. Nonetheless,
these approaches still suffer from two issues. First, the target domain is required to contain the same categories or attributes as the source domain at test time, therefore failing
to scale to unseen categories (see Fig. 1(a)). Second, they
highly rely upon having access to vast quantities of labeled
data (Fig. 1(a, b)) at train time. Such labels provide useful
information during the training process and play a key role
in some settings (e.g. scalable I2I translation).
Recently, several works have studied I2I translation
given a few images of the target class (as in Fig. 1(b)).
Benaim and Wolf [3] approach one-shot I2I translation by
first training a variational autoencoder for the seen domain
and then adapting those layers related to the unseen domain.
ZstGAN [26] introduces zero-shot I2I translation, employing the annotated attributes of unseen categories instead

4453

