Equalization Loss for Long-Tailed Object Recognition
Jingru Tan1 Changbao Wang2 Buyu Li3 Quanquan Li2
Wanli Ouyang4 Changqing Yin1 Junjie Yan2
1
Tongji University 2 SenseTime Research 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
{tjr120,yinchangqing}@tongji.edu.cn, {wangchangbao,liquanquan,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
byli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Object recognition techniques using convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved great success. However, state-of-the-art object detection methods still perform
poorly on large vocabulary and long-tailed datasets, e.g.
LVIS. In this work, we analyze this problem from a novel
perspective: each positive sample of one category can be
seen as a negative sample for other categories, making the
tail categories receive more discouraging gradients. Based
on it, we propose a simple but effective loss, named equalization loss, to tackle the problem of long-tailed rare categories by simply ignoring those gradients for rare categories. The equalization loss protects the learning of rare
categories from being at a disadvantage during the network
parameter updating. Thus the model is capable of learning better discriminative features for objects of rare classes.
Without any bells and whistles, our method achieves AP
gains of 4.1% and 4.8% for the rare and common categories
on the challenging LVIS benchmark, compared to the Mask
R-CNN baseline. With the utilization of the effective equalization loss, we finally won the 1st place in the LVIS Challenge 2019. Code has been made available at: https:
//github.com/tztztztztz/eql.detectron2

1. Introduction
Recently, the computer vision community has witnessed
the great success of object recognition because of the
emerge of deep learning and convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Object recognition, which is a fundamental task in
computer vision, plays a central role in many related tasks,
such as re-identification, human pose estimation and object
tracking.
Today, most datasets for general object recognition, e.g.
Pascal VOC [10] and COCO [28], mainly collect frequently
seen categories, with a large number of annotations for each

Figure 1: The overall gradient analysis on positive and negative samples. We collect the average L2 norm of gradient
of weights in the last classifier layer. Categories’ indices are
sorted by their instance counts. Note that for one category,
proposals of all the other categories and the background are
negative samples for it.

class. However, when it comes to more practical scenarios,
a large vocabulary dataset with a long-tailed distribution
of category frequency (e.g. LVIS [15]) is inevitable. The
problem of the long-tailed distribution of the categories is
a great challenge to the learning of object detection models, especially for the rare categories (categories with very
few samples). Note that for one category, all the samples
of other categories including the background are regarded
as negative samples. So the rare categories can be easily
overwhelmed by the majority categories (categories with a
large number of samples) during training and are inclined
to be predicted as negatives. Thus the conventional object
detectors trained on such an extremely unbalanced dataset

11662

