Low-rank Compression of Neural Nets:
Learning the Rank of Each Layer
Yerlan Idelbayev
Dept. CSE, University of California, Merced

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
Dept. CSE, University of California, Merced

yidelbayev@ucmerced.edu

mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Neural net compression can be achieved by approximating each layer’s weight matrix by a low-rank matrix. The
real difficulty in doing this is not in training the resulting
neural net (made up of one low-rank matrix per layer), but
in determining what the optimal rank of each layer is—
effectively, an architecture search problem with one hyperparameter per layer. We show that, with a suitable formulation, this problem is amenable to a mixed discretecontinuous optimization jointly over the ranks and over the
matrix elements, and give a corresponding algorithm. We
show that this indeed can select ranks much better than
existing approaches, making low-rank compression much
more attractive than previously thought. For example, we
can make a VGG network faster than a ResNet and with
nearly the same classification error.
Compressing large deep neural nets so that they can be
deployed on resource-constrained devices, such as smart
cameras or mobile phones, is a problem of considerable interest at present. Of the many existing compression forms
we focus on low-rank compression, whose roots lie in matrix algebra, and where we replace a matrix W with another one having lower rank (which can thus be written as
the product UVT of two smaller matrices). That low-rank
compression can be very effective is obvious from its many
applications in numerical linear algebra, image and signal
processing, model order reduction, machine learning and
statistics, and other areas in science and engineering. Indeed it has been applied for deep net compression (see related work), although it generally has been found less effective than other compression techniques such as weight
quantization or pruning. However, a low-rank representation has the advantage of fast inference (particularly on
GPUs), since it uses dense matrices having a local, regular
and parallelizable memory access pattern.
A fundamental problem in low-rank compression is the
selection of the rank. This is often not recognized because
selecting the rank and the corresponding matrices U and

V is very easy in some special but important cases, which
accounts for the widespread use of low-rank compression.
Indeed, say we are given a matrix W and want to find a lowrank matrix that produces the lowest approximation error to
W. The solution of this problem is known and is computationally very convenient: solving a single full singular
value decomposition (SVD) we obtain the optimal solution
for any desired rank and hence any desired approximation
error [15]. We simply sort the singular values and pick as
many as we need in increasing order to reach the desired approximation error. The matrices U and V are given by the
corresponding singular vectors. Note that we need not solve
a separate optimization problem for each target value of the
error or rank: we get all the possible solutions at once. This
property will prove useful in our algorithm later.
This property also holds in a special case of the model
compression problem (well known in statistics as reducedrank regression (RRR) [22, 41]): solving a linear regression
fit but constraining the rank of the coefficient matrix to be
at most r. This problem can be solved again for all possible
values of the rank r by computing a single SVD of the data
matrix (training input and output vectors).
Let us now see why this is much harder in the case of a
deep net where we want to find both the rank for each layer
matrix and the matrix coefficients so that some desired error
is minimized and the ranks are constrained. The solution is
not given anymore by computing a single SVD and examining a list of ranks and their errors. What is relatively easy
(at least, doable in current practice with deep nets) is to find
the weights of the matrix at each layer if we fix ahead of
time the rank rk that we want to use in each layer k. This
is because we can then write the matrix at each layer as
Uk VkT and optimize this network as usual over all the Uk
and Vk matrices. That is, we compute the gradient using
the chain rule (easily done with automatic differentiation in
deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch [39] or TensorFlow [1]) and use it with stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
to converge (approximately at least) to a local minimizer.
This makes it obvious that the real problem is in determining optimal values for the set of ranks r1 , . . . , rK . It
18049

