EmotiCon: Context-Aware Multimodal Emotion Recognition using Frege’s
Principle
Trisha Mittal1 , Pooja Guhan1 , Uttaran Bhattacharya1 , Rohan Chandra1 , Aniket Bera1 , Dinesh Manocha1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
{trisha, pguhan, uttaranb, rohan, ab, dm}@cs.umd.edu
Project URL: https://gamma.umd.edu/emoticon
Abstract
We present EmotiCon, a learning-based algorithm for
context-aware perceived human emotion recognition from
videos and images. Motivated by Frege’s Context Principle from psychology, our approach combines three interpretations of context for emotion recognition. Our first interpretation is based on using multiple modalities (e.g. faces
and gaits) for emotion recognition. For the second interpretation, we gather semantic context from the input image
and use a self-attention-based CNN to encode this information. Finally, we use depth maps to model the third interpretation related to socio-dynamic interactions and proximity
among agents. We demonstrate the efficiency of our network
through experiments on EMOTIC, a benchmark dataset. We
report an Average Precision (AP) score of 35.48 across 26
classes, which is an improvement of 7-8 over prior methods. We also introduce a new dataset, GroupWalk, which is
a collection of videos captured in multiple real-world settings of people walking. We report an AP of 65.83 across
4 categories on GroupWalk, which is also an improvement
over prior methods.

1. Introduction
Perceiving the emotions of people around us is vital in
everyday life. Humans often alter their behavior while interacting with others based on their perceived emotions. In
particular, automatic emotion recognition has been used for
different applications, including human-computer interaction [13], surveillance [12], robotics, games, entertainment,
and more. Emotions are modeled as either discrete categories or as points in a continuous space of affective dimensions [16]. In the continuous space, emotions are treated as
points in a 3D space of valence, arousal, and dominance.
In this work, our focus is on recognizing perceived human
emotion rather than the actual emotional state of a person in
the discrete emotion space.
Initial works in emotion recognition have been mostly
unimodal [46, 1, 47, 44] approaches. The unique modality

Figure 1: Context-Aware Multimodal Emotion Recognition:
We use three interpretations of context to perform perceived emotion recognition. We use multiple modalities (Context 1) of faces
and gaits, background visual information (Context 2) and sociodynamic inter-agent interactions (Context 3) to infer the perceived
emotion. EmotiCon outperforms prior context-aware emotion
recognition methods. Above is an input sample from the EMOTIC
dataset.

may correspond to facial expressions, voice, text, body posture, gaits, or physiological signals. This was followed by
multimodal emotion recognition [49, 21, 50], where various combinations of modalities were used and combined in
various manners to infer emotions.
Although such modalities or cues extracted from a person can provide us with information regarding the perceived
emotion, context also plays a very crucial role in the understanding of the perceived emotion. Frege’s context principle [45] urges not asking for the meaning of a word in isolation and instead of finding the meaning in the context of
a sentence. We use this notion behind the context principle
in psychology for emotion recognition. ‘Context’ has been
interpreted in multiple ways by researchers in psychology,
including:
(a) Context 1 (Multiple Modalities): Incorporating cues
from different modalities was one of the initial definitions of context. This domain is also known as Multimodal Emotion Recognition. Combining modalities
114234

