Learning to Optimize on SPD Manifolds
Zhi Gao1 , Yuwei Wu1∗, Yunde Jia1 , Mehrtash Harandi2
1
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, and Data61, Australia
{gaozhi 2017,wuyuwei,jiayunde}@bit.edu.cn, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract
Many tasks in computer vision and machine learning
are modeled as optimization problems with constraints in
the form of Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices.
Solving such optimization problems is challenging due to
the non-linearity of the SPD manifold, making optimization
with SPD constraints heavily relying on expert knowledge
and human involvement. In this paper, we propose a metalearning method to automatically learn an iterative optimizer on SPD manifolds. Specifically, we introduce a novel
recurrent model that takes into account the structure of input gradients and identifies the updating scheme of optimization. We parameterize the optimizer by the recurrent
model and utilize Riemannian operations to ensure that our
method is faithful to the geometry of SPD manifolds. Compared with existing SPD optimizers, our optimizer effectively exploits the underlying data distribution and learns
a better optimization trajectory in a data-driven manner.
Extensive experiments on various computer vision tasks including metric nearness, clustering, and similarity learning
demonstrate that our optimizer outperforms existing stateof-the-art methods consistently.

1. Introduction
Optimization problems with constraints in the form of
Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices are pervasive
in the computer vision and machine learning communities
with a variety of applications. For example, in similarity
learning, the non-negativity of the Mahalanobis distance requires the metric to be an SPD matrix [13, 22, 34]. To fit
a Gaussian mixture model to data, the SPD constraint is required to obtain the covariance of each model [18]. Other
applications range from coding with higher-order statistics
[7, 15], to visual classification [8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 41, 42], and
clustering [11, 21].
∗ Corresponding author

In general, the SPD constraint makes the optimization problems challenging and non-trivial to address [35].
Directly applying gradient-based optimization algorithms
in the Euclidean space (e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD)) to such optimization problems is not fruitful and
lead to results that do not comply with the geometry of the
SPD manifold. To alleviate this issue, one needs to resort
to the Riemannian form of gradient-based optimization algorithms [1]. Such optimizers view optimization problems
with manifold constraints as unconstrained problems and
utilize Riemannian operators to move along the manifold
(SPD manifold in our case) in the quest for the solution.
Prior to our work, all the efforts and the focus of the
community were directed towards designing Riemannian
optimizers by hand [5, 23, 24, 25, 38, 46]. For example,
Bonnabel [5] developed the SGD algorithm on Riemannian manifolds, and Roy et al. [25] generalized the momentum SGD to the Riemannian setting. The design of the
optimizer, evaluating its performance, and probably updating the optimization scheme requires intuitions and expert
knowledge about manifolds to achieve a satisfactory result.
That is, the hand-designed optimizer relies heavily on expert knowledge and human involvements. Besides, existing
SPD optimizers are task-independent. Since the underlying
data distribution differs among various tasks [2, 32], an efficient optimizer should be tailored to the task in hand. Thus,
a natural question arises: can we automatically design taskspecific optimizers on SPD manifolds?
Our work is inspired by advances in meta-learning that
offers a new perspective to optimization techniques. The
meta-learning can automatically acquire knowledge to learn
how to learn or quickly adapt to new information [27, 37].
In particular, some methods show that the optimization
knowledge can be acquired by parameterizing the optimizer
with a neural network, however, the network is trained to
optimize in the Euclidean space [2, 17, 28, 43]. To the best
of our knowledge, existing works have never attempted to
learn the optimizer on SPD manifolds. A possible reason
is that, directly applying existing meta-learning methods

7700

