Task Agnostic Robust Learning on Corrupt Outputs
by Correlation-Guided Mixture Density Networks
Sungjoon Choi
Kakao Brain

Sanghoon Hong
Kakao Brain

Kyungjae Lee
Seoul National University

sam.choi@kakaobrain.com

sanghoon.hong@kakaobrain.com

kyungjae.lee@rllab.snu.ac.kr

Sungbin Lim∗
UNIST
sungbin@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on weakly supervised learning
with noisy training data for both classification and regression problems. We assume that the training outputs are
collected from a mixture of a target and correlated noise distributions. Our proposed method simultaneously estimates
the target distribution and the quality of each data which
is defined as the correlation between the target and data
generating distributions. The cornerstone of the proposed
method is a Cholesky Block that enables modeling dependencies among mixture distributions in a differentiable manner
where we maintain the distribution over the network weights.
We first provide illustrative examples in both regression and
classification tasks to show the effectiveness of the proposed
method. Then, the proposed method is extensively evaluated
in a number of experiments where we show that it constantly
shows comparable or superior performances compared to
existing baseline methods in the handling of noisy data.

1. Introduction
Training a deep neural network requires immense
amounts of training data which are often collected using
crowd-sourcing methods, such as Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (AMT). However, in practice, the crowd-sourced labels are often noisy [4]. Furthermore, naive training of deep
neural networks is often vulnerable to over-fitting given the
noisy training data in that they are capable of memorizing
the entire dataset even with inconsistent labels, leading to a
poor generalization performance [44]. We address this problem through the principled idea of revealing the correlations
between the target distribution and the other (possibly noise)
distributions by assuming that a training dataset is sampled
from a mixture of a target distribution and other correlated
distributions.
∗ This work is done at Kakao Brain

Throughout this paper, we aim to address the following
two questions: 1) How can we define (or measure) the quality of training data in a principled manner? 2) In the presence
of inconsistent outputs, how can we infer the target distribution in a scalable manner? Traditionally, noisy outputs are
handled by modeling additive random distributions, often
leading to robust loss functions [16] or estimating the structures of label corruptions in classifications tasks [22] (for
more details, refer to Section 2).
To address the first question, we leverage the concept of
a correlation. Precisely, we define and measure the quality
of training data using the correlation between the target
distribution and the data generating distribution. However,
estimating the correct correlation requires access to the target
distribution, whereas learning the correct target distribution
requires knowing the correlation between the distributions
to be known, making it a chicken-and-egg problem. To
address the second question, we present a novel method that
simultaneously estimates the target distribution as well as the
correlation in a fully differentiable manner using stochastic
gradient descent methods.
The cornerstone of the proposed method is a Cholesky
Block in which we employ the Cholesky transform for sampling the weights of a neural network that enables us to
model correlated outputs. Similar to Bayesian neural networks [6], we maintain the probability distributions over
the weights, but we also leverage mixture distributions to
handle the inconsistencies in a dataset. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first approach simultaneously to infer
the target distribution and the output correlations using a
neural network in an end-to-end manner. We will refer to
this framework as ChoiceNet.
ChoiceNet is first applied to synthetic regression tasks
and a real-world regression task where we demonstrate its
robustness to extreme outliers and its ability to distinguish
the target distribution and noise distributions. Subsequently,
we move on to image classification tasks using a number of
benchmark datasets where we show that it shows comparable or superior performances compared to existing baseline
13872

