Real-Time Panoptic Segmentation from Dense Detections
Rui Hou∗,1,2

Jie Li∗,1
1
1

Arjun Bhargava1 Allan Raventos1 Vitor Guizilini1
Jerome Lynch2 Adrien Gaidon1

Toyota Research Institute

2

Chao Fang1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

{firstname.lastname}@tri.global

2

{rayhou, jerlynch}@umich.edu

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation is a complex full scene parsing
task requiring simultaneous instance and semantic segmentation at high resolution. Current state-of-the-art approaches cannot run in real-time, and simplifying these architectures to improve efficiency severely degrades their accuracy. In this paper, we propose a new single-shot panoptic segmentation network that leverages dense detections
and a global self-attention mechanism to operate in realtime with performance approaching the state of the art. We
introduce a novel parameter-free mask construction method
that substantially reduces computational complexity by efficiently reusing information from the object detection and
semantic segmentation sub-tasks. The resulting network has
a simple data flow that requires no feature map re-sampling,
enabling significant hardware acceleration. Our experiments on the Cityscapes and COCO benchmarks show that
our network works at 30 FPS on 1024 × 2048 resolution,
trading a 3% relative performance degradation from the
current state of the art for up to 440% faster inference.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is the basis of many real-life applications, including autonomous driving, robotics, and image editing. Panoptic segmentation, proposed by Kirillov
et al. [14], aims to provide a complete 2D description of a
scene. This task requires each pixel in an input image to be
assigned to a semantic class (as in semantic segmentation)
and each object instance to be identified and segmented (as
in instance segmentation). Facilitated by the availability of
several open-source datasets (e.g. Cityscapes [5], COCO
[20], Mapillary Vistas [23]), this topic has drawn a lot of
attention since it was first introduced [15, 13, 36, 28].
In panoptic segmentation, pixels are categorized in two
∗ Equal contribution.

This work was done when Rui Hou was an intern at Toyota Research
Institute (TRI).

Figure 1: Inference times and panoptic quality (PQ) for
the state of the art and our method on the Cityscapes validation set at 1024 × 2048 resolution with a ResNet-50-FPN
backbone (except for DeeperLab). Our method runs in realtime at a competitive accuracy.
high level classes: stuff representing amorphous and uncountable regions (such as sky and road), and things covering countable objects (such as persons and cars). These two
categories naturally split the panoptic segmentation task
into two sub-tasks, namely semantic segmentation and instance segmentation. Most recent approaches use a single
backbone for feature extraction and add various branches
on top of the shared representations to perform each downstream task separately, generating the final panoptic prediction with fusion heuristics [13, 36, 28].
To date, most studies on panoptic segmentation focus on improving model accuracy, either by integrating
more advanced semantic and instance segmentation methods [28, 16] or by introducing novel information flow and
loss functions[15, 30]. None of these methods are suitable
for real-time applications due to prohibitively slow inference speeds. A small subset of recent works is making
progress towards faster panoptic segmentation algorithms
[7, 38] but at a significant cost in terms of accuracy.
To achieve high quality panoptic segmentation under

8523

