SpSequenceNet: Semantic Segmentation Network on 4D Point Clouds
Hanyu Shi1 , Guosheng Lin1∗, Hao Wang1 , Tzu-Yi HUNG2 , and Zhenhua Wang3
1

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Delta Research Center,
3
Zhejiang University of Technology
E-mail: hanyu001@ntu.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Point clouds are useful in many applications like autonomous driving and robotics as they provide natural 3D
information of the surrounding environments. While there
are extensive research on 3D point clouds, scene understanding on 4D point clouds, a series of consecutive 3D
point clouds frames, is an emerging topic and yet underinvestigated. With 4D point clouds (3D point cloud videos),
robotic systems could enhance their robustness by leveraging the temporal information from previous frames. However, the existing semantic segmentation methods on 4D
point clouds suffer from low precision due to the spatial
and temporal information loss in their network structures.
In this paper, we propose SpSequenceNet to address this
problem. The network is designed based on 3D sparse convolution, and it includes two novel modules, a cross-frame
global attention module and a cross-frame local interpolation module, to capture spatial and temporal information
in 4D point clouds. We conduct extensive experiments on
SemanticKITTI, and achieve the state-of-the-art result of
43.1% on mIoU, which is 1.5% higher than the previous
best approach.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is a basic problem in computer vision. For autonomous driving cars and robotic systems that
work in the real world, the performance and robustness of
scene understanding is extremely crucial, since wrong decisions may result in fatal accidents. Researchers are trying
to use more information to improve the performance and
robustness. 3D point clouds, collected by Lidar or Depth
cameras, provide more natural geometry information than
2D images. Further more, auto-driving cars and robots always work continuously within a period of time, thus the
∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

(a) Frame t = 0.

(b) Frame t = 1.

Figure 1: Two-frame samples of normal camera video
and point cloud sequence. In each frame, the first row is
collected with the normal front camera, and the second row
is a projection of the annotated LiDAR point cloud. The
point cloud is 360◦ around the car captured by the LiDAR
sensors, which has broader perception fields than the normal camera video.
environments change continuously. Under this constraint,
the systems could utilize temporal information from previous timestamps as hints and restrictions.
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in scene
understanding. On 2D images, the task is a per pixel classification problem that assign corresponding categories to
every pixel in the image. Inspired by the FCN [13], great
acchievements have been made in this area, such as Deeplab

4574

