Deep Stereo using Adaptive Thin Volume Representation
with Uncertainty Awareness
Shuo Cheng1*
Zexiang Xu1*
Shilin Zhu1
2
3,4
Zhuwen Li
Li Erran Li
Ravi Ramamoorthi1
Hao Su1
1
4
University of California, San Diego 2 Nuro Inc. 3 Scale AI
Columbia University

Abstract
We present Uncertainty-aware Cascaded Stereo Network
(UCS-Net) for 3D reconstruction from multiple RGB images. Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct finegrained scene geometry from multi-view images. Previous
learning-based MVS methods estimate per-view depth using
plane sweep volumes (PSVs) with a fixed depth hypothesis
at each plane; this requires densely sampled planes for high
accuracy, which is impractical for high-resolution depth because of limited memory. In contrast, we propose adaptive
thin volumes (ATVs); in an ATV, the depth hypothesis of
each plane is spatially varying, which adapts to the uncertainties of previous per-pixel depth predictions. Our UCSNet has three stages: the first stage processes a small PSV to
predict low-resolution depth; two ATVs are then used in the
following stages to refine the depth with higher resolution
and higher accuracy. Our ATV consists of only a small number of planes with low memory and computation costs; yet,
it efficiently partitions local depth ranges within learned
small uncertainty intervals. We propose to use variancebased uncertainty estimates to adaptively construct ATVs;
this differentiable process leads to reasonable and finegrained spatial partitioning. Our multi-stage framework
progressively sub-divides the vast scene space with increasing depth resolution and precision, which enables reconstruction with high completeness and accuracy in a coarseto-fine fashion. We demonstrate that our method achieves
superior performance compared with other learning-based
MVS methods on various challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D scene geometry from captured images is a
core problem in computer vision and graphics with applications in 3D visualization, scene understanding, robotics
and autonomous driving. Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to
reconstruct dense 3D representations from multiple images
* Equal contribution.

One-stage
prediction

Two-stage
prediction

Three-stage
prediction

Our ﬁnal point cloud
reconstruction

RGB image

Ground truth depth
Depth prediction
ATV boundary (Uncetainty interval)

Figure 1: Our UCS-Net leverages adaptive thin volumes
(ATVs) to progressively reconstruct a highly accurate highresolution depth map through multiple stages. We show the
input RGB image, depth predictions with increasing sizes
from three stages, and our final point cloud reconstruction
obtained by fusing multiple depth maps. We also illustrate
a local slice (red) from our depth prediction with the corresponding ATV boundaries that reflect pixel-wise uncertainty intervals. Our ATVs become thinner after a stage with
reduced uncertainty, which enables higher accuracy.
with calibrated cameras. Inspired by the success of deep
convolutional neural networks (CNN), several learningbased MVS methods have been presented [23, 27, 54, 20,
47]; the most recent work leverages cost volumes in a learning pipeline [58, 21], and outperforms many traditional
MVS methods [13].
At the core of the recent success on MVS [58, 21] is
the application of 3D CNNs on plane sweep cost volumes
to effectively infer multi-view correspondence. However,
such 3D CNNs involve massive memory usage for depth
estimation with high accuracy and completeness. In particular, for a large scene, high accuracy requires sampling
a large number of sweeping planes and high completeness
requires reconstructing high-resolution depth maps. In general, given limited memory, there is an undesired trade-off
between accuracy (more planes) and completeness (more
pixels) in previous work [58, 21].

2524

