Towards Accurate Scene Text Recognition with Semantic Reasoning Networks
Deli Yu13∗ Xuan Li2∗ Chengquan Zhang2∗† Tao Liu2
Junyu Han2 Jingtuo Liu2 Errui Ding2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences1
Department of Computer Vision Technology(VIS), Baidu Inc.2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences3
yudeli2018@ia.ac.cn
{lixuan12, zhangchengquan, liutao32, hanjunyu, liujingtuo, dingerrui}@baidu.com

Abstract
Scene text image contains two levels of contents: visual
texture and semantic information. Although the previous
scene text recognition methods have made great progress
over the past few years, the research on mining semantic information to assist text recognition attracts less attention, only RNN-like structures are explored to implicitly model semantic information. However, we observe
that RNN based methods have some obvious shortcomings,
such as time-dependent decoding manner and one-way serial transmission of semantic context, which greatly limit
the help of semantic information and the computation efficiency. To mitigate these limitations, we propose a novel
end-to-end trainable framework named semantic reasoning
network (SRN) for accurate scene text recognition, where a
global semantic reasoning module (GSRM) is introduced to
capture global semantic context through multi-way parallel
transmission. The state-of-the-art results on 7 public benchmarks, including regular text, irregular text and non-Latin
long text, verify the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed method. In addition, the speed of SRN has significant
advantages over the RNN based methods, demonstrating its
value in practical use.

1. Introduction
Text has rich semantic information, which has been used
in many computer vision based applications such as automatic driving [43], travel translator [38], product retrieval,
etc. Scene text recognition is a crucial step in scene text
reading system. Although sequence-to-sequence recognition has made several remarkable breakthroughs in the past
decades [19, 37, 41], text recognition in the wild is still a
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Deli Yu is an intern at
Baidu Inc.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples of text in the wild. (a) are some difficult scene
text images, (b) are individual characters extracted separately from
(a), and (c) are the corresponding semantic word contents. The
characters with red dashed boxes in (b) are easy to be misclassified, only based on visual features.

big challenge, caused by the significant variations of scene
text in color, font, spatial layout and even uncontrollable
background.
Most of the recent works have attempted to improve the
performance of scene text recognition from the perspective
of extracting more robust and effective visual features, such
as upgrading the backbone networks [5, 21, 31], adding rectification modules [30, 31, 40, 44] and improving attention
mechanisms [5, 37, 41]. Nevertheless, it is a fact that, for a
human, the recognition of scene text is not only dependent
on visual perception information, but also affected by the
high-level text semantic context understanding. As some
examples shown in Fig. 1, it is very difficult to distinguish
each character in those images separately when only visual features are considered, especially the characters highlighted with red dotted boxes. Instead, taking semantic context information into consideration, human is likely to infer
the correct result with the total word content.
Unfortunately, for the semantic information, the mainstream text recognition methods consider it in the way of
one-way serial transmission, such as [5, 30, 31, 37, 40, 41,
44], which recursively perceive the character semantic information of the last decoding time step, as shown in Fig. 2
(a). There are several obvious drawbacks in this manner:
First, it can only perceive very limited semantic context
12113

