Why Having 10,000 Parameters in Your Camera Model is Better Than Twelve
Thomas Schöps1
Viktor Larsson1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
Torsten Sattler3
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 3 Chalmers University of Technology
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Zurich Lab

Abstract
Camera calibration is an essential first step in setting
up 3D Computer Vision systems. Commonly used parametric camera models are limited to a few degrees of freedom
and thus often do not optimally fit to complex real lens distortion. In contrast, generic camera models allow for very
accurate calibration due to their flexibility. Despite this,
they have seen little use in practice. In this paper, we argue
that this should change. We propose a calibration pipeline
for generic models that is fully automated, easy to use, and
can act as a drop-in replacement for parametric calibration, with a focus on accuracy. We compare our results to
parametric calibrations. Considering stereo depth estimation and camera pose estimation as examples, we show that
the calibration error acts as a bias on the results. We thus
argue that in contrast to current common practice, generic
models should be preferred over parametric ones whenever possible. To facilitate this, we released our calibration pipeline at https://github.com/puzzlepaint/
camera_calibration, making both easy-to-use and accurate camera calibration available to everyone.

1. Introduction
Geometric camera calibration is the process of determining where the light recorded by each pixel of a camera
comes from. It is an essential prerequisite for 3D Computer Vision systems. Common parametric camera models
allow for only a few degrees of freedom and are thus unlikely to optimally fit to complex real-world lens distortion
(cf . Fig. 1). This can for example be aggravated by placing
cameras behind windshields for autonomous driving [1].
However, accurate calibration is very important, since calibration errors affect all further computations. Even though
the noise introduced by, for example, feature extraction in
the final application is likely much larger than the error in
the camera calibration, the latter can still be highly relevant
since it may act as a bias that cannot be averaged out.
Generic camera models [15] relate pixels and their 3D
observation lines resp. rays outside of the camera optics in a
purely mathematical way, without offering a physical inter-

Figure 1. Residual distortion patterns of fitting two parametric
camera models (left, center) and a generic model (right) to a mobile phone camera. While the generic model shows mostly random
noise, parametric models show strong systematic modeling errors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. 2D sketch of the two generic camera models considered
in this paper. (a) In image space (black rectangle), a grid of control
points is defined that is aligned to the calibrated area (dashed pink
rectangle) and extends beyond it by one cell. A point (red) is unprojected by B-Spline surface interpolation of the values stored for
its surrounding 4x4 points (blue). Interpolation happens among
directions (gray and blue arrows) starting from a projection center
(black dot) for the central model (b), and among arbitrary lines
(gray and blue arrows) for the non-central model (c).

pretation of the camera geometry. They densely associate
pixels with observation lines or rays; in the extreme case,
a separate line is stored for each pixel in the camera image. Due to their many degrees of freedom, they may fit all
kinds of cameras, allowing to obtain accurate, bias-free calibrations. Fig. 2 shows the models considered in this paper.
Previous generic calibration approaches (cf . Sec. 2) have
seen limited use in practice. On the one hand, this might
be since there is no readily usable implementation for any
existing approach. On the other hand, the community at
large does not seem to be aware of the practical advantages
of generic calibration approaches over parametric models.
Our contributions are thus: 1) We propose improvements
to camera calibration, in particular to the calibration pattern
and feature extraction, to increase accuracy. 2) We show
the benefits of accurate generic calibration over parametric
models, in particular on the examples of stereo depth and
camera pose estimation. 3) We publish our easy-to-use calibration pipeline and generic camera models as open source.

2535

