HyperSTAR: Task-Aware Hyperparameters for Deep Networks
Gaurav Mittal⋆†

Chang Liu⋆‡
Nikolaos Karianakis†
Victor Fragoso†
†
‡
Microsoft
Northeastern University

Mei Chen†

Yun Fu‡

{gaurav.mittal, nikos.karianakis, victor.fragoso, mei.chen}@microsoft.com
liu.chang6@husky.neu.edu

yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

Task-Aware Warm-Start
Dataset A

1. Introduction
Transfer learning has become a de-facto practice to
push the performance boundary on several computer vision
tasks [8, 49], most notably image classification [16, 19, 38].
Although transfer learning improves performance on new
tasks, it requires machine learning (ML) experts to spend
hours finding the right hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate,
layers to fine-tune, optimizer, etc.) that can achieve the
best performance. Researchers have relied on Hyperpa⋆ Authors with equal contribution.

This work was done when C. Liu was a research intern at Microsoft.

Performance

Dataset Z

Unseen Dataset

(

Performance

,

Conﬁg. 1
Conﬁg. 2
Conﬁg. N

)

Performance
Conﬁg. 1
Conﬁg. 2
…

…

Performance
Predictor

Rank 1
Rank 2

Rank N Conﬁg. N

Optimal
Conﬁguration

Task-Agnostic
HPO
Random
Search
…

Prior Knowledge

)

Conﬁg. N

…

,

…

(

Conﬁg. 1
Conﬁg. 2

…

While deep neural networks excel in solving visual
recognition tasks, they require significant effort to find hyperparameters that make them work optimally. Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) approaches have automated
the process of finding good hyperparameters but they do not
adapt to a given task (task-agnostic), making them computationally inefficient. To reduce HPO time, we present HyperSTAR (System for Task Aware Hyperparameter Recommendation), a task-aware method to warm-start HPO for
deep neural networks. HyperSTAR ranks and recommends
hyperparameters by predicting their performance conditioned on a joint dataset-hyperparameter space. It learns
a dataset (task) representation along with the performance
predictor directly from raw images in an end-to-end fashion. The recommendations, when integrated with an existing HPO method, make it task-aware and significantly reduce the time to achieve optimal performance. We conduct
extensive experiments on 10 publicly available large-scale
image classification datasets over two different network architectures, validating that HyperSTAR evaluates 50% less
configurations to achieve the best performance compared to
existing methods. We further demonstrate that HyperSTAR
makes Hyperband (HB) task-aware, achieving the optimal
accuracy in just 25% of the budget required by both vanilla
HB and Bayesian Optimized HB (BOHB).

Hyperband

HyperSTAR

Figure 1. HyperSTAR learns to recommend optimal hyperparameter configurations for an unseen task by learning end-to-end over a
joint dataset-hyperparameter space. These recommendations can
accelerate existing HPO methods leading to state-of-the-art performance for resource-constrained budgets.

rameter Optimization (HPO), ranging from simple random
search [3] to sophisticated Bayesian Optimization [39] and
Hyperband [29], to reduce manual effort and automate the
process of finding the optimal hyperparameters. Though
more effective than manual search, these approaches are
still slow since most of them trigger the same procedure for
any new task and do not leverage any information from past
experiences on related tasks.
Many approaches accelerate HPO [24, 27, 41] including “warm-start” techniques which exploit the correlation
among tasks [41, 36, 12, 2, 47]. Some of these use metalearning to warm-start HPO by exploiting the task information (meta-features) from past searches [12]. These
methods either guide the search policy for hyperparameters using a learned prior over hand-crafted dataset statistics [12, 48, 2], or pick the search policy of the most similar task from a database [47, 10]. Although these methods
accelerate HPO, there is no method that leverages visualbased priors or learns deep feature representations to jointly
encode dataset and hyperparameters to expedite HPO on

8736

