METAL: Minimum Effort Temporal Activity Localization in Untrimmed Videos
Da Zhang† , Xiyang Dai‡ , and Yuan-Fang Wang†
†

University of California, Santa Barbara; ‡ Microsoft

{dazhang, yfwang}@cs.ucsb.edu, xiyang.dai@microsoft.com

Abstract
Existing Temporal Activity Localization (TAL) methods
largely adopt strong supervision for model training which
requires (1) vast amounts of untrimmed videos per each
activity category and (2) accurate segment-level boundary
annotations (start time and end time) for every instance.
This poses a critical restriction to the current methods in
practical scenarios where not only segment-level annotations are expensive to obtain but many activity categories
are also rare and unobserved during training. Therefore,
Can we learn a TAL model under weak supervision that
can localize unseen activity classes? To address this scenario, we define a novel example-based TAL problem called
Minimum Effort Temporal Activity Localization (METAL):
Given only a few examples, the goal is to find the occurrences of semantically-related segments in an untrimmed
video sequence while model training is only supervised by
the video-level annotation. Towards this objective, we propose a novel Similarity Pyramid Network (SPN) that adopts
the few-shot learning technique of Relation Network and directly encodes hierarchical multi-scale correlations, which
we learn by optimizing two complimentary loss functions in
an end-to-end manner. We evaluate the SPN on the THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet datasets, of which we rearrange
the videos to fit the METAL setup. Results show that our
SPN achieves performance superior or competitive to stateof-the-art approaches with stronger supervision.

1. Introduction
TAL is a fundamental problem in computer vision and
has drawn increasing interests over the past few years due
to its vast potential applications in security surveillance,
robotics, etc. While impressive progress has been made [34,
12, 42, 6, 43, 28, 47, 7, 3, 20, 8, 31, 55, 53, 33, 48, 52, 54] to
recognize and localize temporal segments in videos, success
of these deep learning models heavily relies on the availability of a huge amount of labeled training data, mean-

Untrimmed videos only with Video-level labels

Training
Labels: High Jump

Trimmed Videos

Shotput

Soccer Penalty

SPN
High Jump

Labels: Soccer Penalty, Kicking Ball

Trimmed Videos

Untrimmed video from Unseen activity class

Few examples
Unseen classes

SPN
Car Washing

Localization Outputs

Testing
Ice Fishing [22.7s – 63.5s]

Ice Fishing

Wind Surfing

Figure 1: Minimum Effort Temporal Activity Localization (METAL): during training, we simply have untrimmed
videos with only video-level labels and trimmed videos of
the same label; during testing, the learned model is applied
to TAL in untrimmed videos given only a few trimmed examples from unseen classes.
ing that model training requires the full annotation of the
ground truth segment-level boundary for each activity instance among all possible classes. This severely limits their
(1) scalability in practical scenarios as annotating temporal
boundaries for long untrimmed videos is very expensive and
time-consuming [46] and (2) applicability to newly emerging or rare events which are not observed in the original
training dataset.
By contrast, human beings are capable of recognizing
and localizing new activity classes in untrimmed videos
by observing a few examples from each class. This motivates us to develop TAL methods that require significantly
fewer annotations for training and generalize well to rare
and novel activity categories. In this paper, we introduce a
new challenging example-based TAL problem called Minimum Effort Temporal Activity Localization (METAL).
As illustrated in Figure 1, we focus on the following scenario: during training, we have (1) untrimmed videos with
13882

