Unsupervised Model Personalization while Preserving Privacy and Scalability:
An Open Problem
Matthias De Lange1
Ales Leonardis2
1

KU Leuven

Xu Jia2
Gregory Slabaugh2
2

Huawei, Noah’s Ark Lab

{firstname.lastname}@kuleuven.be

Abstract
This work investigates the task of unsupervised model
personalization, adapted to continually evolving, unlabeled
local user images. We consider the practical scenario where
a high capacity server interacts with a myriad of resourcelimited edge devices, imposing strong requirements on scalability and local data privacy. We aim to address this
challenge within the continual learning paradigm and provide a novel Dual User-Adaptation framework (DUA) to
explore the problem. This framework flexibly disentangles
user-adaptation into model personalization on the server
and local data regularization on the user device, with desirable properties regarding scalability and privacy constraints. First, on the server, we introduce incremental
learning of task-specific expert models, subsequently aggregated using a concealed unsupervised user prior. Aggregation avoids retraining, whereas the user prior conceals
sensitive raw user data, and grants unsupervised adaptation. Second, local user-adaptation incorporates a domain
adaptation point of view, adapting regularizing batch normalization parameters to the user data. We explore various
empirical user configurations with different priors in categories and a tenfold of transforms for MIT Indoor Scene
recognition, and classify numbers in a combined MNIST
and SVHN setup. Extensive experiments yield promising results for data-driven local adaptation and elicit user priors
for server adaptation to depend on the model rather than
user data. Hence, although user-adaptation remains a challenging open problem, the DUA framework formalizes a
principled foundation for personalizing both on server and
user device, while maintaining privacy and scalability.

1. Introduction
Data availability and increased hardware efficiency have
made neural networks thrive in a wide range of tasks, competing human-level performance in a variety of tasks [13].

Sarah Parisot2,3
Tinne Tuytelaars1
3

Mila

{firstname.lastname}@huawei.com

However, high performing deep neural network models lead
to considerable data requirements, with high capacity models trained on large amounts of labeled data. Additionally, performance could be significantly increased by personalizing models to user-specific data. Nonetheless, user
data cannot be shared directly due to rigorous privacy constraints. This motivates the need to separate supervised
model training on the server from local adaptation to a
user’s unlabeled personal data. Furthermore, the personalized user model performing tasks locally has the additional
benefit of alleviated connectivity requirements.
In this work, we explore this challenge in a class incremental learning setting, relying on the assumption that a
user’s personal data evolves over time. We define a pragmatic distributed setup comprising a central server connected with a large number of user devices. We assume the
server to be a high-end machine endowed with extensive
storage capacity and computational resources. By contrast,
the compact user device has limited resources for both storage and computation. In practice, the number of users may
be very high, hence imposing the need for scalable useradaptation. A naive approach consists of training a new
server model from scratch for each user, resulting in a linearly increasing demand for computational resources. Another infeasible route is to locally finetune user-models, as
user devices are confined by limited computational capabilities. This paper explores a more realistic solution, training a single ensemble of models on the server, subsequently
aggregated leveraging user-specific priors. Besides scalability, two additional hurdles must be tackled: the server is
precluded access to local user data by pressing privacy requirements, and user data is typically unlabeled, raising the
need for unsupervised adaptation.
In order to tackle these rigorous constraints, we introduce a new Dual User-Adaptation framework (DUA) for
model personalization using a task incremental setup. In
this setting, tasks are defined as clearly delineated batches
of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, en-

14463

