Multi-Modal Domain Adaptation for Fine-Grained Action Recognition
Jonathan Munro
University of Bristol

Dima Damen
University of Bristol

jonathan.munro@bristol.ac.uk

dima.damen@bristol.ac.uk

training

Abstract

Multi-Modal
Self-Supervison

Inference

hin Modality
Wit
arial Alignm
s
er
e
v
d

nt

A

Fine-grained action recognition is the problem of recognising actions and interactions such as “cutting a tomato”
or “tightening a bolt” compared to coarse-grained actions
such as “preparing a meal”. This has a wide range of applications in assistive technologies in homes as well as in
industry. Supervised approaches rely on collecting a large
number of labelled examples to train discriminative models. However, due to the difficulty in collecting and annotating such fine-grained actions, many datasets collect long
untrimmed sequences. These contain several fine-grained
actions from a single [43, 50] or few [8, 47] environments.
Figure 2 shows the recent surge in large-scale finegrained action datasets. Two approaches have been attempted to achieve scalability: crowd-sourcing scripted actions [17, 46, 47], and long-term collections of natural interactions in homes [8, 37, 43]. While the latter offers more

Multi-Modal
Action Recognition

nt

1. Introduction

Labelled
Source Domain

hin Modalit
Wit rial Align y
m
r sa
e
ve
Ad

Fine-grained action recognition datasets exhibit environmental bias, where multiple video sequences are captured from a limited number of environments. Training a
model in one environment and deploying in another results
in a drop in performance due to an unavoidable domain
shift. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) approaches
have frequently utilised adversarial training between the
source and target domains. However, these approaches
have not explored the multi-modal nature of video within
each domain. In this work we exploit the correspondence
of modalities as a self-supervised alignment approach for
UDA in addition to adversarial alignment (Fig. 1).
We test our approach on three kitchens from our largescale dataset, EPIC-Kitchens [8], using two modalities
commonly employed for action recognition: RGB and Optical Flow. We show that multi-modal self-supervision
alone improves the performance over source-only training
by 2.4% on average. We then combine adversarial training with multi-modal self-supervision, showing that our approach outperforms other UDA methods by 3%.

Unlabelled
Target Domain

Figure 1: Our proposed UDA approach for multi-modal
action recognition. Improved target domain performance
is achieved via multi-modal self-supervision on source and
target domains simultaneously, jointly optimised with multiple domain discriminators, one per-modality.
realistic videos, many actions are collected in only a few
environments. This leads to learned representations which
do not generalise well [53].
Transferring a model learned on a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target domain is known as Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA). Recently, significant
attention has been given to deep UDA in other vision
tasks [14, 15, 32, 33, 51, 55]. However, very few works
have attempted deep UDA for video data [7, 19]. Surprisingly, none have tested on videos of fine-grained actions
and all these approaches only consider video as images (i.e.
RGB modality). This is in contrast with self-supervised approaches that have successfully utilised multiple modalities
within video when labels are not present during training [1].
Up to our knowledge, no prior work has explored the
multi-modal nature of video data for UDA in action recognition. We summarise our contributions as follows:
• We show that multi-modal self-supervision, applied to
both source and unlabelled target data, can be used for

122

