Weakly Supervised Visual Semantic Parsing
Alireza Zareian, Svebor Karaman, and Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
{az2407,sk4089,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to extract entities, predicates and their semantic structure from images,
enabling deep understanding of visual content, with many
applications such as visual reasoning and image retrieval.
Nevertheless, existing SGG methods require millions of
manually annotated bounding boxes for training, and are
computationally inefficient, as they exhaustively process all
pairs of object proposals to detect predicates. In this paper,
we address those two limitations by first proposing a generalized formulation of SGG, namely Visual Semantic Parsing, which disentangles entity and predicate recognition,
and enables sub-quadratic performance. Then we propose
the Visual Semantic Parsing Network, VSPN ET, based on a
dynamic, attention-based, bipartite message passing framework that jointly infers graph nodes and edges through an
iterative process. Additionally, we propose the first graphbased weakly supervised learning framework, based on a
novel graph alignment algorithm, which enables training
without bounding box annotations. Through extensive experiments, we show that VSPN ET outperforms weakly supervised baselines significantly and approaches fully supervised performance, while being several times faster. We
publicly release the source code of our method1 .

1. Introduction
Deep learning has excelled in various tasks such as
object detection [33] and speech recognition [1], but it
falls short of tasks that require deeper semantic understanding and reasoning, such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [47]. Motivated by the success of structured
representations in natural language processing [2, 34, 37],
computer vision has started to adopt scene graphs to improve performance and explainability, in various tasks
such as VQA [35, 12], image captioning [42], and image retrieval [14]. The task of Scene Graph Generation
(SGG) [40] aims to represent an image with a set of enti1 https://github.com/alirezazareian/vspnet

Figure 1. An example of structured scene understanding formulated as Scene Graph Generation, where predicates are edges,
compared to the proposed Visual Semantic Parsing, where predicates are nodes and edges represent semantic roles.

ties (nodes) and predicates (directed edges), as illustrated
in Figure 1 (bottom). Several methods have been proposed
to address this problem [40, 20, 41, 48], but despite their
success, important challenges remain unaddressed.
Most existing methods are computationally inefficient,
as they exhaustively process every pair of object proposals,
in order to detect predicates. This results in a quadratic order with respect to the number of proposals. Extending to
higher-order interactions has not been studied, and would
make this problem even more complex. Furthermore, existing SGG methods require bounding box annotation for each
object (node) in ground truth graphs, over the entire training
data, which is an expensive constraint. We argue that SGG
should ideally be disentangled from bounding box localization, so it can focus on high-level semantic and relational
reasoning rather than low-level boundary analysis. However, weakly supervised SGG has barely been studied, and
the performance is far from supervised methods [50].
To advance structured scene understanding, we propose
the Visual Semantic Parsing Network (VSPN ET), which

3736

