OASIS: A Large-Scale Dataset for Single Image 3D in the Wild
Weifeng Chen1,2 Shengyi Qian1 David Fan2 Noriyuki Kojima1 Max Hamilton1 Jia Deng2
1

2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Princeton University

{wfchen,syqian,kojimano,johnmaxh}@umich.edu dfan@alumni.princeton.edu,jiadeng@princeton.edu

Human Annotations

Reconstructed Pixel-wise Depth

Human Annotations

Reconstructed Pixel-wise Depth

Figure 1. We introduce Open Annotations of Single-Image Surfaces (OASIS), a large-scale dataset of human annotations of 3D surfaces
for 140,000 images in the wild. More examples in the supplementary material.

Abstract
Single-view 3D is the task of recovering 3D properties
such as depth and surface normals from a single image.
We hypothesize that a major obstacle to single-image 3D
is data. We address this issue by presenting Open Annotations of Single Image Surfaces (OASIS), a dataset for
single-image 3D in the wild consisting of annotations of detailed 3D geometry for 140,000 images. We train and evaluate leading models on a variety of single-image 3D tasks.
We expect OASIS to be a useful resource for 3D vision research. Project site: https://pvl.cs.princeton.
edu/OASIS.

1. Introduction
Single-view 3D is the task of recovering 3D properties
such as depth and surface normals from a single RGB image. It is a core computer vision problem of critical importance. 3D scene interpretation is a foundation for understanding events and planning actions. 3D shape representation is crucial for making object recognition robust against
changes in viewpoint, pose, and illumination. 3D from a
single image is especially important due to the ubiquity of
monocular images and videos. Even with a stereo camera
with which 3D can be reconstructed by triangulating matching pixels from different views, monocular 3D cues are still

necessary in textureless or specular regions where it is difficult to reliably match pixel values.
Single-image 3D is challenging. Unlike multiview 3D,
it is ill-posed and resists tractable analytical formulation
except in the most simplistic settings. As a result, datadriven approaches have shown greater promise, as evidenced by a plethora of works that train deep networks to
map an RGB image to depth, surface normals, or 3D models [11, 17, 36, 14, 43, 24]. However, despite substantial
progress, the best systems today still struggle with handling
scenes “in the wild”— arbitrary scenes that a camera may
encounter in the real world. As prior work has shown [5],
state-of-art systems often give erroneous results when presented with unfamiliar scenes with novel shapes or layouts.
We hypothesize that a major obstacle of single-image
3D is data. Unlike object recognition, whose progress has
been propelled by datasets like ImageNet [10] covering
diverse object categories with high-quality labels, singleimage 3D has lacked an ImageNet equivalent that covers
diverse scenes with high-quality 3D ground truth. Existing datasets are restricted to either a narrow range of
scenes [31, 9] or simplistic annotations such as sparse relative depth pairs or surface normals [5, 7].
In this paper we introduce Open Annotations of SingleImage Surfaces (OASIS), a large-scale dataset for singleimage 3D in the wild. It consists of human annotations that
1679

