CascadePSP: Toward Class-Agnostic and Very High-Resolution Segmentation
via Global and Local Refinement
Ho Kei Cheng∗ Jihoon Chung∗
HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai
Tencent

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

{hkchengad,jchungaa}@cs.ust.hk

yuwingtai@tencent.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
State-of-the-art semantic segmentation methods were almost exclusively trained on images within a fixed resolution range. These segmentations are inaccurate for very
high-resolution images since using bicubic upsampling of
low-resolution segmentation does not adequately capture
high-resolution details along object boundaries. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach to address the highresolution segmentation problem without using any highresolution training data. The key insight is our CascadePSP
network which refines and corrects local boundaries whenever possible. Although our network is trained with lowresolution segmentation data, our method is applicable to
any resolution even for very high-resolution images larger
than 4K. We present quantitative and qualitative studies
on different datasets to show that CascadePSP can reveal
pixel-accurate segmentation boundaries using our novel refinement module without any finetuning. Thus, our method
can be regarded as class-agnostic. Finally, we demonstrate
the application of our model to scene parsing in multi-class
segmentation.

1. Introduction
Resolution of commodity cameras and displays has significantly increased with 4K UHD (3840 × 2160) being
the high industry standard. Despite the demand for highresolution media, many state-of-the-art computer vision algorithms face various challenges with images with high
pixel count. Image semantic segmentation is one of these
computer vision tasks. Models for semantic segmentation in deep learning designed for low-resolution images
(e.g. PASCAL or COCO dataset) often fail to generalize to
higher resolution scenarios. Specifically, these models typically use GPU memory linear to the number of pixels, making it practically impossible to directly train a 4K UHD segmentation. High-resolution training data for semantic segmentation is difficult to obtain because pixel-accurate anno∗ Equal contribution. This research is supported in part by Tencent
and the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no.
1620818.

Figure 1. Segmentation of a high-resolution image (3492×2328).
Left: Produced by Deeplab V3+ [6]. Right: Refined by our algorithm.

tation is required, much less that even such high-resolution
training data are available, to train a model on very highresolution images, a much larger receptive field is required
to capture sufficient semantics. Plausible workarounds include downsampling and cropping, but the former removes
details while the latter destroys image context.
This paper proposes CascadePSP1 , a general segmentation refinement model that refines any given segmentation
from low to high resolution. Our model is trained independently and can be easily appended to any existing methods to improve their segmentation, a finer and more accurate segmentation mask of an object can be produced. Our
model takes as input an initial mask that can be an output of
any algorithm to provide a rough object location. Then our
CascadePSP will output a refined mask. Our model is designed in a cascade fashion that generates refined segmentation in a coarse-to-fine manner. Coarse outputs from the
early levels predict object structure which will be used as
input to the latter levels to refine boundary details. Figure 1
shows that the model not only generates output segmenta1 Source code, pretrained models and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/hkchengrex/CascadePSP.

8890

