Where Does It End? – Reasoning About Hidden Surfaces by Object Intersection
Constraints
Michael Strecke and Jörg Stückler
Embodied Vision Group, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
{mstrecke,jstueckler}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Dynamic scene understanding is an essential capability in robotics and VR/AR. In this paper we propose CoSection, an optimization-based approach to 3D dynamic
scene reconstruction, which infers hidden shape information from intersection constraints. An object-level dynamic
SLAM frontend detects, segments, tracks and maps dynamic
objects in the scene. Our optimization backend completes
the shapes using hull and intersection constraints between
the objects. In experiments, we demonstrate our approach
on real and synthetic dynamic scene datasets. We also assess the shape completion performance of our method quantitatively. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the
first method to incorporate such physical plausibility constraints on object intersections for shape completion of dynamic objects in an energy minimization framework.
Input color

1. Introduction
Humans have the remarkable ability to infer missing information using assumptions on the physical plausibility of
scenes. For instance, if we see objects lying on a table, we
immediately conclude that the shape of the objects is constrained by the table surface. We would be surprised if an
object continues within the table.
In this paper we propose Co-Section, a novel approach to
incorporate such constraints into a bottom-up 3D scene reconstruction method. Our method tracks and maps dynamic
objects in the scenes. In dynamic scenes, however, we can
use more than just the image measurements to reason about
the object shapes: individual objects cannot penetrate each
others while they move relative to each others and eventually are in contact. In contrast to a variety of learning-based
approaches for shape completion [6, 18, 5, 24], we incorporate such physical plausibility as intersection constraints in
an energy-minimization framework.
Our formulation optimizes the implicit surfaces of the
objects as a signed distance functions from oriented points.

EM-Fusion

Ours

Figure 1: We propose a novel energy minimization approach to 3D reconstruction in dynamic scenes. Our approach uses a dynamic object-level SLAM method as frontend (such as EM-Fusion [19]). Compared to the TSDF object maps of the frontend, our approach can leverage intersection constraints between objects and visibility constraints to complete object shapes in a physically plausible
way. The top two rows show the same timestep in the scene
car4 from different viewpoints. The bottom rows show different timesteps from the place-items scene. See also the
supplemental video for further visualization.

The oriented point measurements are provided by a dynamic object-level SLAM frontend. It detects, segments,
tracks and 3D reconstructs the objects in local volumetric
SDF representations. Our energy minimization backend optimizes the object maps and incorporates intersection and
hull constraints to complete the object shapes.
We demonstrate our approach on real and synthetic dynamic scene datasets. We also assess our shape completion
19592

