A Quantum Computational Approach to Correspondence Problems on Point Sets
Vladislav Golyanik
Christian Theobalt
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
Modern adiabatic quantum computers (AQC) are already used to solve difficult combinatorial optimisation
problems in various domains of science. Currently, only
a few applications of AQC in computer vision have been
demonstrated. We review AQC and derive a new algorithm
for correspondence problems on point sets suitable for execution on AQC. Our algorithm has a subquadratic computational complexity of the state preparation. Examples
of successful transformation estimation and point set alignment by simulated sampling are shown in the systematic experimental evaluation. Finally, we analyse the differences
in the solutions and the corresponding energy values.

Figure 1: Different 2D point sets — fish [46], qubit, kanji and composer
— aligned with our QA approach. For every pair of point sets, the initial
misalignment is shown on the left, and the registration is shown on the
right. QA is the first transformation estimation and point set alignment
method which can be executed on adiabatic quantum computers.

1. Introduction
Since their proposal in the early eighties [8, 42, 27],
quantum computers have attracted much attention of physicists and computer scientists. Impressive advances both
in quantum computing hardware and algorithms have been
demonstrated over the last thirty years [39, 30, 60, 57, 41,
19, 25, 48, 64, 47]. Quantum computers are not universally
faster than conventional machines, but they can natively execute algorithms relying on quantum parallelism, i.e., the
ability to perform operations on exponentially many superimposed memory states simultaneously [58].
To harness the advantages, carefully designed algorithms
are required. Nowadays, the motivation to take advantage of
quantum effects in computing is also facilitated by the classical computing paradigm approaching its limits, since the
quantum effects are becoming non-neglectable while manufacturing and using conventional CPUs. As a result, alternative paradigms such as massively parallel computing
devices have been brought into being.
While universal gate quantum computer technology has
not yet reached the maturity, modern adiabatic quantum annealers (AQA) are already capable of solving difficult realworld combinatorial optimisation problems [15, 14, 23, 48].
The primary difference of universal gate quantum computing and AQA is that the latter can address objectives formulated as quadratic unconstrained binary optimisation prob-

lems (QUBOP) defined as
arg minn qT Pq,
q∈B

(1)

where q is a set of n binary variables, and P is a symmetric
matrix of weights between the variables. The operational
principle of AQA is grounded on the adiabatic theorem of
quantum mechanics [17] which states that
if a quantum-mechanical system is in the ground state
of a time-dependent Hamiltonian and parameters of
this Hamiltonian are changing gradually enough, the (2)
system will continue to remain in the ground state during the evolution (see Table 1 for quantum notions).
In their seminal paper, Farhi et al. [26] have shown
that the adiabatic principle (2) can be used for solving
N P-complete optimisation problems and laid the foundation for adiabatic quantum computing. Several years later,
Aharonov et al. [2] theoretically showed the equivalence between classical quantum computing and quantum annealing models. As of 2019-2020, general-purpose quantum
computers accessible for research purposes and applications
contain up to 20 qubits [19]. In contrast, the latest quantum
annealers support up to 210 qubits [21]1 . Nevertheless, due
1 the amount of logical qubits which are available on this system is an
order of magnitude lower since most qubits are used for the error correction

9182

