DuDoRNet: Learning a Dual-Domain Recurrent Network for Fast MRI
Reconstruction with Deep T1 Prior

1

Bo Zhou1
Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Yale University

S. Kevin Zhou2,3
Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen

bo.zhou@yale.edu

s.kevin.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with multiple protocols is commonly used for diagnosis, but it suffers from a
long acquisition time, which yields the image quality vulnerable to say motion artifacts. To accelerate, various
methods have been proposed to reconstruct full images from
under-sampled k-space data. However, these algorithms
are inadequate for two main reasons. Firstly, aliasing artifacts generated in the image domain are structural and
non-local, so that sole image domain restoration is insufficient. Secondly, though MRI comprises multiple protocols
during one exam, almost all previous studies only employ
the reconstruction of an individual protocol using a highly
distorted undersampled image as input, leaving the use of
fully-sampled short protocol (say T1) as complementary information highly underexplored. In this work, we address
the above two limitations by proposing a Dual Domain Recurrent Network (DuDoRNet) with deep T1 prior embedded
to simultaneously recover k-space and images for accelerating the acquisition of MRI with a long imaging protocol.
Specifically, a Dilated Residual Dense Network (DRDNet)
is customized for dual domain restorations from undersampled MRI data. Extensive experiments on different sampling patterns and acceleration rates demonstrate that our
method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods,
and can reconstruct high quality MRI.

1. Introduction
MRI is one of the most applied imaging procedures
for disease diagnosis and treatment planning. As a noninvasive, radiation-free, and in-vivo imaging modality, it
provides significantly better soft-tissue contrast than many
other imaging modalities and offers accurate measurements
of both anatomical and functional signals. However, its long
acquisition time, owing to sampling full k-space, especially
under the multiple protocols requiring long Echo Time (TE)

2

and Repetition Time (TR), could lead to significant artifacts
in the reconstructed image caused by patient or physiological motions during acquisitions, i.e. cardiac motion and respiration. Furthermore, a long acquisition time also limits
the availability of MR scanner for patients and causes delayed patient care in the medical system.
To accelerate the MRI acquisition, various efforts have
been made for improving the reconstruction image quality
with undersampled k-space data. Previously, Compressed
Sensing (CS) and Parallel Imaging have achieved significant progresses in fast MRI [20, 4, 8]. In CS-MRI, one
assumes that images have a sparse representation in certain domains [16, 19, 12]. In conventional CS-MRI, previous works focus on using sparse coefficients in sparsifying
transforms, i.e. wavelet transform [22, 32] and contourlet
transform [23], combined with regularization parameters,
i.e. total variation, to solve the ill-posed inverse problems
in an iterative manner. However, these iterative minimization process based on sparsifying transforms tends to generate smaller sparse coefficient values, and lead to loss of
details and unwanted artifacts in the reconstruction when
undersampling rate is high [25]. Thus, current CS-MRI is
limited to a rate of 2 ∼ 3 [16, 25]. Furthermore, reconstruction based on these iterative algorithms is time-consuming;
thus it is challenging to deploy them in near real-time MRI
scenarios, i.e. Cardiac-MRI and Functional-MRI. More recently, triggered by the success of computer vision [11],
deep learning based algorithms have been developed for
fast MRI reconstruction and demonstrated significant advantages [29, 27, 28, 5, 14, 15, 6, 18, 34, 35]. Wang et al.
[29] first proposed to train a multi-layer Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to recover the fully sampled MRI image
from undersampled MRI image using supervised training
with paired data. Similarly, Jin et al. [9] proposed to use UNet [26] to solve the inverse problem in imaging. Yang et
al. [31] developed a De-Aliasing GAN that uses a U-Net as
the generator with a loss function consisting of four components: an image domain loss, a frequency domain loss,
a perceptual loss, and an adversarial loss. Quan et al. [24]
14273

