SDC-Depth: Semantic Divide-and-Conquer Network for Monocular Depth
Estimation
Lijun Wang1 , Jianming Zhang2 , Oliver Wang2 , Zhe Lin2 , and Huchuan Lu1,3 ∗
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Adobe Research, 3 Peng Cheng Lab
{ljwang,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, {jianmzha,owang,zlin}@adobe.com

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is an ill-posed problem, and
as such critically relies on scene priors and semantics. Due
to its complexity, we propose a deep neural network model
based on a semantic divide-and-conquer approach. Our
model decomposes a scene into semantic segments, such
as object instances and background stuff classes, and then
predicts a scale and shift invariant depth map for each semantic segment in a canonical space. Semantic segments
of the same category share the same depth decoder, so the
global depth prediction task is decomposed into a series of
category-specific ones, which are simpler to learn and easier to generalize to new scene types. Finally, our model
stitches each local depth segment by predicting its scale and
shift based on the global context of the image. The model
is trained end-to-end using a multi-task loss for panoptic
segmentation and depth prediction, and is therefore able
to leverage large-scale panoptic segmentation datasets to
boost its semantic understanding. We validate the effectiveness of our approach and show state-of-the-art performance
on three benchmark datasets.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Our depth prediction method jointly decomposes
an input image into both instance (a) and category segments
(b). It then independently predicts depth in a canonical
space for each segment and recomposes them into a final
globally coherent depth map (c). Note that the depth maps
are generated by our SDC-Depth Net trained with sparse
point-level depth order supervision [2].

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is an important component of 3D perception. Compared to reconstruction techniques based on
active sensors or multi-view geometry, monocular depth estimation is significantly more ill-posed, and is therefore critically reliant on learning strong scene priors and semantics.
Recent works studying this problem [4, 14, 39] have
achieved significant progresses using deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) supervised by depth data, showing that they are able to capture complex high-level scene
semantics. In addition, some works [39, 28] further feed
semantic segmentation labels to their models to boost depth
estimation accuracy in some specific domains. However,
monocular depth estimation in the wild remains challeng∗ Corresponding author.

ing due to the diversity of real world scenes.
We propose a Semantic Divide-and-Conquer Network
(SDC-Depth Net) for monocular depth estimation. We decompose a natural image into a number of semantic segments, and then predict, for each segment, a normalized
depth map in the range [0, 1]. We refer to this normalized
depth map as the canonical depth for a given segment. This
decomposition simplifies the depth prediction problem, as
semantic categories have much consistent depth structures
when viewed in isolation, and training category-specific
depth decoders makes it easier to learn these priors. For example, the sky region is always infinitely far away and depth
in the ground region often varies smoothly along the vertical
direction. For object categories like people, instance-level
depth maps also have a high degree of similarity to each

541

