Cross-modality Person re-identification with Shared-Specific Feature Transfer
Yan Lu1,2 , Yue Wu3 , Bin Liu1,2, , Tianzhu Zhang1 , Baopu Li4 , Qi Chu1,2 , Nenghai Yu1,2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information, Chinese Academy of Science, Hefei, China
3
Damo Academy, Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
4
Baidu Research(USA), 1195 Baudeaux Dr, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
luyan17@mail.ustc.edu.cn, matthew.wy@alibaba-inc.com, baopuli@baidu.com
{flowice, tzzhang, qchu, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
RGB-specific

Cross-modality person re-identification (cm-ReID) is a
challenging but key technology for intelligent video analysis. Existing works mainly focus on learning modalityshared representation by embedding different modalities
into a same feature space, lowering the upper bound of
feature distinctiveness. In this paper, we tackle the above
limitation by proposing a novel cross-modality sharedspecific feature transfer algorithm (termed cm-SSFT) to explore the potential of both the modality-shared information
and the modality-specific characteristics to boost the reidentification performance. We model the affinities of different modality samples according to the shared features and
then transfer both shared and specific features among and
across modalities. We also propose a complementary feature learning strategy including modality adaption, project
adversarial learning and reconstruction enhancement to
learn discriminative and complementary shared and specific features of each modality, respectively. The entire cmSSFT algorithm can be trained in an end-to-end manner. We
conducted comprehensive experiments to validate the superiority of the overall algorithm and the effectiveness of each
component. The proposed algorithm significantly outperforms state-of-the-arts by 22.5% and 19.3% mAP on the two
mainstream benchmark datasets SYSU-MM01 and RegDB,
respectively.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to find out images
of the same person to the query image from a large gallery.
Many works focus on feature learning [17, 37] and metric learning [3, 24] on the RGB modality. These methods
Bin Liu is the corresponding author.

Shared

Infrared-specific

RGB-specific

Shared

Infrared-specific

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between our algorithm and
modality-shared feature learning methods. The modality-shared
feature learning methods abandon lots of useful specific cues because the modality-specific information cannot be extracted from
the other modality. Our algorithm tries to introduce modalityspecific features based on the cross-modality near neighbor affinity
modeling, effectively utilizing both shared and specific information for each sample.

have achieved great success, especially with the most recent deep learning technology [39]. However, the dependency on bright lighting environments limits their applications in real complex scenarios. The performance of these
methods degrades dramatically in dark environments where
most cameras cannot work well [47]. Hence, other kinds
of visual sensors like infrared cameras are now widely used
as a complement to RGB cameras to overcome these difficulties, yielding popular research interest on RGB-Infrared
cross-modality person ReID (cm-ReID).
Compared to conventional ReID task, the major difficulty of cm-ReID is the modality discrepancy resulting

13379

