Can Facial Pose and Expression Be Separated with Weak Perspective Camera?
1

1

1,2

1,2

Evangelos Sariyanidi , Casey J. Zampella , Robert T. Schultz and Birkan Tunc
1
2
Center for Autism Research, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania
{sariyanide,zampellac,schultzrt,tuncb}@email.chop.edu

30o

Abstract
Separating facial pose and expression within images requires a camera model for 3D-to-2D mapping. The weak
perspective (WP) camera has been the most popular choice;
it is the default, if not the only option, in state-of-the-art facial analysis methods and software. WP camera is justified
by the supposition that its errors are negligible when the
subjects are relatively far from the camera, yet this claim
has never been tested despite nearly 20 years of research.
This paper critically examines the suitability of WP camera
for separating facial pose and expression. First, we theoretically show that WP causes pose-expression ambiguity,
as it leads to estimation of spurious expressions. Next, we
experimentally quantify the magnitude of spurious expressions. Finally, we test whether spurious expressions have
detrimental effects on a common facial analysis application, namely Action Unit (AU) detection. Contrary to conventional wisdom, we find that severe pose-expression ambiguity exists even when subjects are not close to the camera, leading to large false positive rates in AU detection.
We also demonstrate that the magnitude and characteristics of spurious expressions depend on the point distribution model used to model the expressions. Our results suggest that common assumptions about WP need to be revisited in facial expression modeling, and that facial analysis
software should encourage and facilitate the use of the true
camera model whenever possible.

1. Introduction
Facial expression analysis is one of the most studied
problems in computer vision, motivated by numerous applications in industry, clinical research, entertainment, and
marketing. Variations in head pose create a significant challenge for facial expression analysis [30], as expressions
look significantly different from different angles. Disentangling facial expression from pose is important for improving expression recognition accuracy, as well as from an
explainable AI standpoint, as one cannot reliably interpret

60o

90o

(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
30 o

45o

60o

90o

Smartphone cam.

Webcam

Conference cam.

Action cam.

120 o

160 o

FOV

Smartphone cam. (telephoto)

Figure 1. (a) The three FOVs used in this paper; the perspective
effect increases with FOV. (b) Two subject-to-camera distances
for each FOV. (Z̄close , Z̄far ) was (8.5m, 3.5m), (3.9m, 1.6m) and
(2.3m, 0.9m) for 30°, 60° and 90° FOV, respectively. (c) Illustration of head size relative to image size with Z̄close (top) and with
Z̄far (bottom); the head size was approximately the same, independently of FOV, for either distance. (d) The FOV of several
cameras; the sources for these data are in [3, 6, 5, 4, 1, 2, 7]

the decisions of a facial behavior analysis system if the expression coefficients are confounded by head movements.
The dominant approach for disentangling pose and expressions within 2D images is to project facial shape to
the 3D space, where it can be decomposed into rigid (rotation, translation) and non-rigid factors (expressions) (Section 2.1). This process necessitates a camera model responsible for the 2D-3D projection. The weak perspective
(WP) camera (i.e., scaled orthographic camera) is the de
facto standard model, used in almost all state-of-the-art approaches (Section 1.1). The conventional wisdom is that
WP camera is appropriate when subjects are not close to the
camera (Section 1.1); however, to our knowledge, no study
investigated this claim in 20 years of research. Such an investigation is particularly urgent now, as advances in mobile technologies and online communication lead to a surge
in facial videos recorded using cameras with large field-ofview (FOV) from close distances, and WP camera’s approximation errors increase under those circumstances [19].
In this paper, we theoretically and experimentally inves-

7173

