Learning Instance Occlusion for Panoptic Segmentation
Justin Lazarow∗ Kwonjoon Lee∗ Kunyu Shi∗ Zhuowen Tu
University of California San Diego
{jlazarow, kwl042, kshi, ztu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation requires segments of both
“things” (countable object instances) and “stuff” (uncountable and amorphous regions) within a single output.
A common approach involves the fusion of instance segmentation (for “things”) and semantic segmentation (for
“stuff”) into a non-overlapping placement of segments, and
resolves overlaps. However, instance ordering with detection confidence do not correlate well with natural occlusion
relationship. To resolve this issue, we propose a branch
that is tasked with modeling how two instance masks should
overlap one another as a binary relation. Our method,
named OCFusion, is lightweight but particularly effective
in the instance fusion process. OCFusion is trained with the
ground truth relation derived automatically from the existing dataset annotations. We obtain state-of-the-art results
on COCO and show competitive results on the Cityscapes
panoptic segmentation benchmark.

1. Introduction
Image understanding has been a long standing problem
in both human perception [1] and computer vision [25]. The
image parsing framework [35] is concerned with the task
of decomposing and segmenting an input image into constituents such as objects (text and faces) and generic regions
through the integration of image segmentation, object detection, and object recognition. Scene parsing is similar in
spirit and consists of both non-parametric [33] and parametric [40] approaches.
After the initial development, the problem of image understanding was studied separately as object detection (or
extended to instance segmentation) and semantic segmentation. Instance segmentation [27, 28, 5, 20, 10, 29, 39, 15] requires the detection and segmentation of each thing (countable object instance) within an image, while semantic segmentation [30, 34, 9, 24, 2, 41, 40] provides a dense perpixel classification without distinction between instances
within the same thing category. Kirillov et al. [17] proposed
the panoptic segmentation task that combines the strength
∗ indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1: An illustration of fusion using masks
sorted by detection confidence alone [17] vs. with
the ability to query for occlusions (OCFusion; ours).
Occlude(A, B) = 0 in occlusion head means mask B
should be placed on top of mask A. Mask R-CNN proposes
three instance masks listed with decreasing confidence. The
heuristic of [17] occludes all subsequent instances after the
“person”, while our method retains them in the final output
by querying the occlusion head.
of semantic segmentation and instance segmentation. In this
task, each pixel in an image is assigned either to a background class (stuff ) or to a specific foreground object (an
instance of things).
A common approach for panoptic segmentation has
emerged in a number of works [16, 19, 38] that relies on
combining the strong baseline architectures used in semantic segmentation and instance segmentation into either a
separate or shared architecture and then fusing the results
from the semantic segmentation and instance segmentation
branches into a single panoptic output. Since there is no expectation of consistency in proposals between semantic and
instance segmentation branches, conflicts must be resolved.
Furthermore, one must resolve conflicts within the instance
segmentation branch as it proposes segmentations indepen-

10720

