How Useful is Self-Supervised Pretraining for Visual Tasks?
Alejandro Newell Jia Deng
Princeton University
{anewell,jiadeng}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent advances have spurred incredible progress in
self-supervised pretraining for vision. We investigate what
factors may play a role in the utility of these pretraining
methods for practitioners. To do this, we evaluate various self-supervised algorithms across a comprehensive array of synthetic datasets and downstream tasks. We prepare
a suite of synthetic data that enables an endless supply of
annotated images as well as full control over dataset difficulty. Our experiments offer insights into how the utility
of self-supervision changes as the number of available labels grows as well as how the utility changes as a function
of the downstream task and the properties of the training
data. We also find that linear evaluation does not correlate
with finetuning performance. Code and data is available at
github.com/princeton-vl/selfstudy.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has the potential to revolutionize computer vision. It aims to learn good representations
from unlabeled visual data, reducing or even eliminating
the need for costly collection of manual labels. In the
context of deep networks, the most common use of selfsupervision is in pretraining a network with unlabeled data
for later finetuning on a downstream task. The better the
self-supervision, the better the downstream performance.
Progress on self-supervised pretraining has accelerated
in recent years. In particular, self-supervised models now
produce features that are comparable to or outperform those
produced by ImageNet pretraining [1, 36, 19, 16]. While it
is currently not common to leverage such methods, wider
adoption might be seen in the wake of these advances.
In this work we investigate what barriers might exist between the latest progress in self-supervision and its broader
use in the field, as well as how to approach evaluation in a
way that is informative and useful to practitioners.
We are motivated by the observation that much of the existing literature evaluates self-supervision in either few-shot
settings or when restricting downstream use of the model.

Figure 1. We highlight three possible outcomes when using selfsupervised pretraining, the pretrained model either: a) always provides an improvement over the the model trained from scratch
even as the amount of labeled data increases, b) reaches higher
accuracy with fewer labels but plateaus to the same accuracy as
the baseline, c) converges to baseline performance before accuracy plateaus. In our experiments we find option (c) to be the most
common outcome.

For example, a common form of evaluation is to freeze all
weights of the pretrained network and train a linear layer
for the downstream task. However, for many computer vision tasks, there already exists a large amount of labeled
data, and finetuning of the model is necessary to get as high
accuracy as possible.
Evaluating self-supervision in unrestricted settings is important because in practice there are many situations where
maximizing accuracy is paramount (think of pedestrian detection for self-driving cars). It is in one’s interest to collect as many labeled examples as possible in such a setting.
How useful is self-supervision in these cases? How do we
measure this utility?
Given a downstream task, several outcomes are possible
when comparing a finetuned self-supervised model against
a baseline trained from scratch (illustrated in Fig. 1). With
more labeled data, the performance of a model will improve
and may eventually plateau. But in practice, one has a
finite labeling budget, and that budget will determine the
accuracy reached when training from scratch. There are
three subsequent outcomes for the finetuned model: (a) selfsupervision achieves a better accuracy than the baseline; (b)
self-supervision achieves the same accuracy but with fewer
labeled examples; (c) self-supervision achieves the same accuracy with the same number of labeled examples.
17345

