HUMBI: A Large Multiview Dataset of Human Body Expressions
∗

∗
Zhixuan Yu†
Jae Shin Yoon†
In Kyu Lee†
Jaesik Park‡
Jihun Yu♯
†
‡
University of Minnesota
POSTECH

Prashanth Venkatesh†
Hyun Soo Park†
♯
BinaryVR

Figure 1: We present a new large dataset of multiview human body expressions for modeling view-specific appearance and geometry.
107 synchronized cameras capture the expressions of 772 distinctive subjects. We focus on five elementary expressions: face (blue), gaze
(yellow), hand (pink and purple), body (light orange), and garment including top (light blue) and bottom (light green).

Abstract
This paper presents a new large multiview dataset called
HUMBI for human body expressions with natural clothing.
The goal of HUMBI is to facilitate modeling view-specific
appearance and geometry of gaze, face, hand, body, and
garment from assorted people. 107 synchronized HD cameras are used to capture 772 distinctive subjects across gender, ethnicity, age, and physical condition. With the multiview image streams, we reconstruct high fidelity body expressions using 3D mesh models, which allows representing
view-specific appearance using their canonical atlas. We
demonstrate that HUMBI is highly effective in learning and
reconstructing a complete human model and is complementary to the existing datasets of human body expressions with
limited views and subjects such as MPII-Gaze, Multi-PIE,
Human3.6M, and Panoptic Studio datasets.

1. Introduction
We express sincere intent, emotion, and attention
through our honest body signals [50], including gaze, facial
expression, and gestures. Modeling and photorealistic rendering of such body signals are, therefore, the core enabler
of authentic telepresence. However, it is challenging due to
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work

the complex physical interactions between texture, geometry, illumination, and viewpoint (e.g., translucent skins, tiny
wrinkles, and reflective fabric). Recently, pose- and viewspecific models by making use of a copious capacity of neural encoding [6,39] substantially extend the expressibility of
existing linear models [16]. So far, these models have been
constructed by a sequence of the detailed scans of a target
subject using dedicated camera infrastructure (e.g., multicamera systems [7, 25, 73]). Looking ahead, we would expect a new versatile model that is applicable to the general
appearance of assorted people without requiring the massive scans for every target subject.
Among many factors, what are the core resources to
build such a generalizable model? We argue that the data
that can span an extensive range of appearances from numerous shapes and identities are prerequisites. To validate
our conjecture, we present a new dataset of human body
expressions called HUMBI (HUman Multiview Behavioral
Imaging) that pushes to two extremes: views and subjects.
As of Nov 20191 , the dataset is composed of 772 distinctive subjects with natural clothing across diverse age, gender, ethnicity, and physical condition captured by 107 HD
synchronized cameras (68 cameras facing at frontal body).
Comparing to existing datasets for human body expressions
such as CMU Panoptic Studio [24, 26], MPII [51, 52], and
1 In a contract with public event venues, the dataset is expected to grow
every year.

2990

