Mapillary Street-Level Sequences: A Dataset for Lifelong Place Recognition
Frederik Warburg†,∗, Søren Hauberg†, Manuel López-Antequera‡, Pau Gargallo‡,
Yubin Kuang‡, and Javier Civera§
†
†

Technical University of Denmark, ‡Mapillary AB, §University of Zaragoza

{frwa,sohau}@dtu.dk, ‡{manuel, pau, yubin}@mapillary.com, §jcivera@unizar.es

Abstract
Lifelong place recognition is an essential and challenging
task in computer vision, with vast applications in robust localization and efficient large-scale 3D reconstruction. Progress is
currently hindered by a lack of large, diverse, publicly available
datasets. We contribute with Mapillary Street-Level Sequences
(MSLS), a large dataset for urban and suburban place recognition from image sequences. It contains more than 1.6 million
images curated from the Mapillary collaborative mapping platform. The dataset is orders of magnitude larger than current
data sources, and is designed to reflect the diversities of true
lifelong learning. It features images from 30 major cities across
six continents, hundreds of distinct cameras, and substantially
different viewpoints and capture times, spanning all seasons
over a nine-year period. All images are geo-located with GPS
and compass, and feature high-level attributes such as road type.
We propose a set of benchmark tasks designed to push
state-of-the-art performance and provide baseline studies. We
show that current state-of-the-art methods still have a long
way to go, and that the lack of diversity in existing datasets has
prevented generalization to new environments. The dataset and
benchmarks are available for academic research.1

1. Introduction
Visual place recognition is essential for the long-term
operation of Augmented Reality and robotic systems [31].
However, despite its relevance and vast research efforts, it
remains challenging in practical settings due to the wide array
of appearance variations in outdoor scenes, as seen in the
examples extracted from our dataset in Figure 1.
Recent research on place recognition has shown that
features learned by deep neural networks outperform traditional
∗ The main part of this work was done while Frederik Warburg was an intern
at Mapillary.
1 www.mapillary.com/datasets/places

Figure 1: Mapillary SLS contains imagery from 30 major cities
around the world; red stands for training cities and blue for
test cities. See four samples from San Francisco, Trondheim,
Kampala and Tokyo with challenging appearance changes due
to viewpoint, structural, seasonal, dynamic, and illumination.

hand-crafted features, particularly for drastic appearance
changes [5, 31, 55]. This has motivated the release of several
datasets for training, evaluating and comparing deep learning
models. However, such datasets are limited, in at least three
aspects. First, none of them covers the many appearance
variations encountered in real-world applications. Second,
many of them have insufficient size for training large networks.
Finally, most datasets are collected in small areas, lacking the
geographical diversity needed for generalization.
This paper contributes to the progress of lifelong place
recognition by creating a dataset addressing all the challenges described above. We present Mapillary Street-Level Sequences
(MSLS), the largest dataset for place recognition to date, with
the widest variety of perceptual changes and the broadest
geographical spread2. MSLS covers the following causes of
appearance change: different seasons, changing weather conditions, varying illumination at different times of the day, dynamic
2 See the video accompanying the paper for an overview and sample images.

12626

