MPM: Joint Representation of Motion and Position Map for Cell Tracking
Junya Hayashida Kazuya Nishimura Ryoma Bise
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, {bise@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp}

Abstract
Conventional cell tracking methods detect multiple cells
in each frame (detection) and then associate the detection results in successive time-frames (association). Most
cell tracking methods perform the association task independently from the detection task. However, there is no guarantee of preserving coherence between these tasks, and lack
of coherence may adversely affect tracking performance. In
this paper, we propose the Motion and Position Map (MPM)
that jointly represents both detection and association for not
only migration but also cell division. It guarantees coherence such that if a cell is detected, the corresponding motion flow can always be obtained. It is a simple but powerful
method for multi-object tracking in dense environments. We
compared the proposed method with current tracking methods under various conditions in real biological images and
found that it outperformed the state-of-the-art (+5.2% improvement compared to the second-best).

1. Introduction
Cell behavior analysis is an important research topic in
the fields of biology and medicine. Individual cells must be
detected and tracked in populations to analyze cell behavior metrics including cell migration speed and frequency of
cell division. However, it is too time consuming to manually track a large number of cells. Therefore, automatic
cell tracking is required. Cell tracking in phase-contrast microscopy is a challenging multi-object tracking task. This is
because the cells tend to have very similar appearance and
their shapes severely deform. Therefore, it is difficult to
identify the same cell among frames based on only its appearance. Moreover, cells in contact with each other often
have blurry intercellular boundaries. In this case, it is difficult to identify touching cells from only one image. Finally,
a cell may divide into two cells (cell mitosis), which is a
very different situation from that of general object tracking.
The tracking-by-detection method is the most popular
tracking paradigm because of the good quality of the detection algorithms that use convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for the detection step. These methods detect cells
in each frame and then associate the detection results among

the time-frames by maximizing the sum of association
scores of hypotheses, where the association step is often
performed independently from the detection step [21, 31, 8].
They basically use hand-crafted association scores based on
the proximity and similarity in shape of cells, but the scores
only evaluate the similarity of individual cells; i.e., they do
not use the context of nearby cells. Moreover, the scores
depend on the conditions of the time-lapse images, such as
the frame interval, cell type, and cell density.
On the other hand, the positional relationship of nearby
cells is important to identify the association when the density is high. Several methods have been proposed for using
context information [32, 17]. Hayashida et al. [17] proposed a cell motion field (CMF) that represents the cell
association between successive frames in order to directly
predict cell motion (association) by using a CNN. This enables cell tracking at low frame rates. This method outperformed the previous methods that use hand-crafted association scores. However, it still independently performs the
detection and association inference. This raises the possibility of incoherence between the two steps; e.g., although a
cell is detected, there is no response at the detected position
in the CMF, and this would affect the tracking performance.
Many applications use multi-task learning [16, 19, 11,
45], i.e., learning multiple-related tasks. This method basically has common layers express task-shared features and
output branches that represent task-specific features. Multitask learning improves the accuracy of the tasks compared
with individual learning. However, it is not easy to preserve
the coherence between the detection and association tasks in
multi-task learning. If we simply apply a branch network,
there is no guarantee that the coherence between these tasks
will be preserved: e.g., the network may detect a cell but
not produce a corresponding association for the cell, which
would adversely affect tracking performance.
Unlike such multi-task learning methods, we propose the
Motion and Position Map (MPM) that jointly represents
both detection and association for not only migration but
also cell division, as shown in Fig. 1, where the distribution of magnitudes of MPM indicates the cell-position
likelihood map at frame t; the direction of the 3D vector
encoded on a pixel in MPM indicates the motion direction

3823

