Rethinking Data Augmentation for Image Super-resolution:
A Comprehensive Analysis and a New Strategy
Jaejun Yoo∗
EPFL.

Namhyuk Ahn∗
Ajou University

Kyung-Ah Sohn†
Ajou University

jaejun.yoo88@gmail.com

aa0dfg@ajou.ac.kr

kasohn@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
Data augmentation is an effective way to improve
the performance of deep networks. Unfortunately, current
methods are mostly developed for high-level vision tasks
(e.g., classification) and few are studied for low-level vision tasks (e.g., image restoration). In this paper, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the existing augmentation
methods applied to the super-resolution task. We find that
the methods discarding or manipulating the pixels or features too much hamper the image restoration, where the
spatial relationship is very important. Based on our analyses, we propose CutBlur that cuts a low-resolution patch
and pastes it to the corresponding high-resolution image region and vice versa. The key intuition of CutBlur is to enable
a model to learn not only “how” but also “where” to superresolve an image. By doing so, the model can understand
“how much”, instead of blindly learning to apply superresolution to every given pixel. Our method consistently and
significantly improves the performance across various scenarios, especially when the model size is big and the data
is collected under real-world environments. We also show
that our method improves other low-level vision tasks, such
as denoising and compression artifact removal.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation (DA) is one of the most practical
ways to enhance model performance without additional
computation cost in the test phase. While various DA
methods [7, 29, 30, 13] have been proposed in several
high-level vision tasks, DA in low-level vision has been
scarcely investigated. Instead, many image restoration studies, such as super-resolution (SR), have relied on the synthetic datasets [22], which we can easily increase the number of training samples by simulating the system degradation functions (e.g., using the bicubic kernel for SR).
Because of the gap between a simulated and a real data
* indicates equal contribution. Most work was done in NAVER Corp.
† indicates corresponding author.

distribution, however, models that are trained on simulated
datasets do not exhibit optimal performance in the real environments [4]. Several recent studies have proposed to mitigate the problem by collecting real-world datasets [1, 4, 32].
However, in many cases, it is often very time-consuming
and expensive to obtain a large number of such data. Although this is where DA can play an important role, only a
handful of studies have been performed [9, 24].
Radu et al. [24] was the first to study various techniques
to improve the performance of example-based single-image
super-resolution (SISR), one of which was data augmentation. Using rotation and flipping, they reported consistent improvements across models and datasets. Still, they
only studied simple geometric manipulations with traditional SR models [12, 23] and a very shallow learning-based
model, SRCNN [8]. To the best of our knowledge, Feng et
al. [9] is the only work that analyzed a recent DA method
(Mixup [30]) in the example-based SISR problem. However, the authors provided only a limited observation using
a single U-Net-like architecture and tested the method with
a single dataset (RealSR [4]).
To better understand DA methods in low-level vision, we
provide a comprehensive analysis on the effect of various
DA methods that are originally developed for high-level vision tasks (Section 2). We first categorize the existing augmentation techniques into two groups depending on where
the method is applied; pixel-domain [7, 29, 30] and featuredomain [11, 10, 26, 27]. When directly applied to SISR, we
find that some methods harm the image restoration results
and even hampers the training, especially when a method
largely induces the loss or confusion of spatial information
between nearby pixels (e.g., Cutout [7] and feature-domain
methods). Interestingly, basic manipulations like RGB permutation that do not cause a severe spatial distortion provide
better improvements than the ones which induce unrealistic
patterns or a sharp transition of the structure (e.g., Mixup
[30] and CutMix [29]).
Based on our analyses, we propose CutBlur, a new augmentation method that is specifically designed for the lowlevel vision tasks. CutBlur cut and paste a low resolution
18375

