Few-Shot Pill Recognition
Suiyi Ling1∗, Andréas Pastor1∗, Jing Li2 , Zhaohui Che3 , Junle Wang4 , Jieun Kim5 , Patrick Le Callet1
1

University of Nantes 2 Alibaba Group 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Tencent 5 Hanyang University
{suiyi.ling, andreas.pastor, patrick.lecallet }@univ-nantes.fr jing.li.univ@gmail.com
chezhaohui@sjtu.edu.cn wangjunle@gmail.com

jkim2@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Pill image recognition is vital for many personal/public
health-care applications and should be robust to diverse unconstrained real-world conditions. Most existing pill recognition models are limited in tackling this challenging fewshot learning problem due to the insufficient instances per
category. With limited training data, neural network based
models have limitations in discovering most discriminating
features, or going deeper. Especially, existing models fail to
handle the hard samples taken under less controlled imaging conditions. In this study, a new pill image database,
namely CURE, is first developed with more varied imaging conditions and instances for each pill category. Secondly, a light-weight W 2 -net is proposed for better pill segmentation. Thirdly, a Multi-Stream (MS) deep network that
captures task-related features along with a novel two-stage
training methodology are proposed. Within the proposed
framework, a Batch All strategy that considers all the samples is first employed for the sub-streams, and then a Batch
Hard strategy that considers only the hard samples mined in
the first stage is utilized for the fusion network. By doing so,
complex samples that could not be represented by one type
of feature could be focused and the model could be forced to
exploit other domain-related information more effectively.
Experiment results show that the proposed model outperforms state-of-the-art models on both the National Institute
of Health (NIH) and our CURE database.

1. Introduction
Accurately recognizing prescription pill images according to their visual appearance helps to ensure patients’
safety and facilitate contemporary healthcare system for patients/old people. Furthermore, it can be useful in avoiding errors across the pharmacological chain; it can also improve the care provided by experts on poison control [28],
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. The framework of the proposed pill recognition model
that 1) takes color, texture, contour, and imprinted text information
as input; 2) uses first the Batch ALL (BA) and then the Batch Hard
(BH) strategy. ⊖ denotes the subtraction operation.

increase medication persistence [4], minimize the loss of
medications and prescriptions in evacuation scenarios [22],
and promote the development of remote/self-diagnosis technology and smart health-care applications [34].
However, accurate pill recognition in daily life is usually
hindered by the few-shot learning problem, where the number of samples per category is small; for instance, the NIH
dataset [35] contains only 7 samples per category. Moreover, although there are various commercial products and
web-based services for pill image identification, no complete solution has been found to make the system sufficiently robust to different noisy imaging conditions in both
professional and general public healthcare services. In academic literature, most existing pill recognition models fail
in the few-shot regime. This failure is more likely under
less-controlled noisy imaging conditions, especially regarding the hard samples. There are mainly two types of hard
samples: 1) hard negatives: different pill categories with
similar visual appearance; 2) hard positives: pills under the
same category but with significantly different visual characteristics due to the noisy imaging conditions. For instance,

9789

