ROAM: Recurrently Optimizing Tracking Model
Tianyu Yang1,2 Pengfei Xu3 Runbo Hu3 Hua Chai3 Antoni B. Chan2
1
Tencent AI Lab 2 City University of Hong Kong 3 Didi Chuxing

Abstract
In this paper, we design a tracking model consisting of
response generation and bounding box regression, where
the first component produces a heat map to indicate the
presence of the object at different positions and the second
part regresses the relative bounding box shifts to anchors
mounted on sliding-window locations. Thanks to the resizable convolutional filters used in both components to adapt
to the shape changes of objects, our tracking model does
not need to enumerate different sized anchors, thus saving
model parameters. To effectively adapt the model to appearance variations, we propose to offline train a recurrent neural optimizer to update tracking model in a meta-learning
setting, which can converge the model in a few gradient
steps. This improves the convergence speed of updating the
tracking model while achieving better performance. We extensively evaluate our trackers, ROAM and ROAM++, on
the OTB, VOT, LaSOT, GOT-10K and TrackingNet benchmark and our methods perform favorably against state-ofthe-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Generic visual object tracking is the task of estimating
the bounding box of a target in a video sequence given only
its initial position. Typically, the preliminary model learned
from the first frame needs to be updated continuously to
adapt to the target’s appearance variations caused by rotation, illumination, occlusion, deformation, etc. However,
it is challenging to optimize the initial learned model efficiently and effectively as tracking proceeds. Training samples for model updating are usually collected based on estimated bounding boxes, which could be inaccurate. Those
small errors will accumulate over time, gradually resulting
in model degradation.
To avoid model updating, which may introduce unreliable training samples that ruin the model, several approaches [4, 43] investigate tracking by only comparing the
first frame with the subsequent frames, using a similarity
function based on a learned discriminant and invariant deep
Siamese feature embedding. However, training such a deep
representation is difficult due to drastic appearance variations that commonly emerge in long-term tracking. Other

methods either update the model via an exponential moving
average of templates [16, 44], which marginally improves
the performance, or optimize the model with hand-designed
SGD methods [33, 41], which needs numerous iterations
to converge thus preventing real-time speed. Limiting the
number of SGD iterations can allow near real-time speeds,
but at the expense of poor quality model updates due to the
loss function not being optimized sufficiently.
In recent years, much effort has been done on localizing
the object using robust online learned classifier, while few
attention is paid on designing accurate bounding box estimation. Most trackers simply resort to multi-scale search
by assuming that the object aspect ratio does not change
during tracking, which is often violated in real world. Recently, SiamRPN [23] borrows the idea of region proposal
networks [37] in object detection to decompose tracking
task into two branches: 1) classifying the target from the
background, and 2) regressing the accurate bounding box
based with reference to anchor boxes mounted on different
positions. As is shown on the VOT benchmarks [19, 20],
SiamRPN achieves higher precision on bounding box estimation but suffers lower robustness compared with state-ofthe-art methods [8, 9, 26] due to no online model updating.
Furthermore, SiamRPN mounts anchors with different aspect ratios on every spatial location of the feature map to
handle possible shape changes, which is redundant in both
computation and storage.
In this paper, we propose a tracking framework which is
composed of two modules: response generation and bounding box regression, where the first component produces a response map to indicate the possibility of covering the object
for anchor boxes mounted on sliding-window positions, and
the second part predicts bounding box shifts from the anchors to get refined rectangles. Instead of enumerating different aspect ratios of anchors as in SiamRPN, we propose
to use only one sized anchor for each position and adapt
it to shape changes by resizing its corresponding convolutional filter using bilinear interpolation, which saves model
parameters and computing time. To effectively adapt the
tracking model to appearance changes during tracking, we
propose a recurrent model optimization method to learn a
more effective gradient descent that converges the model
update in 1-2 steps, and generalizes better to future frames.
The key idea is to train a neural optimizer that can con-

6718

