Video Modeling with Correlation Networks
Heng Wang

Du Tran

Lorenzo Torresani
Facebook AI

Matt Feiszli

{hengwang,trandu,torresani,mdf}@fb.com

Abstract
Motion is a salient cue to recognize actions in video.
Modern action recognition models leverage motion information either explicitly by using optical flow as input or implicitly by means of 3D convolutional filters that simultaneously capture appearance and motion information. This paper proposes an alternative approach based on a learnable
correlation operator that can be used to establish frame-toframe matches over convolutional feature maps in the different layers of the network. The proposed architecture enables the fusion of this explicit temporal matching information with traditional appearance cues captured by 2D convolution. Our correlation network compares favorably with
widely-used 3D CNNs for video modeling, and achieves
competitive results over the prominent two-stream network
while being much faster to train. We empirically demonstrate that correlation networks produce strong results on a
variety of video datasets, and outperform the state of the art
on four popular benchmarks for action recognition: Kinetics, Something-Something, Diving48 and Sports1M.

1. Introduction
After the breakthrough of AlexNet [29] on ImageNet [7],
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the
dominant model for still-image classification [32, 46, 51,
20]. In the video domain, CNNs were initially adopted as
image-based feature extractor on individual frames of the
video [26]. More recently, CNNs for video analysis have
been extended with the capability of capturing not only
appearance information contained in individual frames but
also motion information extracted from the temporal dimension of the image sequence. This is usually achieved by one
of two possible mechanisms. One strategy involves the use
of a two-stream network [45, 56, 15, 57, 41, 5] where one
stream operates on RGB frames to model appearance information and the other stream extracts motion features from
optical flow provided as input. The representations obtained
from these two distinct inputs are then fused, typically in a
late layer of the network. An alternative strategy is to use

3D convolutions [1, 24, 52, 49, 54, 40, 62, 9] which couple
appearance and temporal modeling by means of spatiotemporal kernels.
In this paper we propose a new scheme based on a
novel correlation operator inspired by the correlation layer
in FlowNet [11]. While in FlowNet the correlation layer
is only applied once to convert the video information from
the RGB pixel space to the motion displacement space, we
propose a learnable correlation operator to establish frameto-frame matches over convolutional feature maps to capture different notions of similarity in different layers of the
network. Similarly to two-stream models, our model enables the fusion of explicit motion cues with appearance information. However, while in two-stream models the motion and appearance subnets are disjointly learned and fused
only in a late layer of the model, our network enables the
efficient integration of appearance and motion information
throughout the network. Compared to 3D CNNs, which extract spatiotemporal features, our model factorizes the computation of appearance and motion, and learns distinct filters capturing different measures of patch similarity. The
learned filters can match pixels moving in different directions. Through our extensive experiments on four action
recognition datasets (Kinetics, Something-Something, Diving48 and Sports1M), we demonstrate that our correlation
network compares favorably with widely-used 3D CNNs
for video modeling, and achieves competitive results over
the prominent two-stream network while being much faster
to train. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• A new correlation operator with learnable filters. By
making use of dilation and grouping, the operator is
highly efficient to compute. Compared to 3D convolution
or optical flow, it provides an alternative way to model
temporal information in video.
• A new correlation network which is designed to integrate
motion and appearance information in every block. A
rigorous study of the new architecture and comparisons
with strong baselines provide insights for the different
design choices.
• Our correlation network outperforms the state-of-the-art
on four different video datasets without using optical
1352

