Learning to Measure the Static Friction Coefficient in Cloth Contact
Abdullah Haroon Rasheed1 , Victor Romero1,2 , Florence Bertails-Descoubes1 ,
Stefanie Wuhrer1 , Jean-Sebastien Franco1 , Arnaud Lazarus2
1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, Grenoble, France
2
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, UMR 7190, Institut Jean le Rond d’Alembert, Paris, France
abdullah-haroon.rasheed@inria.fr

Abstract
Measuring friction coefficients between cloth and an external body is a longstanding issue in mechanical engineering, never yet addressed with a pure vision-based system.
The latter offers the prospect of simpler, less invasive friction measurement protocols compared to traditional ones,
and can vastly benefit from recent deep learning advances.
Such a novel measurement strategy however proves challenging, as no large labelled dataset for cloth contact exists,
and creating one would require thousands of physics workbench measurements with broad coverage of cloth-material
pairs. Using synthetic data instead is only possible assuming the availability of a soft-body mechanical simulator
with true-to-life friction physics accuracy, yet to be verified.
We propose a first vision-based measurement network for
friction between cloth and a substrate, using a simple and
repeatable video acquisition protocol. We train our network
on purely synthetic data generated by a state-of-the-art frictional contact simulator, which we carefully calibrate and
validate against real experiments under controlled conditions. We show promising results on a large set of contact
pairs between real cloth samples and various kinds of substrates, with 93.6% of all measurements predicted within
0.1 range of standard physics bench measurements.

1. Introduction
Computer vision techniques are powerful in analysing
the shape and motion of physical objects from mere images. Yet, accurately inferring physical properties from visual data is still a challenging problem [33]. Our work aims
at estimating physical parameters from the rich dynamic effects that can be observed in cloth motion. Applications
range from non-invasive estimation of cloth properties in
textile engineering to realistic clothing synthesis for virtual
and augmented reality. So far, most existing methods for
cloth acquisition have focused on estimating cloth material
parameters, that is, its stiffness and mass [3, 35, 11]. Fric-

Figure 1. Frames from the same timestep for three cloth motion
sequences simulated with the same material but different friction
coefficients at contact (µ). Top: µ = 0.0, Centre: µ = 0.5,
Bottom: µ = 0.6. Differences are significant between µ = 0.0
and µ = 0.5, but more subtle between µ = 0.5 and µ = 0.6.

tion at contact is a much less studied problem due to the
difficulty of modelling, measuring, and simulating dry frictional contact accurately. However, friction has a high impact on the overall cloth dynamics, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The problem of measuring a friction coefficient accurately in cloth is a longstanding problem, mainly studied
in textile engineering [29, 25]. Better accuracy often comes
at the expense of tedious and generally invasive protocols
with specialised mechanical sensors and hardware. Yet,
the visual variability induced by friction shown in Figure 1
hints at the possibility of a purely vision-based protocol,
discriminating the different motion and folding patterns observed under friction variation. This general idea has recently been leveraged by a few studies in physics to infer
friction coefficients from contacting slender structures like
hair strands [7] or stiff ribbons [26]. While such methods
effectively exploit the connection between observed geom19912

