Rethinking Computer-aided Tuberculosis Diagnosis
Yun Liu1∗
Yu-Huan Wu1 *
Yunfeng Ban2
Huifang Wang2
1
TKLNDST, College of Computer Science, Nankai University

Ming-Ming Cheng1
2
InferVision

http://mmcheng.net/tb/

Abstract
As a serious infectious disease, tuberculosis (TB) is one
of the major threats to human health worldwide, leading
to millions of deaths every year. Although early diagnosis and treatment can greatly improve the chances of survival, it remains a major challenge, especially in developing
countries. Computer-aided tuberculosis diagnosis (CTD) is
a promising choice for TB diagnosis due to the great successes of deep learning. However, when it comes to TB diagnosis, the lack of training data has hampered the progress
of CTD. To solve this problem, we establish a large-scale
TB dataset, namely Tuberculosis X-ray (TBX11K) dataset.
This dataset contains 11200 X-ray images with corresponding bounding box annotations for TB areas, while the existing largest public TB dataset only has 662 X-ray images
with corresponding image-level annotations. The proposed
dataset enables the training of sophisticated detectors for
high-quality CTD. We reform the existing object detectors
to adapt them to simultaneous image classification and TB
area detection. These reformed detectors are trained and
evaluated on the proposed TBX11K dataset and served as
the baselines for future research.

1. Introduction
As the second leading cause of death by infectious
disease (after HIV), tuberculosis (TB) is one of the major global health threats [33, 34]. Every year, there are
about 8,000,000 - 10,000,000 new TB patients, and about
2,000,000 - 3,000,000 people died of TB [34]. TB is
induced by Mycobacterium TB, which can be spread by
sneezing, coughing or other means of excreting infectious
bacteria. Hence TB typically occurs in the lungs through
the respiratory tract. Opportunistic infections in immunocompromised people such as HIV patients and malnourished persons in developing countries have exacerbated this
problem.
If not treated, the mortality rate of TB is very high,
* Equal contribution.

but diagnosing TB in the early stage and imposing treatment with antibiotics greatly improves the chances of survival [6,17,19]. Early diagnosis of TB also helps control the
spread of infection [6]. The increase in multidrug-resistant
TB also leads to the urgent need for a timely and accurate
method of TB diagnosis to track the process of clinical treatment [11]. Unfortunately, TB diagnosis is still a major challenge [1,2,5,6,17,19,31]. The golden standard for TB diagnosis is microscopic examination of sputum and culture of
bacteria for the identification of Mycobacterium TB [1, 2].
Therefore, biosafety level-3 lab (BSL-3) is needed for the
culture of Mycobacterium TB. It requires several months
for this process [1, 2, 19]. What’s worse, hospitals in many
developing countries and resource-constrained communities cannot afford such conditions.
On the other hand, X-ray is the most common and dataintensive screening method in current medical image examination, and X-ray is also one of most commonly used
way for TB screening. Early TB screening through X-ray
has great significance for the early detection, treatment, and
prevention of TB [5, 19, 21, 35, 40]. However, the results of
radiologists’ examination of X-rays often go wrong [21,35],
because it is often difficult for human eye to distinguish TB
areas from X-rays where human eye is not sensitive enough
to many details. In our human study, experienced radiologists from top hospitals only have an accuracy of 68.7%
when compared with the golden standard.
Motivation and Contributions Thanks to the powerful
representation ability of deep learning, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [12, 15, 37], machines have
outperformed human in many fields, such as face recognition [38], image classification [14], object detection [13],
and edge detection [29]. Deep learning can capture details
[16, 28, 29] and never feel tired like people. It is a natural
idea to adopt deep learning for computer-aided TB diagnosis/screening with X-ray images. However, deep learning is
always data-hungry, and it is difficult to collect large-scale
TB data because they are very expensive and private. The
lack of publicly available X-rays has prevented computeraided tuberculosis diagnosis (CTD) from successfully ap12646

