Towards Robust Image Classification Using Sequential Attention Models
Daniel Zoran

Mike Chrzanowski

Po-Sen Huang
Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind
London, UK

Sven Gowal

Alex Mott

danielzoran@google.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose to augment a modern neuralnetwork architecture with an attention model inspired by human perception. Specifically, we adversarially train and analyze a neural model incorporating a human inspired, visual
attention component that is guided by a recurrent top-down
sequential process. Our experimental evaluation uncovers
several notable findings about the robustness and behavior
of this new model. First, introducing attention to the model
significantly improves adversarial robustness resulting in
state-of-the-art ImageNet accuracies under a wide range of
random targeted attack strengths. Second, we show that by
varying the number of attention steps (glances/fixations) for
which the model is unrolled, we are able to make its defense
capabilities stronger, even in light of stronger attacks — resulting in a “computational race” between the attacker and
the defender. Finally, we show that some of the adversarial
examples generated by attacking our model are quite different from conventional adversarial examples — they contain
global, salient and spatially coherent structures coming from
the target class that would be recognizable even to a human,
and work by distracting the attention of the model away from
the main object in the original image.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen great advances in the use and
application of deep neural network models. From large scale
image classification [20] to speech recognition [24], the performance of these models has steadily improved, making
use of new hardware advances, more memory and better optimization strategies. The leading model paradigm for such
tasks, however, has not changed significantly since the original AlexNet paper [30]. Models are still, predominately, built
in a purely feed-forward manner, interleaving convolutional
layers (often with small kernels with limited support) and
simple non-linearities [39]. Recently introduced ResNets
[21], which are some of the most powerful models we use

source: wallet
target: beaver

ResNet-152
250 PGD steps

S3TA-8 (Ours)
250 PGD steps

top-1: wallet

top-1: beaver

top-1: beaver

Figure 1: We augment a modern neural network with a
sequential top-down attention model for image classification.
The model achieves state-of-the-art adversarial robustness
against PGD attacks and the resulting adversarial images
are often human interpretable. On the left is a source image
(label:wallet) — both an adversarially trained ResNet-152
and our model classify it correctly. In the middle and on the
right are adversarial examples produced by a 250 step PGD
attack against each model (target class is beaver). Both
models fail to defend against the attack and predict the target
class as their top-1 output. However, while the attack image
for the ResNet contains no visible interpretable structure, the
attack image for our model contains a salient and coherent
image of a beaver’s head (best viewed zoomed in on screen).
currently, have not changed this scenery significantly.
While there is no doubt that these models are very successful in solving some tasks, concerns have been raised
about their robustness and reliability [35, 48]. Small, carefully chosen perturbations to the input, often imperceptible
to a human observer, may cause these models to output incorrect predictions with high confidence [48]. These kind of
perturbations are called adversarial examples [18, 48] and
are a subject of ongoing research [4, 9, 55].
The current paradigm of neural network models has certainly been inspired by the human and primate visual system
[43]. Early predecessor models have directly made this connection, and there is a line of work which connects between
the activations of such neural network models and the neural activity in brains [8]. These parallels between models
19483

