COCAS: A Large-Scale Clothes Changing Person Dataset for Re-identification
Shijie Yu∗1,2 , Shihua Li∗3 , Dapeng Chen1 , Rui Zhao1 , Junjie Yan1 , and Yu Qiao†1
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint
Lab,Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Institute of Microelectronics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed great progress in person reidentification (re-id). Several academic benchmarks such
as Market1501, CUHK03 and DukeMTMC play important
roles to promote the re-id research. To our best knowledge, all the existing benchmarks assume the same person will have the same clothes. While in real-world scenarios, it is very often for a person to change clothes. To
address the clothes changing person re-id problem, we construct a novel large-scale re-id benchmark named ClOthes
ChAnging Person Set (COCAS), which provides multiple
images of the same identity with different clothes. COCAS totally contains 62,382 body images from 5,266 persons. Based on COCAS, we introduce a new person reid setting for clothes changing problem, where the query
includes both a clothes template and a person image taking another clothes. Moreover, we propose a two-branch
network named Biometric-Clothes Network (BC-Net) which
can effectively integrate biometric and clothes feature for
re-id under our setting. Experiments show that it is feasible
for clothes changing re-id with clothes templates.

1. Introduction
“On Tuesday, December 29, 2015, a white female suspect walked into the Comerica Bank, stating she was armed
with a bomb and demanded money. The female suspect escaped with an undisclosed amount of cash. The video shows
that the suspect run behind the laundromat, change clothes
and flee north towards the I-94 Service Drive. ”1
∗ Equally-contributed first authors(sj.yu@siat.ac.cn,lishihua@ime.ac.cn)
† Corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn)
1 http://www.wjr.com/2016/01/06/woman-wanted-in-southwestdetroit-bank-robbery

(a) A realistic scenario for clothes changing person re-id.

(b) Example of our clothes changing re-id setting

Figure 1. (a) shows a realistic case that a suspect with a black
coat changed her clothes to a white coat. (b) shows our clothes
changing re-id setting, where the man with white and black stripes
T-shirt (the target image which is marked by a red box) is identified
by the man with white T-shirt (the query image) and the white and
black stripes T-shirt (the clothes template).

Person re-identification (re-id) plays more and more important roles in video surveillance systems with a wide
range of applications. Previous re-id protocols [47, 46, 24,
22, 23, 39, 4, 6, 12, 2] assume the same person wears the
same clothes, however, they cannot cope with the clothes
changing case in the above news. As shown in Fig. 1a,
the suspect wants to escape being arrested, thus she intentionally changes the clothes. The conventional re-id models
[3, 34, 2, 47, 16, 33, 42] tend to fail for at least two reasons.
First, these models are trained on identities with the same
clothes. The clothes’ appearance is statistically regarded as
a kind of discriminative feature by the model. Furthermore,
biometric traits like face and body shape are too weak to be
learned, because they only take up a small part of the body
image. On the other hand, learning a clothes-irrelevant per-

3400

