Deep Polarization Cues for Transparent Object Segmentation
Agastya Kalra1 , Vage Taamazyan1 , Supreeth Krishna Rao1 , Kartik Venkataraman1 , Ramesh Raskar∗1,2 ,
and Achuta Kadambi∗1,3
1

Akasha Imaging
MIT Media Lab
3
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
2

Abstract
Segmentation of transparent objects is a hard, open
problem in computer vision. Transparent objects lack texture of their own, adopting instead the texture of scene background. This paper reframes the problem of transparent object segmentation into the realm of light polarization, i.e.,
the rotation of light waves. We use a polarization camera to
capture multi-modal imagery and couple this with a unique
deep learning backbone for processing polarization input
data. Our method achieves instance segmentation on cluttered, transparent objects in various scene and background
conditions, demonstrating an improvement over traditional
image-based approaches. As an application we use this for
robotic bin picking of transparent objects.

(a) Intensity Image - 2 of the above
balls are printouts

(b) Mask-RCNN Segmentation detects two false positives

1. Introduction

(c) Angle of Polarization - easily
seperates real ball from printout

(d) Our Segmentation - detects no
false positives

Transparent objects occur in manufacturing, life sciences, and automotive industries. In contrast to conventional objects, transparent objects lack texture of their own.
As a result, it is hard to segment transparent objects captured with standard imaging—segmentation algorithms do
not have any texture to latch on to. In this paper, we bring
transparent object segmentation to the realm of polarization
imaging. As shown in Figure 1, the polarization imagery
of transparent objects visualizes their very unique texture.
There is a geometry-dependent signature on edges and a
very unique pattern arises in the angle of linear polarization. The object’s intrinsic texture is more visible in the
polarization than in just in the intensity. Unfortunately, the
peculiar texture of polarization requires re-examination for
deep learning in the context of polarization imagery.
∗ Contributions from these authors occurred wholly during their consulting periods at Akasha Imaging.

Figure 1: Polarized CNNs leverage unique texture from
polarized imagery for robust segmentation. Standard
instance segmentation is unable to differentiate between a
print-out spoof and a real ball. Our segmentation is able to
robustly segment the real ball using the unique polarization
texture. Our paper studies this textural motif and designs a
customized deep learning architecture.
In this paper, we introduce a new deep learning framework for polarization-based segmentation of transparent objects. We refer to our framework as a Polarized Convolutional Neural Network (Polarized CNN). Our framework
consists of a novel backbone that is suitable for processing
the peculiar texture of polarization and can be coupled with
architectures like Mask R-CNN (e.g. Polarized Mask RCNN) to produce accurate and robust solution for instance
segmentation of transparent objects. We summarize our
18602

