Learning to Segment 3D Point Clouds in 2D Image Space
Yecheng Lyu∗
Xinming Huang
Ziming Zhang
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
{ylyu, xhuang, zzhang15}@wpi.edu

Abstract
In contrast to the literature where local patterns in 3D
point clouds are captured by customized convolutional operators, in this paper we study the problem of how to effectively
and efficiently project such point clouds into a 2D image
space so that traditional 2D convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) such as U-Net can be applied for segmentation. To
this end, we are motivated by graph drawing and reformulate it as an integer programming problem to learn the
topology-preserving graph-to-grid mapping for each individual point cloud. To accelerate the computation in practice,
we further propose a novel hierarchical approximate algorithm. With the help of the Delaunay triangulation for graph
construction from point clouds and a multi-scale U-Net for
segmentation, we manage to demonstrate the state-of-the-art
performance on ShapeNet and PartNet, respectively, with
significant improvement over the literature. Code is available at https://github.com/Zhang-VISLab.
Figure 1: State-of-the-art part segmentation performance comparison on

1. Introduction

ShapeNet, where IoU denotes intersection-over-union.

Recently point cloud processing has been attracting more
and more attention [45, 44, 17, 46, 10, 61, 34, 25, 57, 29, 66,
30, 73, 72, 33, 71, 18, 39, 27, 38, 60, 28, 53, 47, 70]. As a
fundamental data structure to store the geometric features, a
point cloud saves the 3D positions of points scanned from
the physical world as an orderless list. In contrast, images
have regular patterns on 2D grid with well-organised pixels
in local neighborhood. Such local regularity is beneficial for
fast 2D convolution, leading to well-designed convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) such as FCN [35], GoogleNet [54]
and ResNet [16] that can efficiently and effectively extract
local features from pixels to semantics with state-of-the-art
performance for different applications.
Motivation. In fact PointNet1 [45] for point cloud classification and segmentation can be re-interpreted from the
perspective of CNN. In general, PointNet projects each 3D

(x, y, z)-point into a higher dimensional feature space using
a multilayer perceptron (MLP) and pools all the features
from a cloud globally as a cloud signature for further usage.
As an equivalent CNN implementation, one can construct
an (x, y, z)-image with all the 3D points as the pixels in
a random order and (0, 0, 0) for the rest of the image, and
apply 1 × 1 convolutional kernels sequentially to the image,
followed by a global max-pooling operator. Different from
conventional RGB images, here (x, y, z)-images define a
new 2D image space with x, y, z as channels. Same image
representation has been explored in [37, 36, 41, 64, 65] for
LiDAR points. Unlike CNNs, PointNet lacks of the ability
of extracting local features that may limit its performance.

∗ Part of this work was done when the author was an intern at Mitsubishi
Electric Research Laboratories (MERL).
1 For simplicity in our explanation, we assume no bias term in PointNet.

This observation inspires us to investigate whether in the
literature there exists a state-of-the-art method that applies
conventional 2D CNNs as backbone to image representations for 3D point cloud segmentation. Surprisingly, as we
summarize in Table 1, we can only find a few, indicating that
currently such integrated methods for point cloud segmen112255

