AdderNet: Do We Really Need Multiplications in Deep Learning?
Hanting Chen1,2∗, Yunhe Wang2∗ , Chunjing Xu2†, Boxin Shi3,4 , Chao Xu1 , Qi Tian2 , Chang Xu5
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 NELVT, Dept. of CS, Peking University. 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
5
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney.
{htchen, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
{yunhe.wang, xuchunjing, tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Compared with cheap addition operation, multiplication
operation is of much higher computation complexity. The
widely-used convolutions in deep neural networks are exactly cross-correlation to measure the similarity between
input feature and convolution filters, which involves massive multiplications between float values. In this paper, we
present adder networks (AdderNets) to trade these massive
multiplications in deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs), for much cheaper additions to reduce computation costs. In AdderNets, we take
the ℓ1 -norm distance between filters and input feature as
the output response. The influence of this new similarity
measure on the optimization of neural network have been
thoroughly analyzed. To achieve a better performance, we
develop a special back-propagation approach for AdderNets by investigating the full-precision gradient. We then
propose an adaptive learning rate strategy to enhance the
training procedure of AdderNets according to the magnitude of each neuron’s gradient. As a result, the proposed AdderNets can achieve 74.9% Top-1 accuracy 91.7%
Top-5 accuracy using ResNet-50 on the ImageNet dataset
without any multiplication in convolutional layer. The
codes are publicly available at: https://github.com/huaweinoah/AdderNet.

1. Introduction
Given the advent of Graphics Processing Units (GPUs),
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with billions
of floating number multiplications could receive speed-ups
and make important strides in a large variety of computer
vision tasks, e.g. image classification [26, 17], object detection [23], segmentation [19], and human face verifica∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

tion [32]. However, the high-power consumption of these
high-end GPU cards (e.g. 250W+ for GeForce RTX 2080
Ti) has blocked modern deep learning systems from being
deployed on mobile devices, e.g. smart phone, camera, and
watch. Existing GPU cards are far from svelte and cannot
be easily mounted on mobile devices. Though the GPU itself only takes up a small part of the card, we need many
other hardware for supports, e.g. memory chips, power circuitry, voltage regulators and other controller chips. It is
therefore necessary to study efficient deep neural networks
that can run with affordable computation resources on mobile devices.
Addition, subtraction, multiplication and division are the
four most basic operations in mathematics. It is widely
known that multiplication is slower than addition, but most
of the computations in deep neural networks are multiplications between float-valued weights and float-valued activations during the forward inference. There are thus many papers on how to trade multiplications for additions, to speed
up deep learning. The seminal work [5] proposed BinaryConnect to force the network weights to be binary (e.g.-1
or 1), so that many multiply-accumulate operations can be
replaced by simple accumulations. After that, Hubara et
al. [15] proposed BNNs, which binarized not only weights
but also activations in convolutional neural networks at runtime. Moreover, Rastegari et al. [22] introduced scale factors to approximate convolutions using binary operations
and outperform [15, 22] by large margins. Zhou et al. [39]
utilized low bit-width gradient to accelerate the training
of binarized networks. Cai et al. [4] proposed an halfwave Gaussian quantizer for forward approximation, which
achieved much closer performance to full precision networks.
Though binarizing filters of deep neural networks significantly reduces the computation cost, the original recognition accuracy often cannot be preserved. In addition,
the training procedure of binary networks is not stable and
usually requests a slower convergence speed with a small

1468

