E GO -T OPO: Environment Affordances from Egocentric Video
Tushar Nagarajan1

Yanghao Li2 Christoph Feichtenhofer2
1
UT Austin 2 Facebook AI Research

Kristen Grauman1,2

tushar@cs.utexas.edu, {lyttonhao, feichtenhofer, grauman}@fb.com

Abstract
First-person video naturally brings the use of a physical environment to the forefront, since it shows the camera
wearer interacting fluidly in a space based on his intentions. However, current methods largely separate the observed actions from the persistent space itself. We introduce a model for environment affordances that is learned
directly from egocentric video. The main idea is to gain a
human-centric model of a physical space (such as a kitchen)
that captures (1) the primary spatial zones of interaction
and (2) the likely activities they support. Our approach
decomposes a space into a topological map derived from
first-person activity, organizing an ego-video into a series
of visits to the different zones. Further, we show how to
link zones across multiple related environments (e.g., from
videos of multiple kitchens) to obtain a consolidated representation of environment functionality. On EPIC-Kitchens
and EGTEA+, we demonstrate our approach for learning scene affordances and anticipating future actions in
long-form video. Project page: http://vision.cs.
utexas.edu/projects/ego-topo/

1. Introduction
“The affordances of the environment are what it offers
the animal, what it provides or furnishes... It implies the
complementarity of the animal and the environment.”—
James J. Gibson, 1979
In traditional third-person images and video, we see
a moment in time captured intentionally by a photographer who paused to actively record the scene. As a result, scene understanding is largely about answering the
who/where/what questions of recognition: what objects are
present? is it an indoor/outdoor scene? where is the person
and what are they doing? [56, 53, 73, 43, 74, 34, 70, 18].
In contrast, in video captured from a first-person “egocentric” point of view, we see the environment through the
eyes of a person passively wearing a camera. The surroundings are tightly linked to the camera-wearer’s ongoing inter-

cut onion

pour salt

wash pan

take knife

put onion

peel potato

T=1→8

T = 42→ 80

Untrimmed
Egocentric
Video

Figure 1: Main idea. Given an egocentric video, we build a topological map of the environment that reveals activity-centric zones
and the sequence in which they are visited. These maps capture
the close tie between a physical space and how it is used by people, which we use to infer affordances of spaces (denoted here with
color-coded dots) and anticipate future actions in long-form video.

actions with the environment. As a result, scene understanding in egocentric video also entails how questions: how can
one use this space, now and in the future? what areas are
most conducive to a given activity?
Despite this link between activities and environments,
existing first-person video understanding models typically
ignore that the underlying environment is a persistent physical space. They instead treat the video as fixed-sized chunks
of frames to be fed to neural networks [47, 6, 15, 66,
49, 42]. Meanwhile, methods that do model the environment via dense geometric reconstructions [64, 20, 58] suffer from SLAM failures—common in quickly moving headmounted video—and do not discriminate between those 3D
structures that are relevant to human actions and those that
are not (e.g., a cutting board on the counter versus a random
patch of floor). We contend that neither the “pure video” nor
the “pure 3D” perspective adequately captures the scene as
an action-affording space.
Our goal is to build a model for an environment that captures how people use it. We introduce an approach called
1163

