Learning to Super Resolve Intensity Images from Events
https://github.com/gistvision/e2sri

S. Mohammad Mostafavi I.
GIST, South Korea

Jonghyun Choi
GIST, South Korea

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST, South Korea

mostafavi@gist.ac.kr

jhc@gist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Reconstructing high-definition photo-realistic intensity images from pure events in end-to-end learning. Our events to superresolved intensity image reconstruction recovers more details with less artifacts in comparison to recent methods of EG [24] and EV [17].

Abstract
An event camera detects per-pixel intensity difference
and produces asynchronous event stream with low latency,
high dynamic range, and low power consumption. As a
trade-off, the event camera has low spatial resolution. We
propose an end-to-end network to reconstruct high resolution, high dynamic range (HDR) images directly from the
event stream. We evaluate our algorithm on both simulated
and real-world sequences and verify that it captures fine
details of a scene and outperforms the combination of the
state-of-the-art event to image algorithms with the state-ofthe-art super resolution schemes in many quantitative measures by large margins. We further extend our method by
using the active sensor pixel (APS) frames or reconstructing images iteratively.

1. Introduction
Event cameras, also known as neuromorphic cameras,
have successfully opened their path to the computer vision and robotics society for its low cost and high dynamic

sensing range with low latency and low power consumption. It represents the changes of intensity for a pixel location (x, y) as a plus or minus sign (σ) asynchronously
by checking the amount of intensity changes with a predefined threshold. This stream-like representation, depending
on the scene and camera movement, can achieve µs order
of latency through accurate timestamps (t) and is expressed
per fired event in the form of (x, y, t, σ). This device has
garnered a lot of attention due to the high applicability in
systems requiring high dynamic range outputs with low latency, and low power and low memory consumption constraints [15, 24, 17, 27, 5]. New applications for the event
cameras have emerged such as intensity image reconstruction or recovering geometric features such as optical flow or
depth from the event stream [1, 18, 10, 3, 22, 23].
Unfortunately, most commercially available event cameras produce relatively low resolution event streams for
their efficiency. While there are number of proposals on
many applicationsestimating super-resolved intensity images from the events has been barely explored in the literature. To generate the high resolution images from the
event, one can combine a method to transfer events to inten12768

