Flow2Stereo: Effective Self-Supervised Learning of
Optical Flow and Stereo Matching
Pengpeng Liu†∗
Irwin King†
Michael Lyu†
Jia Xu§
†
§
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Huya AI

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a unified method to jointly
learn optical flow and stereo matching. Our first intuition is
stereo matching can be modeled as a special case of optical
flow, and we can leverage 3D geometry behind stereoscopic
videos to guide the learning of these two forms of correspondences. We then enroll this knowledge into the state-ofthe-art self-supervised learning framework, and train one
single network to estimate both flow and stereo. Second,
we unveil the bottlenecks in prior self-supervised learning
approaches, and propose to create a new set of challenging proxy tasks to boost performance. These two insights
yield a single model that achieves the highest accuracy
among all existing unsupervised flow and stereo methods on
KITTI 2012 and 2015 benchmarks. More remarkably, our
self-supervised method even outperforms several state-ofthe-art fully supervised methods, including PWC-Net and
FlowNet2 on KITTI 2012.

1. Introduction
Estimating optical flow and stereo matching are two fundamental computer vision tasks with a wide range of applications [6, 31]. Despite impressive progress in the past
decades, accurate flow and stereo estimation remain a longstanding challenge. Traditional stereo matching estimation
approaches often employ different pipelines compared with
prior flow estimation methods [13, 2, 36, 19, 40, 37, 12, 11,
7]. These methods merely share common modules, and they
are computationally expensive.
Recent CNN-based methods directly estimate optical
flow [4, 15, 32, 39, 14] or stereo matching [20, 3] from
two raw images, achieving high accuracy with real-time
speed. However, these fully supervised methods require a
large amount of labeled data to obtain state-of-the-art performance. Moreover, CNNs for flow estimation are drastically different from those for stereo estimation in terms of
network architecture and training data [4, 28].
∗ Work mainly done during an internship at Huya AI.

𝑡+1

Left

Right

𝐼3

𝐼4

Optical Flow
Disparity

𝑡

𝐼1

𝐼2

Cross-view
Optical Flow

Figure 1. Illustration of 12 cross-view correspondnce maps among
4 stereoscopic frames. We leverage all these geometric consistency constraints, and train one single network to estimate both
flow and stereo.

Is it possible to train one single network to estimate both
flow and stereo using only one set of data, even unlabeled?
In this paper, we show conventional self-supervised methods can learn to estimate these two forms of dense correspondences with one single model, when fully utilizing
stereoscopic videos with inherent geometric constraints.
Fig. 2 shows the geometric relationship between stereo
disparity and optical flow. We consider stereo matching
as a special case of optical flow, and compute 12 crossview correspondence maps between images captured at different time and different view (Fig. 1. This enables us
to train one single network with a set of photometric and
geometric consistency constraints. Besides, after digging
into conventional two-stage self-supervised learning framework [25, 26], we show that creating challenging proxy
tasks is the key for performance improvement. Based on
this observation, we propose to employ additional challenging conditions to further boost the performance.
These two insights yield a method outperforming all
existing unsupervised flow learning methods by a large
margin, with Fl-noc = 4.02% on KITTI 2012 and Flall = 11.10% on KITTI 2015. Remarkably, our selfsupervised method even outperforms several state-of-theart fully supervised methods, including PWC-Net [39],
FlowNet2 [15], and MFF [34] on KITTI 2012. More impor16648

