Sign Language Transformers:
Joint End-to-end Sign Language Recognition and Translation
Necati Cihan Camgöz  , Oscar Koller q , Simon Hadfield  and Richard Bowden 


CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK, q Microsoft, Munich, Germany

{n.camgoz, s.hadfield, r.bowden}@surrey.ac.uk, oscar.koller@microsoft.com

SIGN LANGUAGE GLOSSES

Abstract
Prior work on Sign Language Translation has shown
that having a mid-level sign gloss representation (effectively
recognizing the individual signs) improves the translation
performance drastically. In fact, the current state-of-theart in translation requires gloss level tokenization in order
to work. We introduce a novel transformer based architecture that jointly learns Continuous Sign Language Recognition and Translation while being trainable in an end-to-end
manner. This is achieved by using a Connectionist Temporal
Classification (CTC) loss to bind the recognition and translation problems into a single unified architecture. This joint
approach does not require any ground-truth timing information, simultaneously solving two co-dependant sequence-tosequence learning problems and leads to significant performance gains.
We evaluate the recognition and translation performances of our approaches on the challenging RWTHPHOENIX-Weather-2014T (PHOENIX14T) dataset. We report state-of-the-art sign language recognition and translation results achieved by our Sign Language Transformers. Our translation networks outperform both sign video to
spoken language and gloss to spoken language translation
models, in some cases more than doubling the performance
(9.58 vs. 21.80 BLEU-4 Score). We also share new baseline
translation results using transformer networks for several
other text-to-text sign language translation tasks.

1. Introduction
Sign Languages are the native languages of the Deaf and
their main medium of communication. As visual languages,
they utilize multiple complementary channels1 to convey information [62]. This includes manual features, such as hand
shape, movement and pose as well as non-manuals features,
such as facial expression, mouth and movement of the head,
shoulders and torso [5].
The goal of sign language translation is to either convert
written language into a video of sign (production) [59, 60]
or to extract an equivalent spoken language sentence from
a video of someone performing continuous sign [9]. However, in the field of computer vision, much of this latter work
1 Linguists refer to these channels as articulators.

Connectionist Temporal Classification

Spoken Language Sentence

Transformer Encoder

Transformer Decoder

Transformer Encoder

Transformer Decoder

Spatial Embedding

Word Embedding

SLRT

SLTT

Shifted Spoken Language Words

Figure 1: An overview of our end-to-end Sign Language
Recognition and Translation approach using transformers.
has focused on recognising the sequence of sign glosses2
(Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR)) rather
than the full translation to a spoken language equivalent
(Sign Language Translation (SLT)). This distinction is important as the grammar of sign and spoken languages are
very different. These differences include (to name a few):
different word ordering, multiple channels used to convey
concurrent information and the use of direction and space
to convey the relationships between objects. Put simply, the
mapping between speech and sign is complex and there is
no simple word-to-sign mapping.
Generating spoken language sentences given sign language videos is therefore a spatio-temporal machine translation task [9]. Such a translation system requires us to accomplish several sub-tasks, which are currently unsolved:
Sign Segmentation: Firstly, the system needs to detect
sign sentences, which are commonly formed using topiccomment structures [62], from continuous sign language
videos. This is trivial to achieve for text based machine
translation tasks [48], where the models can use punctuation marks to separate sentences. Speech-based recognition and translation systems, on the other hand, look for
pauses, e.g. silent regions, between phonemes to segment
spoken language utterances [69, 76]. There have been studies in the literature addressing automatic sign segmentation
[36, 52, 55, 4, 13]. However to the best of the authors’
knowledge, there is no study which utilizes sign segmentation for realizing continuous sign language translation.
2 Sign glosses are spoken language words that match the meaning of
signs and, linguistically, manifest as minimal lexical items.

10023

