Learning Saliency Propagation for Semi-Supervised Instance Segmentation
Yanzhao Zhou†1,2 , Xin Wang2 , Jianbin Jiao1 , Trevor Darrell2 and Fisher Yu2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
UC Berkeley

zhouyanzhao215@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {xinw, trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu, jiaojb@ucas.ac.cn, i@yf.io

A b u n d a n t B ox A n n o t a t i o n s

Instance segmentation methods [13, 3, 25] have enjoyed
great success recently thanks to deep convolutional networks and availability of new datasets [5, 32]. Those methods can be applied in a broad range of applications such as
key point detection and 3D cuboid fitting. However, collecting these fine annotations requires prohibitively expensive human effort, preventing the existing frameworks from
learning on larger data. This difficulty limits our further
study in the instance segmentation problem.
One possible solution is to use the abundant cheaper
bounding box annotations to relieve the shortage of segmentation supervision. Some works [15, 20] have explored how
to generalize to unseen categories with the weak supervi† Work was done while Yanzhao was a visiting scholar at UC Berkeley.
1 Our source code is available at github.com/ucbdrive/ShapeProp

Lo
Backbone

Shape
Representation
Mask Head

ShapeProp
Module
Propagation Weights

ss

1. Introduction

Instance Saliency

Box Head

Lo

Instance segmentation is a challenging task for both
modeling and annotation. Due to the high annotation cost,
modeling becomes more difficult because of the limited
amount of supervision. We aim to improve the accuracy
of the existing instance segmentation models by utilizing a
large amount of detection supervision. We propose ShapeProp, which learns to activate the salient regions within the
object detection and propagate the areas to the whole instance through an iterative learnable message passing module. ShapeProp can benefit from more bounding box supervision to locate the instances more accurately and utilize the feature activations from the larger number of instances to achieve more accurate segmentation. We extensively evaluate ShapeProp on three datasets (MS COCO,
PASCAL VOC, and BDD100k) with different supervision
setups based on both two-stage (Mask R-CNN) and singlestage (RetinaMask) models. The results show our method
establishes new states of the art for semi-supervised instance segmentation. 1

ss

Abstract

Limited Mask Annotations

Figure 1: ShapeProp jointly learns from the abundant
yet coarse-grained boxes and the fine-detailed yet limited
amount of masks to extract a shape representation, which
provide strong shape prior to mask head to improve segmentation accuracy and generalization.
sion. However, the segmentation modules usually only get
pixel information from only fine segmentation supervision.
It is still not well understood how to exploit the new pixellevel information from bounding boxes, even though more
box-level supervision can improve the object localization,
In this work, we aim to combine the weekly supervised
segmentation information in bounding boxes and full instance segmentation supervision for semi-supervised learning of instance segmentation. The task is a generalization
of the “partially supervised instance segmentation” in previous literature [16, 20] which assumes the costly mask annotations are available for a subset of categories. We denote
this as category-wise semi-supervision and also consider a
realistic image-wise semi-supervision where only a subset
of images has masks. The category-wise and image-wise
semi-supervision focuses on inter- and intra-class generalization. Note that the considerably cheaper bounding box
annotations are available for all object instances.
110307

