TESA: Tensor Element Self-Attention via Matricization
Francesca Babiloni1 , Ioannis Marras1 , Gregory Slabaugh1 , Stefanos Zafeiriou2
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

2

Imperial College London

Abstract
Representation learning is a fundamental part of modern computer vision, where abstract representations of data
are encoded as tensors optimized to solve problems like image segmentation and inpainting. Recently, self-attention in
the form of a Non-Local Block has emerged as a powerful
technique to enrich features, by capturing complex interdependencies in feature tensors. However, standard selfattention approaches leverage only spatial relationships,
drawing similarities between vectors and overlooking correlations between channels. In this paper, we introduce a
new method, called Tensor Element Self-Attention (TESA)
that generalizes such work to capture interdependencies
along all dimensions of the tensor using matricization. An
order R tensor produces R results, one for each dimension.
The results are then fused to produce an enriched output
which encapsulates similarity among tensor elements. Additionally, we analyze self-attention mathematically, providing new perspectives on how it adjusts the singular values of
the input feature tensor. With these new insights, we present
experimental results demonstrating how TESA can benefit
diverse problems including classification and instance segmentation. By simply adding a TESA module to existing
networks, we substantially improve competitive baselines
and set new state-of-the-art results for image inpainting on
CelebA and low light raw-to-rgb image translation on SID.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) represent the state-of-the-art method in a variety of computer vision problems but, in their standard implementation, they
are limited to compute only local regions of the input. This
innate characteristic makes long-range dependencies, which
are a key aspect in a variety of tasks, hard to capture without the use of circumventing techniques. The use of deeper
stacks of convolutional layers, for instance, increases neurons’ receptive fields [31] at the cost of optimization dif-

Figure 1: The input 3rd-order tensor is viewed as a combination of its three mode-matricizations. Combining their
outputs allows the method to make use of inter- and intrachannel correlations. Blue-gray, white and gray 3D boxes
represent similar vectors within each one of the three matricizations. Red cubes in the Z tensor represent similar
elements in Z.
ficulties [20] and higher complexity [38]. Recently, more
sophisticated layers (e.g. Non-Local Blocks) have been proposed, which directly leverage these interdependencies as
a means to enrich the intermediate CNN representations
[41, 47, 39, 49, 28]. These blocks have been proven useful,
beating competitive baselines in video action recognition,
classification and instance segmentation. At the same time,

13945

