Polishing Decision-based Adversarial Noise with a Customized Sampling
Yucheng Shi1,2 , Yahong Han1,2∗, Qi Tian3
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{yucheng, yahong}@tju.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
As an effective black-box adversarial attack, decisionbased methods polish adversarial noise by querying the target model. Among them, boundary attack is widely applied
due to its powerful noise compression capability, especially
when combined with transfer-based methods. Boundary attack splits the noise compression into several independent
sampling processes, repeating each query with a constant
sampling setting. In this paper, we demonstrate the advantage of using current noise and historical queries to customize the variance and mean of sampling in boundary attack to polish adversarial noise. We further reveal the relationship between the initial noise and the compressed noise
in boundary attack. We propose Customized Adversarial
Boundary (CAB) attack that uses the current noise to model
the sensitivity of each pixel and polish adversarial noise
of each image with a customized sampling setting. On the
one hand, CAB uses current noise as a prior belief to customize the multivariate normal distribution. On the other
hand, CAB keeps the new samplings away from historical
failed queries to avoid similar mistakes. Experimental results measured on several image classification datasets emphasizes the validity of our method.

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples [29, 22] have revealed the inherent vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs). Based
on attackers’ knowledge of the target model [23], adversarial attacks can be divided into white-box attacks and blackbox attacks. In black-box attack, attackers can only query
target model and get the hard-label predictions without access to complete knowledge of target model. Transferbased attacks [13, 18, 8, 9, 25], decision-based attacks
[32, 10, 2, 25], and attacks based on zeroth order optimization [5, 20, 31] are three mainstream black-box attacks.
∗ Corresponding author.

Among them, decision-based attacks squeeze out noise by
randomly searching in the input space of original image. It
requires neither substitute models as transfer-based attacks
nor a thorough query to the target model as zeroth order
optimization, and can generate adversarial noise with relatively small magnitude under limited queries. Several recent
studies [2, 1, 7] indicates that, a combination of transferbased attacks and decision-based attacks achieves the stateof-the-art black-box attack effect.
Constructing adversarial examples is not to simply fool
DNNs, but to quantitatively evaluate the robustness of target model. By continuously polishing adversarial perturbation, we can gradually achieve an accurate evaluation of
the minimum noise magnitude for misclassification. For an
image classifier, the minimum noise required to misclassify
each image, the reasonable query direction in each stages
of one attack process, and even the sensitivity of each pixel
in an image are all different [11]. Therefore, an accurate
evaluation on the robustness of one target model requires
customization of each image and its attack process. Whitebox attacks directly model the correlation between pixels
and categories by back-propagation [13, 3]. For black-box
attacks, the only clue available for attackers is the historical
query, which is an unbiased characterization of each pixel’s
noise sensitivity. However, most existing decision-based attacks [1, 2] use constant sampling settings independent of
historical queries or current noise, which severely hinders
the efficiency of noise polishing.
Failed samplings in decision-based attacks contain location information of decision boundaries [12]. Although
failed samplings, i.e., samples fall in the true category, cannot be directly used to compress noise, they depict directions with greater probability across the decision boundary. Since we want as many samples as possible that fall
in the other side of decision boundary, this information can
be used to customize sampling process and keep new samples away from directions with a high probability of failure.
But existing decision-based attacks always sample on a constant distribution, and never change the sampling during the

1030

