Upgrading Optical Flow to 3D Scene Flow through Optical Expansion
∗

Gengshan Yang1 , Deva Ramanan1,2
1 Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Argo AI
{gengshay, deva}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We describe an approach for upgrading 2D optical flow
to 3D scene flow. Our key insight is that dense optical expansion – which can be reliably inferred from monocular
frame pairs – reveals changes in depth of scene elements,
e.g., things moving closer will get bigger. When integrated
with camera intrinsics, optical expansion can be converted
into a normalized 3D scene flow vectors that provide meaningful directions of 3D movement, but not their magnitude
(due to an underlying scale ambiguity). Normalized scene
flow can be further “upgraded” to the true 3D scene flow
knowing depth in one frame. We show that dense optical
expansion between two views can be learned from annotated optical flow maps or unlabeled video sequences, and
applied to a variety of dynamic 3D perception tasks including optical scene flow, LiDAR scene flow, time-to-collision
estimation and depth estimation, often demonstrating significant improvement over the prior art.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D motion is crucial for autonomous robots
to move safely in a dynamic world. For example, collision
avoidance and motion planning in a dynamic requirement
hinge on such inferences [8, 33, 34, 40]. Many robotic platforms make use of stereo cameras or time-of-flight sensors
for which metric distances are accessible. Here, 3D motion
can be determined by searching for correspondence over
frames, or registration between 3D point clouds. Such active sensing and fixed-baseline stereo methods struggle to
capture far-away objects due to limited baselines and sparse
sensor readings. In this work, we analyze the problem of
dynamic 3D perception with monocular cameras, which do
not suffer from baselines or sparse readings.
Challenges However, estimating 3D motion from
monocular cameras is fundamentally ill-posed without
making assumptions about the scene rigidity: given a particular 2D flow vector, there is an infinite pair of 3D points
∗ Code will be available at github.com/gengshan-y/expansion.

Figure 1. Optical flow vs optical expansion. From left to right:
overlaid two consecutive frames, color-coded optical flow fields
and optical expansion map, where white indicates larger expansion
or motion towards the camera. Notice it is difficult to directly read
the 3D motion of the hawk from optical flow. However, it is easy
to tell the hawk is approaching the caemra from optical expansion.

along two degrees of freedom (obtained by back-projecting
two rays for the source and target pixel - see Fig. 3) that
project to the same 2D flow. Intuitively, a close-by object
that moves slowly will generate the same 2D flow as a faraway object that moves fast.
Prior work Nevertheless, there have been numerous attempts at monocular dynamic scene reconstruction using
multi-body SfM and non-rigid SfM [26, 64]. A recent
approach [6] attempts to solve the monocular scene flow
problem in its generality. Because such tasks are underconstrained, these methods need to rely on strong prior assumptions, either in the form of prior 3D geometry (typically learned from data-driven scenes) or prior 3D motion
(typically rigid-body priors) that are difficult to apply to “inthe-wild” footage. Instead, we derive a simple but direct
geometric relationship between 3D motion and 2D correspondence that allows us to extract up-to-scale 3D motion.
Why optical expansion? Human perception informs us
that changes in the perceived size of an object are an important cue to determine its motion in depth [50, 52]. Indeed,
optical expansion is also a well-known cue for biological
navigation, time-to-contact prediction, and looming estimation [15]. Inspired by these observations, we propose to
augment 2D optical flow measurements with 2D optical expansion measurements: for each pixel in a reference frame,
we estimate both a 2D offset and a relative scale change
(u, v, s), as shown in Fig.2. We show that such measurements can be robustly extracted from an image pair, and
importantly, resolve half of the fundamental ambiguity in
3D motion estimation. Because optical expansion is a local
11334

