MTL-NAS: Task-Agnostic Neural Architecture Search towards
General-Purpose Multi-Task Learning
Yuan Gao1∗ , Haoping Bai2∗† , Zequn Jie1 , Jiayi Ma3 , Kui Jia4 , and Wei Liu1
1
Tencent AI Lab 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
Wuhan University 4 South China University of Technology
{ethan.y.gao, bhpfelix, zequn.nus, jyma2010}@gmail.com, kuijia@scut.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
We propose to incorporate neural architecture search
(NAS) into general-purpose multi-task learning (GP-MTL).
Existing NAS methods typically define different search
spaces according to different tasks. In order to adapt to
different task combinations (i.e., task sets), we disentangle
the GP-MTL networks into single-task backbones (optionally encode the task priors), and a hierarchical and layerwise features sharing/fusing scheme across them. This enables us to design a novel and general task-agnostic search
space, which inserts cross-task edges (i.e., feature fusion
connections) into fixed single-task network backbones.
Moreover, we also propose a novel single-shot gradientbased search algorithm that closes the performance gap between the searched architectures and the final evaluation
architecture. This is realized with a minimum entropy regularization on the architecture weights during the search
phase, which makes the architecture weights converge to
near-discrete values and therefore achieves a single model.
As a result, our searched model can be directly used for
evaluation without (re-)training from scratch.
We perform extensive experiments using different singletask backbones on various task sets, demonstrating the
promising performance obtained by exploiting the hierarchical and layerwise features, as well as the desirable generalizability to different i) task sets and ii) single-task backbones. The code of our paper is available at https:
//github.com/bhpfelix/MTLNAS.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of deep
neural networks. It integrates hierarchical feature extraction
and optimization in an automatic and end-to-end manner
[24, 26, 30, 57]. Although deep learning algorithms relieve
* Equal contributions with a random order.
† Work performed at Tencent AI Lab.

researchers from feature engineering, they still need carefully designed neural architectures. More recently, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has received increasing attentions in automating the design of deep neural architectures [71]. NAS methods have produced highly competitive architectures on various computer vision tasks, such as
image classification [5, 8, 9, 25, 35, 43, 59, 71], object detection [7, 14, 66], and semantic segmentation [33, 44].
Another paradigm to boost the performance of the deep
neural networks is multi-task learning (MTL) [29, 51].
Multi-task learning has achieved a success in many applications by learning multiple related tasks simultaneously.
This success mainly owes to two key factors, i.e., different tasks produce multiple supervision signals that, i) impose additional regularization among different tasks, and ii)
produce implicit data augmentation on labels [13, 51]. Traditional MTL methods share a single convolutional feature
extractor among all tasks, and keep a separate head for each
task to produce task-specific predictions. It implicitly assumes that all the learned hierarchical and layerwise features are identical, and are able to perform well on all the
tasks. Recent researches show that such an assumption does
not always hold [42], i.e., improper feature sharing may introduce negative transfer of some tasks, thus leading to the
degradation of the performance [51].
It is natural to consider incorporating NAS into generalpurpose MTL (GP-MTL) to pursue better architectures. To
benefit GP-MTL, the NAS algorithm has to adapt to different tasks (or different combinations of tasks, i.e., task sets,
in MTL). However, the existing NAS by design prohibits to
do so as the search spaces are typically different across different tasks. Fundamentally, those differences in the search
spaces reflect different task priors (e.g., see how the prior of
semantic segmentation is encoded in Auto-Deeplab [33]).
But when learning on multiple tasks, it is extremely difficult to encode the priors for multiple tasks into the search
space, especially when the tasks are loosely related.
We tackle this difficulty by disentangling the task prior
from the feature sharing/fusing scheme in GP-MTL. More

11543

