Gradually Vanishing Bridge for Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Shuhao Cui1,2

Shuhui Wang1∗ Junbao Zhuo1,2

Chi Su3

Qingming Huang1,2,4

Qi Tian5

1

2

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Kingsoft Cloud, Beijing, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 5 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

{cuishuhao18s, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn, junbao.zhuo@vipl.ict.ac.cn, suchi@kingsoft.com,
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
In unsupervised domain adaptation, rich domainspecific characteristics bring great challenge to learn
domain-invariant representations. However, domain discrepancy is considered to be directly minimized in existing solutions, which is difficult to achieve in practice.
Some methods alleviate the difficulty by explicitly modeling domain-invariant and domain-specific parts in the representations, but the adverse influence of the explicit construction lies in the residual domain-specific characteristics
in the constructed domain-invariant representations. In this
paper, we equip adversarial domain adaptation with Gradually Vanishing Bridge (GVB) mechanism on both generator and discriminator. On the generator, GVB could not
only reduce the overall transfer difficulty, but also reduce
the influence of the residual domain-specific characteristics in domain-invariant representations. On the discriminator, GVB contributes to enhance the discriminating ability, and balance the adversarial training process. Experiments on three challenging datasets show that our GVB
methods outperform strong competitors, and cooperate well
with other adversarial methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/cuishuhao/GVB.

1. Introduction
Diverse vision applications have gained significant improvement with the cutting-edge technologies such as deep
convolutional neural networks (CNN). Despite of success
already achieved, even a subtle departure from training data
may still cause existing shallow or deep models to make
spurious predictions. Directly applying a deep CNN welltrained on millions of images to a new domain encounters
performance degradation, while collecting labeled samples
for the new domain is expensive and time-consuming. To
alleviate such notorious domain discrepancy, researchers re∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the bridge for adversarial domain adaptation. On the generator, the bridge models domain-specific representations and connects either source or target domain to intermediate domain. On the discriminator, the bridge balances the
adversarial game by providing additive adjustable discriminating
ability. In these processes, the method to construct bridge is the
key issue in our study.

sort to unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [5, 13, 37,
39, 46, 50] that transfers knowledge from labeled source
data to related unlabeled target data.
In traditional UDA methods, domain discrepancy is reduced by learning transferable representations [10, 14, 28],
or reweighing the importance of the samples [29]. Deep
methods carry forward the thought of learning transferable representations by distribution alignment on multiple layers [8, 9, 23, 44, 51]. Recently, many domain
adaptation methods are inspired by Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [1, 12, 27, 49]. Based on GAN,
the transferable representations are constructed by the generator that tries to fool the discriminator in the minmax
game [9, 17, 35, 36, 40]. In these studies, the discrepancy
between source and target domains is considered to be directly minimized. Towards more robust UDA, we reinvestigate the intrinsic weakness possessed by existing domain
discrepancy minimization paradigms.

12455

