_o_ops_!_ Predicting Unintentional Action in Video
Dave Epstein

Boyuan Chen
Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
oops.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
From just a short glance at a video, we can often tell
whether a person’s action is intentional or not. Can we train
a model to recognize this? We introduce a dataset of in-thewild videos of unintentional action, as well as a suite of tasks
for recognizing, localizing, and anticipating its onset. We
train a supervised neural network as a baseline and analyze its performance compared to human consistency on the
tasks. We also investigate self-supervised representations
that leverage natural signals in our dataset, and show the
effectiveness of an approach that uses the intrinsic speed of
video to perform competitively with highly-supervised pretraining. However, a significant gap between machine and
human performance remains.

1. Introduction
From just a glance at a video, we can often tell whether
a person’s action is intentional or not. For example, Figure
1 shows a person attempting to jump off a raft, but unintentionally tripping into the sea. In a classic series of papers, developmental psychologist Amanda Woodward demonstrated
that this ability to recognize the intentionality of action is

learned by children during their first year [72, 73, 7]. However, predicting the intention behind action has remained elusive for machine vision. Recent advances in action recognition have largely focused on predicting the physical motions
and atomic actions in video [30, 20, 42], which captures the
means of action but not the intent of action.
We believe a key limitation for perceiving visual intentionality has been the lack of realistic data with natural variation of intention. Although there are now extensive video
datasets for action recognition [30, 20, 42], people are usually competent, which causes datasets to be biased towards
successful outcomes. However, this bias for success makes
discriminating and localizing visual intentionality difficult
for both learning and quantitative evaluation.
We introduce a new annotated video dataset that is abundant with unintentional action, which we have collected by
crawling publicly available “fail” videos from the web. Figure 2 shows some examples, which cover in-the-wild situations for both intentional and unintentional action. Our
video dataset, which we will publicly release, is both large
(over 50 hours of video) and diverse (covering hundreds of
scenes and activities). We annotate videos with the temporal location at which the video transitions from intentional to
unintentional action. We define three tasks on this dataset:

Intentional Action Unintentional Action

Time
Predicted Failure

Figure 1: Intentional versus Unintentional: Did this person intend for this action to happen, or was it an accident? In
this paper, we introduce a large in-the-wild video dataset of unintentional action. Our dataset, which we have collected by
downloading “fail” videos from the web, contains over twenty thousand clips, and they span a diverse number of activities
and scenes. Using this dataset, we study a variety of visual clues for learning to predict intentionality in video.
1919

