DeFeat-Net: General Monocular Depth via Simultaneous Unsupervised
Representation Learning
Jaime Spencer, Richard Bowden, Simon Hadfield
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP)
University of Surrey
{jaime.spencer, r.bowden, s.hadfield}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
In the current monocular depth research, the dominant approach is to employ unsupervised training on large
datasets, driven by warped photometric consistency. Such
approaches lack robustness and are unable to generalize to
challenging domains such as nighttime scenes or adverse
weather conditions where assumptions about photometric
consistency break down.
We propose DeFeat-Net (Depth & Feature network), an
approach to simultaneously learn a cross-domain dense
feature representation, alongside a robust depth-estimation
framework based on warped feature consistency. The resulting feature representation is learned in an unsupervised
manner with no explicit ground-truth correspondences required.
We show that within a single domain, our technique is
comparable to both the current state of the art in monocular depth estimation and supervised feature representation
learning. However, by simultaneously learning features,
depth and motion, our technique is able to generalize to
challenging domains, allowing DeFeat-Net to outperform
the current state-of-the-art with around 10% reduction in
all error measures on more challenging sequences such as
nighttime driving.

1. Introduction
Recently there have been many advances in computer
vision tasks related to autonomous vehicles, including
monocular depth estimation [22, 83, 73] and feature learning [13, 61, 65]. However, as shown in Figure 1, these approaches tend to fail in the most complex scenarios, namely
adverse weather and nighttime conditions.
In the case of depth estimation, this is usually due to
the assumption of photometric consistency, which starts to
break down in dimly-lit environments. Feature learning
can overcome such strong photometric assumptions, but

Figure 1. Left: Challenging lighting conditions during nighttime
driving. Right: A catastrophic failure during depth map estimation
for a current state-of-the-art monocular depth estimation framework, after being trained specifically for this scenario.

these approaches tend to require ground truth pixel-wise
correspondences and obtaining this ground truth in crossseasonal situations is non-trivial. Inconsistencies between
GPS measurements and drift from Visual Odometry (VO)
makes automatic pointcloud alignment highly inaccurate
and manual annotation is costly and time-consuming.
We make the observation that depth estimation and feature representation are inherently complementary. The process of estimating the depth for a scene also allows for the
computation of ground-truth feature matches between any
views of the scene. Meanwhile robust feature spaces are
necessary in order to create reliable depth-estimation systems with invariance to lighting and appearance change.
Despite this relationship, all existing approaches tackle
these challenges independently. Instead, we propose
DeFeat-Net, a system that is capable of jointly learning
depth from a single image in addition to a dense feature
representation of the world and ego-motion between consecutive frames. What’s more, this is achieved in an entirely self-supervised fashion, requiring no ground truth
other than a monocular stream of images.
We show how the proposed framework can use the existing relationships between these tasks to complement each
other and boost performance in complex environments. As
has become commonplace [23], the predicted depth and
ego-motion can be used to generate a correspondence map

14402

