Intra- and Inter-Action Understanding via Temporal Action Parsing
Dian Shao Yue Zhao Bo Dai Dahua Lin
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{sd017, zy317, bdai, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Current methods for action recognition primarily rely on
deep convolutional networks to derive feature embeddings
of visual and motion features. While these methods have
demonstrated remarkable performance on standard benchmarks, we are still in need of a better understanding as
to how the videos, in particular their internal structures,
relate to high-level semantics, which may lead to benefits
in multiple aspects, e.g. interpretable predictions and even
new methods that can take the recognition performances
to a next level. Towards this goal, we construct TAPOS,
a new dataset developed on sport videos with manual annotations of sub-actions, and conduct a study on temporal
action parsing on top 1 . Our study shows that a sport activity usually consists of multiple sub-actions and that the
awareness of such temporal structures is beneficial to action
recognition. We also investigate a number of temporal parsing methods, and thereon devise an improved method that
is capable of mining sub-actions from training data without knowing the labels of them. On the constructed TAPOS,
the proposed method is shown to reveal intra-action information, i.e. how action instances are made of sub-actions,
and inter-action information, i.e. one specific sub-action
may commonly appear in various actions.

1. Introduction
Action understanding is a central topic in computer vision, which benefits a number of real-world applications,
including video captioning [54], video retrieval [17, 41] and
vision-based robotics [32]. Although over the past decade,
remarkable progress has been made on action classification [56, 51, 48, 13], action localization [58, 31], and action segmentation [27, 23, 6], the insight into actions themselves remains lacking, as few works have analyzed actions
at a finer-granularity, such as exploring their internal structures (intra-action understanding), discovering their mutual
relationships (inter-action understanding).
1 Project website: https://sdolivia.github.io/TAPOS/

One hindrance for intra- and inter-action understanding
is a well-annotated dataset, which provides annotations that
penetrate into actions, besides action labels as in most existing datasets [45, 24, 20, 21]. However, such a dataset is hard
to collect, especially when labeling sub-actions. Specifically, action labels provided by humans are sometimes ambiguous and inconsistent, e.g. open/close fridge are treated
as the same action while pour milk/oil belong to different actions. Such an issue could become severer when we
deal with sub-actions, as compared to actions, sub-actions
share more subtle differences between each other. Moreover, sub-actions belonging to the same category could not
only appear in different instances of some action, but also
instances of different actions. Although previous attempts
have alleviated these issues by restricting the types of both
actions and sub-actions within relatively more formatted
cases, e.g. instructional [47, 33] and cooking [40, 22, 46, 10]
videos. In more general cases, ensuring a consistent labeling scheme across sub-actions may be infeasible, considering the scale of a dataset.
Fortunately, we observe that humans are sensitive to
boundaries of sub-actions, even without knowing their categories. We thus provide intra-action annotations in the form
of high-quality temporal segmentations, instead of subaction labels. The temporal segmentations divide actions
into segments of different sub-actions, implicitly revealing
actions’ internal structures. The constructed dataset, which
we refer to as Temporal Action Parsing of Olympics
Sports (TAPOS), contains over 16K action instances in 21
Olympics sport classes. We focus on Olympics sport actions as they have consistent and clean backgrounds, and
diverse internal structures and rich sub-actions. These characteristics would encourage models to exploit the action
themselves rather than the background scenes.
On top of TAPOS, we notice a temporal segmental network (TSN) [53] can obtain significant performance gains
when the segments are aligned with temporal structures, instead of being evenly divided. Motivated by the study, we
propose to investigate actions by temporally parse an action
instance into segments, each of which covers a complete
sub-action, where categories of these sub-actions are un-

730

