Deblurring using Analysis-Synthesis Networks Pair
Adam Kaufman

Raanan Fattal

adam.kaufman@mail.huji.ac.il

raananf@cs.huji.ac.il

School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
Blind image deblurring remains a challenging problem
for modern artificial neural networks. Unlike other image
restoration problems, deblurring networks fail behind the
performance of existing deblurring algorithms in case of
uniform and 3D blur models. This follows from the diverse
and profound effect that the unknown blur-kernel has on the
deblurring operator.
We propose a new architecture which breaks the deblurring network into an analysis network which estimates the
blur, and a synthesis network that uses this kernel to deblur the image. Unlike existing deblurring networks, this
design allows us to explicitly incorporate the blur-kernel in
the network’s training.
In addition, we introduce new cross-correlation layers
that allow better blur estimations, as well as unique components that allow the estimate blur to control the action of
the synthesis deblurring action.
Evaluating the new approach over established benchmark datasets shows its ability to achieve state-of-the-art
deblurring accuracy on various tests, as well as offer a major speedup in runtime.

1. Introduction
When taking a photo using a handheld device, such as a
smartphone, camera shakes are hard to avoid. If the scene
is not very bright, the movement during exposure results in
a blurry image. This becomes worse as the scene is darker
and a longer exposure time is needed.
The task of recovering a blur-free image given a single
blurry photo is called deblurring and is typically divided
into blind and non-blind cases, depending on whether the
blur-kernel is known and unknown respectively. Both cases
were studied extensively in the computer vision literature,
and were addressed using dedicated algorithms [26, 36, 17,
44, 31, 5] and using Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs),
which are either used for implementing parts of the de-

blurring pipeline [35, 43, 49, 1, 37] or carrying-out the entire pipeline [28, 39, 19, 20, 29]. Due to the ill-posedness
of the blind deblurring case, classic methods use various
constraints and image priors to regularize the space of solutions [7, 3, 26, 41, 9]. Typically these methods consist
of a time-consuming iterative optimization, where both the
sharp image and blur-kernel are recovered, as well as relay
on specific image priors that may fail on certain types of
images.
In these respects, the ANN-based solutions offer a clear
advantage. While they may require a long training time,
their subsequent application consists of a rather efficient
feed-forward procedure. Furthermore, using suitable training sets they achieve a (locally) optimal performance over
wide classes of images. It is worth noting that in this domain
the training sets are produced automatically by applying a
set of blur-kernels over a set of sharp images involving no
manual effort.
Nevertheless, unlike other image restoration problems,
such as denoising [50, 51], upscaling [6, 14, 24], and inpainting [32, 45, 47], even the case of spatially-uniform
blind deblurring ANN-based approaches fail to show a clear
improvement over existing algorithms when it comes to the
accuracy of the deblurred image. This major shortcoming
stems from the fact that the space of blur-kernels, which
specifies the blur degradation, is very large and has a very
diverse effect over the inverse operator. Indeed, this is in
contrast to the one-dimensional space of noise amplitude
σ that governs denoising. While it is shown that a single
network trained over a wide range of σ can achieve a denoising accuracy over a specific σ ∗ which is comparable to
a network trained over that particular value [50]. The analog experiment shows that this is far from being the case for
image deblurring, as reported in [35] and demonstrated in
Figure 1.
In this paper we describe a novel network architecture
and training scheme that account for the unique nature of
the deblurring operation. The design of this new network
incorporates various components found in image deblurring
algorithms, and allows it to mimic and generalize their op15811

