Hyperbolic Visual Embedding Learning for Zero-Shot Recognition
Shaoteng Liu1,2 Jingjing Chen1† Liangming Pan3 Chong-Wah Ngo4 Tat-Seng Chua3 Yu-Gang Jiang1
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 National University of Singapore 4 City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
This paper proposes a Hyperbolic Visual Embedding
Learning Network for zero-shot recognition. The network
learns image embeddings in hyperbolic space, which is capable of preserving the hierarchical structure of semantic
classes in low dimensions. Comparing with existing zeroshot learning approaches, the network is more robust because the embedding feature in hyperbolic space better represents class hierarchy and thereby avoid misleading resulted from unrelated siblings. Our network outperforms
exiting baselines under hierarchical evaluation with an extremely challenging setting, i.e., learning only from 1,000
categories to recognize 20,841 unseen categories. While
under flat evaluation, it has competitive performance as
state-of-the-art methods but with five times lower embedding dimensions. Our code is publicly available ∗ .

1. Introduction
Real-world image recognition applications are usually
faced with thousands of object classes. Collecting sufficient
training data for each class is time-consuming and sometimes infeasible. Therefore, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [34,
35, 9], which aims to recognize the novel categories which
are unseen during the training phase, has become an important research problem that needs to study.
Nevertheless, zero-shot learning is generally regarded
as a difficult problem. As reported in [17], for generalized large-scale zero-shot image recognition, the best performance attained on the ImageNet dataset (with 2,2841
class) is less than 10% in terms of top-5 accuracy, which
is far away from real-world applications. On the one hand,
the class defined in the ImageNet is organized according
to the WordNet hierarchy, including both general and finegrained objects. For example, there are hundreds of species
of dogs; distinguishing them with sufficient labeled training
data is difficult, not mentioning the situation when the training sample is unavailable. Therefore, learning a model aim† Corresponding author. Email: chenjingjing@fudan.edu.cn
∗ https://github.com/ShaoTengLiu/Hyperbolic_ZSL

Squirrel

Ground Squirrel

Arctic Squirrel

Rock Squirrel

Flying Squirrel

Tree Squirrel

Black Squirrel

Red Squirrel

Figure 1. Given an unseen image from “Arctic Squirrel” (bounded
in green), the proposed hyperbolic visual embedding learning networks will tend to predict to its immediate parent class “ground
squirrel”(bounded in blue) while existing methods will predict it
to its wrong sibling class “rock squirrel”.

ing to predict correct specific classes is not practical under
large-scale zero-shot settings. To make ZSL more applicable in real-world applications, we notice that when the ZSL
system cannot make a specific prediction targeted to the leaf
class, users tend to tolerate a relative general but correct
predictions rather than a specific but wrong prediction. For
example, Figure 1 shows a part of the class hierarchy in the
ImageNet. Given an unseen image of “red squirrel”, users
may prefer to have the prediction “tree squirrel” rather than
“Kangaroo”. Besides, making a slightly general but correct
prediction makes it convenient to design the user interface
for improving the results. Therefore, in this paper, we argue
that a robust ZSL system should have the ability to output a
correct but less fine-grained label (e.g., the direct parent of
the ground-truth label).
Existing works, however, are not designed to optimize
the robustness of the zero-shot recognition systems. Generally, most of the existing works are implicit models that directly learn a mapping from visual space to semantic space
[9] [29]. The semantic space are usually represented by semantic vectors, such as word vectors obtained from GloVe
[28] or Word2Vec [24] models. As hierarchical relations
among categories are not encoded in the semantic space,
these models are unlikely to fulfill the robust recognition.
More recent works propose to introduce class hierarchy by
modeling the hierarchical relation with graph neural net4321
9273

