Optical Flow in Dense Foggy Scenes using Semi-Supervised Learning
Wending Yan∗1 , Aashish Sharma∗1 , and Robby T. Tan1,2
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Yale-NUS College
eleyanw@nus.edu.sg, aashish.sharma@u.nus.edu, robby.tan@{nus,yale-nus}.edu.sg

Abstract
In dense foggy scenes, existing optical flow methods are
erroneous. This is due to the degradation caused by dense
fog particles that break the optical flow basic assumptions
such as brightness and gradient constancy. To address
the problem, we introduce a semi-supervised deep learning technique that employs real fog images without optical flow ground-truths in the training process. Our network
integrates the domain transformation and optical flow networks in one framework. Initially, given a pair of synthetic
fog images, its corresponding clean images and optical flow
ground-truths, in one training batch we train our network in
a supervised manner. Subsequently, given a pair of real fog
images and a pair of clean images that are not corresponding to each other (unpaired), in the next training batch, we
train our network in an unsupervised manner. We then alternate the training of synthetic and real data iteratively. We
use real data without ground-truths, since to have groundtruths in such conditions is intractable, and also to avoid
the overfitting problem of synthetic data training, where the
knowledge learned on synthetic data cannot be generalized
to real data testing. Together with the network architecture
design, we propose a new training strategy that combines
supervised synthetic-data training and unsupervised realdata training. Experimental results show that our method
is effective and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in
estimating optical flow in dense foggy scenes.

1. Introduction
Fog is a common and inevitable weather phenomenon. It
degrades visibility by weakening the background scene information, and washing out the colors of the scene. This
degradation breaks the Brightness Constancy Constraint
(BCC) and Gradient Constancy Constraint (GCC) used in
existing optical flow methods. To our knowledge, none
of the existing methods can handle dense foggy scenes robustly. This is because most of them (e.g. [42, 6, 14, 38, 30,
* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† This work is supported by MOE2019-T2-1-130.

(a) Input Image

(b) PWCNet [38]

(c) Our Result

(d) Ground-Truth

Figure 1: (a) Input dense foggy image (first frame). (b) Optical
flow result from the existing baseline method PWCNet [38]. We
can observe that the result is erroneous and the method cannot
handle dense fog. As shown in (c), compared to it, our method
performs more robustly.

43]) are designed under the assumption of clear visibility.
One of the possible solutions is to render synthetic fog
images based on the commonly used physics model (i.e.,
the Koschmieder model [18]), and then to train a network
on the synthetic fog images and their corresponding optical
flow ground-truths in a supervised manner. While in our
investigation, it works to some extent, when applied to real
dense fog images in the testing stage, it does not perform
adequately. The main cause is the domain gap between the
synthetic and real fog images. The synthetic images are
too crude to represent the complexity of real fog images.
This problem can be fixed by using real fog images, instead
of synthetic fog images for training. However, to obtain
the correct optical flow ground-truths for real fog images is
extremely challenging [3].
Another possible solution is to defog the real fog images
using an existing defogging method (e.g., [39, 7, 12, 1, 45,
21]), and then to estimate the flow using an existing optical flow method. This two-stage solution, however, is not
effective either. First, existing defogging methods are not
designed for optical flow, hence their outputs might not be
optimum for flow computation. Second, defogging, particularly for dense fog, is still an open problem. Hence, the
113259

