HRank: Filter Pruning using High-Rank Feature Map
Mingbao Lin1 , Rongrong Ji1,5∗, Yan Wang2 , Yichen Zhang1 ,
Baochang Zhang3 , Yonghong Tian4,5 , Ling Shao6
1
Media Analytics and Computing Laboratory, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Informatics, Xiamen University, China, 2 Pinterest, USA, 3 Beihang University, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
6
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
lmbxmu@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, yanw@pinterest.com, ethan.zhangyc@gmail.com,
bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, yhtian@pku.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Neural network pruning offers a promising prospect
to facilitate deploying deep neural networks on resourcelimited devices. However, existing methods are still challenged by the training inefficiency and labor cost in pruning
designs, due to missing theoretical guidance of non-salient
network components. In this paper, we propose a novel filter pruning method by exploring the High Rank of feature
maps (HRank). Our HRank is inspired by the discovery that
the average rank of multiple feature maps generated by a
single filter is always the same, regardless of the number of
image batches CNNs receive. Based on HRank, we develop
a method that is mathematically formulated to prune filters
with low-rank feature maps. The principle behind our pruning is that low-rank feature maps contain less information,
and thus pruned results can be easily reproduced. Besides,
we experimentally show that weights with high-rank feature
maps contain more important information, such that even
when a portion is not updated, very little damage would be
done to the model performance. Without introducing any
additional constraints, HRank leads to significant improvements over the state-of-the-arts in terms of FLOPs and parameters reduction, with similar accuracies. For example,
with ResNet-110, we achieve a 58.2%-FLOPs reduction by
removing 59.2% of the parameters, with only a small loss
of 0.14% in top-1 accuracy on CIFAR-10. With Res-50,
we achieve a 43.8%-FLOPs reduction by removing 36.7%
of the parameters, with only a loss of 1.17% in the top1 accuracy on ImageNet. The codes can be available at
https://github.com/lmbxmu/HRank.

∗ Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated great success in computer vision applications, like
classification [33, 11], detection [7, 30], and segmentation
[25, 2]. However, their high demands in computing power
and memory footprint prohibit most state-of-the-art CNNs
to be deployed in edge devices such as smartphones or
wearable devices. While good progress has been made in
designing new hardware and/or hardware-specific CNN acceleration frameworks like TensorRT, it retains as a significant demand to reduce the FLOPs and size of CNNs, with
limited compromise on accuracy [4]. Popular techniques
include filter compression [6], parameter quantization [3],
and network pruning [10].
Among them, network pruning has shown broad
prospects in various emerging applications. Typical works
either prune the filter weights to obtain sparse weight matrices (weight pruning) [10, 9, 1], or remove entire filters from
the network (filter pruning) [18, 19, 20]. Besides network
compression, weight pruning approaches can also achieve
acceleration on specialized software [28] or hardware [8].
However, they have limited applications on general-purpose
hardware or BLAS libraries. In contrast, filter pruning approaches do not have this limitation since entire filters are
removed. In this paper, we focus on the filter pruning to
achieve model compression (reduction in parameters) and
acceleration (reduction in FLOPs), aiming to provide a versatile solution for devices with low computing power.
The core of filter pruning lies in the selection of filters,
which should yield the highest compression ratio with the
lowest compromise in accuracy. Based on the design of
filter evaluation functions, we empirically categorize filter
pruning into two groups as discussed below.

1529

