Fast Video Object Segmentation with Temporal Aggregation Network and
Dynamic Template Matching
Xuhua Huang1∗
Jiarui Xu1∗
Yu-Wing Tai2
Chi-Keung Tang1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tencent
xhuangat@ust.hk

jxuat@ust.hk

yuwingtai@tencent.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
Significant progress has been made in Video Object
Segmentation (VOS), the video object tracking task in its
finest level. While the VOS task can be naturally decoupled into image semantic segmentation and video object tracking, significantly much more research effort has
been made in segmentation than tracking. In this paper, we introduce “tracking-by-detection” into VOS which
can coherently integrates segmentation into tracking, by
proposing a new temporal aggregation network and a
novel dynamic time-evolving template matching mechanism
to achieve significantly improved performance. Notably,
our method is entirely online and thus suitable for oneshot learning, and our end-to-end trainable model allows
multiple object segmentation in one forward pass. We
achieve new state-of-the-art performance on the DAVIS
benchmark without complicated bells and whistles in both
speed and accuracy, with a speed of 0.14 second per
frame and J &F measure of 75.9% respectively. Project
page is available at https://xuhuaking.github.
io/Fast-VOS-DTTM-TAN/.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a fine-grained labeling problem aiming to find pixel-level correspondence
across frames in a given video, which has broad range of
applications including surveillance, video editing, robotics
and autonomous driving. In this work, we focus on the
semi-supervised VOS setting in which the ground-truth segmentation masks of the target objects in the first frame are
given. The task is then to automatically predict the segmentation masks of the target objects for the rest of the
video. With the recent advances in deep learning and the
introduction of the DAVIS datasets [44, 45], tremendous
progress has been made in tackling this semi-supervised
VOS task. Notwithstanding, existing state-of-the-art methods are heavily biased toward semantic segmentation in
their design and thus they do not leverage the advantages
∗ Equal contribution. This research is supported in part by Tencent
and the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no.
1620818.

Figure 1. Qualitative comparisons on the DAVIS validation set.
The camel example shows the case when FEELVOS [48] misjudges pixels from another object. The racing car example shows
that PReMVOS [38] switches to another object between two consecutive frames. Both FEELVOS and PReMVOS are respectively
the top 2 entries on the DAVIS benchmark.

of excellent tracking solutions. We believe that the VOS
task can be naturally decoupled into image semantic segmentation and video object tracking:
In semantic segmentation, most works [8, 9, 10, 11] are
mainly based on Fully Convolutional Networks [37]. Many
VOS pipelines [29, 4, 49, 1, 48, 52, 41] exploit these architectures to produce a segmentation map. However, semantic segmentation is not instance sensitive. In complex
scenarios where many different instances share the same semantics (e.g., pedestrians, vehicles and cases in Figure 1),
these methods based on semantic segmentation may fail to
track individual objects consistently. This has prompted us
18879

