Relative Interior Rule in Block-Coordinate Descent
Tomáš Werner, Daniel Průša, Tomáš Dlask
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
{werner,prusapa1,dlaskto2}@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
It is well-known that for general convex optimization
problems, block-coordinate descent can get stuck in poor
local optima. Despite that, versions of this method known
as convergent message passing are very successful to approximately solve the dual LP relaxation of the MAP inference problem in graphical models. In attempt to identify
the reason why these methods often achieve good local minima, we argue that if in block-coordinate descent the set of
minimizers over a variable block has multiple elements, one
should choose an element from the relative interior of this
set. We show that this rule is not worse than any other rule
for choosing block-minimizers. Based on this observation,
we develop a theoretical framework for block-coordinate
descent applied to general convex problems. We illustrate
this theory on convergent message-passing methods.

tion of a piecewise-affine (hence non-differentiable) convex
function. Examples are max-sum diffusion [11, 17, 23],
TRW-S [8], MPLP [2], SRMP [9], and [3, 12]. For many
problems from computer vision, TRW-S is typically faster
than all competing methods and its fixed points are not far
from global minima, especially for large sparse instances
[19, 7]. This motivates us to study convergent messagepassing methods independently of MAP inference, with the
hope of extending them to a wider class of convex problems.

1. Introduction

One might think that convergent message-passing methods are ‘just’ applications of BCD to suitable forms of the
dual LP relaxation. However, this is not the whole explanation: we believe these methods have a single feature that
allows them to achieve good local optima. In a BCD iteration, the minimizer over a variable block need not be unique
and therefore a single minimizer must be chosen. We argue
that this minimizer should be chosen from the relative interior of the set of all minimizers over the variable block. We
call this the relative interior rule.

Block-coordinate descent (BCD) is an iterative optimization method which in every iteration finds a global optimum of the problem over a subset of variables, keeping
the remaining variables fixed. For some problems, fixed
points of BCD and cluster points of the sequence generated
by it are global optima, see, e.g., [20] and the references
therein. Focusing on convex problems, BCD can be made
very efficient and scalable provided that optimality can be
guaranteed, as in [13, 5, 1]. For general convex problems,
BCD fixed/cluster points can be arbitrarily poor local minima (where ‘local’ is meant with respect to block-coordinate
moves). Therefore, BCD is mostly regarded unsuitable for
general convex problems.
An exception is the class of methods known as convergent message passing, used to approximately solve the
linear-programming (LP) relaxation of the MAP inference
problem in graphical models [19, 7] (frequently used to
model low-level computer vision tasks such as denoising, segmentation or registration) and some other combinatorial problems [18]. These methods apply various
forms of BCD to various forms of the dual LP relaxation,
where the latter boils down to the unconstrained minimiza-

Based on this observation, we develop a theoretical
framework for BCD applied to general convex problems.
We distinguish three types of block-coordinate local minima: (ordinary) local minima, interior local minima, and
pre-interior local minima. We show that the relative interior
rule is not worse than any other rule to choose variableblock minimizers, in the following sense: starting from any
non-pre-interior local minimum, BCD satisfying the relative interior rule inevitably improves the objective; starting
from any pre-interior local minimum, BCD (not necessarily satisfying the relative interior rule) never improves the
objective. Assuming a linear objective function, we show
that local and interior local minima form sets of faces of
the feasible set, which are closed under intersection. Inspired by the proof in [17] (revisited in [16, §8]), we prove
convergence of BCD satisfying the relative interior rule to
the set of pre-interior local minima. We show how wellknown convergent message-passing methods fit in our theory. Here, local minimality conditions induced by the relative interior rule correspond to local consistencies, such as
arc consistency [23] or weak-tree agreement [8]. We also
sketch applications to some new problems.

7559

