A Shared Multi-Attention Framework for Multi-Label Zero-Shot Learning
Dat Huynh
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

huynh.dat@husky.neu.edu

eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we develop a shared multi-attention model
for multi-label zero-shot learning. We argue that designing attention mechanism for recognizing multiple seen and
unseen labels in an image is a non-trivial task as there is
no training signal to localize unseen labels and an image
only contains a few present labels that need attentions out
of thousands of possible labels. Therefore, instead of generating attentions for unseen labels which have unknown
behaviors and could focus on irrelevant regions due to the
lack of any training sample, we let the unseen labels select among a set of shared attentions which are trained to
be label-agnostic and to focus on only relevant/foreground
regions through our novel loss. Finally, we learn a compatibility function to distinguish labels based on the selected
attention. We further propose a novel loss function that consists of three components guiding the attention to focus on
diverse and relevant image regions while utilizing all attention features. By extensive experiments, we show that our
method improves the state of the art by 2.9% and 1.4% F1
score on the NUS-WIDE and the large scale Open Images
datasets, respectively.

1. Introduction
Recognition of all labels in an image, referred to as
multi-label recognition, is a fundamental problem in computer vision with applications in self-driving cars, surveillance systems and assistive robots, among others. To successfully support real-world tasks, multi-label recognition
systems must accurately learn tens of thousands of labels,
handle unseen labels and localize them in images. Despite advances, in particular, using deep neural networks,
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], to date, there is no multi-label
learning algorithm that can achieve all these goals. This
paper takes steps towards addressing large-scale multi-label
zero-shot learning and localization.
The majority of existing work on multi-label learning
have focused on exploiting dependencies among labels to
improve the recognition performance of methods that learn

Figure 1: Visualization of attentions learned by a single attention
for all labels, one attention per label and our shared multi-attention
model. Our method successfully attends to relevant image regions
for both seen and unseen labels while producing only a few number of attentions that significantly improves the memory and computational complexity for predicting thousands of labels.

a separate classifier for each label [1, 11, 3, 12, 13, 14, 3, 8,
15]. However, they cannot handle the classification of (multiple) unseen labels in an image and cannot localize labels.
A few recent work have incorporated attention mechanism
into multi-label learning to focus on relevant image regions
[16, 17, 18, 10], yet, they lack the ability to handle unseen
labels. Moreover, the recurrent neural network employed
in [16, 18], which has to sequentially compute the attention
regions for the subsequent label to be predicted, imposes
large training and inference time and limits the scalability
to classify a large number of labels in an image.
On the other hand, a large body of work have focused
on zero-shot learning with the goal of recognizing unseen
labels [19, 20, 21, 7, 9, 22, 23, 24], with some of the recent
work taking advantage of attention models [25, 26, 27] to
improve the prediction accuracy. However, these methods
address the multi-class zero-shot learning, where each image is assumed to have one label, hence cannot handle the
multi-label setting, where an image contains several labels,
some of which could be unseen. Moreover, as observed by
[28, 29, 30], using a single feature vector to encode discrim18776

