Quaternion Product Units for Deep Learning on 3D Rotation Groups
Xuan Zhang1 , Shaofei Qin1 , Yi Xu∗1 , and Hongteng Xu2
1

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute 2 Infinia ML, Inc.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
{floatlazer, 1105042987, xuyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, hongteng.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel quaternion product unit (QPU) to
represent data on 3D rotation groups. The QPU leverages quaternion algebra and the law of 3D rotation group,
representing 3D rotation data as quaternions and merging them via a weighted chain of Hamilton products. We
prove that the representations derived by the proposed QPU
can be disentangled into “rotation-invariant” features and
“rotation-equivariant” features, respectively, which supports the rationality and the efficiency of the QPU in theory. We design quaternion neural networks based on our
QPUs and make our models compatible with existing deep
learning models. Experiments on both synthetic and realworld data show that the proposed QPU is beneficial for
the learning tasks requiring rotation robustness.

1. Introduction
Representing 3D data like point clouds and skeletons
is essential for many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [17, 37], robotics [30], and gaming [2,
16]. In practice, we often model these 3D data as the collection of points on a 3D rotation group SO(3), e.g., a skeleton
can be represented by the rotations between adjacent joints.
Accordingly, the uncertainty hidden in these data is usually
caused by the randomness on rotations. For example, in action recognition, the human skeletons with different orientations may represent the same action [27, 35]; in autonomous
driving, the point clouds with different directions may capture the same vehicle [37]. Facing to the 3D data with such
rotation discrepancies, we often require the corresponding
representation methods to be robust to rotations.
Currently, many deep learning-based representation
∗ The corresponding author of this paper is Yi Xu (xuyi@sjtu.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by NSFC 61671298, STCSM
18DZ2270700, and 111 Plan B07022.

methods have made efforts to enhance their robustness to
rotations [4, 6, 29, 3, 26]. However, the architectures of
their models are tailored for the data in the Euclidean space,
rather than 3D rotation data. In particular, the 3D rotation
data are not closed under the algebraic operations used in
their models (i.e., additions and multiplications).1 The mismatching between data and model makes these methods difficult to analyze the influence of rotations on their outputs
quantitatively. Although this mismatching problem can be
mitigated by augmenting training data with additional rotations [18], this solution gives us no theoretical guarantee.
To overcome the challenge mentioned above, we proposed a novel quaternion product unit (QPU) for 3D rotation data, which establishes an efficient and interpretable
mechanism to enhance the robustness of deep learning models to rotations. As illustrated in Figure 1a, for each 3D rotation, we represent it as a unit quaternion, whose imaginary
part indicates the direction of its rotation axis, and the real
part corresponds to the cosine of its rotation angle, respectively. Taking N quaternions as its inputs, the QPU first applies quaternion power operation to each input, scaling their
rotation angles and rotation axes, respectively. Then, it applies a chain of Hamilton products to merge the weighted
quaternions and output a rotation accordingly. The parameters of the QPU consists of the scaling coefficients and the
bias introduced to the rotation angles.
The proposed QPU leverages quaternion algebra and the
law of 3D rotation groups, merging the inputs as one quaternion. Because 3D rotation group is closed under the operations used in our QPU, the output is still a valid rotation. Moreover, given a dataset X ⊂ SO(3)N , where each
x = [x1 , ..., xN ] ∈ X contains N rotations, we can define two kinds of rotation robustness for a mapping function
f : SO(3)N 7→ SO(3):
Rotation-invariance f (R(x)) = f (x), ∀x ∈ X .
Rotation-equivariance f (R(x)) = R(f (x)), ∀x ∈ X .
1 For example, adding two 3D rotation matrices together or multiplying
a scalar with a 3D rotation matrix will not result in a valid rotation matrix.

7304

