SAINT: Spatially Aware Interpolation NeTwork for Medical Slice Synthesis
Cheng Peng1 Wei-An Lin1 Haofu Liao2 Rama Chellappa1 Shaohua Kevin Zhou3,4
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 University of Rochester
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen

Abstract
Deep learning-based single image super-resolution
(SISR) methods face various challenges when applied to 3D
medical volumetric data (i.e., CT and MR images) due to
the high memory cost and anisotropic resolution, which adversely affect their performance. Furthermore, mainstream
SISR methods are designed to work over specific upsampling factors, which makes them ineffective in clinical practice. In this paper, we introduce a Spatially Aware Interpolation NeTwork (SAINT) for medical slice synthesis to alleviate the memory constraint that volumetric data poses.
Compared to other super-resolution methods, SAINT utilizes voxel spacing information to provide desirable levels
of details, and allows for the upsampling factor to be determined on the fly. Our evaluations based on 853 CT scans
from four datasets that contain liver, colon, hepatic vessels, and kidneys show that SAINT consistently outperforms
other SISR methods in terms of medical slice synthesis quality, while using only a single model to deal with different
upsampling factors.

(a) Bicubical Interpolation

(b) mDCSRN[4]

(c) 3D RDN2 [27]

(d) SAINT (Ours)

1. Introduction
Medical imaging methods such as computational tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are essential to modern day diagnosis and surgery planning. To
provide necessary visual information of the human body,
it is desirable to acquire high resolution and high contrast
medical images. For MRI, the acquisition of higher resolution images take a long time, and thus, practitioners often
accelerate the process by acquiring fewer slices1 . ’CT image acquisition is much faster than MRI; however, due to the
high cost of keeping complete 3D volumes in memory and
print, typically only necessary number of slices are stored.
As a result, most medical imaging volumes are anisotropic,
with high within-slice resolution and low between-slice resolution. The inconsistent resolution leads to a range of
1 Cross-sectional images of the human body
2 The residual dense network (RDN) proposed in [27], where kernels
are changed from 2D to 3D.

Figure 1: 3D renderings of bones from CT slice interpolation results. Bicubical interpolation (a) from sparsely sampled CT volume, with highly unrealistic distortions. Methods (b) and (c) improve the image quality; however, they
are still under-resolved as is evident on the spinal column.
SAINT (d) resolves details much better on the spinal column.
issues, from unpleasant viewing experience to difficulties
in developing robust analysis algorithms. Currently, many
datasets [9, 19, 1] use affine transforms to equalize voxel
spacing between volumes, which may introduce significant
distortions to the original data, as shown in Fig. 1a. There17750

