Deformable Siamese Attention Networks for Visual Object Tracking
Yuechen Yu, Yilei Xiong, Weilin Huang† , Matthew R. Scott
Malong Technologies
{rogyu, yilxiong, whuang, mscott}@malong.com

Abstract
Siamese-based trackers have achieved excellent performance on visual object tracking. However, the target template is not updated online, and the features of the target
template and search image are computed independently in a
Siamese architecture. In this paper, we propose Deformable
Siamese Attention Networks, referred to as SiamAttn, by introducing a new Siamese attention mechanism that computes deformable self-attention and cross-attention. The
self-attention learns strong context information via spatial attention, and selectively emphasizes interdependent
channel-wise features with channel attention. The crossattention is capable of aggregating rich contextual interdependencies between the target template and the search
image, providing an implicit manner to adaptively update
the target template. In addition, we design a region refinement module that computes depth-wise cross correlations
between the attentional features for more accurate tracking. We conduct experiments on six benchmarks, where our
method achieves new state-of-the-art results, outperforming the strong baseline, SiamRPN++ [24], by 0.464→0.537
and 0.415→0.470 EAO on VOT 2016 and 2018.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking aims to track a given target object at each frame over a video sequence. It is a fundamental task in computer vision [17, 16, 20], and has numerous practical applications, such as automatic driving [23],
human-computer interaction [28], robot sensing, etc. Recent efforts have been devoted to improving the performance of visual object trackers. However, developing a fast,
accurate and robust tracker is still highly challenging due to
the vast amount of deformations, motions and occlusions
that often occur on video objects with complex background
[38, 22, 10].
Deep learning technologies have significantly advanced
the task of visual object tracking, by providing the strong
Corresponding author: whuang@malong.com

SiamMask

SiamRPN++

Dimp-50

SiamAttn

Figure 1: Tracking results of our deformable Siamese attention networks (SiamAttn) with three state-of-the-art trackers. Our results are more accurate, and are robust to appearance changes, complex background and close distractors
with occlusions. Fig. 4 further shows the strong discriminative features learned by our Siamese attention module.
capacity of learning powerful deep features. For example,
Bertinetto et al. [1] first introduced Siamese networks for
visual tracking. Since then, object trackers built on Siamese
networks and object detection frameworks have achieved
the state-of-the-art performance, such as SiamRPN [25],
SiamRPN++ [24], and SiamMask [36]. The Siamese-based
trackers formulate the problem of visual object tracking as
a matching problem by computing cross-correlation similarities between a target template and a search region,
which transforms the tracking problem into finding the target object from an image region by computing the highest visual similarity [1, 25, 24, 36, 44]. Therefore, it
casts the tracking problem into a Region Proposal Network (RPN) [13] based detection framework by leveraging Siamese networks, which is the key to boost the performance of recent deep trackers.
Siamese-based trackers are trained completely offline by
using massive frame pairs collected from videos, and thus

6728

