Instance Shadow Detection
Tianyu Wang1,2,∗ , Xiaowei Hu1, *, Qiong Wang2 , Pheng-Ann Heng1,2 , and Chi-Wing Fu1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Self shadow

Instance shadow detection is a brand new problem, aiming to find shadow instances paired with object instances.
To approach it, we first prepare a new dataset called SOBA,
named after Shadow-OBject Association, with 3,623 pairs
of shadow and object instances in 1,000 photos, each
with individually-labeled masks. Second, we design LISA,
named after Light-guided Instance Shadow-object Association, an end-to-end framework to automatically predict the
shadow and object instances, together with the shadowobject associations and light direction. Then, we pair up
the predicted shadow and object instances and match them
with the predicted shadow-object associations to generate
the final results. In our evaluations, we formulate a new
metric named the shadow-object average precision to measure the performance of our results. Further, we conducted
various experiments and demonstrate our method’s applicability to light direction estimation and photo editing.

1. Introduction
“When you light a candle, you also cast a shadow,”—Ursula
K. Le Guin written in A Wizard of Earthsea.
When some objects block the light, shadows are formed.
And when we see a shadow, we also know that there must
be some objects that create or cast the shadow. Shadows are
light-deficient regions in a scene, due to light occlusion, but
they carry the shape of the light-occluding objects, as they
are projections of these objects onto the physical world. In
this work, we are interested in a new problem, i.e., finding
shadows together with their associated objects.
Concerning shadows, prior works in computer vision
and image understanding focus mainly on shadow detection [15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 26, 46, 50, 54] and shadow removal [8, 16, 17, 25, 37, 47]. Our goal in this work is
to leverage the remarkable computation capability of deep
neural networks to address the new problem of associating
* Joint first authors

Cast shadow
(a) Input photo

(c) Shadow
instance mask

(b) Our result

(d) Object
instance mask

(e) Shadow-object
association mask

Figure 1. Given a photo with shadows (a), the problem of instance
shadow detection is to detect the individual shadow instances (c)
and the individual object instances (d), as well as to associate the
shadows with the objects (e) that cast them. (b) shows the prediction results produced by our method on (a).

shadows and objects—instance shadow detection. That is,
we want to detect the shadow instances in images, together
with the associated object that casts each shadow.
Being able to find shadow-object associations has the potentials to benefit various applications. For example, for
privacy protection, when we remove humans and cars from
photos, we can remove objects and associated shadows altogether. In a recent work on removing objects from images
for privacy protection [42], the shadows are simply left behind. Also, when we edit photos, say by scaling or translating objects, we can naturally manipulate objects with their
associated shadows simultaneously. Further, shadow-object
associations give hints to the light direction in the scene,
supporting applications such as relighting.
To approach the problem of instance shadow detection,
first, we prepare a new dataset called SOBA, named after
Shadow OBject Association. SOBA contains 3,623 pairs
of shadow-object associations over 1,000 photos, each with
three masks (see Figures 1 (c)-(e)): (i) shadow instance
mask, where we label each shadow instance with a unique
color; (ii) shadow-object association mask, where we label

1880

