Intelligent Home 3D: Automatic 3D-House Design
from Linguistic Descriptions Only
Qi Chen1,2∗
Qi Wu3∗
Rui Tang4
Yuhan Wang4
Shuai Wang4
Mingkui Tan1†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, China
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide, Australia, 4 Kujiale, Inc.
sechenqi@mail.scut.edu.cn

qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

{ati,daishu,luorui}@qunhemail.com

mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Home design is a complex task that normally requires architects to ﬁnish with their professional skills and tools. It
will be fascinating that if one can produce a house plan intuitively without knowing much knowledge about home design and experience of using complex designing tools, for
example, via natural language. In this paper, we formulate
it as a language conditioned visual content generation problem that is further divided into a ﬂoor plan generation and
an interior texture (such as ﬂoor and wall) synthesis task.
The only control signal of the generation process is the linguistic expression given by users that describe the house
details. To this end, we propose a House Plan Generative
Model (HPGM) that ﬁrst translates the language input to
a structural graph representation and then predicts the layout of rooms with a Graph Conditioned Layout Prediction
Network (GC-LPN) and generates the interior texture with
a Language Conditioned Texture GAN (LCT-GAN). With
some post-processing, the ﬁnal product of this task is a 3D
house model. To train and evaluate our model, we build
the ﬁrst Text–to–3D House Model dataset, which will be released at: https://github.com/chenqi008/HPGM.

1. Introduction
Everyone wants a dream home, but not everyone can design home by themselves. Home design is a complex task
that is normally done by certiﬁcated architects, who have to
receive several years of training on designing, planning and
using special designing tools. To design a home, they typically start by collecting a list of requirements for a building
layout. Then, they use trial-and-error to generate layouts
with a combination of intuition and prior experience. This
∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

The building contains two bedrooms, one
washroom, one balcony, one living room,
and one kitchen. Bedroom2 is in southeast
with 10 square meters. Bedroom2 floor is
White Wood Veneer and wall is Blue Wall
Cloth... Livingroom1 is next to bedroom1.
Bedroom1 is adjacent to balcony1…澳

(a) User linguistic requirements澳

(b) 3D-House design澳

Figure 1: An example of generated 3D house with description using HPGM on the Text–to–3D House Model dataset.
3D-house generation from requirement seeks to design a 3D
building automatically from given linguistic descriptions.
usually takes from a couple of days to several weeks and
has high requirements for professional knowledge.
It will be fantastic if we can design our own home by
ourselves. We may not have design knowledge and have
no idea how to use those complicated professional designing tools, but we have strong linguistic ability to express
our interests and desire. Thus, for time-saving and allowing people without expertise to participate in the design, we
propose to use linguistic expressions as the guidance to generate home design plans (Figure 1). Thanks to the fast development of deep learning [6, 9, 11, 45, 46, 51, 52, 53, 55],
especially Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [3, 4, 8,
10] and vision-language research [13, 29, 38, 47, 50], we
can turn this problem into a text-to-image generation problem, which has been studied in [22, 30, 32, 43, 44]. However, it is non-trivial to directly apply these methods on our
new task because there exist two new technical challenges:
1) A ﬂoor plan is a structured layout which pays more attention to the correctness of size, direction, and connection of
different blocks, while the conventional text-to-image task
focuses more on pixel-level generation accuracy. 2) The interior texture such as ﬂoor and wall needs neater and more
stable pixel generation than general images and should be

12625

