3D Photography using Context-aware Layered Depth Inpainting
Meng-Li Shih12

Shih-Yang Su1

Johannes Kopf3

Jia-Bin Huang1

shihsml@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

shihyang@vt.edu

jkopf@fb.com

jbhuang@vt.edu

1 Virginia Tech

2 National Tsing Hua University

3 Facebook

https://shihmengli.github.io/3D-Photo-Inpainting

(a) Depth-warping (holes)
(b) Depth-warping (stretching)
(c) Facebook 3D photo
(d) Our result
Figure 1. 3D photography from a single RGB-D image. Naı̈ve methods either produce holes (a) or stretch content (b) at disocclusions.
Color and depth inpainting using diffusion is better, but provides a too smooth appearance (c). Our approach is capable of synthesizing
new color/depth texture and structures, leading to more photorealistic novel views (d).

Abstract
We propose a method for converting a single RGB-D input image into a 3D photo — a multi-layer representation
for novel view synthesis that contains hallucinated color
and depth structures in regions occluded in the original
view. We use a Layered Depth Image with explicit pixel
connectivity as underlying representation, and present a
learning-based inpainting model that synthesizes new local color-and-depth content into the occluded region in a
spatial context-aware manner. The resulting 3D photos
can be efficiently rendered with motion parallax using standard graphics engines. We validate the effectiveness of our
method on a wide range of challenging everyday scenes and
show less artifacts compared with the state of the arts.

1. Introduction
3D photography—capturing views of the world with a
camera and using image-based rendering techniques for
novel view synthesis—is a fascinating way to record and reproduce visual perception. It provides a dramatically more
immersive experience than old 2D photography: almost
lifelike in Virtual Reality, and even to some degree on normal flat displays when displayed with parallax.
Classic image-based reconstruction and rendering tech-

niques, however, require elaborate capture setups involving
many images with large baselines [17, 59, 26, 45, 19, 12],
and/or special hardware (e.g., Lytro Immerge, Facebook
Manifold camera1 ).
Recently, we have seen work to make capture for 3D
photography more effortless by using cell phone cameras
and lowering baseline requirements [17, 18]. In the most
extreme cases, novel techniques such as Facebook 3D Photos2 now just require capturing a single snapshot with a dual
lens camera phone, which essentially provides an RGB-D
(color and depth) input image.
In this work we are interested in rendering novel views
from such an RGB-D input. The most salient features in
rendered novel views are the disocclusions due to parallax:
naı̈ve depth-based warping techniques either produce gaps
here (Figure 1a) or stretched content (1b). Recent methods
try to provide better extrapolations.
Stereo magnification [72] and recent variants [52, 39]
use a fronto-parallel multi-plane representation (MPI),
which is synthesized from the small-baseline dual camera
stereo input. However, MPI produces artifacts on sloped
surfaces. Besides, the excessive redundancy in the multi1 https://facebook360.fb.com/2018/05/01/
red-facebook-6dof-camera/
2 https://facebook360.fb.com/2018/10/11/
3d-photos-now-rolling-out-on-facebook-and-in-vr/

8028

