Unsupervised Deep Shape Descriptor with Point Distribution Learning
Yi Shi∗

Mengchen Xu∗
Shuaihang Yuan
Yi Fang†
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE
New York University, New York, USA
{yishi,jl8566,sy2366,yfang}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models have achieved great success in supervised shape descriptor learning for 3D shape retrieval,
classification, and correspondence. However, the unsupervised shape descriptor calculated via deep learning is less
studied than that of supervised ones due to the design challenges of unsupervised neural network architecture. This
paper proposes a novel probabilistic framework for the
learning of unsupervised deep shape descriptors with point
distribution learning. In our approach, we firstly associate
each point with a Gaussian, and the point clouds are modeled as the distribution of the points. We then use deep
neural networks (DNNs) to model a maximum likelihood
estimation process that is traditionally solved with an iterative Expectation-Maximization (EM) process. Our key
novelty is that “training” these DNNs with unsupervised
self-correspondence L2 distance loss will elegantly reveal
the statically significant deep shape descriptor representation for the distribution of the point clouds. We have conducted experiments over various 3D datasets. Qualitative
and quantitative comparisons demonstrate that our proposed method achieves superior classification performance
over existing unsupervised 3D shape descriptors. In addition, we verified the following attractive properties of our
shape descriptor through experiments: multi-scale shape
representation, robustness to shape rotation, and robustness
to noise.

1. Introduction
With recent advancements in range sensors and imaging
technologies, 3D geometric data has been applied in a variety of applications[2, 32, 22, 47, 46]. It is therefore of great
interest to develop methods that can automatically analyze
a large amount of 3D geometric data for different tasks (e.g.
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. The illustration of our proposed unsupervised descriptor
learning method with 3D-GAN [37]. Comparing with 3D-GAN,
Our proposed method does not require the generator and the discriminator while our framework extracts the shape descriptor only
using a decoder.

3D object recognition, classification, correspondence and
retrieval) [4, 5, 3, 10, 41, 39, 37, 14, 18, 40, 38, 9]. To that
end, a lot of efforts have been made, many of which focused
on building robust 3D shape representations. However, the
irregular property and the structural variation of 3D objects
(i.e. 3D human models with different poses, 3D car models
with various design patterns) pose great challenges on the
task of learning a high-quality 3D shape descriptor.
The promising performance of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) in dealing with 2D images motivates 3D computer
vision researchers to transform the 3D geometric data to
Voxel grids in a regular format so that the 3D data can be fed
to a deep net architecture [38] for further processing. While
the extension of the deep learning to volumetric shapes is
conceptually simple, the computational cost of 3D convolution severely limits the storage and computational efficiency
in processing 3D geometric data for object recognition [30].
19353

