HandVoxNet: Deep Voxel-Based Network for 3D Hand Shape and Pose
Estimation from a Single Depth Map
Jameel Malik1,2,3
Sk Aziz Ali1,2
1

TU Kaiserslautern

2

Ibrahim Abdelaziz1,2
Vladislav Golyanik5

DFKI Kaiserslautern

3

Ahmed Elhayek2,4
Christian Theobalt5

Soshi Shimada5
Didier Stricker1,2

4

5

NUST Pakistan

UPM Saudi Arabia

MPII Saarland

Abstract
3D hand shape and pose estimation from a single depth
map is a new and challenging computer vision problem with
many applications. The state-of-the-art methods directly
regress 3D hand meshes from 2D depth images via 2D convolutional neural networks, which leads to artefacts in the
estimations due to perspective distortions in the images.
In contrast, we propose a novel architecture with 3D
convolutions trained in a weakly-supervised manner. The
input to our method is a 3D voxelized depth map, and we
rely on two hand shape representations. The first one is the
3D voxelized grid of the shape which is accurate but does
not preserve the mesh topology and the number of mesh vertices. The second representation is the 3D hand surface
which is less accurate but does not suffer from the limitations of the first representation. We combine the advantages of these two representations by registering the hand
surface to the voxelized hand shape. In the extensive experiments, the proposed approach improves over the state
of the art by 47.8% on the SynHand5M dataset. Moreover,
our augmentation policy for voxelized depth maps further
enhances the accuracy of 3D hand pose estimation on real
data. Our method produces visually more reasonable and
realistic hand shapes on NYU and BigHand2.2M datasets
compared to the existing approaches.

1. Introduction
The problem of deep learning-based 3D hand pose estimation has been extensively studied in the past few years
[33], and recent works achieve high accuracy on public
benchmarks [32, 18, 22]. Simultaneous estimation of 3D
hand pose and shape from a single depth map is a newly
emerging computer vision problem. It is more challenging than the pose estimation because annotating real images for shape is laborious and cumbersome. Other salient
challenges include varying hand shapes, occlusions, high
number of degrees of freedom (DOF) and self-similarity.

Figure 1: Hand shape and pose estimation with HandVoxNet.
A 3D voxelized depth map and accurately regressed heatmaps of
3D joints (left block) are used to estimate two hand shape representations (middle block). To combine the advantages of these representations, we accurately register the shape surface to the voxelized shape (right block). Our architecture with 3D convolutions
establishes a one-to-one mapping between voxelized depth map,
voxelized hand shape and heatmaps of 3D joints.

The dense 3D hand mesh is a richer representation which
is more useful than the sparse 3D joints, and it finds many
applications in computer vision and graphics [27, 23, 17].
With the recent progress in deep learning, a few works
[35, 7, 17, 13, 14] have proposed algorithms for simultaneous hand pose and shape estimation. Malik et al. [14]
developed a 2D CNN-based approach that estimates shapes
directly from 2D depth maps. The recovered shapes suffer from artifacts due to the limited representation capacity
of their hand model [7, 17]. The same problem can occur even by embedding a realistic statistical hand model
(i.e., MANO) [23] inside a deep network [7, 35]. In contrast to these model-based approaches [35, 14], Ge et al. [7]
proposed a more accurate direct regression-based approach
using a monocular RGB image. Recently, Malik et al. [17]
developed another direct regression-based approach from
a single depth image. All of the approaches mentioned
above treat and process depth maps with 2D CNNs, even
though depth maps are intrinsically a 3D data. Training a
2D CNN to estimate 3D hand pose or shape given 2D representation of a depth map is highly non-linear and results in

7113

