Neural Head Reenactment with Latent Pose Descriptors
Egor Burkov1,2
1

Igor Pasechnik1

Samsung AI Center, Moscow

2

Artur Grigorev1

Victor Lempitsky1,2

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Abstract
We propose a neural head reenactment system, which is
driven by a latent pose representation and is capable of predicting the foreground segmentation alongside the RGB image. The latent pose representation is learned as a part of
the entire reenactment system, and the learning process is
based solely on image reconstruction losses. We show that
despite its simplicity, with a large and diverse enough training dataset, such learning successfully decomposes pose
from identity. The resulting system can then reproduce mimics of the driving person and, furthermore, can perform
cross-person reenactment. Additionally, we show that the
learned descriptors are useful for other pose-related tasks,
such as keypoint prediction and pose-based retrieval.

1. Introduction
Head video reenactment has seen dramatic progress in
quality and robustness over the recent years. Current
state-of-the-art systems [33, 22, 37, 30, 39, 42, 10, 36,
35] demonstrate compelling nearly photorealistic “talking
head” reenactments. The most recent ones are able to accomplish this even when a single image of the target person
is available [30, 42, 10, 36, 35], by using deep neural generative networks. In this work, we improve on the pre-existing
neural one-shot head reenactment systems in two important
ways. First, rather straightforwardly, we augment the previous state-of-the-art reenactment system [42] with the ability to predict foreground segmentation. Such prediction is
needed for various scenarios, such as telepresence, where
the transfer of the original background to the new environment can be undesirable.
More importantly, we suggest a new pose1 representation for neural head reenactment. The representation of the
pose plays the key role in the quality of reenactment. Most
systems, including [33, 22, 37, 42, 10, 36], are based on
keypoint (landmark) representation. The main advantage
of such representation is that robust and efficient “off-the1 Here and below, by ‘head pose’ we mean the combination of head
orientation, position, as well as facial expression.

shelf” landmark detectors are now available [21, 2].
Face landmarks, however, suffer from several shortcomings. First, learning a landmark detector requires excessive
annotation effort, and the sets of annotated landmarks often miss some important aspects of the pose. E.g. many
landmark annotations do not include eye pupils, and as a
consequence, the reenactment will not have a full control
of the gaze. Second, many of the landmarks do not have
an anatomical basis, and their annotation is ambiguous and
prone to errors, especially, when they are occluded. In practice, such ambiguity of annotation often translates into temporal instability of keypoint detection that in turn translates
into the reenactment results. Finally, as a representation,
landmarks are person-specific, as they contain considerable
amount of information about pose-independent head geometry. This may be highly undesirable for head reenactment,
e.g. if one wants to drive an iconic photograph or painting
with the target person having a different head geometry.
The emergence of large unlabeled datasets of human
videos such as [29, 4, 5] allows to learn latent poseexpression descriptors in an unsupervised way. This approach has been first explored in [39, 38], where the latent pose descriptors were learned such that the dense
flow between different frames can be inferred from the
learned descriptors. In this work, we propose an alternative to the warping-based approach [39, 38]. Our approach
learns low-dimensional person-agnostic pose descriptors
alongside with medium-dimensional person-specific poseindependent descriptors, by imposing a set of reconstruction losses on video frames over a large collection of videos.
Importantly, when evaluating the reconstruction losses, we
segment out the background, so that the background clutter and its change across frames does not affect the learned
descriptors.
We show that a simple learning framework based on
sampling multiple random frames from the same video
paired with the large size of the video dataset allows to
learn extractors for both descriptors that work very well
for reenactment tasks, including cross-person reenactment.
In particular, we show that our reenactment based on the
new latent pose representation preserves the identity of the
target person much better than when FAb-Net [38] and
113786

