Disentangling Physical Dynamics from Unknown Factors for Unsupervised
Video Prediction
Vincent Le Guen 1,2 , Nicolas Thome 2
1
EDF R&D, Chatou, France
2
CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France

Abstract
Leveraging physical knowledge described by partial differential equations (PDEs) is an appealing way to improve
unsupervised video prediction methods. Since physics is too
restrictive for describing the full visual content of generic
videos, we introduce PhyDNet, a two-branch deep architecture, which explicitly disentangles PDE dynamics from
unknown complementary information. A second contribution is to propose a new recurrent physical cell (PhyCell),
inspired from data assimilation techniques, for performing
PDE-constrained prediction in latent space. Extensive experiments conducted on four various datasets show the ability of PhyDNet to outperform state-of-the-art methods. Ablation studies also highlight the important gain brought out
by both disentanglement and PDE-constrained prediction.
Finally, we show that PhyDNet presents interesting features
for dealing with missing data and long-term forecasting.

1. Introduction
Video forecasting consists in predicting the future content of a video conditioned on previous frames. This is
of crucial importance in various contexts, such as weather
forecasting [73], autonomous driving [29], reinforcement
learning [43], robotics [16], or action recognition [33].
In this work, we focus on unsupervised video prediction,
where the absence of semantic labels to drive predictions
exacerbates the challenges of the task. In this context, a
key problem is to design video prediction methods able to
represent the complex dynamics underlying raw data.
State-of-the-art methods for training such complex dynamical models currently rely on deep learning, with
specific architectural choices based on 2D/3D convolutional [40, 62] or recurrent neural networks [66, 64, 67].
To improve predictions, recent methods use adversarial
training [40, 62, 29], stochastic models [7, 41], constraint
predictions by using geometric knowledge [16, 24, 75] or
by disentangling factors of variation [60, 58, 12, 21].

Figure 1. PhyDNet is a deep model mapping an input video into a
latent space H, from which future frame prediction can be accurately performed. PhyDNet learns H in an unsupervised manner,
such that physical dynamics and unknown factors necessary for
prediction, e.g. appearance, details, texture, are disentangled.

Another appealing way to model the video dynamics is
to exploit prior physical knowledge, e.g. formalized by partial differential equations (PDEs) [11, 55]. Recently, interesting connections between residual networks and PDEs
have been drawn [71, 37, 8], enabling to design physicallyconstrained machine learning frameworks [48, 11, 55, 52].
These approaches are very successful for modeling complex natural phenomena, e.g. climate, when the underlying
dynamics is well described by the physical equations in the
input space [48, 52, 35]. However, such assumption is rarely
fulfilled in the pixel space for predicting generalist videos.
In this work, we introduce PhyDNet, a deep model dedicated to perform accurate future frame predictions from
generalist videos. In such a context, physical laws do not
apply in the input pixel space ; the goal of PhyDNet is to
learn a semantic latent space H in which they do, and are
disentangled from other factors of variation required to per111474

