ViBE: Dressing for Diverse Body Shapes
Wei-Lin Hsiao1,2
1

Kristen Grauman1,2

The University of Texas at Austin

2

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Body shape plays an important role in determining what
garments will best suit a given person, yet today’s clothing
recommendation methods take a “one shape fits all” approach. These body-agnostic vision methods and datasets
are a barrier to inclusion, ill-equipped to provide good
suggestions for diverse body shapes. We introduce ViBE,
a VIsual Body-aware Embedding that captures clothing’s
affinity with different body shapes. Given an image of a
person, the proposed embedding identifies garments that
will flatter her specific body shape. We show how to learn
the embedding from an online catalog displaying fashion
models of various shapes and sizes wearing the products,
and we devise a method to explain the algorithm’s suggestions for well-fitting garments. We apply our approach to a
dataset of diverse subjects, and demonstrate its strong advantages over status quo body-agnostic recommendation,
both according to automated metrics and human opinion.

Ours
Curvy

DeepFashion
Lean

Population average

Figure 1: Trained largely from images of slender fashionistas and
celebrities (bottom row), existing methods ignore body shape’s effect on clothing recommendation and exclude much of the spectrum of real body shapes. Our proposed embedding considers
diverse body shapes (top row) and learns which garments flatter
which across the spectrum of the real population. Histogram plots
the distribution of the second principal component of SMPL [56]
(known to capture weight [31, 69]) for the dataset we collected
(orange) and DeepFashion [55] (purple).

1. Introduction
Research in computer vision is poised to transform the
world of consumer fashion. Exciting recent advances can
link street photos to catalogs [47,54], recommend garments
to complete a look [25,33,34,40,73,76], discover styles and
trends [3, 32, 57], and search based on subtle visual properties [22, 46]. All such directions promise to augment and
accelerate the clothing shopping experience, providing consumers with personalized recommendations and putting a
content-based index of products at their fingertips.
However, when it comes to body shape, state-of-the-art
recommendation methods falsely assume a “one shape fits
all” approach. Despite the fact that the same garment will
flatter different bodies differently, existing methods neglect
the significance of an individual’s body shape when estimating the relevance of a given garment or outfit. This
limitation stems from two key factors. First, current largescale datasets are heavily biased to a narrow set of body
shapes1 —typically thin and tall, owing to the fashionista or
celebrity photos from which they are drawn [26, 51, 55, 66,
1 not to mention skin tone, age, gender, and other demographic factors

84] (see Fig. 1). This restricts everything learned downstream, including the extent of bodies considered for virtual try-on [26, 63, 79]. Second, prior methods to gauge
clothing compatibility often learn from co-purchase patterns [25, 76, 77] or occasion-based rules [40, 53], divorced
from any statistics on body shape.
Body-agnostic vision methods and datasets are thus a
barrier to diversity and inclusion. Meanwhile, aspects of
fit and cut are paramount to what continues to separate the
shopping experience in the physical world from that of the
virtual (online) world. It is well-known that a majority of
today’s online shopping returns stem from problems with
fit [61], and being unable to imagine how a garment would
complement one’s body can prevent a shopper from making
the purchase altogether.
To overcome this barrier, we propose ViBE, a VIsual
Body-aware Embedding that captures clothing’s affinity
with different body shapes. The learned embedding maps
a given body shape and its most complementary garments
close together. To train the model, we explore a novel
source of Web photo data containing fashion models of di-

11059

