P2B: Point-to-Box Network for 3D Object Tracking in Point Clouds

Haozhe Qi, Chen Feng, Zhiguo Cao∗, Feng Zhao, and Yang Xiao
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-Spectral Information Processing, School of
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
qihaozhe, chen feng, zgcao@hust.edu.cn, fzhao@alumni.hust.edu.cn, Yang Xiao@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
sp=0.15

3D object tracking in point clouds is essential for applications in autonomous driving and robotics vision [25, 26,
7]. However, point clouds’ sparsity and disorder imposes
great challenges on this task, and leads to the fact that, wellestablished 2D object tracking approaches (e.g., Siamese
network [3]) cannot be directly applied. Most existing 3D
object tracking methods [1, 4, 24, 16, 15] inherit 2D’s experience and rely heavily on RGB-D information. But they
may fail when RGB visual information is degraded with il∗ Zhiguo Cao is corresponding author (zgcao@hust.edu.cn).

sp=0.96
Seed points with
target-specific feature

Final predicted
3D target box

...

1. Introduction

Target template

...

Towards 3D object tracking in point clouds, a novel
point-to-box network termed P2B is proposed in an endto-end learning manner. Our main idea is to first localize potential target centers in 3D search area embedded
with target information. Then point-driven 3D target proposal and verification are executed jointly. In this way,
the time-consuming 3D exhaustive search can be avoided.
Specifically, we first sample seeds from the point clouds in
template and search area respectively. Then, we execute
permutation-invariant feature augmentation to embed target clues from template into search area seeds and represent
them with target-specific features. Consequently, the augmented search area seeds regress the potential target centers via Hough voting. The centers are further strengthened
with seed-wise targetness scores. Finally, each center clusters its neighbors to leverage the ensemble power for joint
3D target proposal and verification. We apply PointNet++
as our backbone and experiments on KITTI tracking dataset
demonstrate P2B’s superiority (∼10%’s improvement over
state-of-the-art). Note that P2B can run with 40FPS on a
single NVIDIA 1080Ti GPU. Our code and model are available at https://github.com/HaozheQi/P2B.

sp=0.77

sp: Proposal-wise
targetness score

Search area

3D Target proposal

Cluster of potential
target centers

0
1

Seed-wise
targetness score

Figure 1. Exemplified illustration to show how P2B works, from
seeds sampling to 3D target proposal and verification.

luminational change or even inaccessible. We hence focus
on 3D object tracking using only point clouds. The first pioneer effort on this topic appears in [11]. It mainly executes
3D template matching using Kalman filtering [12] to generate bunches of 3D target proposals. Meanwhile, it uses
shape completion to regularize feature learning on point set.
Nevertheless, it tends to suffer from four main defects: 1) its
tracking network cannot be end-to-end trained; 2) 3D search
with Kalman filtering consumes much time; 3) each target
proposal is represented with only one-dimensional global
feature, which may lose fine local geometric information; 4)
shape completion network brings strong class prior which
weakens generality.
Towards the above concerns, we propose a novel pointto-box network termed P2B for 3D object tracking which
can be end-to-end trained. Differing from the intuitive 3D
search with box in [11], we turn to addressing 3D object tracking by first localizing potential target centers and
then executing point-driven target proposal and verification
jointly. Our intuition lies in two folders. First, the pointwise tracking paradigm may help better exploit 3D local
geometric information to characterize target in point clouds.

6329

