Stochastic Sparse Subspace Clustering
Ying Chen1 , Chun-Guang Li1 , and Chong You2
1
SICE, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
EECS, University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
State-of-the-art subspace clustering methods are based
on self-expressive model, which represents each data point
as a linear combination of other data points. By enforcing
such representation to be sparse, sparse subspace clustering is guaranteed to produce a subspace-preserving data
affinity where two points are connected only if they are from
the same subspace. On the other hand, however, data points
from the same subspace may not be well-connected, leading
to the issue of over-segmentation. We introduce dropout to
address the issue of over-segmentation, which is based on
randomly dropping out data points in self-expressive model.
In particular, we show that dropout is equivalent to adding
a squared ℓ2 norm regularization on the representation coefficients, therefore induces denser solutions. Then, we reformulate the optimization problem as a consensus problem
over a set of small-scale subproblems. This leads to a scalable and flexible sparse subspace clustering approach,
termed Stochastic Sparse Subspace Clustering, which can
effectively handle large scale datasets. Extensive experiments on synthetic data and real world datasets validate
the efficiency and effectiveness of our proposal.

1. Introduction
In many real world applications, high-dimensional data
can be well approximated by a union of low-dimensional
subspaces where each subspace corresponds to a class or a
category. The problem of segmenting a set of data points according to the subspaces they belong to, known as subspace
clustering [46, 48], has found many important applications
such as motion segmentation [9, 8], image clustering [28],
hybrid system identification [45, 3], genes expression profiles clustering [29] and so on.
Prior work. A traditional method for subspace clustering
is k-subspaces, which is based on parameterizing a set of
basis to the subspaces and finding a segmentation that minimizes the distance of the data points to its corresponding
subspaces [5, 2]. The k-subspaces method requires an accurate estimation of the dimension of the underlying sub-

spaces which is not available in many applications. In addition, the associated optimization problem is nonconvex,
for which a good initialization is important for finding the
optimal solution [23, 16]. Due to the limitations of the ksubspaces methods, modern subspace clustering resorts to
spectral clustering which recovers the segmentation of data
from a proper data affinity graph that captures whether two
points are from the same subspace or not. A plethora of
early methods for constructing the affinity graph are based
on fitting and comparing local subspaces [54, 63]. Such
methods require dense samples on the subspaces and cannot handle cases where the subspaces are intersecting.
In the past few years, self-expressive model [11, 12] has
emerged as a powerful tool for computing affinity graph
in subspace clustering and has spurred substantial developments and applications. Given a data matrix X =
[x1 , · · · , xN ] ∈ IRD×N whose columns are drawn from
a union of subspaces, self-expressive model states that each
data point xj ∈ IRD can be expressed as a linear combination of other data points, i.e.,
xj = Xcj + ej , cjj = 0,

(1)

where cj ∈ IRN is a coefficient vector and ej is an error
term. While the linear equation in (1) may have many feasible solutions, there exists at least one cj that is subspacepreserving—that is, cij ̸= 0 only if points xi and xj
are in the same subspace [39, 61, 48]. Given subspacepreserving representations [c1 , · · · , cN ], the affinity graph
is induced by an affinity (weight) matrix whose i, j-th entry
is |cij | + |cji |.
Sparse subspace clustering. Many methods have been
proposed for computing subspace-preserving representations by imposing a prior or regularization on the coefficients cj [12, 28, 10, 24, 40, 60, 55, 58]. Among them,
sparse subspace clustering (SSC) [12, 60] that are based
on finding the sparsest solution to (1) have become extreme popular due to their theoretical guarantees and empirical success. Under mild conditions, SSC is guaranteed to recover subspace-preserving solutions even when
data points are corrupted with outliers, noises or missing
values and when the subspaces are intersecting or affine

4155

