BiFuse: Monocular 360◦ Depth Estimation via Bi-Projection Fusion
Fu-En Wang∗1,3

Yu-Hsuan Yeh∗2

Min Sun1,5

fulton84717@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

yuhsuan.eic08g@nctu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Wei-Chen Chiu2

Yi-Hsuan Tsai4

walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

wasidennis@gmail.com

Abstract
Depth estimation from a monocular 360◦ image is an
emerging problem that gains popularity due to the availability of consumer-level 360◦ cameras and the complete
surrounding sensing capability. While the standard of 360◦
imaging is under rapid development, we propose to predict the depth map of a monocular 360◦ image by mimicking both peripheral and foveal vision of the human eye.
To this end, we adopt a two-branch neural network leveraging two common projections: equirectangular and cubemap projections. In particular, equirectangular projection
incorporates a complete field-of-view but introduces distortion, whereas cubemap projection avoids distortion but introduces discontinuity at the boundary of the cube. Thus
we propose a bi-projection fusion scheme along with learnable masks to balance the feature map from the two projections. Moreover, for the cubemap projection, we propose a
spherical padding procedure which mitigates discontinuity
at the boundary of each face. We apply our method to four
panorama datasets and show favorable results against the
existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D structure from 2D images has been widely
studied due to numerous practical applications. For instance, it is crucial for autonomous systems like self-driving
cars and indoor robots to sense the 3D environment since
they need to navigate safely in 3D. Among several techniques for 3D reconstruction, significant improvement has
been achieved in monocular depth estimation due to the advance of deep learning and availability of large-scale 3D
training data. For example, FCRN [16] achieves monocular
1 National Tsing Hua University
2 National Chiao Tung University
3 ASUS AICS Department
4 NEC Labs America
5 MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
∗ The authors contribute equally to this paper.

Figure 1. Our BiFuse network estimates the 360◦ depth from a
monocular image using both equirectangular and cubemap projections. A bi-projection fusion component is proposed to leverage both projections inspired by both peripheral and foveal vision
of the human eye. Given the estimated 360◦ depth, a complete
3D point cloud surrounding the camera can be generated to serve
downstream applications.

depth estimation by their proposed up-projection module.
However, most of the existing methods are designed for a
camera with normal field-of-view (FoV). As 360◦ camera
becomes more and more popular in recent years, the ability
to infer the 3D structure of a camera’s complete surrounding has motivated the study of monocular 360◦ depth estimation.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end trainable neural network leveraging two common projections – equirectangular and cubemap projection – as inputs to predict the
depth map of a monocular 360◦ image. Our main motivation is to combine the capability from both peripheral and
foveal vision like the human eye (see Fig. 1 for the illustration). Note that, equirectangular projection provides a wide
field-of-view mimicking a peripheral vision, whereas cubemap projection provides a smaller but non-distorted fieldof-view mimicking the foveal vision. On the one hand,
equirectangular projection allows all surrounding information to be observed from a single 2D image but introduces
distortion. On the other hand, cubemap projection avoids
distortion but introduces discontinuity at the boundary of

462

