Explaining Knowledge Distillation by Quantifying the Knowledge
Xu Cheng
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Zhefan Rao
Huazhong University of Science & Technology

xcheng8@sjtu.edu.cn

rzf19971013@gmail.com

Yilan Chen
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Quanshi Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

chenyilan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a method to interpret the success of
knowledge distillation by quantifying and analyzing taskrelevant and task-irrelevant visual concepts that are encoded in intermediate layers of a deep neural network
(DNN). More specifically, three hypotheses are proposed
as follows. 1. Knowledge distillation makes the DNN
learn more visual concepts than learning from raw data.
2. Knowledge distillation ensures that the DNN is prone to
learning various visual concepts simultaneously. Whereas,
in the scenario of learning from raw data, the DNN learns
visual concepts sequentially. 3. Knowledge distillation
yields more stable optimization directions than learning
from raw data. Accordingly, we design three types of mathematical metrics to evaluate feature representations of the
DNN. In experiments, we diagnosed various DNNs, and
above hypotheses were verified.

1. Introduction
The success of knowledge distillation [16] has been
demonstrated in various studies [31, 45, 11]. It transfers knowledge from a well-learned deep neural network
(DNN), namely the teacher network, to another DNN,
namely the student network. However, explaining how and
why knowledge distillation outperforms learning from raw
data still remains a challenge.
In this work, we aim to analyze the success of knowledge distillation from a new perspective, i.e. quantifying the
knowledge encoded in the intermediate layer of a DNN. We
quantify and compare the amount of the knowledge encoded
in the DNN learned via knowledge distillation and the DNN
learned from raw data, respectively. Here, the DNN learned
from raw data is termed the baseline network. In this research, the amount of the knowledge of a specific layer is
measured as the number of visual concepts (e.g. object parts

Quantify visual concepts

1. encode
A DNN
learned from
knowledge
distillation

more foreground
less background

2. is prone to learning various
visual concepts simultaneously
3. do not

than

than

A DNN
learned from
raw data

unreliable visual do
concepts are learned at
first but discarded finally

Figure 1. Explanation of knowledge distillation by quantifying visual concepts. Three hypotheses are proposed and verified as follows. 1. Knowledge distillation makes the DNN learn more visual
concepts than learning from raw data. 2. Knowledge distillation
ensures that the DNN is prone to learning various visual concepts
simultaneously. 3. Knowledge distillation yields more stable optimization directions than learning from raw data.

like tails, heads and etc.), which is shown in Figure 1. These
visual concepts activate the feature map of this specific layer
and are used for prediction.
We design three types of mathematical metrics to analyze task-relevant and task-irrelevant visual concepts. Then,
these metrics are used to quantitatively verify three hypotheses as follows.
Hypothesis 1: Knowledge distillation makes the DNN
learn more visual concepts. In this paper, a visual concept
is defined as an image region, whose information is significantly less discarded than the average information discarded in background regions, and is mainly used by the
DNN. We distinguish visual concepts that are relevant to
the task away from other concepts, i.e. task-irrelevant concepts. Let us take the classification task as an example. As
is vividly shown in Figure 1, visual concepts on the foreground are usually regarded task-relevant, while those on
the background are considered task-irrelevant.
112925

