LSM: Learning Subspace Minimization for Low-level Vision
Chengzhou Tang1
Lu Yuan2
Ping Tan1
1
2
Simon Fraser University
Microsoft

Figure 1: Learning subspace minimization solves various low-level vision tasks using unified network structures and parameters.

Abstract
We study the energy minimization problem in low-level
vision tasks from a novel perspective. We replace the heuristic regularization term with a learnable subspace constraint,
and preserve the data term to exploit domain knowledge
derived from the first principle of a task. This learning subspace minimization (LSM) framework unifies the network
structures and the parameters for many low-level vision
tasks, which allows us to train a single network for multiple tasks simultaneously with completely shared parameters,
and even generalizes the trained network to an unseen task
as long as its data term can be formulated. We demonstrate
our LSM framework on four low-level tasks including interactive image segmentation, video segmentation, stereo
matching, and optical flow, and validate the network on various datasets. The experiments show that the proposed LSM
generates state-of-the-art results with smaller model size,
faster training convergence, and real-time inference.

1. Introduction
Many low-level vision tasks (e.g. image segmentation [50,
75, 23], video segmentation [48, 73, 41], stereo matching [63, 5, 59] and optical flow [28, 8, 69]) are conventionally
formulated as an energy minimization problem:
min D(x) + R(x),

(1)

x

where x is the desired solution (e.g. a disparity field for
stereo matching), and the two terms D(x) and R(x) are the
data term and regularization term respectively. The data term
D(x) is usually well designed following the first principle

of a task, such as the color consistency assumption in stereo
and optical flow. However, the regularization term R(x) is
often heuristic. Typically, it regularizes x at the pixel-level
and encourages similar pixels to have similar solution values.
The regularization term is necessary because low-level vision
tasks are usually ill-posed [60], and a standalone data term is
often insufficient, e.g. the aperture problem in optical flow.
However, a vanilla L2 smoothness regularization [72]
may cause over-smoothed results at object boundaries. Ideally, the regularization term should smooth out noises in
x and preserve sharp edges. Thus, many edge-preserving
regularization terms have been developed, such as the Total
Variation (TV) regularization [66, 10], the anisotropic diffusion [57], the bilteral filter [54] which focuses on designing
better similarity measurements between pixels, and the distance in a learned feature embedding space [65, 68, 44] has
also been adopted for the same purpose. But it is still an
unsolved problem to design an ideal similarity measurement
for efficient and accurate energy minimization.
We study this energy minimization problem from a different perspective. Instead of focusing on the pixel-level similarity, we exploit image-level context information. Specifically,
we preserve the data term D(x) but replace the heuristic
regularization term R(x) with a subspace constraint:
min D(x), s.t. x ∈ V = span{v1 , · · · vK },

(2)

x

where V is a K-dimensional subspace, and {v1 , · · · vK } is
the corresponding basis vectors. Our motivation is different from the regularization term R(x): we use the imagelevel context information to regularize the problem by assuming the desired solution x is composited of several layers [15, 79, 80], e.g. motion layers for optical flow, and
each basis vector vk will correspond to one of these lay16235

