Taking a Deeper Look at Co-Salient Object Detection
Deng-Ping Fan1,2,∗ Zheng Lin1,∗ Ge-Peng Ji3 Dingwen Zhang4 Huazhu Fu2 Ming-Ming Cheng1
1
TKLNDST, College of CS, Nankai University 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University 4 Xidian University

GT

Image

(* Equal contributions) http://dpfan.net/CoSOD3k/

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1: Different salient object detection (SOD) tasks. (a) Traditional SOD [75]. (b) Within-image co-salient object
detection (CoSOD) [89], where common salient objects are detected from a single image. (c) Existing CoSOD, where salient
objects are detected according to a pair [51] or a group [81] of images with similar appearances. (d) The proposed CoSOD
in the wild, which requires a large amount of semantic context, making it more challenging than existing CoSOD.

Abstract
Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) is a newly emerging and rapidly growing branch of salient object detection
(SOD), which aims to detect the co-occurring salient objects in multiple images. However, existing CoSOD datasets
often have a serious data bias, which assumes that each
group of images contains salient objects of similar visual
appearances. This bias results in the ideal settings and
the effectiveness of the models, trained on existing datasets,
may be impaired in real-life situations, where the similarity
is usually semantic or conceptual. To tackle this issue, we
first collect a new high-quality dataset, named CoSOD3k,
which contains 3,316 images divided in 160 groups with
multiple level annotations, i.e., category, bounding box, object, and instance levels. CoSOD3k makes a significant leap
in terms of diversity, difficulty and scalability, benefiting related vision tasks. Besides, we comprehensively summarize
34 cutting-edge algorithms, benchmarking 19 of them over
four existing CoSOD datasets (MSRC, iCoSeg, Image Pair
and CoSal2015) and our CoSOD3k with a total of ∼61K
images (largest scale), and reporting group-level performance analysis. Finally, we discuss the challenge and future work of CoSOD. Our study would give a strong boost
to growth in the CoSOD community. Benchmark toolbox
and results are available on our project page.

1. Introduction
RGB Salient object detection (SOD) [6,18,46,90], RGBD SOD [22, 25, 98, 103], and Video SOD [23] have been
an active [29, 49, 71, 101] research field in computer vision community over the past decade. SOD mimics the
human vision system to detect the most attention-grabbing
object(s) from individual image, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). As
a branch, co-salient object detection (CoSOD) was emerged
recently to employ a set of images, which has been attracting growing attention (see Tab. 2) due to its application values in collection-aware crops [34], co-segmentation [77],
weakly supervised learning [100], image retrieval [11], image quality assessment [78], and video foreground detection [24], etc.
The goal of CoSOD is to extract the salient object(s) that
are common among image(s), such as the red-clothed football player or blue-clothed gymnast, in Fig. 1 (b & c). To
address this problem, current models tend to focus only on
the appearance-similarity between objects. However, this
would lead to data selection bias and is not always appropriate, since, in real-life applications, salient objects in a
group of images often vary in terms of texture, color, scene,
and background (see our CoSOD3k dataset in Fig. 1 (d)),
even if they belong to the same category.
To take a deeper look at CoSOD, we make three distinct

2919

