SampleNet: Differentiable Point Cloud Sampling
Itai Lang
Tel Aviv University

Asaf Manor
Tel Aviv University

Shai Avidan
Tel Aviv University

itailang@mail.tau.ac.il

asafmanor@mail.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
There is a growing number of tasks that work directly on
point clouds. As the size of the point cloud grows, so do
the computational demands of these tasks. A possible solution is to sample the point cloud first. Classic sampling
approaches, such as farthest point sampling (FPS), do not
consider the downstream task. A recent work showed that
learning a task-specific sampling can improve results significantly. However, the proposed technique did not deal
with the non-differentiability of the sampling operation and
offered a workaround instead.
We introduce a novel differentiable relaxation for point
cloud sampling that approximates sampled points as a mixture of points in the primary input cloud. Our approximation scheme leads to consistently good results on classification and geometry reconstruction applications. We also
show that the proposed sampling method can be used as a
front to a point cloud registration network. This is a challenging task since sampling must be consistent across two
different point clouds for a shared downstream task. In all
cases, our approach outperforms existing non-learned and
learned sampling alternatives. Our code is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
The popularity of 3D sensing devices increased in recent
years. These devices usually capture data in the form of a
point cloud - a set of points representing the visual scene.
A variety of applications, such as classification, registration
and shape reconstruction, consume the raw point cloud data.
These applications can digest large point clouds, though it
is desirable to reduce the size of the point cloud (Figure 1)
to improve computational efficiency and reduce communication costs.
This is often done by sampling the data before running
the downstream task [8, 11, 12]. Since sampling preserves
the data structure (i.e., both input and output are point
1 https://github.com/itailang/SampleNet

SampleNet

SampleNet

SampleNet

Registration

Reconstruction

Classification

A CAR!

Figure 1. Applications of SampleNet. Our method learns to sample a point cloud for a subsequent task. It employs a differentiable relaxation of the selection of points from the input point
cloud. SampleNet lets various tasks, such as classification, registration, and reconstruction, to operate on a small fraction of the
input points with minimal degradation in performance.

clouds), it can be used natively in a process pipeline. Also,
sampling preserves data fidelity and retains the data in an
interpretable representation.
An emerging question is how to select the data points.
A widely used method is farthest point sampling (FPS) [30,
52, 18, 27]. FPS starts from a point in the set, and iteratively
selects the farthest point from the points already selected [7,
23]. It aims to achieve a maximal coverage of the input.
FPS is task agnostic. It minimizes a geometric error and
does not take into account the subsequent processing of the
sampled point cloud. A recent work by Dovrat et al. [6]
presented a task-specific sampling method. Their key idea
was to simplify and then sample the point cloud. In the
first step, they used a neural network to produce a small
set of simplified points in the ambient space, optimized for
the task. This set is not guaranteed to be a subset of the

7578

