EventCap: Monocular 3D Capture of High-Speed Human Motions
using an Event Camera
Lan Xu1,3 Weipeng Xu2 Vladislav Golyanik2 Marc Habermann2 Lu Fang1 Christian Theobalt2
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, China
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
Robotics Institute, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
2

lxuan@connect.ust.hk {wxu,golyanik,mhaberma,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
fanglu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The high frame rate is a critical requirement for capturing fast human motions. In this setting, existing markerless image-based methods are constrained by the lighting requirement, the high data bandwidth and the consequent high computation overhead. In this paper, we propose EventCap — the first approach for 3D capturing of
high-speed human motions using a single event camera.
Our method combines model-based optimization and CNNbased human pose detection to capture high frequency motion details and to reduce the drifting in the tracking. As
a result, we can capture fast motions at millisecond resolution with significantly higher data efficiency than using high
frame rate videos. Experiments on our new event-based fast
human motion dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and accuracy of our method, as well as its robustness to challenging lighting conditions.

1. Introduction
With the recent popularity of virtual and augmented reality (VR and AR), there has been a growing demand for
reliable 3D human motion capture. As a low-cost alternative to the widely used marker- and sensor-based solutions,
markerless video-based motion capture alleviates the need
for intrusive body-worn motion sensors and markers. This
research direction has received increased attention over the
last years [13, 21, 53, 63, 69].
In this paper, we focus on markerless motion capture
for high-speed movements, which is essential for many applications such as training and performance evaluation for
gymnastics, sports and dancing. Capturing motion at a high
frame rate leads to a very high data bandwidth and algorithm complexity for the existing methods. While the current marker- and sensor-based solutions can support more
than 400 frames per second (fps) [62, 65, 43], the literature
on markerless high frame rate motion capture is sparse.

Figure 1: We present the first monocular event-based 3D human motion
capture approach. Given the event stream and the low frame rate intensity
image stream from a single event camera, our goal is to track the highspeed human motion at 1000 frames per second.

Several recent works [30, 72] revealed the importance of
the high frame rate camera systems for tracking fast motions. However, they still suffer from the aforementioned
fundamental problem — the high frame rate leads to excessive amounts of raw data and large bandwidth requirement
for data processing (e.g., capturing RGB stream of VGA
resolution at 1000 fps from a single view for one minute
yields 51.5GB of data). Moreover, both methods [30, 72]
assume 1) well-lit scenarios for compensating the short exposure time at high frame rate, and 2) indoor capture due to
the limitation of the IR-based depth sensor.
In this paper, we propose a rescue to the problems outlined above by using an event camera. Such bio-inspired
dynamic vision sensors [32] asynchronously measure perpixel intensity changes and have multiple advantages over
conventional cameras, including high temporal resolution,
high dynamic range, low power consumption and low data
bandwidth. These properties potentially allow capturing
very fast motions with significantly higher data efficiency
in general lighting conditions. Nevertheless, using the
14968

