Defending and Harnessing the Bit-Flip based Adversarial Weight Attack
Zhezhi He† , Adnan Siraj Rakin† , Jingtao Li, Chaitali Chakrabarti and Deliang Fan
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
zhezhihe@asu.edu, dfan@asu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
As the Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieve humansurpassing performance in multiple computer vision related
tasks, its applications in the real-world scenarios are growing rapidly. In such a scenario, the fault-tolerance capability
of the neural network is of great research interest for developing reliable neural networks against weak random fault
and even strong malicious attacks. A significant amount
of research effort has focused on DNNs being fooled by
human-imperceptible input noise, aka. adversarial example.
However, another vulnerable dimension of DNN is model
parameters, which has been barely investigated.
Owing to the enormous model size (hundreds of MBs for
state-of-the-art DNNs [9, 24]), modern DNN accelerators
(e.g., GPU) normally need to store the model parameters in
main memory, namely, Dynamic Random-Access-Memory
† These authors contributed equally

Code is released at: https://github.com/elliothe/BFA

BatchNorm On
Bias and etc. Chip
∙

Insensitive
High Volume

Weight

Core
∙

Off
Chip

DRAM

RHA

(a) Concept illustration of quantized DNN under BFA.

75
50
25

accuracy (%)

Recently, a new paradigm of the adversarial attack on
the quantized neural network weights has attracted great
attention, namely, the Bit-Flip based adversarial weight attack, aka. Bit-Flip Attack (BFA). BFA has shown extraordinary attacking ability, where the adversary can malfunction a quantized Deep Neural Network (DNN) as a random
guess, through malicious bit-flips on a small set of vulnerable weight bits (e.g., 13 out of 93 millions bits of 8-bit quantized ResNet-18). However, there are no effective defensive
methods to enhance the fault-tolerance capability of DNN
against such BFA. In this work, we conduct comprehensive
investigations on BFA and propose to leverage binarizationaware training and its relaxation – piece-wise clustering as
simple and effective countermeasures to BFA. The experiments show that, for BFA to achieve the identical prediction accuracy degradation (e.g., below 11% on CIFAR-10),
it requires 19.3× and 480.1× more effective malicious bitflips on ResNet-20 and VGG-11 respectively, compared to
defend-free counterparts.

Sensitive
Low Volume

DNN

0

5

Without defense
With defense
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
number of bit-flips

(b) Accuracy vs. # bit-flips with/without defense.

Figure 1: The fault injection on the identified vulnerable
weight bits can be physically conducted by Row-Hammer
Attack (RHA) [19]. Meanwhile, the DNN under defense
has higher resistance against the malicious bit-flips.

(DRAM). Recent research advances have brought up the
vulnerability issue of data stored in DRAM, where RowHammer Attack (RHA) [19] has been shown to maliciously
flip the memory bits in DRAM without being granted any
data write privileges, as depicted in Fig. 1. Unfortunately,
DNNs stored in DRAM with floating-point representation
can be easily hacked to fully malfunction, through single
bit-flip (e.g. in an exponential bit of any weight) through
RHA [8]. Thanks to the DNN weight quantization technique, DNN is more compact since the weights are represented in a fixed-point format with constrained representation. Such a representation has been proven to significantly
enhance the immunity of quantized DNN to such malicious
bit-flips in [8]. However, a newly proposed Bit-Flip Attack
(BFA) [17] whose progressive bit searching algorithm can
114095

