Weakly-Supervised 3D Human Pose Learning via Multi-view Images in the Wild
Umar Iqbal

Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz

{uiqbal, pmolchanov, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
One major challenge for monocular 3D human pose estimation in-the-wild is the acquisition of training data that
contains unconstrained images annotated with accurate 3D
poses. In this paper, we address this challenge by proposing a weakly-supervised approach that does not require
3D annotations and learns to estimate 3D poses from unlabeled multi-view data, which can be acquired easily in
in-the-wild environments. We propose a novel end-to-end
learning framework that enables weakly-supervised training using multi-view consistency. Since multi-view consistency is prone to degenerated solutions, we adopt a 2.5D
pose representation and propose a novel objective function that can only be minimized when the predictions of the
trained model are consistent and plausible across all camera views. We evaluate our proposed approach on two large
scale datasets (Human3.6M and MPII-INF-3DHP) where it
achieves state-of-the-art performance among semi-/weaklysupervised methods.

1. Introduction
Learning to estimate 3D body pose from a single RGB
image is of great interest for many practical applications.
The state-of-the-art methods [6, 16, 17, 28, 32, 39–41, 52, 53]
in this area use images annotated with 3D poses and train
deep neural networks to directly regress 3D pose from images. While the performance of these methods has improved significantly, their applicability in in-the-wild environments has been limited due to the lack of training data
with ample diversity. The commonly used training datasets
such as Human3.6M [10], and MPII-INF-3DHP [22] are
collected in controlled indoor settings using sophisticated
multi-camera motion capture systems. While scaling such
systems to unconstrained outdoor environments is impractical, manual annotations are difficult to obtain and prone
to errors. Therefore, current methods resort to existing
training data and try to improve the generalizabilty of
trained models by incorporating additional weak supervision in form of various 2D annotations for in-the-wild images [27,39,52]. While 2D annotations can be obtained eas-

ily, they do not provide sufficient information about the 3D
body pose, especially when the body joints are foreshortened or occluded. Therefore, these methods rely heavily
on the ground-truth 3D annotations, in particular, for depth
predictions.
Instead of using 3D annotations, in this work, we propose to use unlabeled multi-view data for training. We assume this data to be without extrinsic camera calibration.
Hence, it can be collected very easily in any in-the-wild
setting. In contrast to 2D annotations, using multi-view
data for training has several obvious advantages e.g., ambiguities arising due to body joint occlusions as well as
foreshortening or motion blur can be resolved by utilizing information from other views. There have been only
few works [14, 29, 33, 34] that utilize multi-view data to
learn monocular 3D pose estimation models. While the approaches [29, 33] need extrinsic camera calibration, [33, 34]
require at least some part of their training data to be labelled
with ground-truth 3D poses. Both of these requirements
are, however, very hard to acquire for unconstrained data,
hence, limit the applicability of these methods to controlled
indoor settings. In [14], 2D poses obtained from multiple
camera views are used to generate pseudo ground-truths for
training. However, this method uses a pre-trained pose estimation model which remains fixed during training, meaning
2D pose errors remain unaddressed and can propagate to the
generated pseudo ground-truths.
In this work, we present a weakly-supervised approach
for monocular 3D pose estimation that does not require any
3D pose annotations at all. For training, we only use a
collection of unlabeled multi-view data and an independent
collection of images annotated with 2D poses. An overview
of the approach can be seen in Fig. 1. Given an RGB image
as input, we train the network to predict a 2.5D pose representation [12] from which the 3D pose can be reconstructed
in a fully-differentiable way. Given unlabeled multi-view
data, we use a multi-view consistency loss which enforces
the 3D poses estimated from different views to be consistent
up to a rigid transformation. However, naively enforcing
multi-view consistency can lead to degenerated solutions.
We, therefore, propose a novel objective function which is
15243

