DSNAS: Direct Neural Architecture Search without Parameter Retraining
Shoukang Hu*1 , Sirui Xie*2 , Hehui Zheng3 , Chunxiao Liu4 , Jianping Shi4 , Xunying Liu1 , Dahua Lin1 †∗
Low correlation

Abstract
If NAS methods are solutions, what is the problem? Most
existing NAS methods require two-stage parameter optimization. However, performance of the same architecture
in the two stages correlates poorly. In this work, we propose a new problem definition for NAS, task-specific endto-end, based on this observation. We argue that given a
computer vision task for which a NAS method is expected,
this definition can reduce the vaguely-defined NAS evaluation to i) accuracy of this task and ii) the total computation consumed to finally obtain a model with satisfying
accuracy. Seeing that most existing methods do not solve
this problem directly, we propose DSNAS, an efficient differentiable NAS framework that simultaneously optimizes architecture and parameters with a low-biased Monte Carlo
estimate. Child networks derived from DSNAS can be deployed directly without parameter retraining. Comparing
with two-stage methods, DSNAS successfully discovers networks with comparable accuracy (74.4%) on ImageNet in
420 GPU hours, reducing the total time by more than 34%.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning is partially built upon the
architecture of neural networks. However, the variation of
network architectures always incurs unpredictable changes
in performance, causing tremendous efforts in ad hoc architecture design. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is believed to be promising in alleviating this pain. Practitioners
from the industry would like to see NAS techniques that automatically discover task-specific networks with reasonable
performance, regardless of their generalization capability.
Therefore, NAS is always formulated as a hyper-parameter
optimization problem, whose algorithmic realization spans
evolution algorithm [21, 7], reinforcement learning [28],
Bayesian optimization [9], Monte Carlo Tree Search [25],
and differentiable architecture search [14, 27, 3]. Re∗ Equal contribution. Work done at SenseTime Research. Correspondence skhu@se.cuhk.edu.hk, srxie@ucla.edu
† 1. The Chinese Univsersity of Hong Kong; 2. University of California,
Los Angeles; 3. Cambridge University; 4. SenseTime Research.

Landscape of accuracy

Search

Retrain

Architecture space

Figure 1. Projecting from the architecture space A to the network
space N (θ) with different parameter training schemes in searching and retraining results in accuracy with low correlation.

cently, these algorithmic frameworks have exhibited pragmatic success in various challenging tasks, e.g. semantic
segmentation [12] and object detection [4] etc.
However, even as an optimization problem, NAS is almost vaguely defined. Most of the NAS methods proposed
recently are implicitly two-stage methods. These two stages
are searching and evaluation (or retraining). While the architecture optimization process is referring to the searching
stage, in which a co-optimization scheme is designed for
parameters and architectures, there runs another round of
parameter optimization in the evaluation stage, on the same
set of training data for the same task. This is to some extent
contradicting the norm in a machine learning task that no
optimization is allowed in evaluation. A seemingly sensible argument could be that the optimization result of NAS is
only the architecture, and the evaluation of an architecture
is to check its performance after retraining. There is certainly no doubt that architectures that achieve high performance when retrained from scratch are reasonable choices

12084

