Counterfactual Samples Synthesizing for Robust Visual Question Answering
Long Chen1∗ Xin Yan1∗ Jun Xiao1† Hanwang Zhang2 Shiliang Pu3 Yueting Zhuang1
1
DCD Lab, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
3
MReaL Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Hikvision Research Institute

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA), i.e., answering natural language questions about the visual content, is one of
the core techniques towards complete AI. With the release
of multiple large scale VQA datasets (e.g., VQA v1 [6] and
v2 [17]), VQA has received unprecedented attention and
∗ Long Chen and Xin Yan are co-first authors with equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.
1 Codes: https://github.com/yanxinzju/CSS-VQA

LMH

surfing

What is the man doing
in the water

LMH
+ CSS

surfing

Image & Question

Model

Answer

✗
Grad-CAM

Despite Visual Question Answering (VQA) has realized
impressive progress over the last few years, today’s VQA
models tend to capture superficial linguistic correlations in
the train set and fail to generalize to the test set with different QA distributions. To reduce the language biases, several
recent works introduce an auxiliary question-only model to
regularize the training of targeted VQA model, and achieve
dominating performance on VQA-CP. However, since the
complexity of design, current methods are unable to equip
the ensemble-based models with two indispensable characteristics of an ideal VQA model: 1) visual-explainable: the
model should rely on the right visual regions when making
decisions. 2) question-sensitive: the model should be sensitive to the linguistic variations in question. To this end, we
propose a model-agnostic Counterfactual Samples Synthesizing (CSS) training scheme. The CSS generates numerous
counterfactual training samples by masking critical objects
in images or words in questions, and assigning different
ground-truth answers. After training with the complementary samples (i.e., the original and generated samples), the
VQA models are forced to focus on all critical objects and
words, which significantly improves both visual-explainable
and question-sensitive abilities. In return, the performance
of these models is further boosted. Extensive ablations have
shown the effectiveness of CSS. Particularly, by building on
top of the model LMH [14], we achieve a record-breaking
performance of 58.95% on VQA-CP v2, with 6.5% gains.1

✓
Reference Regions

(a) Visual-Explainable Ability
What is the color of the luggage

blue

✓

blue

✗

blue

✓

red

✓

LMH
What is the color of the bus

What is the color of the luggage
What is the color of the bus
Image

Questions

LMH
+ CSS
Model

Answers

(b) Question-Sensitive Ability

Figure 1: The two indispensable characteristics of an ideal VQA
model. (a) visual-explainable ability: the model not only needs
to predict correct answer (e.g., “surfing”), but also relies on the
right reference regions when making this prediction. (b) questionsensitive ability: the model should be sensitive to the linguistic
variations, e.g., after replacing the critical word “luggage” with
“bus”, the predicted answers of two questions should be different.

hundreds of models have been developed. However, since
the inevitable annotation artifacts in the real image datasets,
today’s VQA models always over-rely on superficial linguistic correlations (i.e., language biases) [2, 42, 23, 17].
For example, a model answering “2” for all “how many X”
questions can still get satisfactory performance regardless
of the X. Recently, to disentangle the bias factors and clearly
monitor the progress of VQA research, a diagnostic benchmark VQA-CP (VQA under Changing Priors) [3] has been
proposed. The VQA-CP deliberately has different questionanswer distributions in the train and test splits. The performance of many state-of-the-art VQA models [5, 15, 40, 4]
drop significantly on VQA-CP compared to other datasets.
Currently, the prevailing solutions to mitigate the bias issues are ensemble-based methods: they introduce an aux-

10800

