Distribution-induced Bidirectional Generative Adversarial Network for Graph
Representation Learning
∗

Shuai Zheng1,2 , Zhenfeng Zhu1,2, , Xingxing Zhang1,2 , Zhizhe Liu1,2 , Jian Cheng3,4 , Yao Zhao1,2
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
1,2

{zs1997,zhfzhu,zhangxing,yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn, 3,4 jcheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Graph representation learning aims to encode all nodes
of a graph into low-dimensional vectors that will serve as
input of many compute vision tasks. However, most existing
algorithms ignore the existence of inherent data distribution and even noises. This may significantly increase the
phenomenon of over-fitting and deteriorate the testing accuracy. In this paper, we propose a Distribution-induced
Bidirectional Generative Adversarial Network (named DBGAN) for graph representation learning. Instead of the
widely used normal distribution assumption, the prior distribution of latent representation in our DBGAN is estimated in a structure-aware way, which implicitly bridges the
graph and feature spaces by prototype learning. Thus discriminative and robust representations are generated for all nodes. Furthermore, to improve their generalization ability while preserving representation ability, the samplelevel and distribution-level consistency is well balanced via
a bidirectional adversarial learning framework. An extensive group of experiments are then carefully designed and
presented, demonstrating that our DBGAN obtains remarkably more favorable trade-off between representation and
robustness, and meanwhile is dimension-efficient, over currently available alternatives in various tasks. The source
code is released in https://github.com/SsGood/
DBGAN .

1. Introduction
A graph is a collection of nodes and edges that can be
used to model relationships and processes between data in
a variety of scenarios, such as biomedical networks, citation networks, and social networks. Therefore, graph anal∗ Corresponding author.

ysis is a necessary step to explore the internal information
of these networks. However, due to the complex topology and high data dimension of graph data, most of the
current machine learning methods for simple sequences or
grids design are not suitable for graph data analysis. As a
general approach to these problems, Graph representation
learning aims to represent sparse raw features of graph nodes as compact low-dimensional vectors while preserving
enough information for subsequent downstream tasks, such
as link prediction [6,38], clustering [26,36], and recommendation [30, 34]. In recent years, a variety of graph representation learning methods have been proposed, which can be
broadly summarized into two categories: proximity-based
algorithms and deep learning-based algorithms.
By applying matrix factorization, proximity-based algorithms, such as GraRep [2], HOPE [27], M-NMF [39]
attempt to factorize the graph adjacency matrix to obtain
the node representation. While for probabilistic models,
such as DeepWalk [30], line [33], and node2vec [13], they
learn the node representation with local neighborhood connectivities through randomwalk and various order proximities. These methods are all focused on preserving the original neighborhood relationship in a low dimensional space.
Recent studies have also shown that probabilistic models and matrix factorization-based algorithms are equivalent
and can be implemented by a unified model [31].
Deep learning-based approaches are receiving increasing
attention, most of which use the auto-encoder framework to
capture the latent representation. SDNE [37] and DNGR [3]
use deep auto-encoders to model the positive point-wise
mutual information (PPMI) while preserving the structure
of the graph. The GAE [17] first merges the GCN [16] as an
encoder into the auto-encoder framework to seek the latent
representation by reconstructing the adjacency matrix. In
addition, MGAE [36], GDN [20], and GALA [29] attempt
to preserve node feature in latent representation by building

7224

