MoreFusion: Multi-object Reasoning for 6D Pose Estimation
from Volumetric Fusion
Kentaro Wada, Edgar Sucar, Stephen James, Daniel Lenton, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Laboratory, Imperial College London
{k.wada18, e.sucar18, slj12, djl11, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Robots and other smart devices need efficient objectbased scene representations from their on-board vision systems to reason about contact, physics and occlusion. Recognized precise object models will play an important role
alongside non-parametric reconstructions of unrecognized
structures. We present a system which can estimate the accurate poses of multiple known objects in contact and occlusion from real-time, embodied multi-view vision. Our
approach makes 3D object pose proposals from single RGBD views, accumulates pose estimates and non-parametric
occupancy information from multiple views as the camera
moves, and performs joint optimization to estimate consistent, non-intersecting poses for multiple objects in contact.
We verify the accuracy and robustness of our approach
experimentally on 2 object datasets: YCB-Video, and our
own challenging Cluttered YCB-Video. We demonstrate a
real-time robotics application where a robot arm precisely
and orderly disassembles complicated piles of objects, using only on-board RGB-D vision.

(a) Pose Estimation

(b) Volumetric Fusion

1. Introduction
Robots and other smart devices that aim to perform complex tasks such as precise manipulation in cluttered environments need to capture information from their cameras
that enables reasoning about contact, physics and occlusion
among objects. While it has been shown that some shortterm tasks can be accomplished using end-to-end learned
models that connect sensing to action, we believe that extended and multi-stage tasks can greatly benefit from persistent 3D scene representations.
Even when the object elements of a scene have known
models, inferring the configurations of many objects that
are mutually occluding and in contact is challenging even
with state-of-the-art detectors. In this paper we present a
vision system that can tackle this problem, producing a persistent 3D multi-object representation in real-time from the
multi-view images of a single moving RGB-D camera. Our

(c) Real Scene

Figure 1: MoreFusion produces accurate 6D object pose
predictions by explicitly reasoning about occupied and free
space via a volumetric map. We demonstrate the system in
a real-time robot grasping application.
system has four main components, as highlighted in Figure 2: 1) 2D object detection is fed to object-level fusion
to make volumetric occupancy map of objects. 2) A pose
prediction network that uses RGB-D data and the surrounding occupancy grid makes 3D object pose estimates. 3)
Collision-based pose refinement jointly optimizes the poses
of multiple objects with differentiable collision checking.
4) The intermediate volumetric representation of objects are
replaced with information-rich CAD models.
Our system takes full advantage of depth information
and multiple views to estimate mutually consistent object
114540

