Context R-CNN: Long Term Temporal Context for Per-Camera Object Detection
Sara Beery*† , Guanhang Wu† , Vivek Rathod† , Ronny Votel† , Jonathan Huang†
California Institute of Technology* Google†
Abstract
In static monitoring cameras, useful contextual information can stretch far beyond the few seconds typical video
understanding models might see: subjects may exhibit similar behavior over multiple days, and background objects
remain static. Due to power and storage constraints, sampling frequencies are low, often no faster than one frame per
second, and sometimes are irregular due to the use of a motion trigger. In order to perform well in this setting, models
must be robust to irregular sampling rates. In this paper we
propose a method that leverages temporal context from the
unlabeled frames of a novel camera to improve performance
at that camera. Specifically, we propose an attention-based
approach that allows our model, Context R-CNN, to index
into a long term memory bank constructed on a per-camera
basis and aggregate contextual features from other frames
to boost object detection performance on the current frame.
We apply Context R-CNN to two settings: (1) species detection using camera traps, and (2) vehicle detection in traffic cameras, showing in both settings that Context R-CNN
leads to performance gains over strong baselines. Moreover, we show that increasing the contextual time horizon
leads to improved results. When applied to camera trap
data from the Snapshot Serengeti dataset, Context R-CNN
with context from up to a month of images outperforms a
single-frame baseline by 17.9% mAP, and outperforms S3D
(a 3d convolution based baseline) by 11.2% mAP.

Figure 1: Visual similarity over long time horizons. In static cameras, there exists significantly more long term temporal consistency than
in data from moving cameras. In each case above, the images were taken
on separate days, yet look strikingly similar.
cameras are taken automatically (without a human photographer), there is no guarantee that the objects of interest will
be centered, focused, well-lit, or an appropriate scale. We
break these challenges into three categories, each of which
can cause failures in single-frame detection networks:
• Objects of interest partially observed. Objects can
be very close to the camera and occluded by the edges
of the frame, partially hidden in the environment due
to camouflage, or very far from the camera.
• Poor image quality. Objects are poorly lit, blurry, or
obscured by weather conditions like snow or fog.
• Background distractors. When moving to a new
camera location, there can exist salient background objects that cause repeated false positives.

1. Introduction
We seek to improve recognition within passive monitoring cameras, which are static and collect sparse data over
long time horizons.1 Passive monitoring deployments are
ubiquitous and present unique challenges for computer vision but also offer unique opportunities that can be leveraged for improved accuracy.
For example, depending on the triggering mechanism
and the camera placement, large numbers of photos at any
given camera location can be empty of any objects of interest (up to 75% for some ecological camera trap datasets)
[30]. Further, as the images in static passive-monitoring
1 Models and code will be released online.

These cases are often difficult even for humans. On the
other hand, there are aspects of the passive monitoring problem domain that can give us hope — for example, subjects
often exhibit similar behavior over multiple days, and background objects remain static, suggesting that it would be
beneficial to provide temporal context in the form of additional frames from the same camera. Indeed we would
expect humans viewing passive monitoring footage to often
rewind to get better views of a difficult-to-see object.
113075

