Generative Hybrid Representations for Activity Forecasting
with No-Regret Learning
Jiaqi Guan∗1, 2 , Ye Yuan1 , Kris M. Kitani1 , and Nicholas Rhinehart∗1, 3
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Illinois Urbana Champaign 3 UC Berkeley
{jiaqig, yyuan2, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu, nrhinehart@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Automatically reasoning about future human behaviors
is a difficult problem but has significant practical applications to assistive systems. Part of this difficulty stems from
learning systems’ inability to represent all kinds of behaviors. Some behaviors, such as motion, are best described
with continuous representations, whereas others, such as
picking up a cup, are best described with discrete representations. Furthermore, human behavior is generally not
fixed: people can change their habits and routines. This
suggests these systems must be able to learn and adapt continuously. In this work, we develop an efficient deep generative model to jointly forecast a person’s future discrete actions and continuous motions. On a large-scale egocentric
dataset, EPIC-KITCHENS, we observe our method generates high-quality and diverse samples while exhibiting better generalization than related generative models. Finally,
we propose a variant to continually learn our model from
streaming data, observe its practical effectiveness, and theoretically justify its learning efficiency.

1. Introduction
A key requirement for intelligent systems to safely interact with humans is the ability to predict plausible human
behaviors. Additionally, they must be able to adapt to variability in behavior over time. However, forecasting a person’s behaviors is generally difficult due to the immense set
of possible behaviors that humans showcase. This makes
it challenging to choose a unified representation for human
behavior. Some behaviors are better modeled as continuous
representations, for instance, a person’s future trajectory.
Other behaviors are more succinctly represented discretely,
such as interacting with an object. Our goal is to develop
an efficient predictive model for joint discrete-continuous
∗ Work done primarily while Jiaqi Guan and Nicholas Rhinehart were
at CMU. Jiaqi Guan’s current email: jiaqi@illinois.edu

Past images:

Point cloud:

Possible future actions:
Stove

Sink
Bench

Fridge
Timeline

Door

Figure 1. Generative hybrid activity forecasting. Our model
generates possible future trajectories and actions with past trajectory and images as context. A point cloud is recovered with ORBSLAM. Histograms show the possibilities of top 5 action classes.

spaces, which takes rich sensory information from egocentric videos as input to forecast a person’s future behaviors.
For many applications based on a predictive model of future human behavior, it is important that the model is able to
characterize the uncertainty of its predictions. A generative
model can naturally represent uncertainty and is also wellsuited for modeling a hybrid representation of human behavior. Thus, we propose a generative model that can represent the joint distribution of discrete and continuous behaviors by leveraging recent success in generative modeling.
Unlike some popular generative models (e.g. GANs [12]
and variational autoencoders [21]), our method can compute exact likelihoods, which makes it possible to precisely
evaluate the model’s predictions of future behaviors. It is
part of a family of methods known as invertible generative
models [5, 13, 20]. We learn a generative model of discrete
actions by applying the Gumbel-Softmax trick [29], and
condition this model on continuous samples produced by an
invertible generative trajectory model [36]. We show how
we can jointly learn both models efficiently. The results
on a large-scale egocentric dataset, EPIC-KITCHENS [4],
demonstrate the advantage of our model in joint trajectory-

173

