ScrabbleGAN: Semi-Supervised Varying Length Handwritten Text Generation
Sharon Fogel† , Hadar Averbuch-Elor§ , Sarel Cohen , Shai Mazor† and Roee Litman†
† Amazon Rekognition, Israel
§ Cornell Tech, Cornell University

Abstract
Optical character recognition (OCR) systems performance have improved significantly in the deep learning
era. This is especially true for handwritten text recognition (HTR), where each author has a unique style, unlike
printed text, where the variation is smaller by design. That
said, deep learning based HTR is limited, as in every other
task, by the number of training examples. Gathering data is
a challenging and costly task, and even more so, the labeling task that follows, of which we focus here. One possible
approach to reduce the burden of data annotation is semisupervised learning. Semi supervised methods use, in addition to labeled data, some unlabeled samples to improve
performance, compared to fully supervised ones. Consequently, such methods may adapt to unseen images during
test time.
We present ScrabbleGAN, a semi-supervised approach
to synthesize handwritten text images that are versatile both
in style and lexicon. ScrabbleGAN relies on a novel generative model which can generate images of words with an
arbitrary length. We show how to operate our approach
in a semi-supervised manner, enjoying the aforementioned
benefits such as performance boost over state of the art supervised HTR. Furthermore, our generator can manipulate
the resulting text style. This allows us to change, for instance, whether the text is cursive, or how thin is the pen
stroke.

1. Introduction
Documentation of knowledge using handwriting is one
of the biggest achievements of mankind: the oldest written records mark the transition from prehistory into history,
and indeed, most evidence of historic events can be found
in handwritten scripts and markings. Handwriting remained
the dominant way of documenting events and data well after
Gutenberg’s printing press in the mid-1400s. Both printing and handwriting are becoming somewhat obsolete in
Corresponding author: shafog@amazon.com
§ work done while working at Amazon.

Figure 1: The word “Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious”
(34 letters) from the movie “Mary Poppins” written in different styles using our network. Note that some of these
styles are cursive.
the digital era, when courtroom stenographers are being replaced by technology [4], further, most of the text we type
remains in digital form and never meets a paper.
Nevertheless, handwritten text still has many applications today, a huge of amount of handwritten text has accumulated over the years, ripe to be processed, and still
continues to be written today. Two prominent cases where
handwriting is still being used today are healthcare and financial institutions. There is a growing need for those to
be extracted and made accessible, e.g. by modern search
engines. While modern OCRs seem to be mature enough
to handle printed text [18, 19], handwritten text recognition
(HTR) does not seem to be on par. We attribute this gap to
both the lack of versatile, annotated handwritten text, and
the difficulty to obtain it. In this work, we attempt to address this gap by creating real-looking synthesized text, reducing the need for annotations and enriching the variety of
training data in both style and lexicon.
Our contributions are threefold; First, we present a
novel fully convolutional handwritten text generation architecture, which allows for arbitrarily long outputs. This is in
contrast to the vast majority of text related solutions which

4324

