PIFuHD: Multi-Level Pixel-Aligned Implicit Function for
High-Resolution 3D Human Digitization∗
Shunsuke Saito1,3
1

Tomas Simon2

University of Southern California

2

Jason Saragih2

Facebook Reality Labs

Hanbyul Joo3
3

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Recent advances in image-based 3D human shape
estimation have been driven by the significant improvement
in representation power afforded by deep neural networks.
Although current approaches have demonstrated the potential in real world settings, they still fail to produce
reconstructions with the level of detail often present in the
input images. We argue that this limitation stems primarily
form two conflicting requirements; accurate predictions
require large context, but precise predictions require high
resolution. Due to memory limitations in current hardware,
previous approaches tend to take low resolution images as
input to cover large spatial context, and produce less precise
(or low resolution) 3D estimates as a result. We address
this limitation by formulating a multi-level architecture that
is end-to-end trainable. A coarse level observes the whole
image at lower resolution and focuses on holistic reasoning.
This provides context to an fine level which estimates highly
detailed geometry by observing higher-resolution images.
We demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms
existing state-of-the-art techniques on single image human
shape reconstruction by fully leveraging 1k-resolution input
images.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity human digitization is the key to enabling a
myriad of applications from medical imaging to virtual reality. While metrically accurate and precise reconstructions of
humans is now possible with multi-view systems [12, 26], it
has remained largely inaccessible to the general community
due to its reliance on professional capture systems with strict
environmental constraints (e.g., high number of cameras,
controlled illuminations) that are prohibitively expensive
and cumbersome to deploy. Increasingly, the community has
turned to using high capacity deep learning models that have
shown great promise in acquiring reconstructions from even
a single image [19, 42, 30, 1]. However, the performance
∗ Website: https://shunsukesaito.github.io/PIFuHD/

Figure 1: Given a high-resolution single image of a person,
we recover highly detailed 3D reconstructions of clothed
humans at 1k resolution.

of these methods currently remains significantly lower than
what is achievable with professional capture systems.
The goal of this work is to achieve high-fidelity 3d
reconstruction of clothed humans from a single image at
a resolution sufficient to recover detailed information such
as fingers, facial features and clothing folds (see Fig. 1).
Our observation is that existing approaches do not make
full use of the high resolution (e.g., 1k or larger) imagery
of humans that is now easily acquired using commodity
sensors on mobile phones. This is because the previous
approaches rely on holistic reasoning to map between the
2D appearance of an imaged human and their 3D shape,
where, in practice, down-sampled images are used due to
the prohibitive memory requirements [19, 42]. Although
local image patches have important cues for detailed 3D
reconstruction, these are rarely leveraged in the full highresolution inputs due to the memory limitations of current
graphics hardware.
Approaches that aim to address this limitation can be
categorized into one of two camps. In the first camp, the
problem is decomposed in a coarse-to-fine manner, where
high-frequency details are embossed on top of low-fidelity
surfaces. In this approach, a low image resolution is used

84

