FSS-1000: A 1000-Class Dataset for Few-Shot Segmentation
Xiang Li1

Tianhan Wei1 Yau Pun Chen1
1
HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai2
2
Tencent

Chi-Keung Tang1

{xlide, tweiab, ypchen}@connect.ust.hk, yuwingtai@tencent.com, cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
Over the past few years, we have witnessed the success of
deep learning in image recognition thanks to the availability of large-scale human-annotated datasets such as PASCAL VOC, ImageNet, and COCO. Although these datasets
have covered a wide range of object categories, there are
still a significant number of objects that are not included.
Can we perform the same task without a lot of human annotations? In this paper, we are interested in few-shot object
segmentation where the number of annotated training examples are limited to 5 only. To evaluate and validate the
performance of our approach, we have built a few-shot segmentation dataset, FSS-1000, which consists of 1000 object
classes with pixelwise annotation of ground-truth segmentation. Unique in FSS-1000, our dataset contains significant number of objects that have never been seen or annotated in previous datasets, such as tiny daily objects, merchandise, cartoon characters, logos, etc.
We build our baseline model using standard backbone
networks such as VGG-16, ResNet-101, and Inception. To
our surprise, we found that training our model from scratch
using FSS-1000 achieves comparable and even better results than training with weights pre-trained by ImageNet
which is more than 100 times larger than FSS-1000. Both
our approach and dataset are simple, effective, and easily
extensible to learn segmentation of new object classes given
very few annotated training examples. Dataset is available
at https://github.com/HKUSTCV/FSS-1000

1. Introduction
Although unprecedented in the number of object categories when first released, contemporary image datasets for
training deep neural networks such as PASCAL VOC [5]
(19,740 images, 20 classes), ILSVRC [29] (1,281,167 images, 1,000 classes), and COCO [21] (204,721 images, 80
classes) are actually quite limited for visual recognition
tasks in the real world: a rough estimate of the number of
different objects on the Earth falls in the range of 500,000
This research is supported in part by Tencent and the Research Grant
Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 1620818.

to 700,000, following the total number of nouns in the English language. While the exact total number of visual object categories is smaller than these numbers, these largescale datasets contribute less than 1% in total. Extending a
new object category to existing datasets is a major undertaking because a lot of human annotation effort is required:
in ImageNet, the mean number of images in a given class is
650. More importantly, observe that the number of images
within each object category in ImageNet for instance can
vary significantly, ranging from 1 to 3,047. This inevitably
introduces undesirable biases which may have a detrimental effect on important tasks solely relying on pre-trained
weights obtained using a dataset that is biased in both the
choice of object classes (small number) and images within a
given class (uneven distribution). Biases in existing datasets
have also been recently reported [9, 20].
Thus, Few-Shot Learning has emerged as an attractive
alternative for important computer vision tasks, especially
when the given new dataset is very small and dissimilar
so relying on the aforementioned pre-trained weights may
not work well. Particularly relevant is image segmentation which requires extremely labor-intensive, pixelwise labeling for supervised learning. In few-shot segmentation,
given an input consisting of a small support image set with
labels (5 in this paper) and a query image set without labels, the learned model should properly segment the query
images, even the pertinent objects belong to an object class
unseen before.
There is no large-scale object dataset for few-shot segmentation. Previous research on few-shot segmentation relies on a manual split of the PASCAL VOC dataset to train
and evaluate a new model [31, 26], but only 20 and 80
classes in the PASCAL VOC and COCO datasets respectively contain pixelwise segmentation information. Thus,
building a large-scale object segmentation dataset is necessary to extensively and objectively evaluate the performance
of our and future few-shot models.
FSS-1000 is the first large-scale dataset for few-shot segmentation with built-in object category hierarchy which emphasizes the number of object classes rather than the number of images. FSS-1000 is highly scalable: 10 new images
with ground-truth segmentation are all it takes for new object class extension.
12869

