Transferable, Controllable, and Inconspicuous Adversarial Attacks on Person
Re-identification With Deep Mis-Ranking
Hongjun Wang1∗
Guangrun Wang1∗
Ya Li2
Dongyu Zhang2
Liang Lin1,3†
1
2
3
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou University
DarkMatter AI
1

2

{wanghq8,wanggrun,zhangdy27}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

liya@gzhu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
The success of deep neural networks (DNNs) has benefited a wide range of computer vision tasks, such as person
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

linliang@ieee.org

Before
Attack

Abstract
The success of DNNs has driven the extensive applications of person re-identification (ReID) into a new era.
However, whether ReID inherits the vulnerability of DNNs
remains unexplored. To examine the robustness of ReID systems is rather important because the insecurity of ReID systems may cause severe losses, e.g., the criminals may use
the adversarial perturbations to cheat the CCTV systems.
In this work, we examine the insecurity of current bestperforming ReID models by proposing a learning-to-misrank formulation to perturb the ranking of the system output. As the cross-dataset transferability is crucial in the
ReID domain, we also perform a back-box attack by developing a novel multi-stage network architecture that pyramids the features of different levels to extract general and
transferable features for the adversarial perturbations. Our
method can control the number of malicious pixels by using
differentiable multi-shot sampling. To guarantee the inconspicuousness of the attack, we also propose a new perception loss to achieve better visual quality.
Extensive experiments on four of the largest ReID
benchmarks (i.e., Market1501 [45], CUHK03 [17],
DukeMTMC [33], and MSMT17 [40]) not only show the
effectiveness of our method, but also provides directions of
the future improvement in the robustness of ReID systems.
For example, the accuracy of one of the best-performing
ReID systems drops sharply from 91.8% to 1.4% after being
attacked by our method. Some attack results are shown
in Fig. 1. The code is available at https://github.
com/whj363636/Adversarial-attack-onPerson-ReID-With-Deep-Mis-Ranking.

3

Query

After
Attack
Before
Attack

Query

After
Attack

Figure 1. The rank-10 predictions of AlignedReID [36] (one of
the state-of-the-art ReID models) before and after our attack on
Market-1501. The green boxes represent the correctly matching
images, while the red boxes represent the mismatching images.

re-identification (ReID), a crucial task aiming at matching
pedestrians across cameras. In particular, DNNs have benefited ReID in learning discriminative features and adaptive
distance metrics for visual matching, which drives ReID to
Query
a new era [36,44]. Thanks to DNNs, there have been extensive applications of ReID in video surveillance or criminal
identification for public safety.
Despite the impressive gain obtained from DNNs,
whether ReID inherits the vulnerability of DNNs remains
unexplored. Specifically, recent works found that DNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial attacks [23,35] (An adversarial attack is to mislead a system with adversarial examples). In
the past two years, the adversarial attack has achieved remarkable success in fooling DNN-based systems, e.g., image classification. Can the recent DNN-based ReID systems
survive from an adversarial attack? The answer seems not
promising. Empirically, evidence has shown that a person
wearing bags, hats, or glasses can mislead a ReID system to
output a wrong prediction [7,11,16,22,43]. These examples
may be regarded as natural adversarial examples.
To examine the robustness of ReID systems against adversarial attacks is of significant importance. Because the
insecurity of ReID systems may cause severe losses, for
example, in criminal tracking, the criminal may disguise
themselves by placing adversarial perturbations (e.g., bags,
hats, and glasses) on the most appropriate position of the
1342

