Continual Learning with Extended Kronecker-factored Approximate Curvature
Janghyeon Lee1

Hyeong Gwon Hong2
Donggyu Joo1
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
2
Graduate School of AI, KAIST

Junmo Kim1,2

{wkdgus9305, honggudrnjs, jdg105, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a quadratic penalty method for continual
learning of neural networks that contain batch normalization (BN) layers. The Hessian of a loss function represents the curvature of the quadratic penalty function, and a
Kronecker-factored approximate curvature (K-FAC) is used
widely to practically compute the Hessian of a neural network. However, the approximation is not valid if there is
dependence between examples, typically caused by BN layers in deep network architectures. We extend the K-FAC
method so that the inter-example relations are taken into
account and the Hessian of deep neural networks can be
properly approximated under practical assumptions. We
also propose a method of weight merging and reparameterization to properly handle statistical parameters of BN,
which plays a critical role for continual learning with BN,
and a method that selects hyperparameters without source
task data. Our method shows better performance than baselines in the permuted MNIST task with BN layers and in
sequential learning from the ImageNet classification task
to fine-grained classification tasks with ResNet-50, without
any explicit or implicit use of source task data for hyperparameter selection.

in practice [29]. Further, even though most state-of-the-art
deep network architectures [11, 12] cannot be easily trained
without batch normalization (BN) layers [14], the effect of
BN is usually not considered and out-of-date network architectures which do not require BN are still mostly used to
evaluate continual learning methods.
BN is quite tricky to manipulate due to training and evaluation discrepancy, and its statistical parameters, means and
variances of activations. Those statistical parameters are
naturally model’s parameters learned from training data, but
they are not free parameters controlled by gradient descent;
they are just determined by the distribution of data. Especially, in a sequential learning scenario, they are vulnerable
to get beyond control as we are dealing with multiple different tasks whose distributions are not the same in general.
Thus, the effect of BN must be discussed and considered
carefully.
In this paper, we propose a quadratic penalty method
with a Hessian approximation, for continual learning of
neural networks that contain BN layers. Before delving
into the detailed method, let us briefly introduce and review
how Hessian can be used for continual learning. For sequential learning, one of the oracle methods which gives an
upper bound performance is the multitask learning method
described as the following optimization problem,

1. Introduction

min λs E(x,t)∈Ds [L(x, t; θ)] + λt E(x,t)∈Dt [L(x, t; θ)],
θ

An artificial neural network catastrophically forgets
about what it has learned from previous tasks in a sequential
learning scenario as it is optimized to solve its current target problem only [6, 25]. Although many continual learning
methods that aim to mitigate catastrophic forgetting have
been introduced in recent years, their use in real-world applications remains somewhat limited owing to their unclear
hyperparameter settings or their use of out-of-date network
architectures. Specifically, many of the current continual
learning methods do not explain how to determine hyperparameters, or experiments are usually performed with hyperparameters carefully tuned through a validation over whole
tasks including past tasks, which is generally not possible

(1)
where Ds and Dt are source and target training dataset, respectively; L is a loss function; λs and λt are importance
hyperparameters that control how important each task is;
and θ is a vectorized model’s parameter. As Ds is not available in a sequential learning scenario, we consider approximating the source task loss function with a function of only
θ, excluding data x and label t. In particular, because target task optimization starts with a source task solution θ∗
as the initial position, it is natural to take the second-order
Taylor series approximation of the source task loss function
at θ = θ∗ ; one advantage of this is that the first-order term
disappears because the gradient at a local minimum is zero.

9001

