Spatio-Temporal Graph for Video Captioning with Knowledge Distillation
Boxiao Pan1 , Haoye Cai1 , De-An Huang1 ,
Kuan-Hui Lee2 , Adrien Gaidon2 , Ehsan Adeli1 , Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Stanford University 2 Toyota Research Institute
{bxpan,hcaiaa,dahuang,eadeli,jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu {kuan.lee,adrien.gaidon}@tri.global

“A cat jumps into a box.”

Figure 1: How to understand and describe a scene from video input? We argue that a detailed understanding of spatiotemporal object interaction is crucial for this task. In this paper, we propose a spatio-temporal graph model to explicitly
capture such information for video captioning. Yellow boxes represent object proposals from Faster R-CNN [12]. Red arrows
denote directed temporal edges (for clarity, only the most relevant ones are shown), while blue lines indicate undirected spatial
connections. Video sample from MSVD [3] with the caption “A cat jumps into a box.” Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Video captioning is a challenging task that requires a
deep understanding of visual scenes. State-of-the-art methods generate captions using either scene-level or objectlevel information but without explicitly modeling object interactions. Thus, they often fail to make visually grounded
predictions, and are sensitive to spurious correlations. In
this paper, we propose a novel spatio-temporal graph model
for video captioning that exploits object interactions in
space and time. Our model builds interpretable links and
is able to provide explicit visual grounding. To avoid unstable performance caused by the variable number of objects, we further propose an object-aware knowledge distillation mechanism, in which local object information is used
to regularize global scene features. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach through extensive experiments on two
benchmarks, showing our approach yields competitive performance with interpretable predictions.

1. Introduction
Scenes are complicated, not only because of the diverse
set of entities involved, but also the complex interactions
among them. Consider the scene shown in Fig. 1. In order

to understand that “A cat jumps into a box,” we need to first
identify “cat” and “box,” then capture the transformation
of “cat jumps into the box.” It is also crucial to be able to
ignore the “television” and “bed,” since they mostly serve
as distractors for understanding what is happening.
The task of video captioning [13, 37] approaches scene
understanding by generating text descriptions from video
input. However, current methods for video captioning are
not able to capture these interactions. Rather than modeling
the correlations among high-level semantic entities, current
methods build connections directly on raw pixels and rely
on the hierarchical deep neural network structure to capture
higher-level relationships [19, 39]. Some works try operating on object features instead, but they either ignore crossobject interaction [49], or object transformation over time
[27, 51]. Despite efforts in directly modeling local object
features, the connections among them are not interpretable
[27, 51], and hence sensitive to spurious correlations.
On the other hand, modeling object relations via video
spatio-temporal graphs [34, 43] has been explored to explicitly construct links between high-level entities by leveraging
the relation-modeling nature of graphs. Specifically, nodes
represent these entities, such as body joints [47], objects /
persons [8, 43, 45], and actions [34], while edges encode
relationships among the entities. Although spatio-temporal

10870

