Joint 3D Instance Segmentation and Object Detection for Autonomous Driving
Dingfu Zhou1,2 , Jin Fang1,2 , Xibin Song1,2∗, Liu Liu5,6 , Junbo Yin3,1,2 ,
Yuchao Dai4 , Hongdong Li5,6 and Ruigang Yang1,2,7
1

Baidu Research 2 National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 4 Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
5
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 6 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australia
7
University of Kentucky, Kentucky, USA
{zhoudingfu, songxibin}@baidu.com

Abstract
Currently, in Autonomous Driving (AD), most of the 3D
object detection frameworks (either anchor- or anchor-freebased) consider the detection as a Bounding Box (BBox) regression problem. However, this compact representation is
not sufficient to explore all the information of the objects.
To tackle this problem, we propose a simple but practical
detection framework to jointly predict the 3D BBox and instance segmentation. For instance segmentation, we propose a Spatial Embeddings (SEs) strategy to assemble all
foreground points into their corresponding object centers.
Base on the SE results, the object proposals can be generated based on a simple clustering strategy. For each cluster, only one proposal is generated. Therefore, the NonMaximum Suppression (NMS) process is no longer needed
here. Finally, with our proposed instance-aware ROI pooling, the BBox is refined by a second-stage network. Experimental results on the public KITTI dataset show that the
proposed SEs can significantly improve the instance segmentation results compared with other feature embeddingbased method. Meanwhile, it also outperforms most of the
3D object detectors on the KITTI testing benchmark.

1. Introduction
Object detection, as a fundamental task in AD and
robotics, has been studied a lot recently. The performance
of object detection has been significantly improved based
on the huge amounts of the labeled dataset [8], [38], [39]
and some super strong baselines such as proposal-based [9],
[35] and anchors-based methods [26], [34]. For easy generalization, objects are usually represented as a 2D BBox
or 3D cuboid with several parameters e.g., Bbox’s center,
∗ Corresponding author: Xibin Song

Figure 1: An example of 3D instance segmentation and object detection from LiDAR point cloud. The top sub-images illustrate the
original point cloud and 3D detection results, where the ground
truth and prediction results are drawn with green and other colors
respectively. The red points in the top right sub-figure are predicted SEs (object centers) for foreground points. The projected
3D BBoxes in the 2D image is shown in the bottom. To be clear,
the RGB image is only used for visualization here.

dimension, and orientation etc.
Many approaches have been proved that this simple representation is suitable for deep learning frameworks while
it also has some limitations. For example, the shape information of the object has been discarded totally. Furthermore, for a certain BBox, some pixels from the background or other objects are inevitable to be included in it.
In the case of occlusion, this situation becomes more serious. In addition, the BBox representation is not accurate
enough to describe the exact location of the object. To well
overcome this limitation, an additional instance mask has
been employed for each BBox to eliminate the influence of
other objects or background. Usually, the instance mask

1839

