Boosting Semantic Human Matting with Coarse Annotations
Jinlin Liu1,2
Yuan Yao1
Wendi Hou1
Miaomiao Cui1
1
2
Xuansong Xie
Changshui Zhang
Xian-sheng Hua1
1

Alibaba Group,

2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

{ljl191782, ryan.yy, wendi.hwd, miaomiao.cmm}@alibaba-inc.com xingtong.xxs@taobao.com
zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Semantic human matting aims to estimate the per-pixel
opacity of the foreground human regions. It is quite challenging and usually requires user interactive trimaps and
plenty of high quality annotated data. Annotating such
kind of data is labor intensive and requires great skills beyond normal users, especially considering the very detailed
hair part of humans. In contrast, coarse annotated human
dataset is much easier to acquire and collect from the public dataset. In this paper, we propose to use coarse annotated data coupled with fine annotated data to boost endto-end semantic human matting without trimaps as extra
input. Specifically, we train a mask prediction network to
estimate the coarse semantic mask using the hybrid data,
and then propose a quality unification network to unify the
quality of the previous coarse mask outputs. A matting refinement network takes in the unified mask and the input
image to predict the final alpha matte. The collected coarse
annotated dataset enriches our dataset significantly, allows
generating high quality alpha matte for real images. Experimental results show that the proposed method performs
comparably against state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, the
proposed method can be used for refining coarse annotated
public dataset, as well as semantic segmentation methods,
which reduces the cost of annotating high quality human
data to a great extent.

(a) Image

(b) Trimap

(c) DIM

(d) W/O coarse annotations

(e) Ours

(f) Alpha-GT

Figure 1. The user interactive method could catch precise semantics and details under the guidance of trimaps. Without the trimap
and enough training dataset, one may get inaccurate semantic estimation, which inevitably leads to wrong matting results. Our
methods achieve comparable matting results by leveraging coarse
annotated data while do not need trimaps as inputs.

achieves fine-grained inference for enclosing objects. However, segmentation techniques focus on pixel-wise binary
classification towards scene understanding, although semantic information is well labelled, it could not catch complicated semantic details like human hair.
The matting problem can be formulated in a general
manner. Given an input image I, matting is modeled as
the weighted combination of foreground image F and background image B as follows [30]:

1. Introduction
Human matting is an important image editing task which
enables accurate separation of humans from their backgrounds. It aims to estimate the per-pixel opacity of the
foreground regions, making it valuable to use the extracted
human image in some recomposition scenarios, including
digital image and video production. One may refer this
task as semantic segmentation problem [4, 7, 24], which

Iz = αz Fz + (1 − αz )Bz ,

αz ∈ [0, 1] .

(1)

where z represents any pixel in image I. The known information in Eq. 1 are the three dimensional RGB color Iz ,
while the RGB color Fz and Bz , and the alpha matte estimation αz are unknown. Matting is thus to solve the 7
unknown variables from 3 known values, which is highly
under-constrained. Therefore, most existing matting methods take a carefully specified trimap as constraint to reduce

8563

