A Self-supervised Approach for Adversarial Robustness
Muzammal Naseer∗†‡ , Salman Khan† , Munawar Hayat† , Fahad Shahbaz Khan†§ , Fatih Porikli∗
∗
Australian National University, Australia, ‡ Data61-CSIRO, Australia
†
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE, § CVL, Linköping University, Sweden
{muzammal.naseer,fatih.porikli}@anu.edu.au
{salman.khan,munawar.hayat,fahad.khan}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Adversarial examples can cause catastrophic mistakes in
Deep Neural Network (DNNs) based vision systems e.g., for
classification, segmentation and object detection. The vulnerability of DNNs against such attacks can prove a major
roadblock towards their real-world deployment. Transferability of adversarial examples demand generalizable defenses that can provide cross-task protection. Adversarial training that enhances robustness by modifying target
model’s parameters lacks such generalizability. On the
other hand, different input processing based defenses fall
short in the face of continuously evolving attacks. In this paper, we take the first step to combine the benefits of both approaches and propose a self-supervised adversarial training mechanism in the input space. By design, our defense
is a generalizable approach and provides significant robustness against the unseen adversarial attacks (e.g. by reducing the success rate of translation-invariant ensemble attack from 82.6% to 31.9% in comparison to previous stateof-the-art). It can be deployed as a plug-and-play solution to protect a variety of vision systems, as we demonstrate for the case of classification, segmentation and detection. Code is available at: https://github.com/
Muzammal-Naseer/NRP .

1. Introduction
Adversarial training (AT) has shown great potential to
safeguard neural networks from adversarial attacks [29, 35].
So far in literature, AT is performed in the model space i.e.,
a model’s parameters are modified by minimizing empirical risk for a given data distribution as well as the perturbed images. Such AT strategy results in the following
challenges. (a) Task dependency: AT is task-dependent
e.g. robust classification models cannot directly be incorporated into an object detection or a segmentation pipeline,
since the overall system would still require further training

Figure 1: Our main idea is to train a Purifier Network in a selfsupervised manner. We generate perturbed images using our proposed Self-supervised Perturbation (SSP) attack that disrupts the
deep perceptual features. The Purifier Network projects back the
perturbed images close to the perceptual space of clean images.
This creates a training loop independent of the task or label space.

with modified task-dependant loss functions. (b) Computational cost: AT is computationally expensive [29] which restricts its applicability to high-dimensional and large-scale
datasets such as ImageNet [34]. (c) Accuracy drop: models trained with AT lose significant accuracy on the original
distribution e.g. ResNet50 [17] accuracy on ImageNet validation set drops from 76% to 64% when robustified against
PGD attack [29] at a perturbation budget of only ǫ ≤ 2
(i.e. maximum change in each pixel can be 2/255). (d) Label leakage: supervised AT suffers from label leakage [23]
which allows the model to overfit on perturbations thus affecting model generalization to unseen adversaries [50].
In comparison to AT, input processing methods [14, 45]
for adversarial defense are scalable and can work across different tasks. However, they have been broken in white-box
1262

