FGN: Fully Guided Network for Few-Shot Instance Segmentation
Zhibo Fan1 , Jin-Gang Yu1,2,∗, Zhihao Liang1 , Jiarong Ou1 ,
Changxin Gao3 , Gui-Song Xia4 , Yuanqing Li1,2
1

South China University of Technology 2 Guangzhou Laboratory
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 Wuhan University
{zanefan0323,zhliang19980922}@gmail.com, {jingangyu,yqli}@scut.edu.cn,
au_jaring@mail.scut.edu.cn, cgao@hust.edu.cn, guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot instance segmentation (FSIS) conjoins the fewshot learning paradigm with general instance segmentation,
which provides a possible way of tackling instance segmentation in the lack of abundant labeled data for training. This
paper presents a Fully Guided Network (FGN) for few-shot
instance segmentation. FGN perceives FSIS as a guided
model where a so-called support set is encoded and utilized to guide the predictions of a base instance segmentation network (i.e., Mask R-CNN), critical to which is the
guidance mechanism. In this view, FGN introduces different
guidance mechanisms into the various key components in
Mask R-CNN, including Attention-Guided RPN, RelationGuided Detector, and Attention-Guided FCN, in order to
make full use of the guidance effect from the support set and
adapt better to the inter-class generalization. Experiments
on public datasets demonstrate that our proposed FGN can
outperform the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [10, 12] is a fundamental computer vision task which aims to simultaneously localize, classify and estimate the segmentation masks of object instances from a given image. The past few years
have witnessed notable advances on instance segmentation
thanks to the prosperity of convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [12, 19, 4, 3], as well as its success in a variety of real-world applications [33, 31, 9]. Existing CNNbased approaches to instance segmentation are mostly fullysupervised, which require abundant labeled data for model
training [12, 24, 11]. Such a data-hungry setting however
may be impractical.
Inspired by the remarkable ability of human to learn with
limited data, few-shot learning (FSL) has recently received
∗ Corresponding author

Support Set

Guidance

Guidance

Guidance

Instance
Segmentation

Query
Detector

FCN

RPN

Mask R-CNN
Fully Guided Network

Figure 1. Illustration of few-shot instance segmentation using
the proposed Fully Guided Network (FGN). To adapt better to
the inter-class generalization, FGN introduces different guidance
mechanisms for the various key components in Mask R-CNN.

a lot of research attention [29, 27, 16, 28, 8]. Assuming
the availability of a large amount of labeled data belonging to certain classes (base classes) for training, FSL aims
at making predictions on data from other different classes
(novel classes) given only a handful of labeled exemplars
for each [29, 27]. Instead of fine-tuning an ordinary model
pre-trained on base classes with the very limited novel-class
samples, or conducting data augmentation, FSL learns a
conditional model that makes predictions conditioned on a
support set, so as to adapt to the inter-class generalization.
The majority of existing FSL models focus on visual
classification, and a minority on semantic segmentation [32,
22, 26, 5]. Nevertheless, it has been rarely explored so
far in the context of instance segmentation, the task of our
concern termed as few-shot instance segmentation (FSIS).
While we argue the FSL paradigm should be effective as
well for addressing instance segmentation with limited data,
it is by no means trivial to couple the two practically. Crucial to any FSL approach is an appropriate mechanism for
encoding and utilizing the support set to guide the base net-

9172

