TubeTK: Adopting Tubes to Track Multi-Object in a One-Step Training Model
Bo Pang, Yizhuo Li, Yifan Zhang, Muchen Li† , Cewu Lu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, †Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{pangbo, liyizhuo, zhangyf sjtu lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, muchenli@alumni.hust.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Video multi-object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental yet
challenging task that has been studied for a long time. It requires the algorithm to predict the temporal and spatial location of objects and classify them into correct categories.
The current mainstream trackers such as [65, 3, 9, 1, 13]
all adopt the tracking-by-detection (TBD) framework. As
a two-step method, this framework simplifies the tracking
problem into two parts: detecting the spatial location of ob∗ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China.

Bounding-Tube

Multi-object tracking is a fundamental vision problem
that has been studied for a long time. As deep learning brings excellent performances to object detection algorithms, Tracking by Detection (TBD) has become the mainstream tracking framework. Despite the success of TBD,
this two-step method is too complicated to train in an endto-end manner and induces many challenges as well, such
as insufficient exploration of video spatial-temporal information, vulnerability when facing object occlusion, and
excessive reliance on detection results. To address these
challenges, we propose a concise end-to-end model TubeTK which only needs one step training by introducing
the “bounding-tube” to indicate temporal-spatial locations
of objects in a short video clip. TubeTK provides a novel
direction of multi-object tracking, and we demonstrate its
potential to solve the above challenges without bells and
whistles. We analyze the performance of TubeTK on several MOT benchmarks and provide empirical evidence to
show that TubeTK has the ability to overcome occlusions to
some extent without any ancillary technologies like Re-ID.
Compared with other methods that adopt private detection
results, our one-stage end-to-end model achieves state-ofthe-art performances even if it adopts no ready-made detection results. We hope that the proposed TubeTK model
can serve as a simple but strong alternative for video-based
MOT task. The code and model will be publicly available
accompanying this paper.

Bounding-Box

Abstract

Figure 1. Bounding-boxes and bounding-tubes. As shown in the
first row, it is difficult to detect the severely occluded target (the
yellow box) by the spatial box without temporal information. In
our TubeTK (the second row), it generates bounding-tubes based
on temporal-spatial features that encode targets’ spatial location
and moving trail at the same time. This leads to a one-step training
tracking method which is more robust when facing occlusions.

jects and matching them in the temporal dimension. Although this is a successful framework, it is important to note
that TBD method suffers from some drawbacks:
1. As shown in [65, 18], the performances of models
adopting TBD framework dramatically vary with detection models. This excessive reliance on image detection results limits performances of the MOT task.
Although there are some existing works aiming at integrating the two steps more closely [67, 20, 3], the
problems are still not solved fundamentally because of
the relatively independent detection model.
2. Due to image-based detection models employed by
TBD, the tracking models are weak when facing severe object occlusions (see Fig. 1). It is extremely difficult to detect occluded objects only through spatial
representations [3]. The low quality detection further
makes tracking unstable, which leads to more compli-

6308

