Partial Weight Adaptation for Robust DNN Inference
Xiufeng Xie
Hewlett Packard Labs

Kyu-Han Kim
Hewlett Packard Labs

xiufeng.xie@hpe.com

kyu-han.kim@hpe.com

Abstract

Video analytics solutions typically use a DNN with pretrained weights for inference, assuming consistent probability distribution between the training and test dataset. Unfortunately, the inputs to DNN inference might have various
distortions that alter the probability distribution and harm
DNN performance in practice. An autonomous vehicle may
drive in and out of shades, causing abrupt brightness change
in the captured video; a drone may change a compression
ratio of video frames while streaming to the inference server
based on wireless link bandwidth; edge servers may need to
process data from IoT devices with heterogeneous camera
hardware and compression strategies. In these scenarios of
input distortions with high dynamic range, existing solutions that rely on a DNN with constant pre-trained weights

Base

(fine-tuned for each input quality)

(same for all inputs)

Distortion level 1
Switch based on
distortion level
Visual
input
Various compression,
resolution, brightness, etc.

Distortion level 2
…

1. Introduction

99.8% weights

0.2% weights
Adaptor

…

Mainstream video analytics uses a pre-trained DNN
model with an assumption that inference input and training
data follow the same probability distribution. However, this
assumption does not always hold in the wild: autonomous
vehicles may capture video with varying brightness; unstable wireless bandwidth calls for adaptive bitrate streaming
of video; and, inference servers may serve inputs from heterogeneous IoT devices/cameras. In such situations, the
level of input distortion changes rapidly, thus reshaping the
probability distribution of the input.
We present GearNN, an adaptive inference architecture
that accommodates DNN inputs with varying distortions.
GearNN employs an optimization algorithm to identify a
tiny set of “distortion-sensitive” DNN parameters, given a
memory budget. Based on the distortion level of the input,
GearNN then adapts only the distortion-sensitive parameters, while reusing the rest of DNN parameters across all
input qualities. In our evaluation of DNN inference with
dynamic input distortions, GearNN improves the accuracy
(mIoU) by an average of 18.12% over a DNN trained with
the undistorted dataset and 4.84% over stability training
from Google, with only 1.8% extra memory overhead.

Original DNN

Inference
result

Distortion level 𝑁

Only cost 1.8% more memory than original DNN to accommodate 10 distortion levels

Figure 1: GearNN, an adaptive inference architecture (This
is a simplified illustration, DNN layers in the adaptor and
those in the base can be interleaved with each other).
suffer from severe accuracy loss [23]. We observe up to a
58% accuracy loss in our experiments (§5).
One workaround to handle input with unstable distortion
level is to train a DNN for each possible distortion level by
augmenting the training data to match that particular distortion level, and then switch between them following the distortion level of the current input. However, there are enormous distortion levels (e.g., JPEG has 100 quality levels),
concurrently running so many DNNs is infeasible, due to
limited memory. Swapping DNNs between disk and memory causes huge latency, and thus, is impractical.
This paper proposes GearNN, an adaptive DNN inference architecture to accommodate real-world inputs with
various distortions, without sacrificing memory efficiency.
GearNN only adapts a tiny portion (e.g., 0.2% of the DNN
size in §4) of the DNN weights that are “distortion sensitive” (called adaptor) to fit the distortion level of the instantaneous input, while reusing the majority of weights (called
base) across all inputs. In this way, the adaptation leads to
high inference accuracy, while reusing most weights guarantees memory efficiency and scalability. We name our design GearNN: like the gearbox that helps one engine handle
different car speeds, GearNN helps a single DNN base to
accommodate a wide range of input distortions.
The GearNN workflow can be summarized as follows:
(i) Identifying distortion-sensitive weights offline. Given
a DNN pre-trained with undistorted training dataset,
19573

