Multi-scale Interactive Network for Salient Object Detection
Youwei Pang1†, Xiaoqi Zhao1†, Lihe Zhang1∗ and Huchuan Lu1,2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{lartpang, zxq}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Salient object detection (SOD) aims at distinguishing the
most visually obvious regions. It is growing rapidly with
the help of data-driven deep learning methods and has been
applied in many computer vision fields, such as visual tracking [24], image retrieval [10], non-photorealistic rendering [28], 4D saliency detection [33], no-reference synthetic
image quality assessmen [38] and so on. Although great
progress has been made at present, two issues still need to
be paid attention to how to extract more effective information from the data of scale variation and how to improve
the spatial coherence of predictions in this situation. Due
to various scales of salient regions, the CNN-based meth† These authors contributed equally to this work.
∗ Corresponding author.

Small

1. Introduction

Middle

Deep-learning based salient object detection methods
achieve great progress. However, the variable scale and
unknown category of salient objects are great challenges all
the time. These are closely related to the utilization of multilevel and multi-scale features. In this paper, we propose the
aggregate interaction modules to integrate the features from
adjacent levels, in which less noise is introduced because of
only using small up-/down-sampling rates. To obtain more
efficient multi-scale features from the integrated features,
the self-interaction modules are embedded in each decoder
unit. Besides, the class imbalance issue caused by the scale
variation weakens the effect of the binary cross entropy
loss and results in the spatial inconsistency of the predictions. Therefore, we exploit the consistency-enhanced loss
to highlight the fore-/back-ground difference and preserve
the intra-class consistency. Experimental results on five
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
without any post-processing performs favorably against 23
state-of-the-art approaches. The source code will be publicly available at https://github.com/lartpang/MINet.

Large

Abstract

Image

GT

MINet

AFNet

CPD

PAGR

Figure 1. Several visual examples with size-varying objects and
their predictions generated by the proposed MINet, AFNet [9],
CPD [41] and PAGR [53] methods.

ods, which are limited by the absence of necessary detailed
information owing to the repeated sub-sampling, have difficulty in consistently and accurately segmenting salient objects of different scales (Fig. 1). In addition, on account of
the inherent localization of convolution operation and the
pixel-level characteristics of the cross entropy function, it is
difficult to achieve uniform highlighting of objects.
For the first problem, the main solution of the existing
methods is to layer-by-layer integrate shallower features.
Some methods [23, 53, 4, 9, 40, 41, 27, 37] connect the
features at the corresponding level in the encoder to the decoder via the transport layer (Fig. 2(a, c, e)). The singlelevel features can only characterize the scale-specific information. In the top-down pathway, the representation capability of details in shallow features is weakened due to the
continuous accumulation of the deeper features. To utilize
the multi-level features, some approaches [51, 13, 34] combine the features from multiple layers in a fully-connected
manner or a heuristic style (Fig. 2(b, f, g)). However, integrating excessive features and lacking a balance between
different resolutions easily lead to high computational cost,
plenty of noise and fusion difficulties, thereby disturbing
the subsequent information recovery in the top-down pathway. Moreover, the atrous spatial pyramid pooling module

9413

