Texture and Shape biased Two-Stream Networks
for Clothing Classification and Attribute Recognition
Yuwei Zhang1 , Peng Zhang1 , Chun Yuan 2,3* , and Zhi Wang 2,3*
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Clothes category classification and attribute recognition
have achieved distinguished success with the development
of deep learning. People have found that landmark detection plays a positive role in these tasks. However, little research is committed to analyzing these tasks from the
perspective of clothing attributes. In our work, we explore
the usefulness of landmarks and find that landmarks can
assist in extracting shape features; and using landmarks
for joint learning can increase classification and recognition accuracy effectively. We also find that texture features have an impelling effect on these tasks and that the
pre-trained ImageNet model has good performance in extracting texture features. To this end, we propose to use
two streams to enhance the extraction of shape and texture, respectively. In particular, this paper proposes a simple implementation, Texture and Shape biased Fashion Networks (TS-FashionNet). Comprehensive and rich experiments demonstrate our discoveries and the effectiveness of
our model. We improve the top-3 classification accuracy
by 0.83% and improve the top-3 attribute recognition recall
rate by 1.39% compared to the state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, fashion image analysis has a rapid expansion in both academy and industry, with its growing application in e-commerce and online shopping. Many studies are committed to clothes recognition ([25], [1], [32]),
retrieval ([9], [8], [18]), recommendation ([15], [19]) and
fashion trend prediction ([1], [28]). The development of efficient deep learning methods and availability of large-scale
rich-annotated fashion dataset are also stupendous impetus
* Corresponding authors. ({yuanc,wangzhi}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

to the progress of these works. All these make various fashion works that seemed impossible to achieve come true.
Among them, we target at clothing classification and attribute recognition, which are fundemental components for
other tasks and can generally bring improvements to them
(e.g., clothing recommendation).
Previous works are aware of the importance of landmark
detection to the clothes classification and attribute recognition and have achieved particular success. For example,
Liu et al. [25] annotated the fashion dataset with landmark
information and proposed a model that could predict the
landmarks and attributes simultaneously; Wang et al. [32]
introduced Bidirectional Convolutional Recurrent Neural
Networks (BCRNNs) for the use of the fashion grammars (i.e., kinematics grammar and symmetry grammar) to
detect landmarks and used landmark-aware attention and
category-driven attention to enhance clothing recognition.
However, these studies have neglected the importance of
joint texture and shape features in fashion classification and
recognition.
Though the idea of using both texture and shape features is straightforward, it is challenging when we incorporate them into real-world tasks, including fashion classification and recognition. In our experiments, we have tried to
combine the two features by adding a branch to an existing
model, which learns jointly with the landmark on an ImageNet pre-trained single-stream network and fine-tune it on
the DeepFashion-C [25] dataset. However, the experimental results show that the accuracy of attribute recognition has
not been improved. It is still challenging to design proper
network architecture to integrate texture and shape features.
To make full use of these two features, we use measurement studies to find the factors that affect the accuracies
when integrating the features into different models. Based
on our measurement insights, we design our Texture and
Shape biased Two-Stream Networks that use joint texture

13538

