Background Data Resampling for Outlier-Aware Classification
Yi Li
Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
{yil898,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of learning an image classifier that allows
detection of out-of-distribution (OOD) examples, with the
help of auxiliary background datasets, is studied. While
training with background has been shown to improve OOD
detection performance, the optimal choice of such dataset
remains an open question, and challenges of data imbalance and computational complexity make it a potentially
inefficient or even impractical solution. Targeted at balancing between efficiency and detection quality, a dataset
resampling approach is proposed for obtaining a compact
yet representative set of background data points. The resampling algorithm takes inspiration from prior work on
hard negative mining, performing an iterative adversarial weighting on the background examples and using the
learned weights to obtain the subset of desired size. Experiments on different datasets, model architectures and training strategies validate the universal effectiveness and efficiency of adversarially resampled background data. Code
is available at https://github.com/JerryYLi/
bg-resample-ood.

1. Introduction
While modern deep neural networks (DNN) achieve or
surpass human-level accuracy on image recognition tasks,
they are also notorious for producing overconfident decisions on misclassified examples [11, 32], or even inputs that
do not belong to any training class [26, 2]. This is problematic for many applications where a) inputs may come from
a different distribution than the training data, and b) reliability of prediction is an important concern. Ideally, DNNs
should be able to discriminate “outliers” from regular test
data (from the training distribution), i.e. to detect out-ofdistribution (OOD) examples [13].
Recently, various approaches have been proposed to address OOD detection in the context of DNNs that output class probabilities from a softmax layer. Most of this
work focuses on improved training through input preprocessing and/or additional loss functions [19, 24, 31, 6, 34].
A less explored alternative is to introduce auxiliary background data, sampled outside the training set, for which

the classifier is forced to produce low-confidence outputs
[22, 7, 14]. This has been proved effective, substantially
improving OOD detection quality with no training enhancements other than application of a simple uniformity loss to
the background data. On the other hand, a large background
dataset, often tens of times the size of the in-distribution
(ID) training set, is required. This implies non-trivial increases in storage space and time complexity.
In this work, we consider the problem of optimally compressing a background dataset for OOD purposes. The goal
is to, starting from a large pool of background data, identify
a compact subset of similar OOD detection performance,
i.e. such that a model trained on the subset has identical
OOD performance to one trained on all the data. The tradeoffs involved in the selection of a good background dataset
are illustrated in Figure 1, where orange points represent the
ID dataset, open circles the pool of background data, and
gray examples the selected subset of OOD examples (OOD
dataset). Also shown as a shaded area is the decision rule
implemented by the optimal classifier for discrimination of
ID vs. OOD data (dark for ID, light for OOD).
When the OOD dataset is small, as in Figure 1a, training is efficient but leads to an inaccurate classifier, since
the OOD dataset only covers a small region of background
space. High classifier accuracy can be achieved with a very
large OOD dataset, as shown in Figure 1b, but this inefficient in computation and memory. A final possibility is
to start from the large pool of background data and sample
a subset of examples. The simplest form of sampling, illustrated in Figure 1c, is to choose samples independently,
using a uniform distribution over the background pool. This
is likely better than the approach of (b) but still suboptimal
in terms of classifier accuracy.
In this work, we seek to develop a sampling strategy
that achieves the optimal trade-off between efficiency and
OOD detection accuracy. For this, we draw inspiration
from hard negative mining in the object detection literature
[8, 10], treating OOD detection as a binary classification
problem with extremely imbalanced positive (ID) vs. negative (OOD) classes. In particular, we propose a dataset
resampling scheme that aims to selecting challenging back-

13218

