Cross-domain Face Presentation Attack Detection via Multi-domain
Disentangled Representation Learning

1

Guoqing Wang1,2 , Hu Han1,3,∗, Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China,
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
guoqing.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {hanhu, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Face presentation attack detection (PAD) has been an
urgent problem to be solved in the face recognition systems. Conventional approaches usually assume the testing
and training are within the same domain; as a result, they
may not generalize well into unseen scenarios because the
representations learned for PAD may overfit to the subjects
in the training set. In light of this, we propose an efficient
disentangled representation learning for cross-domain face
PAD. Our approach consists of disentangled representation
learning (DR-Net) and multi-domain learning (MD-Net).
DR-Net learns a pair of encoders via generative models
that can disentangle PAD informative features from subject discriminative features. The disentangled features from
different domains are fed to MD-Net which learns domainindependent features for the final cross-domain face PAD
task. Extensive experiments on several public datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach for crossdomain PAD.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) is being widely used in a variety of
applications such as smartphone unlock, access control and
pay-with-face. The easiness of obtaining a genuine user’s
face image brings threat to these FR systems, which can be
used to presentation attacks (PAs), e.g., photo, video replay,
or 3D facial mask. In addition, advances in deep learning have significantly promoted the development of face
synthesis technologies like deep facial manipulation attacks
[42], feasible using Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) [22],
or Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [14].
Many approaches have been proposed to tackle various
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. 2D visualization of the features learned by ResNet-18
[18] for live vs. spoof classification on CASIA [52]. We observe
that the testing face features may not gather together as expected
in terms of live and spoof; instead they tend to gather together
in terms of individual subjects. This suggests that the features
learned for PAD are not disentangled from the features for subject classification very well. We believe this is one of the reasons
that leads to poor generalization ability of PAD models under new
application scenarios.

face PAs, which assume that there are inherent disparities
between live and spoof faces, such as texture in color space
[4, 6], image distortion [48], temporal variation [39] or deep
semantic features [50, 36]. Although these methods show
promising performance under intra-database testing scenarios, their performance dramatically degrades when used
in new application scenario (cross-domain PAD). To improve the robustness of PAD under unseen scenarios, some
scenario-invariant auxiliary information (such as face depth
and heart rhythm) has been exploited for distinguishing between live and spoof faces [2, 30, 29]. The robustness of

6678

