Noise-Aware Fully Webly Supervised Object Detection
Yunhang Shen1 , Rongrong Ji1∗, Zhiwei Chen1 , Xiaopeng Hong2 ,
Feng Zheng3 , Jianzhuang Liu4 , Mingliang Xu5 , Qi Tian4
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, 5 Zhengzhou University
shenyunhang01@gmail.com, rrj@xmu.edu.cn, zhiweichen@stu.xmu.edu.cn
hongxiaopeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, zhengf@sustech.edu.cn, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com
iexumingliang@zzu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
We investigate the emerging task of learning object detectors with sole image-level labels on the web without requiring any other supervision like precise annotations or
additional images from well-annotated benchmark datasets.
Such a task, termed as fully webly supervised object detection, is extremely challenging, since image-level labels on
the web are always noisy, leading to poor performance of
the learned detectors. In this work, we propose an end-toend framework to jointly learn webly supervised detectors
and reduce the negative impact of noisy labels. Such noise is
heterogeneous, which is further categorized into two types,
namely background noise and foreground noise. Regarding
the background noise, we propose a residual learning structure incorporated with weakly supervised detection, which
decomposes background noise and models clean data. To
explicitly learn the residual feature between clean data and
noisy labels, we further propose a spatially-sensitive entropy criterion, which exploits the conditional distribution
of detection results to estimate the confidence of background
categories being noise. Regarding the foreground noise,
a bagging-mixup learning is introduced, which suppresses
foreground noisy signals from incorrectly labelled images,
whilst maintaining the diversity of training data. We evaluate the proposed approach on popular benchmark datasets
by training detectors on web images, which are retrieved by
the corresponding category tags from photo-sharing sites.
Extensive experiments show that our method achieves significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods 1 .

∗ Corresponding author.
1 Code and dataset are available at:
shenyunhang/NA-fWebSOD.

https://github.com/

Figure 1: The overall flowchart of fully webly supervised
object detection.

1. Introduction
Most object detection methods [18, 40, 33, 39, 14, 13,
15] rely on strong supervision, i.e., ground-truth bounding
boxes, from well-annotated datasets [12, 32] for training.
Methods such as Mask R-CNN [22] even leverage finegrained pixel-level masks for supervision. Clearly, collecting annotations of bounding boxes or pixel-level masks is
labor-expensive, which results in a serious limitation of existing methods in terms of both the category diversity and
label quantity. It is infeasible to learn an object detector to
effectively handle numerous object categories using such a
setting. One way to reduce the requirement of strong supervision is the Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD),
which only relies on manual image-level annotations for
training [37, 6, 50, 56, 45, 44]. However, for applications
needing very large-scale image sets and categories, imagelevel annotations still require enormous human effort. In
contrast, along with the popularity of photo-sharing sites

11326

