Weakly-Supervised Mesh-Convolutional Hand Reconstruction in the Wild
Dominik Kulon1, 3
Riza Alp Güler 1, 3
Iasonas Kokkinos 3
Michael Bronstein 1, 2, 4 Stefanos Zafeiriou 1, 3
1
Imperial College London 2 USI Lugano 3 Ariel AI 4 Twitter
{d.kulon17, r.guler, m.bronstein, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Cropped Input Image

iasonas@arielai.com

Predicted Mesh

ResNet-50

Latent
Vector

Generated Ground Truth

Predicted Landmarks

Mesh
Loss

Spatial Mesh Convolutional
Decoder

Iterative
Model Fitting

Figure 1: We propose an approach for end-to-end neural network training with mesh supervision that is obtained through an
automated data collection method. We process a large collection of YouTube videos and analyze them with 2D hand keypoint
detector followed by parametric model fitting (right side). The fitting results are used as a supervisory signal (‘mesh loss’) for
a feed-forward network with a mesh convolutional decoder tasked with recovering a 3D hand mesh at its output (left side).

Abstract
We introduce a simple and effective network architecture for monocular 3D hand pose estimation consisting of
an image encoder followed by a mesh convolutional decoder that is trained through a direct 3D hand mesh reconstruction loss. We train our network by gathering a largescale dataset of hand action in YouTube videos and use it
as a source of weak supervision. Our weakly-supervised
mesh convolutions-based system largely outperforms stateof-the-art methods, even halving the errors on the in the
wild benchmark. The dataset and additional resources are
available at https://arielai.com/mesh_hands.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D hand reconstruction can facilitate a broad
array of applications in human-computer interaction, augmented reality, virtual telepresence, or sign language recognition. Still, the current state-of-the-art methods do not always generalize to samples captured in a non-laboratory
environment. Our work is aimed at operating in the wild,
and is therefore trained primarily on a large-scale dataset of
hand action images gathered from YouTube videos; at the
same time our system largely outperforms the current state-

of-the-art as evaluated on public benchmarks.
Even though our method can deliver a dense hand mesh,
we outperform systems that try to solve a more narrow task
of estimating coordinates of a sparse set of keypoints usually corresponding to hand joints and fingertips. The standard approach is to regress heatmaps of 2D landmarks and
find a matching 3D pose [62, 40, 37]. More recent works,
that also focus on full-blown mesh reconstruction, rely on
fitting deformable models to estimated landmarks, effectively exploiting a prior distribution in 3D shape space to
perform 3D reconstruction [5, 60, 2, 20]. Such models are
either parameterized by angles of rotation and weights of a
linear deformation function [44] or latent features learned
from data [17, 27]. We follow the latter approaches, which
have proven to be the most promising, but we substantially
improve their accuracy and robustness.
Our first key contribution is a weakly-supervised training method for 3D mesh reconstruction. We introduce a
fast and accurate method for dataset generation from unlabeled images, that relies on fitting a hand model to 2D
keypoint detections while respecting a prior on rotation angles. Our data generation algorithm processes a sequence
of YouTube videos, generating a curated dataset of images
with 3D hand meshes. We have selected a filtered subset
of 50,000 training annotations comprising hundreds of subjects performing a wide variety of tasks.
14990

