Deep Parametric Shape Predictions using Distance Fields
Dmitriy Smirnov1

Matthew Fisher2 Vladimir G. Kim2
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Richard Zhang2 Justin Solomon1
2
Adobe Research
oversampled

Abstract

undersampled

Chamfer

Many tasks in graphics and vision demand machinery
for converting shapes into consistent representations with
sparse sets of parameters; these representations facilitate
rendering, editing, and storage. When the source data is
noisy or ambiguous, however, artists and engineers often
manually construct such representations, a tedious and potentially time-consuming process. While advances in deep
learning have been successfully applied to noisy geometric
data, the task of generating parametric shapes has so far
been difficult for these methods. Hence, we propose a new
framework for predicting parametric shape primitives using
deep learning. We use distance fields to transition between
shape parameters like control points and input data on a
pixel grid. We demonstrate efficacy on 2D and 3D tasks,
including font vectorization and surface abstraction.

1. Introduction
The creation, modification, and rendering of parametric
shapes, such as in vector graphics, is a fundamental problem
of interest to engineers, artists, animators, and designers.
Such representations offer distinct advantages. By expressing shapes as collections of primitives, we can easily apply transformations and render at arbitrary resolution while
storing only a sparse representation. Moreover, generating
parametric representations that are consistent across inputs
enables us to learn common underlying structure and estimate correspondences between shapes, facilitating tools for
retrieval, exploration, style/structure transfer, and so on.
It is often useful to generate parametric models from
data that do not directly correspond to the target geometry
and contain imperfections or missing parts. This can be
an artifact of noise, corruption, or human-generated input;
often, an artist intends to create a precise geometric object
but produces one that is “sketchy” and ambiguous. Hence,
we turn to machine learning methods, which have shown
success in inferring structure from noisy data.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve stateof-the-art results in vision tasks such as image classification [22], segmentation [25], and image-to-image translation [19]. CNNs, however, operate on raster representations.

Chamfer

uniform

Ψsurf

Ψalign

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Drawbacks of Chamfer distance (above) fixed by
our losses (below). In (a), sampling uniformly in the parameter space of a Bèzier curve (orange) yields oversampling
at the high-curvature area, resulting in a low Chamfer distance to the segments (blue). Our method yields a spatially
uniform representation. In (b), two sets of nearly-orthogonal
line segments have near-zero Chamfer distance despite misaligned normals. We explicitly measure normal alignment.
Grid structure is fundamentally built into convolution as a
mechanism for information to travel between network layers.
This structure is leveraged to optimize GPU performance.
Recent deep learning pipelines that output vector shape primitives have been significantly less successful than pipelines
for analogous tasks on raster images or voxelized volumes.
A challenge in applying deep learning to parametric geometry is the combination of Eulerian and Lagrangian representations. CNNs process data in an Eulerian fashion,
applying fixed operations to a dense grid; Eulerian shape
representations like indicator functions come as values on a
fixed grid. Parametric shapes, on the other hand, use sparse
sets of parameters like control points to express geometry. In
contrast to stationary Eulerian grids, this Lagrangian representation moves with the shape. Mediating between Eulerian
and Lagrangian geometry is key to any learning pipeline for
the problems above, a task we consider in detail.
We propose a learning framework for predicting parametric shapes, addressing the aforementioned issues. By analytically computing a distance field to the primitives during training, we formulate an Eulerian version of Chamfer distance, a
common metric for geometric similarity [41, 12, 24, 17]. Our
metric does not require samples from the predicted or target
shapes, eliminating artifacts that emerge due to nonuniform
sampling. Additionally, our distance field enables alternative loss functions that are sensitive to specific geometric
qualities like alignment. We illustrate the advantages of our
1561

