Joint Graph-based Depth Refinement and Normal Estimation
Mattia Rossi* , Mireille El Gheche* , Andreas Kuhn† , Pascal Frossard*
*

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, † Sony Europe B.V.

Abstract
Depth estimation is an essential component in understanding the 3D geometry of a scene, with numerous applications in urban and indoor settings. These scenarios are
characterized by a prevalence of human made structures,
which in most of the cases are either inherently piece-wise
planar or can be approximated as such. With these settings in mind, we devise a novel depth refinement framework that aims at recovering the underlying piece-wise planarity of those inverse depth maps associated to piece-wise
planar scenes. We formulate this task as an optimization
problem involving a data fidelity term, which minimizes the
distance to the noisy and possibly incomplete input inverse
depth map, as well as a regularization, which enforces a
piece-wise planar solution. As for the regularization term,
we model the inverse depth map pixels as the nodes of a
weighted graph, with the weight of the edge between two
pixels capturing the likelihood that they belong to the same
plane in the scene. The proposed regularization fits a plane
at each pixel automatically, avoiding any a priori estimation of the scene planes, and enforces that strongly connected pixels are assigned to the same plane. The resulting
optimization problem is solved efficiently with the ADAM
solver. Extensive tests show that our method leads to a significant improvement in depth refinement, both visually and
numerically, with respect to state-of-the-art algorithms on
the Middlebury, KITTI and ETH3D multi-view datasets.

1. Introduction
The accurate recovery of depth information in a scene
represents a fundamental step for many applications, ranging from 3D imaging to the enhancement of machine vision systems and autonomous navigation. Typically, dense
depth estimation is implemented either using active devices such as Time-Of-Flight cameras, or via dense stereo
matching methods that rely on two [41, 13, 38, 2] or more
[9, 15, 10, 32, 14, 40] images of the same scene to compute
its geometry. Active methods suffer from noisy measurements, possibly caused by light interference or multiple reflections, therefore they can benefit from a post-processing

step to refine the depth map. Similarly, dense stereo matching methods have a limited performance in untextured areas, where the matching becomes ambiguous, or in the presence of occlusions. Therefore, a stereo matching pipeline
typically includes a refinement step to fill the missing depth
map areas and remove the noise.
In general, the refinement step is guided by the image associated to the measured or estimated depth map. The depth
refinement literature mostly focuses on enforcing some kind
of first order smoothness among the depth map pixels, possibly avoiding smoothing across the edges of the guide image, which may correspond to object boundaries [1, 40, 37].
Although depth maps are typically piece-wise smooth, first
order smoothness is a very general assumptions, which does
not exploit the geometrical simplicity of most 3D scenes.
Based on the observation that most human made environments are characterized by planar surfaces, some authors
propose to enforce second order smoothness by computing
a set of possible planar surfaces a priori and assigning each
depth map pixel to one of them [24]. Unfortunately, this refinement strategy imposes to select a finite number of plane
candidates a priori, which may not be optimal in practice
and lead to reduced performance.
In this article we propose a depth map refinement framework, which promotes a piece-wise planar arrangement of
scenes without any a priori knowledge of the planar surfaces
in the scenes themselves. We cast the depth refinement
problem into the optimization of a cost function involving
a data fidelity term and a regularization. The former penalizes those solutions deviating from the input depth map in
areas where the depth is considered to be reliable, whereas
the latter promotes depth maps corresponding to piece-wise
planar surfaces. In particular, our regularization models the
depth map pixels as the nodes of a weighted graph, where
the weight of the edge between two pixels captures the likelihood that their corresponding points in the 3D scene belong to the same planar surface.
Our contribution is twofold. On the one hand, we propose a graph-based regularization for depth refinement that
promotes the reconstruction of piece-wise planar scenes explicitly. Moreover, thanks to its underneath graph, our regularization is flexible enough to handle non fully piece-wise

12154

