Wish You Were Here: Context-Aware Human Generation
Oran Gafni
Facebook AI Research

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel-Aviv University

oran@fb.com

wolf@fb.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. The “wish you were here” application. Given an image with one or more persons (a), and an optional bounding box indicating
where to add a new person (b), the method generates the pose of the new person (c). Then, given the appearance information of the target
person (d), the method renders a new image (e) with that person.

Abstract
We present a novel method for inserting objects, specifically humans, into existing images, such that they blend
in a photorealistic manner, while respecting the semantic
context of the scene. Our method involves three subnetworks: the first generates the semantic map of the new person, given the pose of the other persons in the scene and an
optional bounding box specification. The second network
renders the pixels of the novel person and its blending mask,
based on specifications in the form of multiple appearance
components. A third network refines the generated face in
order to match those of the target person. Our experiments
present convincing high-resolution outputs in this novel and
challenging application domain. In addition, the three networks are evaluated individually, demonstrating for example, state of the art results in pose transfer benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The field of image generation has been rapidly progressing in recent years due to the advent of GANs, as well as
the introduction of sophisticated architectures and training
methods. However, the generation is either done while giving the algorithm an “artistic freedom” to generate attractive

images, or while specifying concrete constraints such as an
approximate drawing, or desired keypoints.
In other contributions, there is a set of semantic specifications, such as in image generation based on scene graphs,
or on free text, yet these are not demonstrated to generate high-fidelity human images. What seems to be missing, is the middle ground of the two: a method that allows
some freedom, while requiring adherence to high-level constraints that arise from the image context.
In our work, the generated image has to comply with the
soft requirement to have a coherent composition. Specifically, we generate a human figure that fits into the existing
scene. Unlike previous work in the domain of human placement, we do not require a driving pose or a semantic map
to render a novel person, but rather, we generate a semantic
map independently, such that it is suitable to the image context. In addition, we provide rich control over the rendering
aspects, enabling additional applications, such as individual component replacement and sketching a photorealistic
person. Moreover, we provide for significantly higher resolution results (512 × 512 vs. a resolution of 176 × 256
or 64 × 128 in the leading pose transfer benchmarks), over
images with substantial pose variation.
The application domain we focus on is the insertion of
a target person into an image that contains other people.
This is a challenging application domain, since it is easy to
17840

