Learning Unsupervised Hierarchical Part Decomposition of 3D Objects
from a Single RGB Image
Despoina Paschalidou1,3,5 Luc van Gool3,4,5 Andreas Geiger1,2,5
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
2
University of Tübingen 3 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich 4 KU Leuven
5
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Humans perceive the 3D world as a set of distinct objects that are characterized by various low-level (geometry,
reflectance) and high-level (connectivity, adjacency, symmetry) properties. Recent methods based on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) demonstrated impressive progress
in 3D reconstruction, even when using a single 2D image
as input. However, the majority of these methods focuses on
recovering the local 3D geometry of an object without considering its part-based decomposition or relations between
parts. We address this challenging problem by proposing a
novel formulation that allows to jointly recover the geometry of a 3D object as a set of primitives as well as their
latent hierarchical structure without part-level supervision.
Our model recovers the higher level structural decomposition of various objects in the form of a binary tree of primitives, where simple parts are represented with fewer primitives and more complex parts are modeled with more components. Our experiments on the ShapeNet and D-FAUST
datasets demonstrate that considering the organization of
parts indeed facilitates reasoning about 3D geometry.

1. Introduction
Within the first year of their life, humans develop a
common-sense understanding of the physical behavior of
the world [2]. This understanding relies heavily on the ability to properly reason about the arrangement of objects in
a scene. Early works in cognitive science [21, 3, 27] stipulate that the human visual system perceives objects as a hierarchical decomposition of parts. Interestingly, while this
seems to be a fairly easy task for the human brain, computer vision algorithms struggle to form such a high-level
reasoning, particularly in the absence of supervision.
The structure of a scene is tightly related to the inherent
hierarchical organization of its parts. At a coarse level, a

Figure 1: Hierarchical Part Decomposition. We consider
the problem of learning structure-aware representations that
go beyond part-level geometry and focus on part-level relationships. Here, we show our reconstruction as an unbalanced binary tree of primitives, given a single RGB image
as input. Note that our model does not require any supervision on object parts or the hierarchical structure of the 3D
object. We show that our representation is able to model different parts of an object with different levels of abstraction,
leading to improved reconstruction quality.
scene can be decomposed into objects and at a finer level
each object can be represented with parts and these parts
with finer parts. Structure-aware representations go beyond
part-level geometry and focus on global relationships between objects and object parts. In this work, we propose a
structure-aware representation that considers part relationships (Fig. 1) and models object parts with multiple levels of abstraction, namely geometrically complex parts are
modeled with more components and simple parts are modeled with fewer components. Such a multi-scale representation can be efficiently stored at the required level of detail,
namely with less parameters (Fig. 2).
11060

