Bi-directional Relationship Inferring Network for Referring Image Segmentation
Zhiwei Hu1†, Guang Feng1†, Jiayu Sun1 , Lihe Zhang1‡, Huchuan Lu1,2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
hzw950822@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {fengguang.gg, jiayusun666}@gmail.com
{zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

Referring Expression:
Linguistic Feature

Most existing methods do not explicitly formulate the
mutual guidance between vision and language. In this work,
we propose a bi-directional relationship inferring network
(BRINet) to model the dependencies of cross-modal information. In detail, the vision-guided linguistic attention is
used to learn the adaptive linguistic context corresponding to each visual region. Combining with the languageguided visual attention, a bi-directional cross-modal attention module (BCAM) is built to learn the relationship between multi-modal features. Thus, the ultimate semantic
context of the target object and referring expression can be
represented accurately and consistently. Moreover, a gated
bi-directional fusion module (GBFM) is designed to integrate the multi-level features where a gate function is used
to guide the bi-directional flow of multi-level information.
Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms other state-ofthe-art methods under different evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation is a challenging task that
has emerged in recent years. It helps to understand the relationship between language and vision. Unlike the simplicity of traditional semantic segmentation whose each pixel
needs to be assigned a specific semantic category label, referring image segmentation requires a deeper understanding
of image. In order to segment the region that best matches the referring expression, referring image segmentation
needs to take into account appearance attributes, actions, spatial relationships, as well as some other cues contained in
the expression. For example, if the expression is ‘A man
sitting on the right is wearing a black suit’, we need an algorithm that not only distinguishes all the instances in the
image, but also locates the most suitable one, according to
† Equal Contribution
‡ Corresponding Author

Pixel-adaptive Language
Representation
Vision-Guided
Linguistic Attention

bear on the left

Language-Guided
Visual Attention

Input Image

Visual Feature

Referring Visual
Representation

Figure 1: Bi-directional relationship inferring network. The
blue dotted line represents the relationship modeling between each
word. The green solid line represents the bi-directional interaction
between language and vision, and the purple solid line represents
the internal relationship of visual features. Given a referring expression and a query image, the bi-directional cross-modal attention module constructs the cross-modal relationship between linguistic and visual information, which makes the network pay more
attention to the target object pointed by the referring expression.

the semantic meaning of the sentence.
Recently, the rapid development of convolutional neural
network (CNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN) has
greatly promoted the research progress of both computer
vision and natural language processing. The most pervasive solution of referring image segmentation is to extract
the visual and linguistic features by the CNN and the RNN, respectively. These features are then fused to generate the final pixel-wise segmentation mask. Some methods [14, 23, 20, 28] directly concatenate the two kinds of
features and then infer the target object depending on the
network itself. Due to the powerful learning ability of neural network, these methods indeed achieve some reasonable performance. However, they implicitly assume that
each word contributes equally to each visual region without considering the interaction between linguistic and visual features, which often results in some inaccurate target
localization. Later, some works either brutally model the
relationships between the vision-word mixed features in a
fully-connected manner [38] or only unidirectionally utilize
the linguistic attention to formulate the cross-modal rela-

4424

