Deep Degradation Prior for Low-quality Image Classification
Yang Wang1 , Yang Cao1∗, Zheng-Jun Zha1†, Jing Zhang2 , Zhiwei Xiong1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
UBTECH Sydney Artificial Intelligence Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
ywang120@mail.ustc.edu.cn, forrest,zhazj,zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
State-of-the-art image classification algorithms building
upon convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are commonly
trained on large annotated datasets of high-quality images.
When applied to low-quality images, they will suffer a significant degradation in performance, since the structural
and statistical properties of pixels in the neighborhood are
obstructed by image degradation. To address this problem, this paper proposes a novel deep degradation prior for
low-quality image classification. It is based on statistical
observations that, in the deep representation space, image
patches with structural similarity have uniform distribution
even if they come from different images, and the distributions of corresponding patches in low- and high-quality
images have uniform margins under the same degradation
condition. Therefore, we propose a feature de-drifting module (FDM) to learn the mapping relationship between deep
representations of low- and high- quality images, and leverage it as a deep degradation prior (DDP) for low-quality
image classification. Since the statistical properties are independent to image content, deep degradation prior can be
learned on a training set of limited images without supervision of semantic labels and served in a form of “pluggingin” module of the existing classification networks to improve their performance on degraded images. Evaluations
on the benchmark dataset ImageNet-C demonstrate that our
proposed DDP can improve the accuracy of the pre-trained
network model by more than 20% under various degradation conditions. Even under the extreme setting that only
10 images from CUB-C dataset are used for the training
of DDP, our method improves the accuracy of VGG16 on
ImageNet-C from 37% to 55%.

1. Introduction
Recent years witness remarkable progresses of image
classification task [46, 39], mainly with deep convolu∗ co-first author. † Corresponding author.

tional neural network trained on large-scale datasets like
ImageNet [8]. Since the collected images of the existing
datasets are usually free of degradation, such as low visibility [41, 12, 34], color cast [42, 2], and overexposure, evaluation of standard neural network-based methods for image
classification shows a significant drop in classification accuracy when applied to low-quality images [13].
In practice, one solution for this problem is to firstly improve the visibility of degraded images by image enhancement methods, and then to perform image classification,
called two-stage methods in this paper [7, 17, 18]. However,
the main reason why image degradation affects image classification is that the structural and statistical properties of
pixels in the neighborhood are obstructed by image degradation. Since the existing image enhancement methods are
devised to achieve pleasing visual effect, they cannot guarantee that the regions with similar structure in the image
can be enhanced uniformly, leading to uncovered and incomplete feature representation for classification. A typical
example is shown in Figure 1. As can be seen, there is still a
margin between the feature distributions of enhanced image
and clear image.
Another feasible solution for low-quality image classification is to transform it into a domain adaptation problem
and to match the degraded and clear images with adversarial learning or kernelized training. This method is based on
the assumption that the marginal distributions of low- and
high- quality images can be aligned in the learned feature
space by a deep network. Therefore, after decreasing the divergence between the marginal distributions in the learned
feature space, the classifier trained with high-quality images
tends to perform well on the low-quality images.
While promising, most existing domain adaptation approaches require either complex neural network architectures [3, 27, 14] or fine-tuning the target domain [31, 21,
26]. Different from these methods, this paper proposes
to learn a transferrable mapping relationship between deep
representations of low- and high- quality images, and leverage it as a deep degradation prior (DDP) for image classifier. This method is based on statistical observations that, i)

11049

