Siam R-CNN: Visual Tracking by Re-Detection
Paul Voigtlaender1
Jonathon Luiten1,2,†
1
RWTH Aachen University

Philip H.S. Torr2
Bastian Leibe1
2
University of Oxford

{voigtlaender,luiten,leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

Visual Object
Tracking
OTB2015

Abstract
We present Siam R-CNN, a Siamese re-detection architecture which unleashes the full power of two-stage object detection approaches for visual object tracking. We
combine this with a novel tracklet-based dynamic programming algorithm, which takes advantage of re-detections of
both the first-frame template and previous-frame predictions, to model the full history of both the object to be
tracked and potential distractor objects. This enables our
approach to make better tracking decisions, as well as to
re-detect tracked objects after long occlusion. Finally, we
propose a novel hard example mining strategy to improve
Siam R-CNN’s robustness to similar looking objects. Siam
R-CNN achieves the current best performance on ten tracking benchmarks, with especially strong results for long-term
tracking. We make our code and models available at www.
vision.rwth-aachen.de/page/siamrcnn.

1. Introduction
We approach Visual Object Tracking using the paradigm
of Tracking by Re-Detection. We present a powerful novel
re-detector, Siam R-CNN, an adaptation of Faster R-CNN
[54] with a Siamese architecture, which re-detects a template object anywhere in an image by determining if a region proposal is the same object as a template region, and
regressing the bounding box for this object. Siam R-CNN is
robust against changes in object size and aspect ratio as the
proposals are aligned to the same size, which is in contrast
to the popular cross-correlation-based methods [38].
Tracking by re-detection has a long history, reaching
back to the seminal work of Avidan [1] and Grabner et
al. [21]. Re-detection is challenging due to the existence
of distractor objects that are very similar to the template object. In the past, the problem of distractors has mainly been
approached by strong spatial priors from previous predictions [4, 38, 37], or by online adaptation [1, 21, 2, 56, 23,
57, 32]. Both of these strategies are prone to drift.
We instead approach the problem of distractors by making two novel contributions beyond our Siam R-CNN re† Work performed both while at the RWTH Aachen University and on
a research visit at the University of Oxford.

phst@robots.ox.ac.uk

Long Term Visual
Object Tracking
LTB35

Video Object
Segmentation
DAVIS 2016/2017

Ours
Best Competing Method
Left: UPDT, Center: SiamRPN++, Right: SiamMask

Ground
Truth

Figure 1: Example results of Siam R-CNN on 3 different
tracking tasks where it obtains new state-of-the-art results.
detector design. Firstly we introduce a novel hard example
mining procedure which trains our re-detector specifically
for difficult distractors. Secondly we propose a novel Tracklet Dynamic Programming Algorithm (TDPA) which simultaneously tracks all potential objects, including distractor
objects, by re-detecting all object candidate boxes from the
previous frame, and grouping boxes over time into tracklets
(short object tracks). It then uses dynamic programming to
select the best object in the current timestep based on the
complete history of all target object and distractor object
tracklets. By explicitly modeling the motion and interaction of all potential objects and pooling similarity information from detections grouped into tracklets, Siam R-CNN
is able to effectively perform long-term tracking, while being resistant to tracker drift, and being able to immediately
re-detect objects after disappearance. Our TDPA requires
only a small set of new re-detections in each timestep, updating its tracking history iteratively online. This allows
Siam R-CNN to run at 4.7 frames per second (FPS) and its

6578

