Robust Design of Deep Neural Networks against Adversarial Attacks based on
Lyapunov Theory
Arash Rahnama
Modzy
arash.rahnama@modzy.com

Andre T. Nguyen
Booz Allen Hamilton
nguyen andre@bah.com

Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton
raff edward@bah.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to subtle adversarial perturbations applied to the input. These adversarial perturbations, though imperceptible, can easily mislead
the DNN. In this work, we take a control theoretic approach
to the problem of robustness in DNNs. We treat each individual layer of the DNN as a nonlinear system and use Lyapunov theory to prove stability and robustness locally. We
then proceed to prove stability and robustness globally for
the entire DNN. We develop empirically tight bounds on the
response of the output layer, or any hidden layer, to adversarial perturbations added to the input, or to any preceding
hidden layer. We show how the spectral norm of the weight
matrix for an individual layer relates to Lyapunov properties of that layer, and consequently to the local and global
stability and robustness of the DNN. Our results give new
insights into how spectral norm regularization can mitigate
the adversarial effects. Finally, we evaluate the power of our
approach on a variety of data sets and network architectures
and against some of the well-known adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
The objective of a supervised learning task for the input
u 2 Rd , and its associated target value y for a given DNN denoted by H✓ (u), where ✓ is a set of parameters to be learned
during the training, is to classify the instance u correctly
such that y = H✓ (u). Recently, the research community
has become interested in adversarial attacks, where the adversary’s goal is to introduce a small amount of engineered
perturbation ∆ 2 Rd to u, so that u0 = u + ∆, while still
maintaining its perceptual similarity to u, can deceive the
DNN into making a mistake, i.e., H✓ (u + ∆) 6= y. The adversary is usually assumed to be constrained by an `p -norm

so that ku0 uk`p  ✏, where ✏ bounds the adversaries’ freedom to alter the input. While this does not capture the full
scope of potential adversaries [4], attacks of this form have
proven difficult to prevent [32, 5, 2, 31]. While optimal defenses have been developed for simple linear models [3, 24],
the over-parameterized nature of DNNs and the complexity
of surfaces learned during training make the development of
robust solutions against the adversary difficult [14].
In this work, we use Lyapunov theory of stability and robustness of nonlinear systems to develop a new understanding of how DNNs respond to changes in their inputs, and
thus, to adversarial attacks under the `2 norm framework.
By treating each layer l in the DNN as a nonlinear system
hl , we develop a new framework which sets tight bounds on
the response of the individual layer to adversarial perturbations (maximum changes in khl (u) hl (u + ∆)k22 ) based
on the spectral norm of the weights, ⇢(Wl ), of the individual
layer. We characterize Lyapunov properties of an individual
layer and their relationship to local and global stability and
robustness of the network.
Since our analysis is based on a sequence of nonlinear
transformations hl=1,...,n , our method is the first to bound
the response to input alterations by the attack parameter ∆l
for any layer l in the DNN. For simple forward networks
(fully connected and convolutional), our results show that an
attack’s success under the `2 ball is independent of the depth
of the DNN and that the spectral norm of the weight matrix for the first and last layer of a network have the largest
effect on robustness. Our Lyapunov analysis of Residual
Blocks shows that the skip-connections of these blocks contribute to their lack of robustness against adversarial attacks
[13] and that these blocks require more restrictive Lyapunov
conditions (a tighter spectral norm regularization) for maintaining the same level of robustness. This may compromise
the DNN’s accuracy on the clean data set [34, 10]. Previous works [11, 28, 37, 8] have used a penalty on the spec18178

