Learning to Generate 3D Training Data through Hybrid Gradient
Dawei Yang1,2
1
University of Michigan

Jia Deng2
2
Princeton University

ydawei@umich.edu

jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Synthetic images rendered by graphics engines are a
promising source for training deep networks. However, it is
challenging to ensure that they can help train a network to
perform well on real images, because a graphics-based generation pipeline requires numerous design decisions such as
the selection of 3D shapes and the placement of the camera. In this work, we propose a new method that optimizes
the generation of 3D training data based on what we call
“hybrid gradient”. We parametrize the design decisions as
a real vector, and combine the approximate gradient and
the analytical gradient to obtain the hybrid gradient of the
network performance with respect to this vector. We evaluate our approach on the task of estimating surface normal,
depth or intrinsic decomposition from a single image. Experiments on standard benchmarks show that our approach
can outperform the prior state of the art on optimizing the
generation of 3D training data, particularly in terms of
computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Synthetic images rendered by graphics engines have
emerged as a promising source of training data for deep networks, especially for vision and robotics tasks that involve
perceiving 3D structures from RGB pixels [7, 66, 59, 49, 39,
63, 8, 29, 55, 47, 46, 67, 33]. A major appeal of generating
training images from computer graphics is that they have a
virtually unlimited supply and come with high-quality 3D
ground truth for free.
Despite its great promise, however, using synthetic training images from graphics poses its own challenges. One of
them is ensuring that the synthetic training images are useful for real-world tasks, in the sense that they help train a
network to perform well on real images. Ensuring this is
challenging because a graphics-based generation pipeline
requires numerous design decisions, including the selection
of 3D shapes, the composition of scene layout, the application of texture, the configuration of lighting, and the placement of the camera. These design decisions can profoundly

impact the usefulness of the generated training data, but
have largely been made manually by researchers in prior
work, potentially leading to suboptimal results.
In this paper, we address the problem of automatically
optimizing a generation pipeline of synthetic 3D training
data, with the explicit objective of improving the generalization performance of a trained deep network on real images.
One idea is black-box optimization: we try a particular
configuration of the pipeline, use the pipeline to generate
training images, train a deep network on these images, and
evaluate the network on a validation set of real images. We
can treat the performance of the trained network as a blackbox function of the configuration of the generation pipeline,
and apply black-box optimization techniques. Recent works
[65, 50] have explored this exact direction. Yang and Deng
[65] use genetic algorithms to optimize the 3D shapes used
in the generation pipeline. In particular, they start with
a collection of simple primitive shapes such as cubes and
spheres, and evolve them through mutation and combination into complex shapes, whose fitness is determined by
the generalization performance of a trained network. They
show that the 3D shapes evolved from scratch can provide
more useful training data than manually created 3D CAD
models. Meanwhile, Ruiz et al. [50] use black box reinforcement learning algorithms to optimize the parameters
of a simulator, and shows that their approaches converge to
the optimal solution in controlled experiments and can indeed discover good sets of parameters.
The advantage of black-box optimization is that it assumes nothing about the function being optimized as long
as it can be evaluated. As a result, it can be applied to any
existing function, including advanced photorealistic renderers. On the other hand, black-box optimization is computationally expensive—knowing nothing else about the function, it needs many trials to find a reasonable update to the
current solution. In contrast, gradient-based optimization
can be much more efficient by assuming the availability of
the analytical gradient, which can be efficiently computed
and directly correspond to good updates to the current solution, but the downside is that the analytical gradient is
1779

