APQ: Joint Search for Network Architecture, Pruning and Quantization Policy
Tianzhe Wang1,2

Kuan Wang1 Han Cai1 Ji Lin1 Zhijian Liu1 Hanrui Wang1 Yujun Lin1
1
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Song Han1

Single Path One-Shot 6.81

Abstract
We present APQ, a novel design methodology for efficient deep learning deployment. Unlike previous methods
that separately optimize the neural network architecture,
pruning policy, and quantization policy, we design to optimize them in a joint manner. To deal with the larger
design space it brings, we devise to train a quantizationaware accuracy predictor that is fed to the evolutionary
search to select the best fit. Since directly training such a
predictor requires time-consuming quantization data collection, we propose to use predictor-transfer technique to
get the quantization-aware predictor: we first generate
a large dataset of hNN architecture, ImageNet accuracyi
pairs by sampling a pretrained unified once-for-all network
and doing direct evaluation; then we use these data to
train an accuracy predictor without quantization, followed
by transferring its weights to train the quantization-aware
predictor, which largely reduces the quantization data collection time. Extensive experiments on ImageNet show
the benefits of this joint design methodology: the model
searched by our method maintains the same level accuracy as ResNet34 8-bit model while saving 8× BitOps; we
achieve 2×/1.3× latency/energy saving compared to MobileNetV2+HAQ [30, 36] while obtaining the same level
accuracy; the marginal search cost of joint optimization for
a new deployment scenario outperforms separate optimizations using ProxylessNAS+AMC+HAQ [5, 12, 36] by 2.3%
accuracy while reducing orders of magnitude GPU hours
and CO2 emission with respect to the training cost.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has prevailed in many real-world applications like autonomous driving, robotics, and mobile
VR/AR, while efficiency is the key to bridge research and
deployment. Given a constrained resource budget on the
target hardware (e.g., latency, model size, and energy consumption), it requires an elaborated design of network architecture to achieve the optimal performance within the
constraint. Traditionally, the deployment of efficient deep
learning can be split into model architecture design and
model compression (pruning and quantization). Some existing works [10, 9] have shown that such a sequential pipeline
can significantly reduce the cost of existing models. Never-

11.34

DNAS

27.23

MobileNetV2 + HAQ

85.08

ProxylessNAS + AMC + HAQ

11,344

MnasNet

81,029x

APQ (Ours) 0.14
0

100

1,000

10,000

Figure 1. The illustration of marginal search cost for a upcoming
scenario measured in pounds of CO2 emission. Simply extending existing methods could still cost a considerable CO2 emission
which is not environmental-friendly.

theless, careful hyper-parameter tuning is required to obtain
optimal performance [12]. The number of hyper-parameters
grows exponentially when we consider the three stages in
the pipeline together, which will soon exceed acceptable
human labor bandwidth. To tackle the problem, recent
works have applied AutoML techniques to automate the
process. Researchers proposed Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) [44, 45, 18, 19, 2, 4] to automate the model design,
outperforming the human-designed models by a large margin. Based on a similar technique, researchers adopt reinforcement learning to compress the model by automated
pruning [12] and automated quantization [36]. However,
optimizing these three factors in separate stages will lead
to sub-optimal results: e.g., the best network architecture
for the full-precision model is not necessarily the optimal
one after pruning and quantization. Besides, this three-step
strategy also requires considerable search time and energy
consumption [32]. Therefore, we need a solution to jointly
optimize the deep learning model for a certain hardware
platform.
However, directly extending existing AutoML techniques to joint model optimization setting can be problematic. Firstly, the joint search space is cubic compared to
stage-wise search, making the search difficult. Introducing
pruning and quantization into the pipeline will also greatly
increase the total search time, as both of them require timeconsuming post-processing (e.g., fine-tuning) to get accuracy approximation [36, 39]. As shown in Fig. 1, searching for each deployment would lead to a considerable CO2
emission, which can exacerbate the greenhouse effect and
deteriorate the environment seriously. Moreover, the search
space of each step in pipeline could be entangled, and each
12078

