AugFPN: Improving Multi-scale Feature Learning for Object Detection
Chaoxu Guo1,2 Bin Fan1,4∗ Qian Zhang3 Shiming Xiang1,2 Chunhong Pan1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Horizon Robotics
4
School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
{chaoxu.guo,smxiang,chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,{bin.fan}@ieee.org, {qian01.zhang}@horizon.ai
Abstract
Current state-of-the-art detectors typically exploit feature pyramid to detect objects at different scales. Among
them, FPN is one of the representative works that build a
feature pyramid by multi-scale features summation. However, the design defects behind prevent the multi-scale features from being fully exploited. In this paper, we begin
by first analyzing the design defects of feature pyramid in
FPN, and then introduce a new feature pyramid architecture named AugFPN to address these problems. Specifically, AugFPN consists of three components: Consistent
Supervision, Residual Feature Augmentation, and Soft RoI
Selection. AugFPN narrows the semantic gaps between features of different scales before feature fusion through Consistent Supervision. In feature fusion, ratio-invariant context information is extracted by Residual Feature Augmentation to reduce the information loss of feature map at the
highest pyramid level. Finally, Soft RoI Selection is employed to learn a better RoI feature adaptively after feature fusion. By replacing FPN with AugFPN in Faster RCNN, our models achieve 2.3 and 1.6 points higher Average Precision (AP) when using ResNet50 and MobileNet-v2
as backbone respectively. Furthermore, AugFPN improves
RetinaNet by 1.6 points AP and FCOS by 0.9 points AP
when using ResNet50 as backbone. Codes are available on
https://github.com/Gus-Guo/AugFPN .

1. Introduction
With the significant advances in deep convolutional networks (ConvNets), remarkable progress has been achieved
in object detection. A number of detectors [10, 34, 9, 26, 31,
13, 22, 23, 12] have been proposed to steadily push forward
the state-of-the-art. Among these detectors, FPN [22] is a
simple and effective two-stage framework for object detection. Specifically, FPN builds a feature pyramid upon the
∗ Bin Fan is the corresponding author

Figure 1. Three design defects in feature pyramid network: 1) semantic gap between features at different levels before feature
summation, 2) information loss of the feature at the highest pyramid level, 3) heuristic RoI assignment.

inherent feature hierarchy in ConvNet by propagating the
semantically strong features from high levels into features
at lower levels.
By improving multi-scale features with strong semantics, the performance of object detection has been substantially improved. However, there exist some design defects
within the feature pyramid in FPN, which is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Basically, the feature pyramid in FPN can be formulated into three stages: (1) before feature fusion, (2) topdown feature fusion, and (3) after feature fusion. We find
that each stage has an intrinsic flaw as described in the following:
Semantic gaps between features at different levels. Before performing feature fusion, features at different levels
undergo a 1 × 1 convolution layer independently to reduce
feature channels, where the large semantic gaps between
these features are not considered. Fusing these features directly would degrade the power of multi-scale feature representation due to the inconsistent semantic information.
Information loss of the highest-level feature map. In
feature fusion, features are propagated in a top-down path
and low-level features can be improved with the stronger
semantic information from higher-level features. Neverthe-

12595

