Optical Non-Line-of-Sight Physics-based 3D Human Pose Estimation
Mariko Isogawa, Ye Yuan, Matthew O’Toole, Kris Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University
Photon measurements
Wall

Hidden
person

Frames
Estimated 3D human poses

Occluder

Imaging system

Figure 1. Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) Physics-Based 3D Human Pose Estimation. A pulsed laser and a transient sensor record the time
light takes to travel from a point on a wall to the person hidden from sight (left). Given a sequence of 3D transient measurements from an
optical NLOS system (top right), our method estimates a 3D pose sequence using a physics-based policy (bottom right).

Abstract
We describe a method for 3D human pose estimation
from transient images (i.e., a 3D spatio-temporal histogram
of photons) acquired by an optical non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
imaging system. Our method can perceive 3D human pose
by ‘looking around corners’ through the use of light indirectly reflected by the environment. We bring together
a diverse set of technologies from NLOS imaging, human
pose estimation and deep reinforcement learning to construct an end-to-end data processing pipeline that converts
a raw stream of photon measurements into a full 3D human
pose sequence estimate. Our contributions are the design of
data representation process which includes (1) a learnable
inverse point spread function (PSF) to convert raw transient
images into a deep feature vector; (2) a neural humanoid
control policy conditioned on the transient image feature
and learned from interactions with a physics simulator; and
(3) a data synthesis and augmentation strategy based on
depth data that can be transferred to a real-world NLOS
imaging system. Our preliminary experiments suggest that
our method is able to generalize to real-world NLOS measurement to estimate physically-valid 3D human poses.1

1. Introduction
Our goal is to develop a vision-based human pose estimation technique capable of inferring the 3D pose sequence
1 Project page: https://marikoisogawa.github.io/project/nlos pose

of a person without direct line of sight from the sensing device (see Fig. 1). To this end, this work brings together, for
the first time, state-of-the-art techniques in computational
imaging, human pose estimation, humanoid control, and
deep reinforcement learning – all under one system architecture. From computational imaging, we use volumetric
reconstruction algorithms that efficiently process transient
measurements (a 3D spatio-temporal histogram of photons)
captured from a non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging system.
From vision-based pose estimation and humanoid control,
we make use of deep reinforcement learning in a physics
simulator to learn an image feature-conditioned 3D human
pose policy that abides by the laws of physics. All components are integrated into a single end-to-end learnable architecture which takes the raw transient images, converts them
to a deep feature representation using a learnable inverted
point spread function (PSF), and uses a neural humanoid
control policy conditioned on the deep feature to estimate
physically valid 3D human poses. In short, our proposed
end-to-end system models the complete flow of information
from the photon-level all the way to the high-level cognitive
task of 3D human pose estimation.
In order to capture the actions of a person around a corner, we employ a NLOS imaging technique using a pulsed
laser and a time-of-flight sensor [30]. The imaging process
involves sending light pulses towards a visible surface, and
measuring the travel time of light reflected back in response;
this represents a “transient image” [31, 4, 16]. The transient image used here is a 3D volume that encodes the ar17013

