Explorable Super Resolution
Yuval Bahat and Tomer Michaeli
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{yuval.bahat@campus,tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

Low-res input

ESRGAN

Other perfectly consistent reconstructions produced with our approach

Figure 1: Exploring HR explanations to an LR image. Existing SR methods (e.g. ESRGAN [26]) output only one
explanation to the input image. In contrast, our explorable SR framework allows producing infinite different perceptually
satisfying HR images, that all identically match a given LR input, when down-sampled. Please zoom-in to view subtle details.

Abstract
Single image super resolution (SR) has seen major performance leaps in recent years. However, existing methods
do not allow exploring the infinitely many plausible reconstructions that might have given rise to the observed lowresolution (LR) image. These different explanations to the
LR image may dramatically vary in their textures and fine
details, and may often encode completely different semantic information. In this paper, we introduce the task of explorable super resolution. We propose a framework comprising a graphical user interface with a neural network
backend, allowing editing the SR output so as to explore the
abundance of plausible HR explanations to the LR input. At
the heart of our method is a novel module that can wrap
any existing SR network, analytically guaranteeing that its
SR outputs would precisely match the LR input, when downsampled. Besides its importance in our setting, this module
is guaranteed to decrease the reconstruction error of any
SR network it wraps, and can be used to cope with blur kernels that are different from the one the network was trained
for. We illustrate our approach in a variety of use cases,
ranging from medical imaging and forensics, to graphics.

1. Introduction
Single image super resolution (SR) is the task of producing a high resolution (HR) image from a single low

resolution (LR) image. Recent decades have seen an increasingly growing research interest in this task, peaking
with the recent surge of methods based on deep neural
networks. These methods demonstrated significant performance boosts, some in terms of achieving low reconstruction errors [4, 10, 14, 24, 12, 29, 11] and some in terms of
producing photo-realistic HR images [13, 26, 23], typically
via the use of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5].
However, common to all existing methods is that they do not
allow exploring the abundance of plausible HR explanations
to the input LR image, and typically produce only a single
SR output. This is dissatisfying as although these HR explanations share the same low frequency content, manifested in
their coarser image structures, they may significantly vary
in their higher frequency content, such as textures and small
details (see e.g., Fig. 1). Apart from affecting the image appearance, these fine details often encode crucial semantic
information, like in the cases of text, faces and even textures (e.g., distinguishing a horse from a zebra). Existing
SR methods ignore this abundance of valid solutions, and
arbitrarily confine their output to a specific appearance with
its particular semantic meaning.
In this paper, we initiate the study of explorable super resolution, and propose a framework for achieving it
through user editing. Our method consists of a neural network utilized by a graphical user interface (GUI), which
allows the user to interactively explore the space of perceptually pleasing HR images that could have given rise to
12716

