GAN Compression: Efficient Architectures for Interactive Conditional GANs
Muyang Li1,3
lmxyy@mit.edu
1

Ji Lin1

Yaoyao Ding1,3

jilin@mit.edu

yyding@mit.edu

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Input

Input

Zhijian Liu1
2

zhijian@mit.edu

junzhu@adobe.com

Adobe Research

3

CycleGAN: 56.8G MACs Ours: 2.67G (21.2×)

pix2pix: 56.8G MACs

Ours: 4.81G (11.8×)

Jun-Yan Zhu2

Song Han1
songhan@mit.edu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Input

Ground Truth

GauGAN: 281G MACs

Ours: 31.7G (8.8×)

Figure 1: We introduce GAN Compression, a general-purpose method for compressing conditional GANs. Our method reduces
the computation of widely-used conditional GAN models including pix2pix, CycleGAN, and GauGAN by 9-21× while
preserving the visual fidelity. Our method is effective for a wide range of generator architectures, learning objectives, and both
paired and unpaired settings.

Abstract
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (cGANs)
have enabled controllable image synthesis for many computer vision and graphics applications. However, recent
cGANs are 1-2 orders of magnitude more computationallyintensive than modern recognition CNNs. For example, GauGAN consumes 281G MACs per image, compared to 0.44G
MACs for MobileNet-v3, making it difficult for interactive
deployment. In this work, we propose a general-purpose
compression framework for reducing the inference time and
model size of the generator in cGANs. Directly applying existing CNNs compression methods yields poor performance
due to the difficulty of GAN training and the differences
in generator architectures. We address these challenges in
two ways. First, to stabilize the GAN training, we transfer
knowledge of multiple intermediate representations of the
original model to its compressed model, and unify unpaired
and paired learning. Second, instead of reusing existing
CNN designs, our method automatically finds efficient architectures via neural architecture search (NAS). To accelerate
the search process, we decouple the model training and
architecture search via weight sharing. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method across different supervision settings (paired and unpaired), model architectures,
and learning methods (e.g., pix2pix, GauGAN, CycleGAN).
Without losing image quality, we reduce the computation of

CycleGAN by more than 20× and GauGAN by 9×, paving
the way for interactive image synthesis. The code and demo
are publicly available.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [14] excel at
synthesizing photo-realistic images. Their conditional extension, conditional GANs [44, 27, 69], allows controllable image synthesis and enables many computer vision and graphics applications such as interactively creating an image from
a user drawing [45], transferring the motion of a dancing
video stream to a different person [57, 8, 1], or creating VR
facial animation for remote social interaction [59]. All of
these applications require models to interact with humans
and therefore demand low-latency on-device performance
for better user experience. However, edge devices (mobile
phones, tablets, VR headsets) are tightly constrained by
hardware resources such as memory and battery. This computational bottleneck prevents conditional GANs from being
deployed on edge devices.
Different from image recognition CNNs [31, 53, 19,
25], image-conditional GANs are notoriously computationally intensive. For example, the widely-used CycleGAN
model [69] requires more than 50G MACs∗ , 100× more
∗ We use the number of Multiply-Accumulate Operations (MAC) to

15284

