Symmetry and Group in Attribute-Object Compositions
Yong-Lu Li, Yue Xu, Xiaohan Mao, Cewu Lu∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yonglu li, silicxuyue, mxh1999, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Attributes and objects can compose diverse compositions. To model the compositional nature of these general
concepts, it is a good choice to learn them through transformations, such as coupling and decoupling. However, complex transformations need to satisfy specific principles to
guarantee the rationality. In this paper, we first propose a
previously ignored principle of attribute-object transformation: Symmetry. For example, coupling peeled-apple
with attribute peeled should result in peeled-apple,
and decoupling peeled from apple should still output
apple. Incorporating the symmetry principle, a transformation framework inspired by group theory is built, i.e.
SymNet. SymNet consists of two modules, Coupling Network and Decoupling Network. With the group axioms
and symmetry property as objectives, we adopt Deep Neural Networks to implement SymNet and train it in an endto-end paradigm. Moreover, we propose a Relative Moving Distance (RMD) based recognition method to utilize
the attribute change instead of the attribute pattern itself to classify attributes. Our symmetry learning can
be utilized for the Compositional Zero-Shot Learning task
and outperforms the state-of-the-art on widely-used benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/
DirtyHarryLYL/SymNet.

1. Introduction
Attributes describe the properties of generic objects, e.g.
material, color, weight, etc. Understanding the attributes
would directly facilitate many tasks that require deep semantics, such as scene graph generation [15], object perception [33, 9, 40, 35, 7, 20], human-object interaction detection [3, 16, 17]. As side information, attributes can also
be employed in zero-shot learning [8, 39, 38, 37, 12, 41].
Going along with the road of conventional classification setting, some works [14, 28, 39, 29] address attribute
∗ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China.

Apple

Compositionality

Symmetry

+ “peeled’’ =

+ “peeled’’

Peeled-Apple
Contextuality

More?

Peeled-Apple

- “peeled’’

v.s.
Peeled-Apple

Peeled-Egg
(a)

Peeled-Apple

Apple

Apple
(b)

Figure 1. Except for the compositionality and contextuality,
attribute-object compositions also have the symmetry property. For
instance, a peeled-apple should not change after “adding” the
peeled attribute. Similarly, an apple should keep the same after “removing” the peeled attribute because it does not have it.

recognition with the typical discriminative models for objects and achieve poor performance. This is because attributes cannot be well expressed independently of the context [24, 25] (Fig. 1(a)). Subsequently, researchers rethink the nature of attributes and treat them as linear operations [25] to operate these two general concepts, e.g.
“adding” attribute to object (coupling) or “removing” attribute from objects (decoupling). Though such new insight has promoted this field, the current “add-remove” system is not complete and lacks an axiomatics foundation to
satisfy the specific principles of nature. In this paper, we
rethink the physical and linguistic properties of attributeobject, and propose a previously ignored but important principle of attribute-object transformations: symmetry, which
would promote attribute-object learning. Symmetry depicts
the invariance under transformations, e.g. a circle has rotational symmetry under the rotation without changing its
appearance. The transformation that “adding” or “removing” attributes should also satisfy the symmetry: An object
should remain unchanged if we “add” an attribute which
it already has, or “remove” an attribute which it does not
have. For instance, a peeled-apple keeps invariant if
we “add” attribute peeled upon it. Similarly, “removing”
peeled from apple would still result in apple.
As shown in Fig. 1(b), except the compositionality and
contextuality, the symmetry property should also be satisfied to guarantee the rationality. In view of this, we first

11316

