Sketch Less for More: On-the-Fly Fine-Grained Sketch Based Image Retrieval
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Yongxin Yang1 Timothy M. Hospedales1,2 Tao Xiang1 Yi-Zhe Song1
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom 2 University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
{a.bhunia, yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

1. Introduction
Due to the rapid proliferation of touch-screen devices,
the computer vision community has witnessed significant
research progress in sketch-related computer vision problems [49, 41, 29, 6, 9, 4]. Among these methods, sketchbased image retrieval (SBIR) [4, 6, 9] has received particular attention due to its potential commercial applications. SBIR was initially posed as a category-level retrieval problem. However, it became apparent that the key
advantage of sketch over text/tag-based retrieval was conveying fine-grained detail [10] – leading to a focus on
fine-grained SBIR that aims to retrieve a particular photo
within a gallery. Great progress has been made on FGSBIR [49, 41, 29], but two barriers hinder its widespread
adoption in practice – the time taken to draw a complete
sketch, and the drawing skill shortage of the user. Firstly,
while sketch can convey fine-grained appearance details
more easily than text, drawing a complete sketch is slow

Baseline
Ours

55% sketch

95% sketch

Baseline

Fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR)
addresses the problem of retrieving a particular photo instance given a user’s query sketch. Its widespread applicability is however hindered by the fact that drawing a sketch
takes time, and most people struggle to draw a complete
and faithful sketch. In this paper, we reformulate the conventional FG-SBIR framework to tackle these challenges,
with the ultimate goal of retrieving the target photo with
the least number of strokes possible. We further propose
an on-the-fly design that starts retrieving as soon as the
user starts drawing. To accomplish this, we devise a reinforcement learning based cross-modal retrieval framework
that directly optimizes rank of the ground-truth photo over
a complete sketch drawing episode. Additionally, we introduce a novel reward scheme that circumvents the problems related to irrelevant sketch strokes, and thus provides
us with a more consistent rank list during the retrieval. We
achieve superior early-retrieval efficiency over state-of-theart methods and alternative baselines on two publicly available fine-grained sketch retrieval datasets.

Ours

Abstract

Figure 1. Examples showing the potential of our framework that
can retrieve (top-5 list) target photo using fewer number of strokes
than the conventional baseline method.

compared to clicking a tag or typing a search keyword.
Secondly, although state-of-the-art vision systems are good
at recognising badly drawn sketches [36, 50], users who
perceive themselves as someone who “can’t sketch” worry
about getting details wrong and receiving inaccurate results.
In this paper we break these barriers by taking a view
of “less is more” and propose to tackle a new fine-grained
SBIR problem that aims to retrieve the target photo with just
a few strokes, as opposed to requiring the complete sketch.
This problem assumes a “on-the-fly” setting, where retrieval
is conducted at every stroke drawn. Figure 1 offers an illustrative example of our on-the-fly FG-SBIR framework. Due
to stroke-by-stroke retrieval, and a framework optimised for
few-stroke retrieval, users can usually “stop early” as soon
as their goal is retrieved. This thus makes sketch more comparable with traditional search methods in terms of time to
issue a query, and more easily – as those inexperienced at
drawing can retrieve their queried photo based on the easiest/earliest strokes possible [1], while requiring fewer of the
detailed strokes that are harder to draw correctly.
Solving this new problem is non-trivial. One might argue that we can directly feed incomplete sketches into the
off-the-shelf FG-SBIR frameworks [49, 36], perhaps also
enhanced by including synthesised sketches in the training

9779

