Dynamic Convolutions: Exploiting Spatial Sparsity for Faster Inference
Thomas Verelst
Tinne Tuytelaars
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven

1. Introduction
Most research on deep neural networks focuses on improving accuracy without taking into account the model
complexity. As the community moves to more difficult
problems – e.g. from classification to detection or pose estimation – architectures tend to grow in capacity and computational complexity. Nevertheless, for real-time applications running on consumer devices such as mobile phones,
notebooks or surveillance cameras, what matters most is a
good trade-off between performance (i.e., frames processed
per second) and accuracy [9, 24]. Attempts to improve
this trade-off have focused mostly on designing more efficient architectures [21, 39, 44, 53] or compressing existing
ones [17, 19, 28, 33, 38, 50].
Interestingly, most neural networks, including the more
efficient or compressed ones mentioned above, execute the
same calculations for each image, independent of its content. This seems suboptimal: only the complex images

+

mask
unit

sparse conv

mask
unit

sparse conv

+

sparse conv

mask
unit

sparse conv

Modern convolutional neural networks apply the same
operations on every pixel in an image. However, not
all image regions are equally important. To address this
inefficiency, we propose a method to dynamically apply
convolutions conditioned on the input image. We introduce
a residual block where a small gating branch learns which
spatial positions should be evaluated. These discrete gating
decisions are trained end-to-end using the Gumbel-Softmax
trick, in combination with a sparsity criterion. Our experiments on CIFAR, ImageNet, Food-101 and MPII show
that our method has better focus on the region of interest
and better accuracy than existing methods, at a lower computational complexity. Moreover, we provide an efficient
CUDA implementation of our dynamic convolutions using
a gather-scatter approach, achieving a significant improvement in inference speed on MobileNetV2 and ShuffleNetV2.
On human pose estimation, a task that is inherently spatially sparse, the processing speed is increased by 60% with
no loss in accuracy.

sparse conv

Abstract

sparse conv

{thomas.verelst, tinne.tuytelaars}@esat.kuleuven.be

+

Figure 1: In each residual block, a small gating network
(mask unit) predicts pixel-wise masks determining the locations where dynamic convolutions are evaluated.
require such deep and wide networks. Therefore, the domain of conditional execution gained momentum [4, 5, 6].
Compared to static compression methods, the architecture
of the network is adapted based on the input image. For instance, the network depth can vary per image since easy
and clear images require fewer convolutional layers than
ambiguous ones [46, 48, 51]. The neural network chooses
which operations to execute. Such practice is often called
gating [11, 22], and can be applied at the level of convolutional layers [46, 48, 51], channels [3, 13, 30] or other
elements in the network.
In this work, we focus on reducing computations by executing conditionally in the spatial domain. Typical convolutional networks apply all convolutional filters on every
location in the image. In many images, the subject we want
to classify or detect is surrounded by background pixels,
where the necessary features can be extracted using only
few operations. For example, flat regions such as a blue
sky can easily be identified. We call such images spatially
sparse.
We propose a method, trained end-to-end without explicit spatial supervision, to execute convolutional filters on
important image locations only. For each residual block,
a small gating network chooses the locations to apply dynamic convolutions on (Fig. 1). Gating decisions are trained
end-to-end using the Gumbel-Softmax trick [23, 31]. Those
decisions progress throughout the network: the first stages
extract features from complex regions in the image, while
the last layers use higher-level information to focus on the

2320

