RDCFace: Radial Distortion Correction for Face Recognition
He Zhao, Xianghua Ying* , Yongjie Shi, Xin Tong, Jingsi Wen, and Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE)
School of EECS, Peking University
{zhaohe97, shiyongjie, xin tong, wenjingsi}@pku.edu.cn

{xhying, zha}@cis.pku.edu.cn

Figure 1: Examples of Face images with and without radial lenses distortion. The faces are cropped from images under
different levels of radial distortion (Top). These distorted face images are rectified by our method (Bottom), which greatly
reduce the geometric deformation and calibrate the faces into standard view.

Abstract
The effects of radial lens distortion often appear in wideangle cameras of surveillance and safeguard systems, which
may severely degrade performances of previous face recognition algorithms. Traditional methods for radial lens distortion correction usually employ line features in scenarios that are not suitable for face images. In this paper,
we propose a distortion-invariant face recognition system
called RDCFace, which only utilize the distorted images
of faces, to directly alleviate the effects of radial lens distortion. RDCFace is an end-to-end trainable cascade network, which can learn rectification and alignment parameters to achieve a better face recognition performance without requiring supervision of facial landmarks and distortion
parameters. We design sequential spatial transformer layers to optimize the correction, alignment, and recognition
modules jointly. The feasibility of our method comes from
implicitly using the statistics of the layout of face features
learned from the large-scale face data. Extensive experiments indicate that our method is robust to distortion and
gains significant improvements on several benchmarks including LFW, YTF, CFP, and RadialFace, a real distorted
face dataset compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the help of Deep Learning and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), the performance of face recogni* Corresponding Author

tion algorithms increased rapidly in the past few years
[28, 21, 7]. Furthermore, the data-driven algorithm has successfully enhanced the robustness of learned facial features.
In other words, a well designed CNN is capable of handling
pose, occlusion and illumination variations of face images
to a considerably high degree [42, 41, 19].
However, almost all existing face recognition algorithms
are based on the assumption of the ideal pinhole camera
model, whereas the ATM, monitoring system, and safeguard system usually use wide-angle cameras because of
their large field of view (FOV). As illustrated in the Fig. 2,
while the wide-angle lens provides broad scenes, face in
the image is significantly distorted by radial lens distortion.
The distorted face not only influences the way humans perceive one another, but also greatly degrade the performance
of existing face recognition methods.
Traditional radial distortion correction algorithms tended
to estimate the distortion parameters with calibration pattern [20, 39] or projections of lines detected in distorted
images [29, 1]. However, the correction performance is
limited by the requirement of a specific pattern and the accuracy of lines detecting results. In addition, face images
are lack of line information which are not suitable for linebased methods. As far as we know, face recognition under
radial distortion is required by practical application environments but is still a not well solved challenging problem.
In this paper, we propose RDCFace, a cascade network which maps a face image with radial distortion to
its distortion-free counterpart to learn distortion-invariant

7721

