Uninformed Students: Student–Teacher Anomaly Detection
with Discriminative Latent Embeddings
Paul Bergmann

Michael Fauser

David Sattlegger

Carsten Steger

MVTec Software GmbH
www.mvtec.com
{paul.bergmann, fauser, sattlegger, steger}@mvtec.com

Abstract
We introduce a powerful student–teacher framework for
the challenging problem of unsupervised anomaly detection
and pixel-precise anomaly segmentation in high-resolution
images. Student networks are trained to regress the output of a descriptive teacher network that was pretrained on
a large dataset of patches from natural images. This circumvents the need for prior data annotation. Anomalies
are detected when the outputs of the student networks differ from that of the teacher network. This happens when
they fail to generalize outside the manifold of anomaly-free
training data. The intrinsic uncertainty in the student networks is used as an additional scoring function that indicates anomalies. We compare our method to a large number
of existing deep learning based methods for unsupervised
anomaly detection. Our experiments demonstrate improvements over state-of-the-art methods on a number of realworld datasets, including the recently introduced MVTec
Anomaly Detection dataset that was specifically designed
to benchmark anomaly segmentation algorithms.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised pixel-precise segmentation of regions that
appear anomalous or novel to a machine learning model is
an important and challenging task in many domains of computer vision. In automated industrial inspection scenarios,
it is often desirable to train models solely on a single class
of anomaly-free images to segment defective regions during
inference. In an active learning setting, regions that are detected as previously unknown by the current model can be
included in the training set to improve the model’s performance.
Recently, efforts have been made to improve anomaly
detection for one-class or multi-class classification [2, 3,
10, 11, 21, 28, 29]. However, these algorithms assume that
anomalies manifest themselves in the form of images of an

Figure 1: Qualitative results of our anomaly detection method on
the MVTec Anomaly Detection dataset. Top row: Input images
containing defects. Center row: Ground truth regions of defects
in red. Bottom row: Anomaly scores for each image pixel predicted by our algorithm.

entirely different class and a simple binary image-level decision whether an image is anomalous or not must be made.
Little work has been directed towards the development of
methods that can segment anomalous regions that only differ in a very subtle way from the training data. Bergmann
et al. [7] provide benchmarks for several state-of-the-art algorithms and identify a large room for improvement.
Existing work predominantly focuses on generative algorithms such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[31, 32] or Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [5, 36]. These
detect anomalies using per-pixel reconstruction errors or by
evaluating the density obtained from the model’s probability distribution. This has been shown to be problematic
due to inaccurate reconstructions or poorly calibrated likelihoods [8, 22].
The performance of many supervised computer vision
algorithms [16, 34] is improved by transfer learning, i.e. by
using discriminative embeddings from pretrained networks.
For unsupervised anomaly detection, such approaches have
not been thoroughly explored so far. Recent work suggests
that these feature spaces generalize well for anomaly detec-

4183

