Sketch-BERT: Learning Sketch Bidirectional Encoder Representation from
Transformers by Self-supervised Learning of Sketch Gestalt
Hangyu Lin∗ , Yanwei Fu ∗
School of Data Science, Fudan University

Yu-Gang Jiang† , Xiangyang Xue
School of Computer Science, Fudan University

18210980008,yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn

ygj, xyxue@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous researches of sketches often considered
sketches in pixel format and leveraged CNN based models in the sketch understanding. Fundamentally, a sketch is
stored as a sequence of data points, a vector format representation, rather than the photo-realistic image of pixels. SketchRNN [7] studied a generative neural representation for sketches of vector format by Long Short Term
Memory networks (LSTM). Unfortunately, the representation learned by SketchRNN is primarily for the generation
tasks, rather than the other tasks of recognition and retrieval of sketches. To this end and inspired by the recent BERT model [3], we present a model of learning
Sketch Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformer (Sketch-BERT). We generalize BERT to sketch domain, with the novel proposed components and pre-training
algorithms, including the newly designed sketch embedding
networks, and the self-supervised learning of sketch gestalt.
Particularly, towards the pre-training task, we present a
novel Sketch Gestalt Model (SGM) to help train the SketchBERT. Experimentally, we show that the learned representation of Sketch-BERT can help and improve the performance of the downstream tasks of sketch recognition, sketch
retrieval, and sketch gestalt.

1. Introduction
With the prevailing of touch-screen devices, e.g., iPad,
everyone can easily draw simple sketches. It thus supports
the demand of automatically understanding the sketches,
which have been extensively studied in [28, 22, 17] as a type
of 2D pixel images. Interestingly, the free-hand sketches reflect our abstraction and iconic representation that are composed of patterns, structure, form and even simple logic of
objects and scenes in the world around us. Thus rather than
∗ indicates equal contributions, † indicates corresponding author. Y. Fu

is with School of Data Science, and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Fudan University.

being taken as 2D images, sketches should be intrinsically
analyzed from the view of sequential data, which however,
has less been touched in earlier works. Typically, a sketch
consists of several strokes where each stroke can be seen as
a sequence of points. We take the same 5-element vector
format representation for sketches as in [7]. Briefly speaking, each point has 2-dimensional continuous position value
and 3-dimensional one hot state value which indicates the
state of the point.
According to Gestalt principles of perceptual grouping
[2], humans can easily perceive a sketch as a sequence of
data points. To analyze the sequential sketch drawings,
SketchRNN [7] aimed at learning neural representation of
sketches by combining variational autoencoder (VAE) with
a Long Short Term Memory networks (LSTM), primary
for the sketch generation. In contrast, human vision systems would be capable of both understanding semantics,
or abstracting the patterns from sketches. For instance, we
can easily both predict the category label of sketches from
“Ground Truth” column (sketch recognition task), and complete the “Masked Input” column of sketches (sketch gestalt
task), as shown in Fig. 1. Comparably, this demands significant high quality in learning much more general and comprehensive sketch representation.
Formally, a new sketch Gestalt (sGesta) task is, for the
first time, proposed in this paper as in Fig. 1. The name
sketch Gestalt comes from the famous Gestalt theory which
emphasizes the whole structure of an object rather than
some parts. Particularly, the task of sketch gestalt aims at
recovering the masked parts of points in sketches and completes the shape of masked sketches. It needs to predict both
continuous position values and discrete state values which
are utilized to define the sketch points. We show that leveraging the sketch gestalt task helps better understanding the
general patterns of sketches.
To this end, this paper proposes a novel model of
learning Sketch Bidirectional Encoder Representation from
Transformer (Sketch-BERT), which is inspired by the recent BERT model [3] from Natural Language Processing
(NLP). Essentially, the transformer structure exerts great
16758

