SG-NN: Sparse Generative Neural Networks for
Self-Supervised Scene Completion of RGB-D Scans
Angela Dai

Christian Diller
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: Our method takes as input a partial RGB-D scan and predicts a high-resolution 3D reconstruction while predicting
unseen, missing geometry. Key to our approach is its self-supervised formulation, enabling training solely on real-world,
incomplete scans. This not only obviates the need for synthetic ground truth, but is also capable of generating more complete
scenes than any single target scene seen during training. To achieve high-quality surfaces, we further propose a new sparse
generative neural network, capable of generating large-scale scenes at much higher resolution than existing techniques.

Abstract
We present a novel approach that converts partial and
noisy RGB-D scans into high-quality 3D scene reconstructions by inferring unobserved scene geometry. Our approach is fully self-supervised and can hence be trained
solely on real-world, incomplete scans. To achieve selfsupervision, we remove frames from a given (incomplete)
3D scan in order to make it even more incomplete; selfsupervision is then formulated by correlating the two levels
of partialness of the same scan while masking out regions
that have never been observed. Through generalization
across a large training set, we can then predict 3D scene
completion without ever seeing any 3D scan of entirely complete geometry. Combined with a new 3D sparse generative neural network architecture, our method is able to predict highly-detailed surfaces in a coarse-to-fine hierarchical fashion, generating 3D scenes at 2cm resolution, more
than twice the resolution of existing state-of-the-art methods as well as outperforming them by a significant margin
in reconstruction quality.1
1 Source code available here.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen incredible progress on
RGB-D reconstruction of indoor environments using commodity RGB-D sensors such as the Microsoft Kinect,
Google Tango, or Intel RealSense [22, 16, 23, 36, 5,
10]. However, despite remarkable achievements in RGBD tracking and reconstruction quality, a fundamental challenge still remains – the incomplete nature of resulting 3D
scans caused by inherent occlusions due to the physical limitations of the scanning process; i.e., even in a careful scanning session it is inevitable that some regions of a 3D scene
remain unobserved. This unfortunately renders the resulting
reconstructions unsuitable for many applications, not only
those that require quality 3D content, such as video games
or AR/VR, but also robotics where a completed 3D map significantly facilitates tasks such as grasping or querying 3D
objects in a 3D environment.
In order to overcome the incomplete and partial nature
of 3D reconstructions, various geometric inpainting techniques have been proposed, for instance, surface interpolation based on the Poisson equation [17, 18] or CAD shapefitting techniques [1, 2, 8]. A very recent direction leverages

849

