Classifying, Segmenting, and Tracking
Object Instances in Video with Mask Propagation
Gedas Bertasius, Lorenzo Torresani
Facebook AI

Abstract
We introduce a method for simultaneously classifying,
segmenting and tracking object instances in a video sequence. Our method, named MaskProp, adapts the popular Mask R-CNN to video by adding a mask propagation
branch that propagates frame-level object instance masks
from each video frame to all the other frames in a video clip.
This allows our system to predict clip-level instance tracks
with respect to the object instances segmented in the middle frame of the clip. Clip-level instance tracks generated
densely for each frame in the sequence are finally aggregated to produce video-level object instance segmentation
and classification. Our experiments demonstrate that our
clip-level instance segmentation makes our approach robust
to motion blur and object occlusions in video. MaskProp
achieves the best reported accuracy on the YouTube-VIS
dataset, outperforming the ICCV 2019 video instance segmentation challenge winner despite being much simpler and
using orders of magnitude less labeled data (1.3M vs 1B images and 860K vs 14M bounding boxes). The project page
is at: https://gberta.github.io/maskprop/.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we tackle the recently introduced video instance segmentation problem [42]. This task requires segmenting all instances of a predefined set of object classes
in each frame, classifying them, and linking individual instances over the entire sequence.
In recent years, convolutional networks have obtained remarkable results in still-image object detection [16, 33, 14,
15], and segmentation [27, 45, 8, 4]. However, extending
these models to video instance segmentation is challenging. In order to localize objects precisely, these methods
have to operate at very large spatial resolution. As a result,
detectors based on the popular ResNet-101 or ResNet-152
backbones [17] can rarely fit more than one image per GPU
during training. In the context of video instance segmentation this is problematic because tracking objects over time
requires analyzing multiple video frames simultaneously.

Figure 1: In this paper, we tackle the problem of video instance segmentation, which requires classifying, segmenting, and tracking object instances in a given video sequence.
Our proposed Mask Propagation framework (MaskProp)
provides a simple and effective way for solving this task.
To address this issue, one could reduce the spatial resolution of the input and fit more video frames in a GPU.
However, doing so typically leads to a significant drop in
segmentation or detection performance. Alternatively, one
could perform high-resolution instance segmentation on individual frames and then link segmentations temporally in
a separate post-processing stage. However, performing instance segmentation and tracking in two disjoint steps often produces suboptimal results, because these two tasks
are closely intertwined. The key challenge then becomes
designing a unified model that can track objects in video
while maintaining strong detection accuracy.
Currently, the best method for video instance segmentation is the ICCV 2019 challenge winner [28]. It tackles
video instance segmentation by dividing it into four problems: 1) detection, 2) classification, 3) segmentation, and
4) tracking. These four problems are solved independently
using several off-the-shelf components and their respective
solutions are combined and adapted to the video instance
segmentation task. However, despite effective performance,
such an approach is disadvantageous because it requires designing and tuning a separate model (or, in some cases, an
ensemble of models) for each of the four tasks. This renders the approach costly and cumbersome. On the other
end of the complexity spectrum, MaskTrack R-CNN [42] is
a simple unified approach trained end-to-end but it achieves
significantly lower performance (30.3 vs 44.8 video mAP).

9739

