Computing Valid p-values for Image Segmentation by Selective Inference
Kosuke Tanizaki1 , Noriaki Hashimoto1 , Yu Inatsu2 , Hidekata Hontani1 , Ichiro Takeuchi1,2*
1
Nagoya Institute of Technology, 2 RIKEN

Abstract
Image segmentation is one of the most fundamental tasks
in computer vision. In many practical applications, it is
essential to properly evaluate the reliability of individual
segmentation results. In this study, we propose a novel
framework for quantifying the statistical significance of individual segmentation results in the form of p-values by statistically testing the difference between the object region
and the background region. This seemingly simple problem is actually quite challenging because the difference —
called segmentation bias — can be deceptively large due to
the adaptation of the segmentation algorithm to the data.
To overcome this difficulty, we introduce a statistical approach called selective inference, and develop a framework
for computing valid p-values in which segmentation bias
is properly accounted for. Although the proposed framework is potentially applicable to various segmentation algorithms, we focus in this paper on graph-cut- and thresholdbased segmentation algorithms, and develop two specific
methods for computing valid p-values for the segmentation
results obtained by these algorithms. We prove the theoretical validity of these two methods and demonstrate their
practicality by applying them to the segmentation of medical images.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is one of the most fundamental tasks
in computer vision. Segmentation algorithms are usually
formulated as a problem of optimizing a certain loss function. For example, in threshold (TH)-based segmentation
algorithms [24, 38], the loss functions are defined based on
similarity within a given region and dissimilarity between
different regions. In graph cut (GC)-based segmentation algorithms [5, 2], the loss functions are defined based on the
similarity of adjacent pixels in a given region and dissimilarity of adjacent pixels at the boundaries. Depending on
the problem and the properties of the target images, an appropriate segmentation algorithm must be selected.
* Correspondence to I.T. (e-mail: takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp).

In many practical non-trivial applications, there may be
the risk of obtaining incorrect segmentation results. In practical problems in which segmentation results are used for
high-stake decision-making or as a component of a larger
system, it is essential to properly evaluate their reliability. For example, when segmentation results are used in
a computer-aided diagnosis system, it should be possible to
appropriately quantify the risk that the obtained individual
segments are false positive findings. If multiple segmentation results with ground truth annotations are available, it
is possible to quantify the expected proportion of the overall false positive findings (e.g., by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis). On the other hand, it is
challenging to quantitatively evaluate the reliability of individual segmentation results when the ground-truth segmentation result is not available,
In this study, we propose a novel framework called PostSegmentation Inference (PSegI) for quantifying the statistical significance of individual segmentation results in the
form of p-values when only null images (images in which
we know that there exist no objects) are available. For simplicity, we focus only on segmentation problems in which
an image is divided into an object region and a background
region. To quantify the reliability of individual segmentation results, we utilize a statistical hypothesis test for determining the difference between the two regions (see (2) in
§2). If the difference is sufficiently large and the probability of observing such a large difference is sufficiently small
in a null image (i.e., one that contains no specific objects),
it indicates that the segmentation result is statistically significant. The p-value of the statistical hypothesis test can
be used as a quantitative reliability metric of individual segmentation results; i.e., if the p-value is sufficiently small, it
implies that a segmentation result is reliable.
Although this problem seems fairly simple, computing
a valid p-value for the above statistical hypothesis test is
challenging because the difference between the object and
background regions can be deceptively large even in a null
image that contains no specific objects since the segmentation algorithm divides the image into two regions so that
they are as different as possible. We refer to this deceptive difference in segmentation results as segmentation bias.

9553

