Self-Supervised Human Depth Estimation from Monocular Videos
Feitong Tan1,∗ Hao Zhu2,∗ Zhaopeng Cui3 Siyu Zhu4 Marc Pollefeys3 Ping Tan1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Nanjing University
3
ETH Zürich 4 Alibaba AI Labs

Abstract
Previous methods on estimating detailed human depth
often require supervised training with ‘ground truth’ depth
data. This paper presents a self-supervised method that can
be trained on YouTube videos without known depth, which
makes training data collection simple and improves the generalization of the learned network. The self-supervised
learning is achieved by minimizing a photo-consistency
loss, which is evaluated between a video frame and its
neighboring frames warped according to the estimated
depth and the 3D non-rigid motion of the human body. To
solve this non-rigid motion, we first estimate a rough SMPL
model at each video frame and compute the non-rigid body
motion accordingly, which enables self-supervised learning
on estimating the shape details. Experiments demonstrate
that our method enjoys better generalization and performs
much better on data in the wild.

1. Introduction
Understanding and reconstructing human motion from
images and videos is an important problem in computer vision with many applications including surveillance,
VR/AR, and tele-presence. Many works focus on estimating a 2D or 3D skeleton model [6, 29, 25, 34, 26, 39].
While a skeleton model could be useful for surveillance,
other applications demand a 3D surface model of the undressed human body, which is often represented by the
SMPL [24] or SCAPE [3] model. Many works have been
proposed to estimate those parametric shape models from
images [35, 17, 30, 12, 18]. However, the mid- and highfrequency shape details, e.g., cloth wrinkles and folds, are
not captured in the SMPL and SCAPE models, which limits
their application in AR/VR and tele-presence applications.
Only a handful of recent works [41, 54, 38, 50, 1, 4] can
recover those details from a single image, but they all rely
on ground-truth 3D data for supervision. This paper aims to
develop a self-supervised method for detailed human depth
estimation, such that the network can be trained on a much
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

larger dataset, e.g. YouTube videos, for improved performance.
Self-supervised learning has been adopted [10, 9, 21] to
train depth estimation from a single image for static scenes
by enforcing photo-consistency between the left and right
views in a stereo pair. Basically, the left view can be warped
to the right view according to the estimated depth, the
photo-consistency between the right view and the warped
left view can be used to train the network. In principle, if
the human motion between two video frames is known, we
could adopt the same photo-consistency principle to train
the network for human depth estimation. However, the challenge is that human body has non-rigid motion and requires
much more complicated motion models such as those in DynamicFusion [28] and VolumeDeform [15], which are difficult to estimate as well.
To address this challenge, we represent the human depth
by a SMPL model with an additive residual detail map. This
representation is similar to the base and detail shape formulation in [41], but it bears two important advantages.
Firstly, the SMPL model estimation has been well studied and is robust even on data in the wild, which makes
the base shape estimation more reliable. As we will see
in experiments, this helps to reduce large errors in the estimated depth. Secondly, the SMPL model parameters have
clear semantic meanings and can be used to induce the nonrigid motion of the human body between two neighboring
video frames. In this way, the non-rigid human body motion
can be solved, and the photo-consistency for self-supervised
learning in [10, 9, 21] can be employed to train the depth estimation network.
Measuring photo-consistency between neighboring
video frames is still hard, even when the non-rigid motion
to align the two human shapes is known. We design our
method to be robust to occlusion, motion inaccuracy, and
shading changes to achieve a robust method.
With the proposed self-supervised framework, we can
train our network using almost endless online video clips.
This vast training data significantly improves the generalization of the trained network on unseen data, making human depth estimation more robust.
1650

