On the Detection of Digital Face Manipulation
Hao Dang∗

Feng Liu∗ Joel Stehouwer∗ Xiaoming Liu
Anil Jain
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824

Abstract
Detecting manipulated facial images and videos is an increasingly important topic in digital media forensics. As advanced face synthesis and manipulation methods are made
available, new types of fake face representations are being created which have raised significant concerns for their
use in social media. Hence, it is crucial to detect manipulated face images and localize manipulated regions. Instead
of simply using multi-task learning to simultaneously detect manipulated images and predict the manipulated mask
(regions), we propose to utilize an attention mechanism to
process and improve the feature maps for the classification task. The learned attention maps highlight the informative regions to further improve the binary classification
(genuine face v. fake face), and also visualize the manipulated regions. To enable our study of manipulated face detection and localization, we collect a large-scale database
that contains numerous types of facial forgeries. With this
dataset, we perform a thorough analysis of data-driven fake
face detection. We show that the use of an attention mechanism improves facial forgery detection and manipulated
region localization. The code and database are available at
cvlab.cse.msu.edu/project-ffd.html.

1. Introduction
Human faces play an important role in human-human
communication and association of side information, e.g.,
gender and age with identity. For instance, face recognition is increasingly utilized in our daily life for applications such as access control and payment [50]. However,
these advances also entice malicious actors to manipulate
face images to launch attacks, aiming to be authenticated as
the genuine user. Moreover, manipulation of facial content
has become ubiquitous, and raises new concerns especially
in social media content [41–43]. Recent advances in deep
learning have led to a dramatic increase in the realism of
face synthesis and enabled a rapid dissemination of “fake
∗ denotes equal contribution by the authors.

Figure 1. Given one genuine face image, there are three types of
facial forgery attacks: physical spoofing attack (print and replay
attack), adversarial attack [18], and digital manipulation attack.

news” [7]. Therefore, to mitigate the adverse impact and
benefit both public security and privacy, it is crucial to develop effective solutions against these facial forgery attacks.
As shown in Fig. 1, there are three main types of facial
forgery attacks. i) Physical spoofing attacks can be as simple as face printed on a paper, replaying image/video on
a phone, or as complicated as a 3D mask [8, 24, 34, 35].
ii) Adversarial face attacks generate high-quality and perceptually imperceptible adversarial images that can evade
automated face matchers [18, 20, 37, 57]. iii) Digital manipulation attacks, made feasible by Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) [28, 40] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [19], can generate entirely or partially modified photorealistic face images. Among these three types,
this work addresses only digital manipulation attacks, with
the objectives of automatically detecting manipulated faces,
as well as localizing modified facial regions. We use the
term “face manipulation detection” or “face forgery detection” to describe our objective.
Digital facial manipulation methods fall into four categories: expression swap, identity swap, attribute manipulation and entire face synthesis (Fig. 2). 3D face reconstruction and animation methods [17, 32, 48, 64] are widely
used for expression swap, such as Face2Face [47]. These
methods can transfer expressions from one person to another in real time with only RGB cameras. Identity swap
methods replace the face of one person with the face of an-

5781

