Compositional Convolutional Neural Networks:
A Deep Architecture with Innate Robustness to Partial Occlusion
Adam Kortylewski Ju He Qing Liu Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Recent findings show that deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) do not generalize well under partial occlusion. Inspired by the success of compositional models at
classifying partially occluded objects, we propose to integrate compositional models and DCNNs into a unified deep
model with innate robustness to partial occlusion. We term
this architecture Compositional Convolutional Neural Network. In particular, we propose to replace the fully connected classification head of a DCNN with a differentiable
compositional model. The generative nature of the compositional model enables it to localize occluders and subsequently focus on the non-occluded parts of the object. We
conduct classification experiments on artificially occluded
images as well as real images of partially occluded objects
from the MS-COCO dataset. The results show that DCNNs do not classify occluded objects robustly, even when
trained with data that is strongly augmented with partial
occlusions. Our proposed model outperforms standard DCNNs by a large margin at classifying partially occluded objects, even when it has not been exposed to occluded objects during training. Additional experiments demonstrate
that CompositionalNets can also localize the occluders accurately, despite being trained with class labels only. The
code used in this work is publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Advances in the architecture design of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) [17, 22, 11] increased the
performance of computer vision systems at image classification enormously. However, recent works [38, 14] showed
that such deep models are significantly less robust at classifying artificially occluded objects compared to Humans.
Furthermore, our experiments show that DCNNs do not
classify real images of partially occluded objects robustly.
Thus, our findings and those of related works [38, 14] point
out a fundamental limitation of DCNNs in terms of generalization under partial occlusion which needs to be addressed.
1 https://github.com/AdamKortylewski/CompositionalNets

Figure 1: Partially occluded cars from the MS-COCO
dataset [20] that are misclassified by a standard DCNN
but correctly classified by the proposed CompositionalNet.
Intuitively, a CompositionalNet can localize the occluders
(occlusion scores on the right) and subsequently focus on
the non-occluded parts of the object to classify the image.

One approach to overcome this limitation is to use data
augmentation in terms of partial occlusion [6, 35]. However, our experimental results show that after training with
augmented data the performance of DCNNs at classifying
partially occluded objects still remains substantially worse
compared to the classification of non-occluded objects.
Compositionality is a fundamental aspect of human cognition [2, 28, 9, 3] that is also reflected in the hierarchical
compositional structure of the ventral stream in visual cortex [34, 27, 21]. A number of works in computer vision
showed that compositional models can robustly classify partially occluded 2D patterns [10, 13, 29, 37]. Kortylewski et
al. [14] proposed dictionary-based compositional models, a
generative model of neural feature activations that can classify images of partially occluded 3D objects more robustly
than DCNNs. However, their results also showed that their
model is significantly less discriminative at classifying nonoccluded objects compared to DCNNs.
In this work, we propose to integrate compositional
models and DCNNs into a unified deep model with innate
robustness to partial occlusion. In particular, we propose to
18940

