End-to-End Learning Local Multi-view Descriptors for 3D Point Clouds
Lei Li1 *
Siyu Zhu2
1
2
HKUST
Alibaba A.I. Labs

Hongbo Fu3†
Ping Tan2,4
3
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In this work, we propose an end-to-end framework to
learn local multi-view descriptors for 3D point clouds. To
adopt a similar multi-view representation, existing studies
use hand-crafted viewpoints for rendering in a preprocessing stage, which is detached from the subsequent descriptor
learning stage. In our framework, we integrate the multiview rendering into neural networks by using a differentiable renderer, which allows the viewpoints to be optimizable parameters for capturing more informative local context of interest points. To obtain discriminative descriptors,
we also design a soft-view pooling module to attentively
fuse convolutional features across views. Extensive experiments on existing 3D registration benchmarks show that our
method outperforms existing local descriptors both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Local descriptors for 3D geometry are widely recognized
as one of the cornerstones in many computer vision and
graphics tasks, such as correspondence establishment, registration, segmentation, retrieval, etc. Particularly, with the
prevalence of consumer-level RGB-D sensors, voluminous
scanned data requires robust local descriptors for scene
alignment and reconstruction [59, 4]. Such 3D data, however, is often noisy and incomplete, presenting challenges
to the design of local descriptors.
Existing hand-engineered local descriptors [20, 11, 46,
45, 53, 52, 48], proposed in the past few decades, are mostly
built upon histograms of low-level 3D geometric properties.
Recent trends with deep neural networks have motivated researchers to develop learning-based local descriptors in a
data-driven manner [66, 8, 24, 19, 6, 57, 12]. Several types
of input representations for 3D local geometry have been
explored, such as raw point cloud patches [24, 6], voxel
grids [66, 12] and multi-view images [19, 67]. Currently,
on the geometric registration benchmark of 3DMatch [66],
most learning-based methods are built upon either Point* L. Li was an intern at Alibaba A.I. Labs.
† H. Fu is the corresponding author. E-mail: hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk

Chiew-Lan Tai1
4
Simon Fraser University

Net [41] with point cloud patches or 3D CNNs with voxel
grids, and 3DSmoothNet [12] achieves the state-of-the-art
performance with smoothed density value voxelization. Despite the impressive progress made by the voxel representation, literature on 3D shape recognition and retrieval [50,
42, 56] indicates superior performance of multi-view images than voxel grids, and some initial attempts [19, 67]
have been made to extend a similar idea to 3D local descriptors. Meanwhile, a line of recent studies has advanced
2D CNNs in learning local descriptors from a single image
patch [15, 51, 34, 63, 23, 35, 32]. These motivate us to perform further investigation into a multi-view representation
for 3D points and their local geometry.
The main challenges of adopting the multi-view representation in learning descriptors are as follows. First, to
obtain multi-view images, a set of viewpoints (virtual cameras) are needed for 3D graphics rendering pipelines in a
preprocessing stage [50, 19]. In existing studies [50, 42, 19,
56, 9, 17], the viewpoints are either randomly sampled or
heuristically hand-picked. However, how to determine the
viewpoints in a data-driven manner to produce more informative renderings for neural networks still remains a question. Second, an effective fusion operation is required to
integrate features from multiple views into a single compact descriptor. Max-view pooling is a dominant fusion approach [50, 42, 19, 56], but this operation might overlook
subtle details [67, 56], leading to sub-optimal performance.
In this work, we propose a novel network architecture
that learns local multi-view descriptors for 3D point clouds
in an end-to-end manner, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Our network consists of three main stages: (1) multi-view rendering for a 3D point of interest of a point cloud; (2) feature
extraction in each rendered view; and (3) feature fusion
across the views. Specifically, we first use an in-network
differentiable renderer [30] to project the 3D local geometry
of a specific point as multi-view patches. Viewpoints used
by the renderer are optimizable parameters during training.
The renderer can back-propagate supervision signals from
rendered pixels to the viewpoints, enabling joint optimization of the rendering stage with the other two stages. Next,
to extract features in each rendered view, we leverage existing CNNs that are well matured in the task of learning

1919

