Attention Scaling for Crowd Counting
Xiaoheng Jiang1 , Li Zhang1 , Mingliang Xu1∗,Tianzhu Zhang2
Pei Lv1 , Bing Zhou1 , Xin Yang3 ,Yanwei Pang4
1
School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University
2
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology
4
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
{jiangxiaoheng, iexumingliang, ielvpei, iebzhou}@zzu.edu.cn
laridzhang@gmail.com, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn, xinyang@dlut.edu.cn, pyw@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based methods
generally take crowd counting as a regression task by outputting crowd densities. They learn the mapping between
image contents and crowd density distributions. Though
having achieved promising results, these data-driven counting networks are prone to overestimate or underestimate
people counts of regions with different density patterns,
which degrades the whole count accuracy. To overcome this
problem, we propose an approach to alleviate the counting
performance differences in different regions. Specifically,
our approach consists of two networks named Density Attention Network (DANet) and Attention Scaling Network
(ASNet). DANet provides ASNet with attention masks related to regions of different density levels. ASNet first generates density maps and scaling factors and then multiplies
them by attention masks to output separate attention-based
density maps. These density maps are summed to give the
final density map. The attention scaling factors help attenuate the estimation errors in different regions. Furthermore, we present a novel Adaptive Pyramid Loss (APLoss)
to hierarchically calculate the estimation losses of subregions, which alleviates the training bias. Extensive experiments on four challenging datasets (ShanghaiTech Part
A, UCF CC 50, UCF-QNRF, and WorldExpo’10) demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
The computer vision based crowd counting task is to infer the number of people presented in images or videos.
It recently has drawn much attention from researchers because of its great value in a wide range of real-world ap∗ The corresponding author is Mingliang Xu.

plications such as video surveillance, public safety, traffic
control, agriculture monitoring, and cell counting.
The solution to this problem has progressively advanced
from detecting individuals to presenting crowd density distributions. The integration of density maps gives the total count. Though previous methods have achieved some
success, they fail to handle highly congested crowd scenes.
These scenes usually exhibit the properties of heavy occlusions, large scale variation, perspective changes, and so
on. Inspired by the great success that the convolutional
neural networks have made in computer vision tasks like
object detection [28, 3, 27], image segmentation [4, 8],
and object tracking [48, 47], it recently springs dozens of
CNN based crowd counting methods [37, 22, 18, 41, 10].
These methods have tried to exploit multi-scale feature fusion [49, 29, 35], multi-task learning [34, 30, 21], and the
attention mechanism [45, 44, 19] to solve the above questions. Even so, there is still much room for improvement
in counting performance, especially in several challenging
crowd datasets [49, 10, 11].
People in images or across scenes usually exhibit various distributions, with some regions overcrowded and other
regions sparsely filled. Two main factors lead to this phenomenon. On the one hand, people scatter or gather together spontaneously in different regions of the scenes. On
the other hand, people’s scale varies due to the change of
camera perspective. Accordingly, the people distributions
in density maps present different patterns. Since CNNs depend heavily on the dataset during the training procedure,
the learned data-driven counting networks are prone to be
affected by different people distributions. As a result, they
perform inconsistently in regions with different people distributions. It is observed that the predictions in high-density
areas are likely to be higher than the ground truth, while the
predictions in low-density areas are likely to be lower than

4706

