VOLDOR: Visual Odometry from Log-logistic Dense Optical flow Residuals
Zhixiang Min
Yiding Yang
Enrique Dunn
Stevens Institute of Technology
{zmin1,yyang99,edunn}@stevens.edu

Abstract
We propose a dense indirect visual odometry method
taking as input externally estimated optical flow fields instead of hand-crafted feature correspondences. We define our problem as a probabilistic model and develop a
generalized-EM formulation for the joint inference of camera motion, pixel depth, and motion-track confidence. Contrary to traditional methods assuming Gaussian-distributed
observation errors, we supervise our inference framework
under an (empirically validated) adaptive log-logistic distribution model. Moreover, the log-logistic residual model
generalizes well to different state-of-the-art optical flow
methods, making our approach modular and agnostic to
the choice of optical flow estimators. Our method achieved
top-ranking results on both TUM RGB-D and KITTI odometry benchmarks. Our open-sourced implementation 1 is inherently GPU-friendly with only linear computational and
storage growth.

1. Introduction
Visual odometry (VO) [60, 21, 22] addresses the recovery of camera poses from an input video sequence,
which supports applications such as augmented reality,
robotics and autonomous driving. Traditional indirect VO
[47, 64, 57] methods rely on the geometric analysis of
sparse keypoint correspondences to determine multi-view
relationships among the input video frames. Moreover,
by virtue of relying on local feature detection and correspondence pre-processing modules, indirect methods pose
the VO problem as a reprojection-error minimization task.
Conversely, direct methods [58, 16, 45], strive to jointly
determine a (semi-)dense registration (warping) across images, as well as the parameters of a camera motion model.
By virtue of evaluating a dense correspondence field, direct
methods strive to minimize photometric error among registered images. While both of these contrasting approaches
have been successful in practice, there are important limitations to be addressed. An open problem within indi1 https://github.com/htkseason/VOLDOR

Figure 1: VOLDOR probabilistic graphical model. Optical
flow field sequences are modeled as observed variables subject to
Fisk-distributed measurement errors. Camera poses, depth map
and rigidness maps are modeled as hidden variables.

rect methods, is how to characterize feature localization error within the context of VO [41, 40, 39, 93], where motion blur, depth occlusions and viewpoint variations may
corrupt such estimates. Nevertheless, least squares methods are commonly used under the assumption of zero-mean
Gaussian distributed observation errors. On the other hand,
the efficacy of direct methods relies on the strict adherence
to the small-motion and appearance-constancy assumptions
(or on the development of registration models robust to such
variations), which speaks to the difficulty of adequately
modeling data variability in this context and, in turn, reduces the scope of their applicability.
Recent developments on optical flow estimation [77, 35]
using supervised learning have yielded state-of-the-art performance. However, such performance benefits have not yet
permeated to pose-estimation tasks, where standard multiview geometry methods still provide the “gold standard”.
This work develops a dense indirect framework for monocular VO that takes as input externally computed optical flow
from supervised-learning estimators. We have empirically
observed that optical flow residuals tend to conform to a
log-logistic (i.e. Fisk) distribution model parametrized by
the optical flow magnitude. We leverage this insight to pro-

4898

