Self-Supervised 3D Human Pose Estimation via
Part Guided Novel Image Synthesis
Jogendra Nath Kundu1∗
Siddharth Seth1∗
Varun Jampani2
Mugalodi Rakesh1
Appearance transfer
1
1
Pose
imitation
R. Venkatesh Babu
Anirban Chakraborty
1
2
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Google Research

Abstract
Camera captured human pose is an outcome of several
sources of variation. Performance of supervised 3D pose
estimation approaches comes at the cost of dispensing with
variations, such as shape and appearance, that may be useful for solving other relatedDisentangling
tasks. As a result, the learned
appearance and pose
model not only inculcates task-bias but also dataset-bias
because of its strong reliance on the annotated samples,
which also holds true for weakly-supervised models. Acknowledging this, we propose a self-supervised learning
framework1 to disentangle such variations from unlabeled
video frames. We leverage the prior knowledge on human
skeleton and poses in the form of a single part based 2D
puppet model, human pose articulation constraints, and a
set of unpaired 3D poses. Our differentiable formalization,
bridging the representation gap between the 3D pose and
spatial part maps, not only facilitates discovery of interpretable pose disentanglement, but also allows us to operate on videos with diverse camera movements. Qualitative results on unseen in-the-wild datasets establish our
superior generalization across multiple tasks beyond the
primary tasks of 3D pose estimation and part segmentation. Furthermore, we demonstrate state-of-the-art weaklysupervised 3D pose estimation performance on both Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP datasets.

1. Introduction
Analyzing humans takes a central role in computer vision systems. Automatic estimation of 3D pose and 2D partarrangements of highly deformable humans from monocular RGB images remains an important, challenging and unsolved problem. This ill-posed classical inverse problem
has diverse applications in human-robot interaction [53],
augmented reality [15], gaming industry, etc.
In a fully-supervised setting [52, 39, 10], the advances
∗ Equal contribution.
1 Project page: http://val.cds.iisc.ac.in/pgp-human/

,
Unpaired 3D pose data
A part-based
2D puppet
model

Image pairs
from wild
videos

Our
Self-supervised
framework

Human pose
articulation constraints
Camera view synthesis

,

Part segmentation

Im
3D pose estimation

Pose
Appearance

Figure 1. Our self-supervised framework not only produces 3D
pose and part segmentation but also enables novel image synthesis
via interpretable latent manipulation of the disentangled factors.

in this area are mostly
driven
recent deep learning archiCamera
view by
synthesis
tectures and the collection of large-scale annotated samples.
However, unlike 2D landmark annotations, it is very difficult to manually annotate 3D human pose on 2D images.
A usual way of obtaining 3D ground-truth (GT) pose annotations is through a well-calibrated in-studio multi-camera
setup [20, 50], which is difficult to configure in outdoor environments. This results in a limited diversity in the available 3D pose datasets, which greatly limits the generalization of supervised 3D pose estimation models.
To facilitate better generalization, several recent
works [7, 46] leverage weakly-supervised learning techniques that reduce the need for 3D GT pose annotations.
Most of these works use an auxiliary task such as multiview 2D pose estimation to train a 3D pose estimator [8,
27]. Instead of using 3D pose GT for supervision, a 3D
pose network is supervised with loss functions on multiview projected 2D poses. To this end, several of these works
still require considerable annotations in terms of paired 2D
pose GT [7, 57, 42, 28], multi-view images [27] and known
camera parameters [46]. Dataset bias still remains a challenge in these techniques as they use paired image and 2D
pose GT datasets which have limited diversity. Given the

6152

3D pose estim

pose
Appearance

