SOS: Selective Objective Switch for Rapid Immunofluorescence Whole Slide
Image Classification
Sam Maksoud1,2

Kun Zhao1
Peter Hobson2
Anthony Jennings2
Brian C. Lovell1
The University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072, Australia
2
Sullivan Nicolaides Pathology, Bowen Hills, QLD 4006, Australia
1

Abstract
The difficulty of processing gigapixel whole slide images
(WSIs) in clinical microscopy has been a long-standing barrier to implementing computer aided diagnostic systems.
Since modern computing resources are unable to perform
computations at this extremely large scale, current state of
the art methods utilize patch-based processing to preserve
the resolution of WSIs. However, these methods are often resource intensive and make significant compromises on processing time. In this paper, we demonstrate that conventional patch-based processing is redundant for certain WSI
classification tasks where high resolution is only required in
a minority of cases. This reflects what is observed in clinical
practice; where a pathologist may screen slides using a low
power objective and only switch to a high power in cases
where they are uncertain about their findings. To eliminate
these redundancies, we propose a method for the selective
use of high resolution processing based on the confidence
of predictions on downscaled WSIs — we call this the Selective Objective Switch (SOS). Our method is validated on
a novel dataset of 684 Liver-Kidney-Stomach immunofluorescence WSIs routinely used in the investigation of autoimmune liver disease. By limiting high resolution processing
to cases which cannot be classified confidently at low resolution, we maintain the accuracy of patch-level analysis
whilst reducing the inference time by a factor of 7.74.

1. Introduction
Patch-level image processing with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is arguably the most widely used
method for gigapixel whole slide image (WSI) analysis
[18]. Ordinarily, processing such a large image in its totality with CNNs is computationally infeasible without significant downscaling — resulting in the loss of detailed information required for fine-grained analytical tasks. However, by processing WSIs in smaller patches, it is possible
to extract the detailed information by preserving the resolu-

Liver
Kidney
Stomach

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of a WSI that includes
multi-tissue types: liver, kidney and stomach.

tion of the original gigapixel image. Thus, applications that
require fine-grained analysis of gigapixel WSIs are able to
incorporate powerful CNNs in their design.
Although there are clear advantages to high resolution
patch-level analysis [16], it is resource intensive and can
substantially increase processing time [13]. In a high
throughput laboratory, any additional per sample processing time will compound, which can make it difficult to
justify the use of deep learning algorithms for WSI analysis. Hence, there is a strong motivation to identify situations where it is unnecessary to process WSIs at their maximum resolution. Unlike bright field microscopy, the increased sensitivity of the immunofluorescence assay allows
for analysis at lower resolutions. Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) microscopy on multi-tissue sections is one such
example where low resolution often provides sufficient discriminatory information.
Multi-tissue IIF slides, such as the Liver-KidneyStomach (LKS) slide shown in Figure 1, allow for the simultaneous observation of immunoreactivity across different tissue types. Comparing observations across tissue types
is crucial to interpreting these WSIs [10]; so it is advantageous to screen them at a lower magnification which allows
multiple tissues to be viewed at once. Most patterns are easily identified at these lower magnifications. Accordingly, a
pathologist will often only switch to a higher magnification
for complex or ambiguous cases that require a greater re13862

