Deep Non-Line-Of-Sight Reconstruction
Javier Grau Chopite∗

Matthias B. Hullin†

Abstract
The recent years have seen a surge of interest in methods for imaging beyond the direct line of sight. The most
prominent techniques rely on time-resolved optical impulse
responses, obtained by illuminating a diffuse wall with an
ultrashort light pulse and observing multi-bounce indirect
reflections with an ultrafast time-resolved imager. Reconstruction of geometry from such data, however, is a complex non-linear inverse problem that comes with substantial
computational demands. In this paper, we employ convolutional feed-forward networks for solving the reconstruction
problem efficiently while maintaining good reconstruction
quality. Specifically, we devise a tailored autoencoder architecture, trained end-to-end, that maps transient images
directly to a depth-map representation. Training is done
using a recent, very efficient transient renderer for threebounce indirect light transport that enables the quick generation of large amounts of training data for the network.
We examine the performance of our method on a variety
of synthetic and experimental datasets and its dependency
on the choice of training data and augmentation strategies,
as well as architectural features. We demonstrate that our
feed-forward network, even if trained solely on synthetic
data, is able to obtain results competitive with previous,
model-based optimization methods, while being orders of
magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Over the last decades, the reconstruction of object shapes
by means of time-of-flight measurements has matured to a
highly pervasive and impactful technology. While it can already be challenging to image objects that are directly visible, recent years have seen researchers successfully demonstrating the even harder task of reconstructing targets hidden beyond the direct line of sight. In this setting, which
we call the non-line-of-sight (NLoS) reconstruction problem, the loss of temporal and directional information caused
by multiple bounces across more or less diffuse surfaces
means that the problem has to be approached in a drastically different manner. Among the techniques proposed in
∗ University of Bonn / jgraucho@uni-bonn.de
† University of Bonn / hullin@cs.uni-bonn.de
‡ University of Mainz / wandm@uni-mainz.de
§ University of Bonn / iseringhausen@cs.uni-bonn.de

Michael Wand‡

Julian Iseringhausen§

literature for reconstructing object geometry and reflectance
from three-bounce indirect measurements are combinatorial
approaches [18], parametric model fits using simple, highly
efficient forward models [15, 18, 19, 27, 29, 34], backprojection not unlike what is used in computed tomography
[20, 35], inverse filtering approaches [12, 28] and spacetime diffraction integrals [23, 24]. For the purpose of this
paper, we focus on such active-illumination, time-of-flight
input despite the fact that steady-state or even purely passive
approaches have also been demonstrated [2, 4, 17, 19].
Representation learning methods based on deep neural networks have become a powerful and widely adopted
tool for representing complex mappings between highdimensional (function) spaces of natural signals by learning
from examples. In recent work, this includes convolutional
regressors for direct time-of-flight imaging [22]. Using
scale-space representations with short-cuts across matching
scales has turned out to be a particularly successful recipe
[31]. Generative convolutional feed-forward networks have
also been used for the creation of 3D data, including 2Dto-3D translations [7, 21, 38]. Despite this widespread success, no such approaches have so far been applied to the
NLoS reconstruction problem. We assume that this can
be attributed to the practical difficulty of generating large
amounts of NLoS training data in laboratories or natural
scenarios. A key step is therefore the development of a simulator that strikes a good balance between computational
cost and physical predictiveness so as to keep the training
problem tractable while yielding generalizable results.
In this paper, we build upon a highly efficient renderer
that has already been used to implement a relatively slow
analysis-by-synthesis scheme for NLoS reconstruction [15].
Here, we use this renderer as a source for large amounts
of training data for the NLoS reconstruction problem. We
complement this existing forward model with the following
additional contributions which are needed to arrive at a full
deep learning solution:
• We propose an end-to-end regressor that computes depth
maps from 3D space-time impulse responses.
• In order to train our network, we propose sampling strategies to generate a wide gamut of representative NLoS
datasets.
• We show that our dataset representation allows for
parameter-free target extraction.
• We propose a fast approximate model for real-world
time-of-flight histogramming setups that turns the rendered, clean datasets into data that is closer to what can
1960

