Semantic Drift Compensation for Class-Incremental Learning
Lu Yu1,2 , Bartłomiej Twardowski2 , Xialei Liu2 , Luis Herranz2 , Kai Wang2 ,
Yongmei Cheng1 , Shangling Jui3 , Joost van de Weijer2
1
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{luyu,btwardowski,xialei,lherranz,kwang,joost}@cvc.uab.es,
chengym@nwpu.edu.cn, jui.shangling@huawei.com

Abstract
Class-incremental learning of deep networks sequentially increases the number of classes to be classified. During training, the network has only access to data of one task
at a time, where each task contains several classes. In this
setting, networks suffer from catastrophic forgetting which
refers to the drastic drop in performance on previous tasks.
The vast majority of methods have studied this scenario for
classification networks, where for each new task the classification layer of the network must be augmented with additional weights to make room for the newly added classes.
Embedding networks have the advantage that new
classes can be naturally included into the network without adding new weights. Therefore, we study incremental
learning for embedding networks. In addition, we propose
a new method to estimate the drift, called semantic drift, of
features and compensate for it without the need of any exemplars. We approximate the drift of previous tasks based
on the drift that is experienced by current task data. We
perform experiments on fine-grained datasets, CIFAR100
and ImageNet-Subset. We demonstrate that embedding networks suffer significantly less from catastrophic forgetting.
We outperform existing methods which do not require exemplars and obtain competitive results compared to methods
which store exemplars. Furthermore, we show that our proposed SDC when combined with existing methods to prevent
forgetting consistently improves results. 1

1. Introduction
Future learning machines should be able to adapt to an
ever-changing world. They should continuously learn new
tasks without forgetting previously learned tasks. Other
than the generally applied setup, where training data for all
1 Code available at https://github.com/yulu0724/SDC-IL.

D
B
A

B'
A'

E
F

C'

C
Semantic Drift Vector:

Figure 1: T-SNE visualization of embedding space after
finetuning. A, B, C indicate prototypes of task 1 after training task 1; A’,B’,C’ and D,E,F respectively for task 1 and
2 after training for task 2. The semantic drift (indicating
forgetting) from task 1 is given by red vectors. Our method
estimates this and compensates the prototypes accordingly.
tasks is simultaneously available, in continual learning tasks
are learned in a consecutive manner. At each moment the algorithm has only access to the data of a single task. For deep
neural networks, one could finetune the network on the data
of the latest task. However, in the absence of training data
of previous tasks, the network suffers from catastrophic forgetting [26]. This refers to a drastic drop in performance on
previous tasks. Continual learning studies strategies to mitigate the impact of catastrophic forgetting [17, 19, 30].
Continual learning has explored a variety of strategies to
prevent networks from forgetting previously learned tasks.
Li et al. [19] propose a method called learning without forgetting (LwF). They use the same data to supervise learning
16982

