f-BRS: Rethinking Backpropagating Refinement for Interactive Segmentation
Konstantin Sofiiuk

Ilia Petrov

Olga Barinova

Anton Konushin

{k.sofiiuk, ilia.petrov, o.barinova, a.konushin}@samsung.com

Samsung AI Center – Moscow

Abstract
Deep neural networks have become a mainstream approach to interactive segmentation. As we show in our experiments, while for some images a trained network provides accurate segmentation result with just a few clicks,
for some unknown objects it cannot achieve satisfactory result even with a large amount of user input. Recently proposed backpropagating refinement scheme (BRS) [15] introduces an optimization problem for interactive segmentation that results in significantly better performance for
the hard cases. At the same time, BRS requires running forward and backward pass through a deep network several times that leads to significantly increased
computational budget per click compared to other methods. We propose f-BRS (feature backpropagating refinement scheme) that solves an optimization problem with respect to auxiliary variables instead of the network inputs,
and requires running forward and backward passes just
for a small part of a network. Experiments on GrabCut,
Berkeley, DAVIS and SBD datasets set new state-of-theart at an order of magnitude lower time per click compared to original BRS [15]. The code and trained models
are available at https://github.com/saic-vul/
fbrs_interactive_segmentation.

1. Introduction
The development of robust models for visual understanding is tightly coupled with data annotation. For instance,
one self-driving car can produce about 1Tb of data every
day. Due to constant changes in environment new data
should be annotated regularly.
Object segmentation provides fine-grained scene representation and can be useful in many applications, e.g. autonomous driving, robotics, medical image analysis, etc.
However, practical use of object segmentation is now limited due to extremely high annotation costs. Several large
segmentation benchmarks [3, 12] with millions of annotated
object instances came out recently. Annotation of these
datasets became feasible with the use of automated inter-

active segmentation methods [1, 3].
Interactive segmentation has been a topic of research for
a long time [26, 10, 11, 13, 2, 31, 18, 22, 15]. The main
scenario considered in the papers is click-based segmentation when the user provides input in a form of positive and
negative clicks. Classical approaches formulate this task as
an optimization problem [4, 10, 11, 13, 2]. These methods have many built-in heuristics and do not use semantic
priors to full extent, thus requiring a large amount of input
from the user. On the other hand, deep learning-based methods [31, 18, 22] tend to overuse image semantics. While
showing great results on the objects that were present in the
training set, they tend to perform poorly on unseen object
classes. Recent works propose different solutions to these
problems [19, 18, 21]. Still, state-of-the-art networks for interactive segmentation are either able to accurately segment
the object of interest after a few clicks or do not provide satisfactory result after any reasonable number of clicks (see
Section 5.1 for experiments).
The recently proposed backpropagating refinement
scheme (BRS) [15] brings together optimization-based and
deep learning-based approaches to interactive segmentation. BRS enforces the consistency of the resulting object mask with user-provided clicks. The effect of BRS is
based on the fact that small perturbations of the inputs for
a deep network can cause massive changes in the network
output [29]. Thus, BRS requires running forward and backward pass multiple times through the whole model, which
substantially increases computational budget per click compared to other methods and is not practical for many enduser scenarios.
In this work we propose f-BRS (feature backpropagating refinement scheme) that reparameterizes the optimization problem and thus requires running forward and backward passes only through a small part of the network (i.e.
last several layers). Straightforward optimization for activations in a small sub-network would not lead to the desired
effect because the receptive field of the convolutions in the
last layers relative to the output is too small. Thus we introduce a set of auxiliary parameters for optimization that
are invariant to the position in the image. We show that op-

8623

