MonoPair: Monocular 3D Object Detection Using Pairwise Spatial Relationships
Yongjian Chen

Lei Tai
Kai Sun
Alibaba Group

Mingyang Li

{yongjian.cyj, tailei.tl, sk157164, mingyangli}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection is an essential component in autonomous driving while challenging to solve, especially for those occluded samples which are only partially visible. Most detectors consider each 3D object as an
independent training target, inevitably resulting in a lack
of useful information for occluded samples. To this end,
we propose a novel method to improve the monocular 3D
object detection by considering the relationship of paired
samples. This allows us to encode spatial constraints for
partially-occluded objects from their adjacent neighbors.
Specifically, the proposed detector computes uncertaintyaware predictions for object locations and 3D distances for
the adjacent object pairs, which are subsequently jointly
optimized by nonlinear least squares. Finally, the onestage uncertainty-aware prediction structure and the postoptimization module are dedicatedly integrated for ensuring the run-time efficiency. Experiments demonstrate that
our method yields the best performance on KITTI 3D detection benchmark, by outperforming state-of-the-art competitors by wide margins, especially for the hard samples.

1. Introduction
3D object detection plays an essential role in various
computer vision applications such as autonomous driving,
unmanned aircrafts, robotic manipulation, and augmented
reality. In this paper, we tackle this problem by using a
monocular camera, primarily for autonomous driving use
cases. Most existing methods on 3D object detection require accurate depth information, which can be obtained
from either 3D LiDARs [8, 30, 34, 35, 23, 45] or multicamera systems [6, 7, 20, 29, 32, 41]. Due to the lack
of directly computable depth information, 3D object detection using a monocular camera is generally considered
a much more challenging problem than using LiDARs or
multi-camera systems. Despite the difficulties in computer
vision algorithm design, solutions relying on a monocular
camera can potentially allow for low-cost, low-power, and

deployment-flexible systems in real applications. Therefore, there is a growing trend on performing monocular
3D object detection in research community in recent years
[3, 5, 26, 27, 31, 36].
Existing monocular 3D object detection methods have
achieved considerable high accuracy for normal objects in
autonomous driving. However, in real scenarios, there are
a large number of objects that are under heavy occlusions,
which pose significant algorithmic challenges. Unlike objects in the foreground which are fully visible, useful information for occluded objects is naturally limited. Straightforward methods on solving this problem are to design networks to exploit useful information as much as possible,
which however only lead to limited improvement. Inspired
by image captioning methods which seek to use scene graph
and object relationships [10, 22, 42] , we propose to fully
leverage the spatial relationship between close-by objects
instead of individually focusing on information-constrained
occluded objects. This is well aligned with human’s intuition that human beings can naturally infer positions of the
occluded cars from their neighbors on busy streets.
Mathematically, our key idea is to optimize the predicted
3D locations of objects guided by their uncertainty-aware
spatial constraints. Specifically, we propose a novel detector to jointly compute object locations and spatial constraints between matched object pairs. The pairwise spatial constraint is modeled as a keypoint located in the geometric center between two neighboring objects, which effectively encodes all necessary geometric information. By
doing that, it enables the network to capture the geometric context among objects explicitly. During the prediction, we impose aleatoric uncertainty into the baseline 3D
object detector to model the noise of the output. The uncertainty is learned in an unsupervised manner, which is
able to enhance the network robustness properties significantly. Finally, we formulate the predicted 3D locations
as well as their pairwise spatial constraints into a nonlinear least squares problem to optimize the locations with a
graph optimization framework. The computed uncertainties are used to weight each term in the cost function. Experiments on challenging KITTI 3D datasets demonstrate

12093

