Domain Decluttering: Simplifying Images to Mitigate
Synthetic-Real Domain Shift and Improve Depth Estimation
Yunhan Zhao1 Shu Kong2 Daeyun Shin1 Charless Fowlkes1
1
2
UC Irvine
Carnegie Mellon University
{yunhaz5, daeyuns, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

Real-to-synthetic Style Transfer

Original (NYUv2)

Object Removal

Object Insertion

Real-to-synthetic Style Transfer

Input Image

Original (NYUv2)

shuk@andrew.cmu.edu

-

L1 Error Map

Predicted Depth

+

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: (a) The presence of novel objects and clutter can drastically degrade the output of a well-trained depth predictor. (b) Standard
domain adaptation (e.g., a style translator trained with CycleGAN) only changes low-level image statistics and fails to solve the problem
(even when trained with depth data from both synthetic and real domains), while removing the clutter entirely (c) yields a remarkably
better prediction. Similarly, the insertion of a poster in (d,e) negatively affects the depth estimate and low-level domain adaptation (f) only
serves to hurt overall performance.

Abstract
Leveraging synthetically rendered data offers great potential to improve monocular depth estimation and other geometric estimation tasks, but closing the synthetic-real domain gap is a non-trivial and important task. While much
recent work has focused on unsupervised domain adaptation, we consider a more realistic scenario where a large
amount of synthetic training data is supplemented by a
small set of real images with ground-truth. In this setting,
we find that existing domain translation approaches are difficult to train and offer little advantage over simple baselines that use a mix of real and synthetic data. A key failure
mode is that real-world images contain novel objects and
clutter not present in synthetic training. This high-level domain shift isn’t handled by existing image translation models.
Based on these observations, we develop an attention
module that learns to identify and remove difficult out-ofdomain regions in real images in order to improve depth

prediction for a model trained primarily on synthetic data.
We carry out extensive experiments to validate our attendremove-complete approach (ARC) and find that it significantly outperforms state-of-the-art domain adaptation
methods for depth prediction. Visualizing the removed regions provides interpretable insights into the synthetic-real
domain gap.

1. Introduction
With a graphics rendering engine one can, in theory,
synthesize an unlimited number of scene images of interest and their corresponding ground-truth annotations [53,
29, 55, 42]. Such large-scale synthetic data increasingly
serves as a source of training data for high-capacity convolutional neural networks (CNN). Leveraging synthetic data
is particularly important for tasks such as semantic segmentation that require fine-grained labels at each pixel and can
be prohibitively expensive to manually annotate. Even more
challenging are pixel-level regression tasks where the output space is continuous. One such task, the focus of our
13330

