Attribution in Scale and Space
Shawn Xu
Google AI Healthcare

Subhashini Venugopalan
Google Research

Mukund Sundararajan
Google Inc.

jinhuaxu@google.com

vsubhashini@google.com

mukunds@google.com

Abstract
We study the attribution problem [28] for deep networks
applied to perception tasks. For vision tasks, attribution
techniques attribute the prediction of a network to the pixels
of the input image. We propose a new technique called Blur
Integrated Gradients (BlurIG). This technique has several
advantages over other methods. First, it can tell at what
scale a network recognizes an object. It produces scores
in the scale/frequency dimension, that we find captures interesting phenomena. Second, it satisfies the scale-space
axioms [14], which imply that it employs perturbations that
are free of artifact. We therefore produce explanations that
are cleaner and consistent with the operation of deep networks. Third, it eliminates the need for a ‘baseline’ parameter for Integrated Gradients [31] for perception tasks. This
is desirable because the choice of baseline has a significant
effect on the explanations. We compare the proposed technique against previous techniques and demonstrate application on three tasks: ImageNet object recognition, Diabetic
Retinopathy prediction, and AudioSet audio event identification. Code and examples are on github1 .

1. Introduction
There is considerable literature on featureimportance/attribution for deep networks [3, 28, 27,
4, 30, 21, 31, 20]. An attribution technique distributes the
prediction score (e.g. sentiment or prevalence of disease) of
a model for a specific input (e.g. paragraph of text or image)
to its base features (e.g. words or pixels); the attribution to
a base feature can be interpreted as its contribution to the
prediction.
Suppose we have a model that predicts diabetic retinopathy (DR) from an image of the fundus of the eye. The attributions identify the (signed) importances of each pixel
to the prediction. This tells us what part of the eye (e.g.
retina/optic disc/macula), the network considers important
to the prediction. We can use these attributions to debug the
1 https://github.com/PAIR-code/saliency

network—is the prediction based on a known pathology of
diabetic retinopathy. The attributions could also assist the
doctor. If the network’s prediction differs from the doctor’s
the attributions could help explain why. This could improve
diagnosis accuracy. [36] elaborates the application attributions to DR.
In this work, we study the attribution problem for perception tasks, i.e., the input is an image or a waveform and
the features are pixels or time points. Perception tasks are
different from others tasks (natural language, drug discovery, recommender systems): The base features (pixels or
time points) are never influential by themselves; information is almost always contained in higher-level features like
edges, textures or frequencies. This makes perception tasks
worthy of separate study.
Our Contributions. We use the theory of scale-space
[16] to make two contributions to the attribution literature:
Explanation in scale and space. Previous attribution techniques produced feature importance for pixels,
i.e., points in space. They do not produce localization
in frequency. We propose a technique called Blur Integrated Gradients (BlurIG) to produce explanations in both
scale/frequency and space. We can therefore tell that the detection of a steel-arch bridge is based on coarse, large-scale
features, whereas the detection of a dog-breed depends on
fine-grained features (see Figure 4b). (This is not simply a
statement that dogs are smaller than bridges. In the dataset
we study, the images frame dogs and bridges similarly.)
Perturbations free of artifacts. All attribution techniques involve perturbations of either the inputs (e.g. [31])
or the network state (e.g. [28]). The premise is that removing an important feature causes a large change in the prediction score. The literature does not however discuss if
these perturbations could accidentally add features. Then,
the change in the score could be because a different object
is detected, and not because information is destroyed. This
could result in the explanation artifacts that identify influential features that are not actually present in the input. (Compare the IG and Blur IG explanations for ‘starfish’ in Figure 3.) We discuss how the scale space-theory addresses
accidental feature creation.
19680

