Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Hierarchical Gradient Synchronization
Lanqing Hu1,2
1

Meina Kan1,2

Shiguang Shan1,2,3

Xilin Chen1,2

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing
Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
lanqing.hu@vipl.ict.ac.cn

{kanmeina,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptation attempts to boost the performance
on a target domain by borrowing knowledge from a well
established source domain. To handle the distribution gap
between two domains, the prominent approaches endeavor to extract domain-invariant features. It is known that
after a perfect domain alignment the domain-invariant representations of two domains should share the same characteristics from perspective of the overview and also any
local piece. Inspired by this, we propose a novel method
called Hierarchical Gradient Synchronization to model the
synchronization relationship among the local distribution
pieces and global distribution, aiming for more precise
domain-invariant features. Specifically, the hierarchical
domain alignments including class-wise alignment, groupwise alignment and global alignment are first constructed.
Then, these three types of alignment are constrained to be
consistent to ensure better structure preservation. As a result, the obtained features are domain invariant and intrinsically structure preserved. As evaluated on extensive domain adaptation tasks, our proposed method achieves stateof-the-art classification performance on both vanilla unsupervised domain adaptation and partial domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
The general hypothesis of machine learning is that the
training and testing data share similar distribution, which
makes the model trained on a large scale labeled data perform well on the test data. However, in many real world
applications, we usually only have access to limited amount
of labeled training data sharing similar distribution with the
testing data, which is insufficient for training a good enough
model. Domain adaptation has shown promising effect on
such a challenge by borrowing knowledge from a sophisticated set (i.e., source domain) which has a large number of

labeled data but lies in a different distribution with the test
data (i.e., target domain).
According to the scale of labeled data in target domain, domain adaptation can be categorized into supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised domain adaptation. This paper mainly concentrates on the unsupervised
domain adaptation where there is only unlabeled data in
target domain. Most existing works deal with the domain
adaptation problem by alleviating marginal distribution discrepancy (i.e., the distribution of data X) or conditional
distribution discrepancy (i.e., distribution of data X given
classes labeled with Y ). Besides, there are also some works
attempting to tackle both the marginal and conditional distribution simultaneously.
In the early days, most methods endeavor to align the
marginal distribution of source and target domains by using instance re-weighting, such as sample selection bias
[45, 7, 19] and co-variate shift [39, 1]. These approaches
are suitable for those scenarios where the source and target
domains share the same support, thus they cannot achieve
satisfactory performance in the wild scenarios.
For better handling the complicated scenarios, the common subspace methods focusing on extracting domain invariant representation came up [14, 13, 37, 12, 38]. These
methods mainly attempt to minimize the gap between
marginal distributions of two domains. In the approach of
Geodesic Flow Kernel (GFK) [13], an infinite number of
the subspaces is integrated to model domain shift between
source and target domain. In [12], a set of landmarks, i.e.,
a subset of labeled data from the source domain that have
the most similar distribution as the target domain, are uncovered to bridge the source and target domain. The methods proposed in [24] and [28] embed deep features into Reproducing Kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) and minimize the
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) of the features for distribution adaptation. JGSA [46] and PUnDA [11] mitigate
the geometrical structure gap and distribution shift jointly.
The method in [48] handles the domain shift by aligning the
14043

