End-to-End Pseudo-LiDAR for Image-Based 3D Object Detection
Rui Qian∗1,2 Divyansh Garg∗1 Yan Wang∗1 Yurong You∗1
Serge Belongie1,2 Bharath Hariharan1 Mark Campbell1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1 Wei-Lun Chao3
1
Cornell Univeristy 2 Cornell Tech 3 The Ohio State University
{rq49, dg595, yw763, yy785, sjb344, bh497, mc288, kqw4}@cornell.edu

chao.209@osu.edu

Abstract
Reliable and accurate 3D object detection is a necessity for safe autonomous driving. Although LiDAR sensors
can provide accurate 3D point cloud estimates of the environment, they are also prohibitively expensive for many
settings. Recently, the introduction of pseudo-LiDAR (PL)
has led to a drastic reduction in the accuracy gap between
methods based on LiDAR sensors and those based on cheap
stereo cameras. PL combines state-of-the-art deep neural networks for 3D depth estimation with those for 3D
object detection by converting 2D depth map outputs to
3D point cloud inputs. However, so far these two networks have to be trained separately. In this paper, we introduce a new framework based on differentiable Change
of Representation (CoR) modules that allow the entire PL
pipeline to be trained end-to-end. The resulting framework
is compatible with most state-of-the-art networks for both
tasks and in combination with PointRCNN improves over
PL consistently across all benchmarks — yielding the highest entry on the KITTI image-based 3D object detection
leaderboard at the time of submission. Our code will be
made available at https://github.com/mileyan/
pseudo-LiDAR_e2e.

1. Introduction
One of the most critical components in autonomous driving is 3D object detection: a self-driving car must accurately detect and localize objects such as cars and pedestrians in order to plan the path safely and avoid collisions.
To this end, existing algorithms primarily rely on LiDAR
(Light Detection and Ranging) as the input signal, which
provides precise 3D point clouds of the surrounding environment. LiDAR, however, is very expensive. A 64-beam
model can easily cost more than the car alone, making selfdriving cars prohibitively expensive for the general public.
One solution is to explore alternative sensors like com∗ Equal contributions

Figure 1: An illustration of the effectiveness of our end-to-end
pipeline. The green bounding box is the ground truth detection of
a car. The yellow points are points from LiDAR. The pink point
cloud is generated from an independently trained depth estimator,
which is inaccurate and lies out of the green box. By making depth
estimation and 3D object detection end-to-end, we obtain a better
blue point cloud. Upon this, the object detector could yield the
state-of-the-art performance.

modity (stereo) cameras. Although there is still a noticeable gap to LiDAR, it is an area with exceptional progress
in the past year [14, 20, 29, 36, 46, 45]. For example,
pseudo-LiDAR (PL) [36, 45] converts a depth map estimated from stereo images into a 3D point cloud, followed
by applying (any) existing LiDAR-based detectors. Taking advantage of the state-of-the-art algorithms from both
ends [2, 15, 30, 34, 45], pseudo-LiDAR achieves the highest image-based 3D detection accuracy (34.1% and 42.4%
at the moderate case) on the KITTI leaderboard [10, 11].
While the modularity of pseudo-LiDAR is conceptual
appealing, the combination of two independently trained
components can yield an undesired performance hit. In
particular, pseudo-LiDAR requires two systems: a depth
estimator, typically trained on a generic depth estimation
(stereo) image corpus, and an object detector trained on the
point cloud data converted from the resulting depth estimates. It is unlikely that the two training objectives are
optimally aligned for the ultimate goal, to maximize final
detection accuracy. For example, depth estimators are typi15881

