Fast-MVSNet: Sparse-to-Dense Multi-View Stereo With Learned Propagation
and Gauss-Newton Refinement
Zehao Yu
ShanghaiTech University

Shenghua Gao
ShanghaiTech University

yuzh@shanghaitech.edu.cn

gaoshh@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

photo-consistency metrics (e.g., SSD, NCC). Designing a
robust metric itself, however, is a challenging task, and
thus some regularization techniques [25, 18] are required
(e.g., using MRF to enforce spatial consistency [25]). While
these methods [34, 13] have shown impressive results, they
are still incompetent on low-textured, specular, and reflective regions where local features are not discriminative for
matching. Recent work [20, 43, 22, 23] shows that by using Deep CNNs, the performance of MVS can be further
improved. For instance, in [43], an MVSNet is proposed,
which builds a cost volume upon CNN features and uses
3D CNNs for cost volume regularization. Such an MVSNet
significantly improves the overall 3D reconstruction quality
compared to traditional hand-crafted metric based methods.

Almost all previous deep learning-based multi-view
stereo (MVS) approaches focus on improving reconstruction quality. Besides quality, efficiency is also a desirable feature for MVS in real scenarios. Towards this end,
this paper presents a Fast-MVSNet, a novel sparse-to-dense
coarse-to-fine framework, for fast and accurate depth estimation in MVS. Specifically, in our Fast-MVSNet, we first
construct a sparse cost volume for learning a sparse and
high-resolution depth map. Then we leverage a smallscale convolutional neural network to encode the depth dependencies for pixels within a local region to densify the
sparse high-resolution depth map. At last, a simple but
efficient Gauss-Newton layer is proposed to further optimize the depth map. On one hand, the high-resolution
depth map, the data-adaptive propagation method and the
Gauss-Newton layer jointly guarantee the effectiveness of
our method. On the other hand, all modules in our FastMVSNet are lightweight and thus guarantee the efficiency
of our approach. Besides, our approach is also memoryfriendly because of the sparse depth representation. Extensive experimental results show that our method is 5× and
14× faster than Point-MVSNet and R-MVSNet, respectively,
while achieving comparable or even better results on the
challenging Tanks and Temples dataset as well as the DTU
dataset. Code is available at https://github.com/
svip-lab/FastMVSNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims at recovering the dense
3D structure of a scene from a set of calibrated images.
It is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision
and has been extensively studied for decades, because of its
wide applications in 3D reconstruction, augmented reality,
autonomous driving, robotics, etc [1, 11].
The core of MVS is the dense correspondence across
images. Traditional methods usually rely on hand-crafted

Nevertheless, all these deep learning-based methods use
multi-scale 3D CNNs to predict the depth maps [43, 20, 21]
or occupancy grids [22, 23], which are thus memoryconsuming, as the memory requirement for 3D volume
grows cubically. This restricts their application to highresolution MVS. Therefore, some recent work [40, 33, 44,
7] has been proposed to address this memory-intensive issue. For instance, R-MVSNet [44] uses Convolutional GRU
to replace 3D CNNs and thus reduces the memory requirement to quadratic, then a variational depth refinement is
performed as a post-processing step to improve accuracy.
Point-MVSNet [7] uses a coarse-to-fine strategy that first
builds a relatively small 3D cost volume to predict a coarse
depth map. Then a PointFlow module is used to upsample and refine the coarse results iteratively. Although these
methods avoid the memory issue in MVS and achieve stateof-the-art 3D reconstruction quality on some challenging
benchmark datasets, their efficiency is still far from satisfactory. In particular, R-MVSNet [44] needs 6.9 seconds to refine a depth map with size 400×300 and Point-MVSNet [7]
uses around 3 seconds to refine a depth map of the size
640×480, which prohibits their application in large-scale
scenarios. Besides 3D reconstruction quality, efficiency is
also a desirable feature for MVS in real scenarios, which
thus motivates us to work towards improving the efficiency
of deep learning-based MVS methods.

1949

