Disentangled and Controllable Face Image Generation via 3D
Imitative-Contrastive Learning
Yu Deng*1,2
1

Jiaolong Yang2 Dong Chen2 Fang Wen2 Xin Tong2
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia

{t-yudeng,jiaoyan,doch,fangwen,xtong}@microsoft.com
Expression

Pose
Yaw: +15° Pitch: +5°

Yaw: -15° Pitch -5°

Smile

Raise eyebrows

Illumination
Right lighting

Left lighting

~
{zi}
Generated image
Random corpus

Figure 1: This paper presents a face image synthesis approach that generates realistic face images of virtual people with
independent latent variables of identity, expression, pose, and illumination. The latent space is interpretable and highly
disentangled, which allows precise control of the targeted images (e.g., degree of each pose angle, lighting intensity and
direction), as shown in the top row. The bottom row shows the generated images when we keep the identity and randomize
other properties. The faces generated by our method are not any real person in the world.

Abstract
We propose an approach for face image generation of
virtual people with disentangled, precisely-controllable latent representations for identity of non-existing people, expression, pose, and illumination. We embed 3D priors into
adversarial learning and train the network to imitate the
image formation of an analytic 3D face deformation and
rendering process. To deal with the generation freedom induced by the domain gap between real and rendered faces,
we further introduce contrastive learning to promote disentanglement by comparing pairs of generated images. Experiments show that through our imitative-contrastive learning, the factor variations are very well disentangled and the
properties of a generated face can be precisely controlled.
We also analyze the learned latent space and present several meaningful properties supporting factor disentanglement. Our method can also be used to embed real images
into the disentangled latent space. We hope our method
could provide new understandings of the relationship between physical properties and deep image synthesis.
* This work was done when Yu Deng was an intern at MSRA.

1. Introduction
Face image synthesis has achieved tremendous success
in the past few years with the rapid advance of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [14]. State-of-the art GAN
models, such as the recent StyleGAN [23], can generate
high-fidelity virtual face images that are sometimes even
hard to distinguish from real ones.
Compared to the vast body of works devoted to improving the image generation quality and tailoring GANs for
various applications, synthesizing face images de novo with
multiple disentangled latent spaces characterizing different
properties of a face image is still not well investigated. Such
a disentangled latent representation is desirable for constrained face image generation (e.g., random identities with
specific illuminations or poses). It can also derive a disentangled representation of a real image by embedding it
into the learned feature space. A seminal GAN research
for disentangled image generation is InfoGAN [6], where
the representation disentanglement is learned in an unsupervised manner via maximizing the mutual information between the latent variables and the observation. However,
15154

