Cross-Domain Semantic Segmentation via Domain-Invariant
Interactive Relation Transfer
Fengmao Lv1∗ †

Tao Liang1,2† Xiang Chen2

Guosheng Lin3

1

Center of Statistical Research & School of Statistics, Southwestern University of Finance and
Economics, China
2
Content Platform of Center & Content Development Platform, Tencent, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{fengmaolv,taoliangdpg}@126.com

chx245296678@gmail.com

Abstract
Exploiting photo-realistic synthetic data to train semantic segmentation models has received increasing attention
over the past years. However, the domain mismatch between synthetic and real images will cause a significant performance drop when the model trained with synthetic images is directly applied to real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose a new domain adaptation approach, called
Pivot Interaction Transfer (PIT). Our method mainly focuses on constructing pivot information that is common
knowledge shared across domains as a bridge to promote
the adaptation of semantic segmentation model from synthetic domains to real-world domains. Specifically, we first
infer the image-level category information about the target
images, which is then utilized to facilitate pixel-level transfer for semantic segmentation, with the assumption that the
interactive relation between the image-level category information and the pixel-level semantic information is invariant
across domains. To this end, we propose a novel multi-level
region expansion mechanism that aligns both the imagelevel and pixel-level information. Comprehensive experiments on the adaptation from both GTAV and SYNTHIA
to Cityscapes clearly demonstrate the superiority of our
method.

1. Introduction
Towards thorough autonomous-driving, road scene segmentation, which aims to acquire detailed understanding
about road environments, is a key functionality. Over the
∗ Corresponding author: F. Lv (email: fengmaolv@126.com).
† indicates equal contribution.

gslin@ntu.edu.sg

past few years, deep convolutional neural networks have
gained great advances in semantic segmentation [21, 2, 19].
However, to train a good segmentation model, it usually requires a huge amount of time and labor effort to obtain sufficient pixel-level annotations of real-world images beforehand. To reduce the labeling consumption, one can turn to
collect photo-realistic synthetic data from game simulators
(e.g., Grand Theft Auto V), where the full pixel-level annotations can be generated automatically [27, 28]. But due to
the clear domain difference between the synthetic (source)
images and real-world (target) images, it will cause a dramatic performance drop if the model trained with the synthetic images is directly applied to real-world scenarios.
In order to promote the adaptation of semantic segmentation model from synthetic domains to real-world domains,
we propose a novel domain adaptation approach dubbed
Pivot Interaction Transfer (PIT) by constructing pivot information that is common knowledge shared across domains
to bridge the domain gap. To this end, we first infer the
image-level category information about the target images,
which can be less challenging to estimate due to the strong
idiosyncrasies of urban traffic scenes (e.g., the region size
and spatial layout of buildings, lights, persons, etc.) [41].
There exists a strong interaction between the image-level
categories and the pixel-level semantic information: the
image-level category information provides global estimation of the categories appeared in the whole image, and
in the meanwhile, suppresses implausible pixel-level label
prediction for segmentation; on the other hand, the specific
pixel-level label information in each image will immediately reveal the image-level categories. Since the images
of urban traffic scenes have very strong idiosyncrasies [41],
the interactive relation between the image-level categories
and the pixel-level semantic information can be invariant

4334

