Video Super-resolution with Temporal Group Attention
Takashi Isobe1,2†, Songjiang Li2 , Xu Jia2∗ , Shanxin Yuan2 , Gregory Slabaugh2 ,
Chunjing Xu2 , Ya-Li Li1 , Shengjin Wang1∗, Qi Tian2
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
jbj18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

{x.jia, songjiang.li, shanxin.yuan, gregory.slabaugh, tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Video super-resolution, which aims at producing a highresolution video from its corresponding low-resolution version, has recently drawn increasing attention. In this work,
we propose a novel method that can effectively incorporate temporal information in a hierarchical way. The input
sequence is divided into several groups, with each one corresponding to a kind of frame rate. These groups provide
complementary information to recover missing details in the
reference frame, which is further integrated with an attention
module and a deep intra-group fusion module. In addition,
a fast spatial alignment is proposed to handle videos with
large motion. Extensive results demonstrate the capability of
the proposed model in handling videos with various motion.
It achieves favorable performance against state-of-the-art
methods on several benchmark datasets. Code is available
at https://github.com/junpan19/VSR_TGA.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution aims at producing high-resolution (HR)
images from the corresponding low-resolution (LR) ones by
filling in missing details. For single image super-resolution,
an HR image is estimated by exploring natural image priors and self-similarity within the image. For video superresolution, both spatial information across positions and
temporal information across frames can be used to enhance
details for an LR frame. Recently the task of video superresolution has drawn much attention in both the research and
industrial communities. For example, video super-resolution
is required when videos recorded for surveillance are zoomed
in to recognize a person’s identity or a car’s license, or when
videos are projected to a high definition display device for
visually pleasant watching.
† The work was done in Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. VSR results for the Calender clip in Vid4 [1]. Our method
produces result with more details (cyan arrow), and fewer artifacts
(red arrow) than DUF [8] and the recent proprosed EDVR [28].

Most video super-resolution methods [9, 1, 25, 29, 17]
adopt the following pipeline: motion estimation, motion
compensation, fusion and upsampling. They estimate optical
flow between a reference frame and other frames in either an
offline or online manner, and then align all other frames to
the reference with backward warping. However, this is not
optimal for video SR. Methods with explicit motion compensation rely heavily on the accuracy of motion estimation. Inaccurate motion estimation and alignment, especially when
there is occlusion or complex motion, results in distortion
and errors, deteriorating the final super-resolution performance. Besides, per-pixel motion estimation such as optical
flow often suffers a heavy computational load. Recently Jo et
al. [8] proposed the DUF method which implicitly utilizes
motion information among LR frames to recover HR frames
by means of dynamic upsampling filters. It is less influenced
by the accuracy of motion estimation but its performance
is limited by the size of the dynamic upsampling filters. In
addition, the temporal information integration process from
other frames to the reference frame is conducted without
explicitly taking the reference frame into consideration. This

8008

