Cylindrical Convolutional Networks for
Joint Object Detection and Viewpoint Estimation
Sunghun Joung1 , Seungryong Kim2,3 , Hanjae Kim1 , Minsu Kim1 ,
Ig-Jae Kim4 , Junghyun Cho4 , and Kwanghoon Sohn1,∗
1
Yonsei University 2 École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
3
Korea University 4 Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{sunghunjoung,incohjk,minsukim320,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr
seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr, {drjay,jhcho}@kist.re.kr

Existing techniques to encode spatial invariance within
deep convolutional neural networks only model 2D transformation fields. This does not account for the fact that
objects in a 2D space are a projection of 3D ones, and thus
they have limited ability to severe object viewpoint changes.
To overcome this limitation, we introduce a learnable module, cylindrical convolutional networks (CCNs), that exploit cylindrical representation of a convolutional kernel
defined in the 3D space. CCNs extract a view-specific feature through a view-specific convolutional kernel to predict
object category scores at each viewpoint. With the viewspecific feature, we simultaneously determine objective category and viewpoints using the proposed sinusoidal softargmax module. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the cylindrical convolutional networks on joint
object detection and viewpoint estimation.

1. Introduction
Recent significant success on visual recognition, such
as image classification [33], semantic segmentation [24],
object detection [12], and instance segmentation [13], has
been achieved by the advent of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). Their capability of handling geometric
transformations mostly comes from the extensive data augmentation and the large model capacity [19, 15, 31], having
limited ability to deal with severe geometric variations, e.g.,
object scale, viewpoints and part deformations. To realize
this, several modules have been proposed to explicitly handle geometric deformations. Formally, they transform the
This research was supported by R&D program for Advanced
Integrated-intelligence for Identification (AIID) through the National Research Foundation of KOREA (NRF) funded by Ministry of Science and
ICT (NRF-2018M3E3A1057289).
∗ Corresponding author

c

𝟎°

view-specific feature

Abstract

𝟗𝟎°
𝟒𝟓°

Figure 1. Illustration of cylindrical convolutional networks
(CCNs) : Given a single image of objects, we apply a view-specific
convolutional kernel to extract the shape characteristic of object
from different viewpoints.

input data by modeling spatial transformation [16, 3, 20],
e.g., affine transformation, or by learning the offset of sampling locations in the convolutional operators [42, 4]. However, all of these works only use a visible feature to handle geometric deformation in the 2D space, while viewpoint
variations occur in the 3D space.
To solve the problems of viewpoint variations, joint
object detection and viewpoint estimation using CNNs
[36, 35, 26, 6] has recently attracted the interest. This involves first estimating the location and category of objects
in an image, and then predicting the relative rigid transformation between the camera coordinate in the 3D space
and each image coordinate in the 2D space. However, category classification and viewpoint estimation problems are
inherently contradictory, since the former requires a viewinvariant feature representation while the latter requires a
view-specific feature representation. Therefore, incorporating viewpoint estimation networks to a conventional object
detector in a multi-task fashion does not help each other, as
demonstrated in several works [26, 7].
Recent studies on 3D object recognition have shown that
object viewpoint information can improve the recognition
performance. Typically, they first represent a 3D object
114163

