ADINet: Attribute driven incremental network for retinal image classification
Qier Meng
Research Center for Medical Bigdata,
National Institute of Informatics

Satoh Shin’ichi
Research Center for Medical Bigdata,
National Institute of Informatics

qiermeng@nii.ac.jp

satoh@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Retinal diseases encompass a variety of types, including
different diseases and severity levels. Training a model with
all possible types of disease is impractical. Dynamically
training a model is necessary when a patient with a new
disease appears. Deep learning techniques have stood out
in recent years, but they suffer from catastrophic forgetting,
i.e., a dramatic decrease in performance when new training
classes appear. We found that keeping the feature distribution of a teacher model helps maintain the performance of
incremental learning. In this paper, we design a framework
named “Attribute Driven Incremental Network” (ADINet),
a new architecture that integrates class label prediction and
attribute prediction into an incremental learning framework
to boost the classification performance. With image-level
classification, we apply knowledge distillation (KD) to retain the knowledge of base classes. With attribute prediction, we calculate the weight of each attribute of an image and use these weights for more precise attribute prediction. We designed attribute distillation (AD) loss to retain
the information of base class attributes as new classes appear. This incremental learning can be performed multiple
times with a moderate drop in performance. The results of
an experiment on our private retinal fundus image dataset
demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods. For demonstrating the generalization of our proposed method, we test it on the ImageNet150K-sub dataset and show good performance.

1. Introduction
Retinal diseases encompass a variety of types, including different diseases and severities. Usually, there are several decades of types of retinal diseases [29]. As the diseases change in different stages, it is difficult to collect all
of the disease types at the same time to train a model, especially in the case of some usual disease like retinal vein
occlusion or central serous chorioretinopathy. Dynamically
training a model is necessary when a patient with a new

Figure 1. Examples of several retinal diseases. Figure illustrates
our basic idea. We study images with image-level labels and corresponding attributes of base classes. We predict labels and attributes of new classes with teacher model.

disease appears. In the medical imaging application, there
is an increasing demand for systems that can implement
incremental learning over a series of tasks. Because it is
difficult to obtain all of the old dataset due to the privacy
of the disease dataset. Deep convolutional networks have
achieved great performance in classification tasks in computer vision. However, the incremental learning paradigm
still suffers from catastrophic forgetting, i.e., a performance
decrease for base classes when datasets for new classes appear [27]. In real-world object classification, systems must
be continuously upgraded by examining new knowledge.
However, retraining a modal always with old data and new
data together is impractical [30]. When a new type of data
appears, a natural way of performing incremental learning
is to fine-tune a pre-trained model on new data. Figure 1
shows the basic idea of our proposed method and example
images of a retinal disease dataset.
Visual attributes are an important research area in computer vision because they can be a powerful mid-level representation that can bridge low-level features and high-level
human recognition. Attributes used for mid-level representation have been investigated in a variety of computer vision
tasks, including recognition, classification, and retrieval, for
14033

