FocalMix: Semi-Supervised Learning for 3D Medical Image Detection
Dong Wang1∗ Yuan Zhang2∗ Kexin Zhang2,3† Liwei Wang1,2
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Yizhun Medical AI Co., Ltd
{wangdongcis,yuan.z,zhangkexin,wanglw}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Applying artificial intelligence techniques in medical
imaging is one of the most promising areas in medicine.
However, most of the recent success in this area highly relies on large amounts of carefully annotated data, whereas
annotating medical images is a costly process. In this paper, we propose a novel method, called FocalMix, which,
to the best of our knowledge, is the first to leverage recent advances in semi-supervised learning (SSL) for 3D
medical image detection. We conducted extensive experiments on two widely used datasets for lung nodule detection, LUNA16 and NLST. Results show that our proposed
SSL methods can achieve a substantial improvement of up to
17.3% over state-of-the-art supervised learning approaches
with 400 unlabeled CT scans.

1. Introduction
Medical imaging plays an essential part in modern medical practice. One of the significant trends in this area is to
exploit advanced techniques in deep learning (DL) and artificial intelligence (AI) to achieve automatic medical image
analysis. Prior work has already demonstrated promising
results in various specific tasks, such as skin cancer classification [8], retinal fundus image analysis [12], with some
preliminary real-world applications, e.g., [5]. However, we
argue that the success should be attributed to not only recent
progress in deep learning techniques but also large volumes
of carefully annotated data.
On the one hand, annotating medical images is an expensive and time-consuming process. This process requires experienced clinical experts to read examination reports, combine them with other test results, and sometimes consult
with other experts. Furthermore, it is even more difficult
to manually annotate such 3D images as CT and MRI with
∗ Equal contribution.
† Part of this work was done during internship at Yizhun Medical AI.

substantially more information. On the other hand, there are
a large number of raw medical images stored in hospital information systems. The cost of retrieving them is negligible
relative to the high expenses of human annotation. Therefore, it becomes a necessary research question whether we
can leverage these raw medical images with little annotation
to improve the diagnostic accuracy of deep learning models.
Meanwhile, semi-supervised learning (SSL) has attracted a lot of research efforts in recent years. Most of
the latest SSL methods generally add an auxiliary loss term
defined on unlabeled data (e.g., consistency regularization
term [30]), or even linear interpolations of both labeled and
unlabeled data (i.e., MixUp augmentation [39]), into the
loss function for better generalization capacities and hence
better performances on the test set. Some of them have
achieved great success on image classification datasets such
as CIFAR [16], which fully demonstrates the potential value
of utilizing unlabeled data.
Applying recent advances of SSL to medical imaging
problems seems to be a tempting approach. However, since
people are more concerned with lesion detection tasks in
medical imaging as opposed to the widely studied classification task in the existing SSL literature, many technical details remain unexplored. For instance, modern SSL frameworks generally require the loss function to be able to deal
with soft labels (e.g., a smooth probability over classes),
whereas most one-stage lesion detection models use the focal loss [22], which has no such natural extension. Also,
state-of-the-art SSL methods use average ensembles to obtain pseudo-labels for unlabeled data. Nonetheless, it is
hard to take the average over bounding boxes predicted by
detection models. Last but not least, very few researches
have touched on data augmentation for medical images,
which, however, is almost an indispensable component for
SSL approaches to achieve their recent success.
In this paper, we discuss a principled method, called FocalMix, for tailoring modern SSL frameworks to overcome
the issues mentioned above. First, we propose a generic
generalization of the focal loss that allows the usage of soft-

3951

