Physically Realizable Adversarial Examples for LiDAR Object Detection
James Tu1 Mengye Ren1,2
Bin Yang1,2 Richard Du3

Siva Manivasagam1,2 Ming Liang1
Frank Cheng1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2

{james.tu,mren3,manivasagam,ming.liang,byang10,frank.cheng,urtasun}@uber.com
rdu@princeton.edu
1

Uber ATG

2

University of Toronto

3

Princeton University

Abstract
Modern autonomous driving systems rely heavily on
deep learning models to process point cloud sensory data;
meanwhile, deep models have been shown to be susceptible
to adversarial attacks with visually imperceptible perturbations. Despite the fact that this poses a security concern
for the self-driving industry, there has been very little exploration in terms of 3D perception, as most adversarial
attacks have only been applied to 2D flat images. In this paper, we address this issue and present a method to generate
universal 3D adversarial objects to fool LiDAR detectors.
In particular, we demonstrate that placing an adversarial
object on the rooftop of any target vehicle to hide the vehicle
entirely from LiDAR detectors with a success rate of 80%.
We report attack results on a suite of detectors using various input representation of point clouds. We also conduct
a pilot study on adversarial defense using data augmentation. This is one step closer towards safer self-driving under
unseen conditions from limited training data.

1. Introduction
Modern autonomous driving systems use deep neural
networks (DNNs) to process LiDAR point clouds in order
to perceive the world [20, 34, 45]. Despite introducing significant performance improvements, DNNs have been previously found to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks when
using image inputs [35, 15, 18, 2], where a small perturbation in the input pixels can cause drastic changes in the output predictions. The potential vulnerabilities, in conjunction with the safety-critical nature of self-driving, motivate
us to investigate the possibility of disrupting autonomous
driving systems with adversarial attacks.
Image perturbations alone however, are not enough for
modern autonomous driving systems, which are typically
equipped with LiDAR sensors producing point clouds as the
primary main sensory input. Several previous works have
shown successful attacks [36, 39, 43] with point cloud perturbations, generating salient modifications by adding, re-

Put Our Adversarial
Mesh on the Vehicle

Road Scene

Vehicle Detected

Road Scene

Vehicle Not Detected

Figure 1: In this work we produce a physically realizable
adversarial object that can make vehicles “invisible”. After placing the object on the rooftop of a target vehicle, the
vehicle will no longer be detected by a LiDAR detector.
moving, and modifying points. Although these attacks work
in theory,arbitrary to point clouds are not always physically
realizable. For instance, a given point cloud may be impossible to generate from a LiDAR sensor due to the lasers’
fixed angular frequencies and light projection geometry.
Towards generating physically realizable attacks, Cao
et al. [7] propose to learn an adversarial mesh capable of
generating adversarial point clouds with a LiDAR renderer.
However, their work only considers learning an adversarial mesh for a few specific frames. As a result, the learned
3D object is not universal and may not be reused in other
3D scenes. Moreover, they have only evaluated their attack
on a very small in-house dataset that contains around a few
hundred frames.
In contrast to [7], we aim to learn a universal and physically realizable adversary. Furthermore, we craft 3D objects
in a novel setting where they are placed on top of vehicles as
rooftop cargo. Such objects can be used in any scene and on
any types of small vehicles, and can hide the entire host vehicle from a strong LiDAR detector [41] with a success rate
113716

