Multi-Modality Cross Attention Network for Image and Sentence Matching
Xi Wei1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,∗, Yan Li2 , Yongdong Zhang1 , Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China; 2 Kuaishou Technology
wx33921@mail.ustc.edu.cn; {tzzhang,fengwu,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn; liyan@kuaishou.com

Abstract
The key of image and sentence matching is to accurately measure the visual-semantic similarity between an image
and a sentence. However, most existing methods make use
of only the intra-modality relationship within each modality or the inter-modality relationship between image regions
and sentence words for the cross-modal matching task. Different from them, in this work, we propose a novel MultiModality Cross Attention (MMCA) Network for image and
sentence matching by jointly modeling the intra-modality
and inter-modality relationships of image regions and sentence words in a unified deep model. In the proposed MMCA, we design a novel cross-attention mechanism, which is
able to exploit not only the intra-modality relationship within each modality, but also the inter-modality relationship
between image regions and sentence words to complement
and enhance each other for image and sentence matching.
Extensive experimental results on two standard benchmarks including Flickr30K and MS-COCO demonstrate that the
proposed model performs favorably against state-of-the-art
image and sentence matching methods.

1. Introduction
Image and sentence matching is one of the fundamental tasks in the field of vision and language [26, 6, 13].
The goal of such a cross-modal matching task is how to
accurately measure the visual-semantic similarity between
an image and a sentence, and is related to many visionlanguage tasks including image-sentence cross-modal retrieval [21, 48, 55], visual captioning [1, 5], visual grounding [8, 53] and visual question answering [1, 52, 25, 25].
This task has drawn remarkable attention and has been
widely adopted to various applications [12, 43, 13, 48], e.g.,
finding similar sentences given an image query for image
annotation and caption, and retrieving matched images with
a sentence query for image search. Although significant progress has been achieved in recent years, it is still a
challenging problem because it requires the understanding
∗ Corresponding Author

man

surﬁng

holding

……

girl

board

dog

A man is surﬁng while holding a girl, and a dog on its own board.

Figure 1. Fine-grained representation for visual and textual elements. Our method can jointly model both intra-modality and
inter-modality relationships in a deep network.

of language semantics, visual contents, and cross-modal relationships and alignments [38].
Due to the huge visual-semantic discrepancy between vision and language [6, 42], matching images and sentences is
still far from being solved. Recently, various methods have
been proposed for this problem, which can be classified into two categories including one-to-one matching [6, 19, 28,
50, 10] and many-to-many matching [14, 12, 21, 26, 48].
One-to-one matching methods usually extract global representations for image and sentence, and then associate them
by exploiting visual-semantic embedding [42]. Most previous methods embed images and sentences independently
into the same embedding space, and then measure their similarities by feature distances in the joint space. Driven by the
success of deep learning, the main stream has been changed
to modality-specific deep feature learning, e.g., learning CNN for image and RNN for sentence. For visual-content
understanding, several deep backbone models have been developed including VGG, ResNet, GoogleNet [11, 34, 37],

10941

