Exploring Categorical Regularization for Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Chang-Dong Xu∗
Xing-Ran Zhao∗
Xin Jin
Xiu-Shen Wei†
Megvii Research Nanjing, Megvii Technology
{xuchangdong, zhaoxingran, jinxin}@megvii.com, weixs.gm@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the domain adaptive object detection problem, where the main challenge lies in signiﬁcant
domain gaps between source and target domains. Previous
work seeks to plainly align image-level and instance-level
shifts to eventually minimize the domain discrepancy. However, they still overlook to match crucial image regions and
important instances across domains, which will strongly affect domain shift mitigation. In this work, we propose a
simple but effective categorical regularization framework for
alleviating this issue. It can be applied as a plug-and-play
component on a series of Domain Adaptive Faster R-CNN
methods which are prominent for dealing with domain adaptive detection. Speciﬁcally, by integrating an image-level
multi-label classiﬁer upon the detection backbone, we can
obtain the sparse but crucial image regions corresponding
to categorical information, thanks to the weakly localization
ability of the classiﬁcation manner. Meanwhile, at the instance level, we leverage the categorical consistency between
image-level predictions (by the classiﬁer) and instance-level
predictions (by the detection head) as a regularization factor
to automatically hunt for the hard aligned instances of target domains. Extensive experiments of various domain shift
scenarios show that our method obtains a signiﬁcant performance gain over original Domain Adaptive Faster R-CNN
detectors. Furthermore, qualitative visualization and analyses can demonstrate the ability of our method for attending
on the key regions/instances targeting on domain adaptation. Our code is open-source and available at https:
//github.com/Megvii-Nanjing/CR-DA-DET.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision,
which aims to identify and localize objects of interest in an
image. In the past decade, remarkable progress has been
∗ Contributed equally.
† X.-S. Wei is the corresponding author (weixs.gm@gmail.com). This
research was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2017YFA0700800).

(a) Source Domain

(b) Target Domain

Figure 1. First row: Exampled images from Cityscapes [2] (source)
and Foggy Cityscapes [29] (target). Second row: Heatmaps by the
backbone network (VGG-16 [31]) of DA Faster R-CNN [1]. Third
row: Heatmaps by the backbone network of DA Faster R-CNN
trained with our categorical regularization framework. Our regularization framework enables more accurate alignment for crucial
regions and important instances, and thus can assist the backbone
network to activate the main objects of interest more accurately in
both domains, and lead to better adaptive detection performance.

witnessed for object detection, with the advances of largescale benchmarks [19] and modern CNN-based detection
frameworks, such as Fast/Faster R-CNN [8, 25]. However,
state-of-the-art detectors require massive training images
with bounding box annotations. This limits their generalization ability when facing new environments (i.e., the target
domain) where the object appearance, background, and even
weather condition signiﬁcantly differ from the training images (i.e., the source domain). Meanwhile, due to the high
cost of box annotations, it is not always feasible to acquire
sufﬁcient annotated training images from new environments.
In such situations, unsupervised domain adaptation offers
an appealing solution by adapting object detectors from labelrich source domains to unlabeled target domains. Among a
large number of methods, a promising manner for domain
adaptation is to utilize the domain classiﬁer to measure do-

11724

