Associate-3Ddet: Perceptual-to-Conceptual Association for 3D Point Cloud
Object Detection
Liang Du†∗1 , Xiaoqing Ye†2 , Xiao Tan2 , Jianfeng Feng1 , Zhenbo Xu3 , Errui Ding2 and Shilei Wen2
1

Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University, China, Key
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence (Fudan University),
Ministry of Education, China.
2
Baidu Inc., China.
3
University of Science and Technology of China, China.

Abstract
Object detection from 3D point clouds remains a challenging task, though recent studies pushed the envelope with
the deep learning techniques. Owing to the severe spatial
occlusion and inherent variance of point density with the
distance to sensors, appearance of a same object varies a
lot in point cloud data. Designing robust feature representation against such appearance changes is hence the key
issue in a 3D object detection method. In this paper, we
innovatively propose a domain adaptation like approach to
enhance the robustness of the feature representation. More
specifically, we bridge the gap between the perceptual domain where the feature comes from a real scene and the conceptual domain where the feature is extracted from an augmented scene consisting of non-occlusion point cloud rich
of detailed information. This domain adaptation approach
mimics the functionality of the human brain when proceeding object perception. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our simple yet effective approach fundamentally boosts
the performance of 3D point cloud object detection and
achieves the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
3D object detection [11, 24, 28, 42, 44] received
widespread attention from both industry and academia due
to its crucial role in autonomous driving [14]. Despite the
tremendous success achieved in recent years in object detection from 2D images [12, 25, 27, 31, 32], object detection
based on 3D point clouds remains an open and highly chal∗ duliang@mail.ustc.edu.cn.
† The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

E

Feature

D

Pred
GT

Traditional 3D Object Detection

E
Perceptual

Feature

D

Association

Pred
GT
Conceptual

Associate-3Ddet
Figure 1. Comparison between traditional 3D object detection and
our Associate-3Ddet. E and D are the encoder and decoder, respectively. In contrast to the traditional method that directly uses
the features of sparse point clouds for detection, our Associate3Ddet learns to associate incomplete percepted features of objects
with more complete features of corresponding class-wise conceptual models for feature enhancement.

lenging problem due to the object occlusion and the variance of the point distribution.
With the distance to the LiDAR sensor increases, the
density of the point cloud dramatically decreases, resulting in the huge density variance. Moreover, some parts
of objects might be invisible due to occlusion or low density point cloud. In these cases, 3D detection results are
error-prone due to lack of compact perceptual features. Recent 3D detection methods [37, 42] struggle to alleviate this
problem. On one hand, STD [42] proposes PointsPool to
transform intermediate point features from sparse expression to more compact voxel representation for final box
prediction. However, for far objects, simple voxelization
did not help the network learn compact perceptual fea-

13329

