Peek-a-Boo: Occlusion Reasoning in Indoor Scenes with Plane Representations
Ziyu Jiang1,3∗ Buyu Liu1 Samuel Schulter1 Zhangyang Wang3 Manmohan Chandraker1,2
1
NEC Laboratories America 2 UC San Diego 3 Texas A&M Universaity

Abstract
We address the challenging task of occlusion-aware indoor 3D scene understanding. We represent scenes by a set
of planes, where each one is defined by its normal, offset and
two masks outlining (i) the extent of the visible part and (ii)
the full region that consists of both visible and occluded parts
of the plane. We infer these planes from a single input image
with a novel neural network architecture. It consists of a twobranch category-specific module that aims to predict layout
and objects of the scene separately so that different types of
planes can be handled better. We also introduce a novel loss
function based on plane warping that can leverage multiple
views at training time for improved occlusion-aware reasoning. In order to train and evaluate our occlusion-reasoning
model, we use the ScanNet dataset [1] and propose (i) a
strategy to automatically extract ground truth for both visible and hidden regions and (ii) a new evaluation metric that
specifically focuses on the prediction in hidden regions. We
empirically demonstrate that our proposed approach can
achieve higher accuracy for occlusion reasoning compared
to competitive baselines on the ScanNet dataset, e.g. 42.65%
relative improvement on hidden regions.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about occlusions occurring in the 3D world is
an ability at which human visual perception excels. While
we develop an understanding for the concept of object permanence already as toddlers, for instance by playing peek-aboo, it is a very challenging skill for machine intelligence to
acquire, since it requires strong contextual and prior knowledge about objects and scenes. This is particularly true for
indoor scenes where the composition of objects and scenes is
highly complex and leads to numerous and strong occlusions.
And while several works exist that investigate this problem
for outdoor scenes [5, 13, 24], there has been comparatively
little work for indoor scenes. But indoor applications that
can potentially benefit from occlusion reasoning are ample,
like robot navigation or augmented reality.
∗ Part of this work was conducted during a summer internship at NEC
Laboratories America.

Planes

Single Image Input

Object Branch

Layout Branch

Occlusion Reasoning

Figure 1: Given a single image as input, our model predicts
planes to describe both visible and occluded areas of the
scene with separate branches for objects and layout (top).
This model can be used for occlusion reasoning and novel
view synthesis (bottom).

To address the problem of occlusion reasoning, the first
step is to find a suitable representation to describe scenes.
Prior work has explored several representations like 3D
bounding boxes for objects [4, 28] or voxels [19]. However, the former representation is rather coarse for general
objects and is not suitable for scene layouts, while the latter
has a significant memory footprint. Most recently, layered
depth images (LDI) [18] have been leveraged for predicting
scene geometry in occluded areas [3, 22], which was also
extended to the object level [2]. We rely on planes as another
promising representation that shows several benefits over
the aforementioned ones. Planes can compactly describe
scenes in a semi-parametric way: each plane is defined by
a normal vector, an offset and a (non-parametric) mask to

113

