Anisotropic Convolutional Networks for 3D Semantic Scene Completion ∗
Jie Li1 Kai Han2 Peng Wang3† Yu Liu4 Xia Yuan1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China 2 University of Oxford, United Kingdom
3
University of Wollongong, Australia 4 The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
As a voxel-wise labeling task, semantic scene completion (SSC) tries to simultaneously infer the occupancy and
semantic labels for a scene from a single depth and/or
RGB image. The key challenge for SSC is how to effectively take advantage of the 3D context to model various
objects or stuffs with severe variations in shapes, layouts
and visibility. To handle such variations, we propose a
novel module called anisotropic convolution, which properties with flexibility and power impossible for the competing methods such as standard 3D convolution and some of
its variations. In contrast to the standard 3D convolution
that is limited to a fixed 3D receptive field, our module
is capable of modeling the dimensional anisotropy voxelwisely. The basic idea is to enable anisotropic 3D receptive field by decomposing a 3D convolution into three
consecutive 1D convolutions, and the kernel size for each
such 1D convolution is adaptively determined on the fly.
By stacking multiple such anisotropic convolution modules,
the voxel-wise modeling capability can be further enhanced
while maintaining a controllable amount of model parameters. Extensive experiments on two SSC benchmarks, NYUDepth-v2 and NYUCAD, show the superior performance of
the proposed method. Our code is available at https:
//waterljwant.github.io/SSC/ .

1. Introduction
To behave in the 3D physical world, it requires an accurate understanding of both the 3D geometry as well as
the semantics of the environment. Humans can easily infer
such geometrical and semantic information of a scene from
partial observations. An open topic in computer vision is to
study how to enable machines such an ability, which is desirable in many applications such as navigation [4], grasping [20], 3D home design [1], to name a few.
∗ This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grants 61773210 and 61603184 and the EPSRC Programme
Grant Seebibyte EP/M013774/1.
† Corresponding author.

Semantic scene completion (SSC) [16] is a computer
vision task teaching the machine how to perceive the 3D
world from the static depth and/or RGB image. The task
has two coupled objectives: one is 3D scene completion,
which aims at inferring the volumetric occupancy of the
scene, and the other is 3D scene labeling, which requires
to predict the semantic labels voxel-wisely. As the objects
within the physical scene carry severe variations in shapes,
layouts, and visibility due to occlusions, the main challenge
thereon is how to model the 3D context to learn each voxel
effectively.
Recently, promising progress has been achieved for
SSC [16, 6, 8, 10, 13] by employing deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). A direct solution is to use 3D
convolutional neural network [16] to model the volumetric context, which consists of a stack of conventional 3D
convolutional layers. This solution, however, suffers from
apparent limitations. On the one hand, 3D convolution
renders a fixed receptive field that does not cater to the
variations of the objects. On the other hand, 3D convolution is resource demanding, which causes massive computational and memory consumption. 3D convolution variations [10, 21] are proposed to address such shortcomings.
For example, a lightweight dimensional decomposition network is proposed in [10] to alleviate the resource consumption, but it still leaves the object variation issue unattended.
In this work, we propose a novel module, termed
anisotropic convolution, to model object variation, which
properties with flexibility and power impossible for competing methods. In contrast to standard 3D convolution and
some of its variations that are limited to the fixed receptive
field, the new module adapts to the dimensional anisotropy
property voxel-wisely and enables receptive field with varying sizes, a.k.a anisotropic receptive field. The basic idea is
to decompose a 3D convolution operation into three consecutive 1D convolutions and equip each such 1d convolution with a mixer of different kernel sizes. The combination weights of such kernels along each 1D convolution are
learned voxel-wisely and thus anisotropic 3D context can
essentially be modeled by consecutively performing such
adaptive 1D convolutions. Although we use multiple ker13351

