Disp R-CNN: Stereo 3D Object Detection via Shape Prior Guided
Instance Disparity Estimation
Jiaming Sun1,2 ∗ Linghao Chen1∗ Yiming Xie1 Siyu Zhang3
Qinhong Jiang2 Xiaowei Zhou1† Hujun Bao1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 SenseTime 3 Southern University of Science and Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel system named Disp
R-CNN for 3D object detection from stereo images. Many
recent works solve this problem by first recovering a point
cloud with disparity estimation and then apply a 3D detector. The disparity map is computed for the entire image, which is costly and fails to leverage category-specific
prior. In contrast, we design an instance disparity estimation network (iDispNet) that predicts disparity only for
pixels on objects of interest and learns a category-specific
shape prior for more accurate disparity estimation. To address the challenge from scarcity of disparity annotation in
training, we propose to use a statistical shape model to generate dense disparity pseudo-ground-truth without the need
of LiDAR point clouds, which makes our system more widely
applicable. Experiments on the KITTI dataset show that,
even when LiDAR ground-truth is not available at training
time, Disp R-CNN achieves competitive performance and
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by 20% in
terms of average precision. The code will be available at
https://github.com/zju3dv/disprcnn.

1. Introduction
3D object detection plays an important role in many applications such as autonomous driving and augmented reality. While most methods work with the LiDAR point
cloud as input, stereo image-based methods have significant
advantages. RGB images provide denser and richer color
information compared to the sparse LiDAR point clouds
while requiring a very low sensor price. Stereo cameras
are also able to perceive longer distances with customizable baseline settings. Recently, learning-based approaches
like [11, 4, 34] tackled the stereo correspondence matching
problem with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang
University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
† Corresponding authors: Hujun Bao and Xiaowei Zhou.

Figure 1. The proposed system estimates an instance disparity
map, i.e., pixel-wise disparities only on foreground objects, for
stereo 3D object detection. This design leads to better disparity
estimation accuracy and faster run-time speed.

achieved impressive results. Taking an estimated disparity
map as the input, 3D object detection methods [31, 30] convert it into a depth map or a point cloud to detect objects
within it. However, since the disparity estimation network
is designed for general stereo matching instead of the 3D
object detection task, these pipelines have two major drawbacks. First, the disparity estimation process operates on
the full image and often fails to produce accurate disparities on low textured or non-Lamberterian surfaces like the
surface of vehicles, which are exactly the regions we need
to do successful 3D bounding boxes estimation. Moreover,
since foreground objects of interest usually occupy much
fewer space than the background in the image, the disparity
estimation network and the 3D detector spend a lot of computation on regions that are not needed for object detection
and lead to a slow running speed.
In this work, we aim to explore how we can solve these
drawbacks with a disparity estimation module that is specialized for 3D object detection. We argue that estimating
disparities on the full image is suboptimal in terms of network feature learning and runtime efficiency. To this end,
we propose a novel system named Disp R-CNN that detects 3D objects with a network designed for instance-level
disparity estimation. The disparity estimation is performed
only on regions that contain objects of interest, thus enabling the network to focus on foreground objects and learn
a category-specific shape prior that is suitable for 3D object detection. As demonstrated in the experiments, with
the guidance of object shape prior, the estimated instance
110548

