A Graduated Filter Method for Large Scale Robust Estimation
Huu Le and Christopher Zach
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
{huul, zach}@chalmers.se

Abstract
Due to the highly non-convex nature of large-scale robust parameter estimation, avoiding poor local minima is
challenging in real-world applications where input data is
contaminated by a large or unknown fraction of outliers.
In this paper, we introduce a novel solver for robust estimation that possesses a strong ability to escape poor local minima. Our algorithm is built upon the class of traditional graduated optimization techniques, which are considered state-of-the-art local methods to solve problems having
many poor minima. The novelty of our work lies in the introduction of an adaptive kernel (or residual) scaling scheme,
which allows us to achieve faster convergence rates. Like
other existing methods that aim to return good local minima
for robust estimation tasks, our method relaxes the original robust problem, but adapts a filter framework from nonlinear constrained optimization to automatically choose the
level of relaxation. Experimental results on real large-scale
datasets such as bundle adjustment instances demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves competitive results. 1

1. Introduction
Robust parameter estimation plays a crucial role in
many computer vision tasks, ranging from low-dimensional
model fitting (e.g., fundamental or essential matrix estimation [17]) to large-scale instances in very high dimensional
space, which may contain hundreds of thousands of measurements (e.g., pose graph optimization [19], SLAM [24]
and bundle adjustment [28]). When the input data is relatively clean with a low percentage of gross outliers, the
set of optimal parameters can be easily obtained under the
maximum likelihood framework, i.e., by minimizing the
sum of the squared residuals [29], and the cost can be optimized using popular off-the-shelf non-linear least squares
solvers (e.g., Ceres [1]). However, under the presence of
a large fraction of gross outliers, standard least-squares fit
often yields results that are biased toward outlying measure1 Our C++ implementation is available at https://github.com/
intellhave/ASKER.

ments. To achieve robustness in low-dimensional settings,
randomized approaches such as RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) [11] and its variants [7, 6] are preferred. Deterministic algorithms that provide global [5] or local solutions [20, 4] to improve RANSAC also exist. However, they
are inapplicable in large-scale settings, where a class of Mestimators [18] must be employed. Under this framework,
if the fraction of outliers is small, then convex ℓ1 or Huber kernels can be sufficient. However, in order to achieve
maximum robustness for the parameter estimation task with
a large outlier ratio, a quasi-convex kernel is usually employed, which in most cases leads to non-convex problems
with many sub-optimal local minima and flat regions in parameter space [31]. Solving such non-convex problems is
well-known to be challenging as it is very likely for an algorithm to converge to a poor local minimum. Our work
proposes a new algorithm to address this problem.
A number of optimization schemes have been proposed to tackle the high non-convexity of robust estimation, and [32] evaluates some of the promising methods.
Among these, graduated optimization, which is often referred as graduated non-convexity (GNC) in the computer
vision community, shows to be the most promising approach due to its competitive ability to escape poor solutions. Therefore, they have been used widely in many robust fitting applications (e.g. [3, 21, 32, 30]). However, the
use of GNC requires a careful design of the graduated optimization schedule, which requires prior knowledge about
the problem. A wrong schedule may cause either unnecessarily long run time in several easy problem instances,
where basic techniques that provide fast convergence such
as Iteratively Re-weighted Least Squares (IRLS) are sufficient, or undesirable results as local minima are not effectively avoided (as demonstrated in Figure 2).
Contributions To address the above problems, we introduce in this paper a new algorithm for large-scale robust
estimation that is as competitive as GNC, but does not require a fixed optimization schedule. To achieve such goal,
we propose to consider the scale parameters as variables
that are jointly optimized with the original parameters. The
15559

