You2Me: Inferring Body Pose in Egocentric Video
via First and Second Person Interactions
Evonne Ng1,2

Donglai Xiang3

Hanbyul Joo4

Kristen Grauman2,4

evonne ng@berkeley.edu

donglaix@cs.cmu.edu

hjoo@fb.com

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

1

UC Berkeley

2

UT Austin

3

Carnegie Mellon University

4

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
The body pose of a person wearing a camera is of great
interest for applications in augmented reality, healthcare,
and robotics, yet much of the person’s body is out of view
for a typical wearable camera. We propose a learningbased approach to estimate the camera wearer’s 3D body
pose from egocentric video sequences. Our key insight is
to leverage interactions with another person—whose body
pose we can directly observe—as a signal inherently linked
to the body pose of the first-person subject. We show that
since interactions between individuals often induce a wellordered series of back-and-forth responses, it is possible to
learn a temporal model of the interlinked poses even though
one party is largely out of view. We demonstrate our idea
on a variety of domains with dyadic interaction and show
the substantial impact on egocentric body pose estimation,
which improves the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Wearable cameras are becoming an increasingly viable
platform for entertainment and productivity. In augmented
reality (AR), wearable headsets will let users blend useful information from the virtual world together with their
real first-person visual experience to access information in a
timely manner or interact with games. In healthcare, wearables can open up new forms of remote therapy for rehabilitating patients trying to improve their body’s physical
function in their own home. In robotics, wearables could
simplify video-based learning from demonstration.
In all such cases and many more, the camera receives
a first-person or “egocentric” perspective of the surrounding visual world. A vision system analyzing the egocentric
video stream should not only extract high-level information about the visible surroundings (object, scenes, events),
but also the current state of the person wearing the camera. In particular, the body pose of the camera wearer is
of great interest, since it reveals his/her physical activity,

Figure 1. Inter-person interactions are common in daily activity
and offer rich signals for perception. Our work considers how
interactions viewed from a first-person wearable camera can facilitate egocentric 3D body pose estimation.

postures, and gestures. Unfortunately, the camera wearer’s
body is often largely out of the camera’s field of view.
While this makes state-of-the-art third-person pose methods
poorly suited [63, 45, 58, 34, 24, 10], recent work suggests
that an ego-video stream nonetheless offers implicit cues for
first-person body pose [26, 69, 70]. However, prior work restricts the task to static environments devoid of inter-person
interactions, forcing the algorithms to rely on low-level cues
like apparent camera motion or coarse scene layout.
Our idea is to facilitate the recovery of 3D body pose for
the camera wearer (or “ego-pose” for short) by paying attention to the interactions between the first and second person
as observed in a first-person video stream.1 Inter-person interactions are extremely common and occupy a large part
of any individual’s day-to-day activities. As is well-known
in cognitive science [47, 60, 8], human body pose is largely
influenced by an inherent synchronization between interacting individuals. For instance, a person who sees someone
reaching out their hand for a handshake will most likely respond by also reaching out their hand; a person animatedly
gesturing while telling a story may see their interacting partner nod in response; children playing may interact closely
with their body motions. See Figure 1.
To that end, we introduce “You2Me”: an approach for
ego-pose estimation that explicitly captures the interplay
between the first and second person body poses. Our model
uses a recurrent neural network to incorporate cues from
1 Throughout, we use “second person” to refer to the person the camera
wearer is currently interacting with; if the wearer is “I”, the interactee or
partner in the interaction is “you”.

9890

