Single-Image HDR Reconstruction by Learning to Reverse the Camera Pipeline
Yu-Lun Liu1,2∗
Wei-Sheng Lai3∗
Yu-Sheng Chen1
Yi-Lung Kao1
3,4
1
Ming-Hsuan Yang
Yung-Yu Chuang
Jia-Bin Huang5
1
National Taiwan University 2 MediaTek Inc. 3 Google 4 UC Merced 5 Virginia Tech

Our results

Input LDR images

https://www.cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw/˜yulunliu/SingleHDR

Figure 1: HDR reconstruction from a single LDR image. Our method recovers missing details for both backlit and overexposed regions of real-world images by learning to reverse the camera pipeline. Note that the input LDR images are captured
by different real cameras, and all reconstructed HDR images have been tone-mapped by [32] for display.

Abstract
Recovering a high dynamic range (HDR) image from a
single low dynamic range (LDR) input image is challenging due to missing details in under-/over-exposed regions
caused by quantization and saturation of camera sensors.
In contrast to existing learning-based methods, our core
idea is to incorporate the domain knowledge of the LDR image formation pipeline into our model. We model the HDRto-LDR image formation pipeline as the (1) dynamic range
clipping, (2) non-linear mapping from a camera response
function, and (3) quantization. We then propose to learn
three specialized CNNs to reverse these steps. By decomposing the problem into specific sub-tasks, we impose effective physical constraints to facilitate the training of individual sub-networks. Finally, we jointly fine-tune the entire
model end-to-end to reduce error accumulation. With extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on diverse image datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably against state-of-the-art single-image HDR
reconstruction algorithms.
*Indicates equal contribution.

1. Introduction
HDR images are capable of capturing rich real-world
scene appearances including lighting, contrast, and details.
Consumer-grade digital cameras, however, can only capture
images within a limited dynamic range due to sensor constraints. The most common approach to generate HDR images is to merge multiple LDR images captured with different exposures [12]. Such a technique performs well on static
scenes but often suffers from ghosting artifacts on dynamic
scenes or hand-held cameras. Furthermore, capturing multiple images of the same scene may not always be feasible
(e.g., existing LDR images on the Internet).
Single-image HDR reconstruction aims to recover an
HDR image from a single LDR input. The problem is
challenging due to the missing information in under-/overexposed regions. Recently, several methods [14, 15, 40, 53,
56] have been developed to reconstruct an HDR image from
a given LDR input using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, learning a direct LDR-to-HDR
mapping is difficult as the variation of HDR pixels (32-bit)
is significantly higher than that of LDR pixels (8-bit). Recent methods address this challenge either by focusing on
11651

