A Characteristic Function Approach to Deep Implicit Generative Modeling
Abdul Fatir Ansari† , Jonathan Scarlett†‡ , and Harold Soh†
†Department of Computer Science
‡Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
{afatir, scarlett, harold}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Implicit Generative Models (IGMs) such as GANs have
emerged as effective data-driven models for generating
samples, particularly images. In this paper, we formulate
the problem of learning an IGM as minimizing the expected
distance between characteristic functions. Specifically, we
minimize the distance between characteristic functions of
the real and generated data distributions under a suitablychosen weighting distribution. This distance metric, which
we term as the characteristic function distance (CFD), can
be (approximately) computed with linear time-complexity in
the number of samples, in contrast with the quadratic-time
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD). By replacing the discrepancy measure in the critic of a GAN with the CFD,
we obtain a model that is simple to implement and stable
to train. The proposed metric enjoys desirable theoretical
properties including continuity and differentiability with respect to generator parameters, and continuity in the weak
topology. We further propose a variation of the CFD in
which the weighting distribution parameters are also optimized during training; this obviates the need for manual
tuning, and leads to an improvement in test power relative
to CFD. We demonstrate experimentally that our proposed
method outperforms WGAN and MMD-GAN variants on a
variety of unsupervised image generation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Implicit Generative Models (IGMs), such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12], seek to learn a model
Qθ of an underlying data distribution P using samples from
P. Unlike prescribed probabilistic models, IGMs do not require a likelihood function, and thus are appealing when
the data likelihood is unknown or intractable. Empirically,
GANs have excelled at numerous tasks, from unsupervised
image generation [18] to policy learning [17].
The original GAN suffers from optimization instability and mode collapse, and often requires various ad-hoc

tricks to stabilize training [31]. Subsequent research has
revealed that the generator-discriminator setup in the GAN
minimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence between the real
and generated data distributions; this divergence possesses
discontinuities that results in uninformative gradients as Qθ
approaches P, which hampers training. Various works have
since established desirable properties for a divergence that
can ease GAN training, and proposed alternative training
schemes [2, 34, 3], primarily using distances belonging to
the Integral Probability Metric (IPM) family [29]. One
popular IPM is the kernel-based metric Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD), and a significant portion of recent
work has focussed on deriving better MMD-GAN variants [21, 5, 1, 22].
In this paper, we undertake a different, more elementary approach, and formulate the problem of learning an
IGM as minimizing the expected distance between characteristic functions of real and generated data distributions.
Characteristic functions are widespread in probability theory and have been used for two-sample testing [15, 11, 8],
yet surprisingly, have not yet been investigated for GAN
training. We find that this approach leads to a simple and
computationally-efficient loss: the characteristic function
distance (CFD). Computing CFD requires linear time in the
number of samples (unlike the quadratic-time MMD), and
our experimental results indicate that CFD minimization results in effective training.
This work provides both theoretical and empirical support for using CFD to train IGMs. We first establish that
the CFD is continuous and differentiable almost everywhere
with respect to the parameters of the generator, and that it
satisfies continuity in the weak topology – key properties
that make it a suitable GAN metric [3, 21]. We provide
novel direct proofs that supplement the existing theory on
GAN training metrics. Algorithmically, our key idea is simple: train GANs using empirical estimates of the CFD under
optimized weighting distributions. We report on systematic
experiments using synthetic distributions and four benchmark image datasets (MNIST, CIFAR10, STL10, CelebA).

7478

