Unsupervised Adaptation Learning for Hyperspectral Imagery Super-resolution
Lei Zhang1∗, Jiangtao Nie2∗ , Wei Wei2,3 , Yanning Zhang2 , Shengcai Liao1 and Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
2
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
The key for fusion based hyperspectral image (HSI)
super-resolution (SR) is to infer the posteriori of a latent
HSI using appropriate image prior and likelihood that depends on degeneration. However, in practice the priors of
high-dimensional HSIs can be extremely complicated and
the degeneration is often unknown. Consequently most existing approaches that assume a shallow hand-crafted image prior and a pre-defined degeneration, fail to well generalize in real applications. To tackle this problem, we present
an unsupervised adaptation learning (UAL) framework. Instead of directly modelling the complicated image prior, we
propose to first implicitly learn a general image prior using
deep networks and then adapt it to a specific HSI. Following
this idea, we develop a two-stage SR network that leverages
two consecutive modules: a fusion module and an adaptation module, to recover the latent HSI in a coarse-to-fine
scheme. The fusion module is pretrained in a supervised
manner on synthetic data to capture a spatial-spectral prior that is general across most HSIs. To adapt the learned
general prior to the specific HSI under unknown degeneration, we introduce a simple degeneration network to assist
learning both the adaptation module and the degeneration
in an unsupervised way. In this way, the resultant imagespecific prior and the estimated degeneration can benefit the
inference of a more accurate posteriori, thereby increasing
generalization capacity. To verify the efficacy of UAL, we
extensively evaluate it on four benchmark datasets and report strong results that surpass existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) consists of hundreds of
spectral bands that record the reflectance of an imaging
scene across a consecutive wavelengths with narrow interval (e.g. 10nm) [1, 32], where each pixel contains a spec∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The corresponding author
is Wei Wei (email: weiweinwpu@nwpu.edu.cn). Project page: https:
//github.com/JiangtaoNie/UAL

trum. Due to the discriminative power of their spectra [13],
HSIs have been widely applied to various computer vision tasks, such as target detection [17], classification [13],
tracking [22] etc. However, physical limitations on spectral
sensor [12, 7] often prevent the collection of high resolution
(HR) HSIs in practice. Hence increasing efforts have been
put forwards to HSI super-resolution (SR).
Recent studies [4, 14, 19] have shown that fusing a low
resolution (LR) HSI with an HR multispectral image (MSI) using maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation [32] is
a promising approach for HSI SR. The key lies on inferring the posteriori of the latent HSI using an appropriate
image prior and the likelihood determined by the degeneration from the latent HSI to the observed LR HSI. To this
end, existing approaches have handcrafted various shallow
prior models, e.g. sparsity [12, 8], low-rank [30] etc. Together with pre-defined degeneration models, e.g. Gaussian
blur based down-sampling [8, 30], they can successfully recover simple structures of HSIs under given degenerations.
However, due to the countless number of imaging scenes
that exist, real HSIs often contain abundant complex structures and the true prior can be extremely complicated, e.g.
multi-mode, image-specific. In addition, random factors in
imaging procedure (e.g. sensor shaking, noise corruption)
usually introduce unknown degeneration into observations.
Hence, when applied to real scenarios, most existing approaches fail to generalize appropriately or obtain pleasing
SR performance, as shown in Figure 1.
In this study, we propose an unsupervised adaptation
learning (UAL) framework and demonstrate good generalization efficacy in HSI SR. In contrast to existing approaches, we propose to learn a deep image-specific prior for each
HSI. Instead of directly modelling such a complicated prior,
we first utilize deep networks to implicitly learn an image
prior that is general across most HSIs and then adapt it to a
specific HSI. Following this idea, we propose a two-stage SR network that employs two consecutive modules to recover the latent HSI in a coarse-to-fine scheme: a fusion module and an adaptation module. The fusion module adopts
a brand-new mutual-guiding architecture, and is pretrained

3073

