Efficient Derivative Computation for Cumulative B-Splines on Lie Groups
Christiane Sommer∗

Vladyslav Usenko∗ David Schubert Nikolaus Demmel
Technical University of Munich

Daniel Cremers

Abstract
Continuous-time trajectory representation has recently
gained popularity for tasks where the fusion of high-framerate sensors and multiple unsynchronized devices is required. Lie group cumulative B-splines are a popular way
of representing continuous trajectories without singularities. They have been used in near real-time SLAM and
odometry systems with IMU, LiDAR, regular, RGB-D and
event cameras, as well as for offline calibration.
These applications require efficient computation of time
derivatives (velocity, acceleration), but all prior works rely
on a computationally suboptimal formulation. In this work
we present an alternative derivation of time derivatives
based on recurrence relations that needs O(k) instead of
O(k 2 ) matrix operations (for a spline of order k) and results in simple and elegant expressions. While producing
the same result, the proposed approach significantly speeds
up the trajectory optimization and allows for computing
simple analytic derivatives with respect to spline knots. The
results presented in this paper pave the way for incorporating continuous-time trajectory representations into more
applications where real-time performance is required.

1. Introduction
Estimating trajectories is a recurring topic in computer
vision research: In odometry and SLAM applications the
sensor motion needs to be estimated, in object tracking and
robotic grasping tasks, we want to compute the 6DoF pose
over time, and for autonomous exploration, path planning
and obstacle avoidance, we need to predict good trajectories. Over the last years, researchers have increasingly
switched to continuous-time trajectories: Instead of a simple list of poses for discrete time points, the trajectory is
elegantly represented by a continuous function in time with
values in the space of possible poses. B-splines are a natural
choice for parameterizing such functions. They have been
used in several well-known works on continuous-time tra∗ These authors contributed equally.
This work was supported by the ERC Consolidator Grant “3D Reloaded”.

10

ax

5

ay

0
5

az
10

15

20

Figure 1. Camera-IMU calibration using a Lie group cumulative
B-spline to represent the IMU trajectory (gray line with axes used
to visualize rotation). Observations of the calibration pattern are
combined with accelerometer and gyroscope measurements to estimate the trajectory and calibration parameters in a joint optimization. The plot visualizes the accelerometer measurements in
m/s2 (dots) overlaid on the continuous estimate generated from the
spline trajectory (line) after optimization. As shown in the experimental section, the proposed formulation is able to significantly
reduce the computational effort of such an optimization.

jectory estimation. However, since the B-spline trajectories
take values in the Lie group of poses, the resulting differential calculus is much more involved than in Euclidean space
Rd . Existing approaches to computing time derivatives suffer from a high computational cost that is actually quadratic
in the spline order.
In this paper, we introduce recurrence relations for respective time derivatives and show how they can be employed to significantly reduce the computational cost and to
derive concrete (analytic) expressions for the spline Jaco-

11148

