A Semi-Supervised Assessor of Neural Architectures
Yehui Tang1,2 , Yunhe Wang2 , Yixing Xu2 , Hanting Chen1,2 , Boxin Shi3,4 ,
Chao Xu1 , Chunjing Xu2∗, Qi Tian2 , Chang Xu5
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 NELVT, Dept. of CS, Peking University. 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
5
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.
{yhtang,chenhanting,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn; xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn
{yunhe.wang,xuyixing,xuchunjing,tian.qi1}@huawei.com; c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) aims to automatically
design deep neural networks of satisfactory performance.
Wherein, architecture performance predictor is critical to
efficiently value an intermediate neural architecture. But
for the training of this predictor, a number of neural architectures and their corresponding real performance often have to be collected. In contrast with classical performance predictor optimized in a fully supervised way, this
paper suggests a semi-supervised assessor of neural architectures. We employ an auto-encoder to discover meaningful representations of neural architectures. Taking each
neural architecture as an individual instance in the search
space, we construct a graph to capture their intrinsic similarities, where both labeled and unlabeled architectures
are involved. A graph convolutional neural network is introduced to predict the performance of architectures based
on the learned representations and their relation modeled
by the graph. Extensive experimental results on the NASBenchmark-101 dataset demonstrated that our method is
able to make a significant reduction on the required fully
trained architectures for finding efficient architectures.

1. Introduction
The impressive successes in computer vision tasks, such
as image classification [11, 10], detection [4] and segmentation [43], heavily depends on an effective design the
backbone deep neural networks, which are usually overparameterized for the sake of effectiveness. Instead of resorting to human expert experience, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) framework focuses on an automatic way to
select hyper-parameters and design appropriate network architectures.
∗ Corresponding author.

There have been a large body of works on NAS, and they
can be roughly divided into two categories. Combinatorial optimization methods search architectures in a discrete
space by generating, evaluating and selecting different architectures, e.g. Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) based methods [29] and Reinforcement Learning (RL) based methods [44]. The other kind of NAS methods are continuous
optimization based, which relax the original search space to
a continuous space and gradient-based optimization is usually applied [24, 20, 3, 35, 36]. In NAS, to get the exact
performance of an architecture, it often takes hours or even
days for a sufficient training process. Reducing the number
of training epochs or introducing the weight sharing mechanism could alleviate prohibitive computational cost, but it
would result in inaccurate performance estimation for the
architectures. Recently, there are studies to collect many
network architectures with known real performance on the
specific tasks and train a performance predictor [5, 32]. This
one-off training of the predictor can then be applied to evaluate the performance of intermediate searched architectures
in NAS, and the overall evaluation cost of an individual architecture can be reduced from hours to milliseconds.
A major bottleneck in obtaining a satisfactory architecture performance predictor could be the collection of a large
annotated training set. Given the expensive cost on annotating a neural architecture with its real performance, the
training set for the performance predictor is often small,
which would lead to an undesirable over-fitting result. Existing methods insist on the fully supervised way to train
the performance predictor, but neglect the significance of
those neural architectures without annotations. In the search
space of NAS, a number of valid neural architectures can be
sampled with ease. Though the real performance could be
unknown, their architecture similarity with those annotated
architectures would convey invaluable information to optimize the performance predictor.
In this paper, we propose to assess neural architectures

1810

