Enhancing Cross-Task Black-Box Transferability of Adversarial Examples
with Dispersion Reduction
Yantao Lu∗
Syracuse University

Yunhan Jia*
Bytedance AI Lab

Jianyu Wang
Baidu USA

Bai Li
Duke University

ylu25@syr.edu

yunhan.jia@bytedance.com

wjyouch@gmail.com

bai.li@duke.edu

Weiheng Chai
Syracuse University

Lawrence Carin
Duke University

Senem Velipasalar
Syracuse University†

wchai01@syr.edu

lcarin@duke.edu

svelipas@syr.edu

Abstract

NSFW
+

Neural networks are known to be vulnerable to carefully
crafted adversarial examples, and these malicious samples
often transfer, i.e., they remain adversarial even against
other models. Although significant effort has been devoted
to the transferability across models, surprisingly little attention has been paid to cross-task transferability, which represents the real-world cybercriminal’s situation, where an ensemble of different defense/detection mechanisms need to be
evaded all at once. We investigate the transferability of adversarial examples across a wide range of real-world computer vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, semantic segmentation, explicit content detection,
and text detection. Our proposed attack minimizes the “dispersion” of the internal feature map, overcoming the limitations of existing attacks, that require task-specific loss
functions and/or probing a target model. We conduct evaluation on open-source detection and segmentation models,
as well as four different computer vision tasks provided by
Google Cloud Vision (GCV) APIs. We demonstrate that our
approach outperforms existing attacks by degrading performance of multiple CV tasks by a large margin with only
modest perturbations.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in adversarial machine learning has
brought the weaknesses of deep neural networks (DNNs)
into the spotlight, and drawn the attention of researchers
working on security and machine learning. Given a deep
learning model, it is easy to generate adversarial examples
∗ Equal contribution
† The information, data, or work presented herein was funded in part by
National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant 1739748, Grant 1816732
and by the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E), U.S.
Department of Energy, under Award Number DE-AR0000940. The views
and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect
those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.

Pass?

OCR
Promotional
Porn Image

Scenario 1: Explicit Content Filtering
Cybercriminal

Scenario 2: Face Authentication
Liveness Detection
Live!
Face Recognition

Spoofed Facial
Pictures

Match!

Figure 1: Real-world computer vision systems deployed in
safety- and security-critical scenarios usually employ an ensemble
of detection mechanisms that are opaque to attackers. Cybercriminals are required to generate adversarial examples that transfer
across tasks to maximize their chances of evading the entire detection systems.

(AEs), which are close to the original input, but are easily
misclassified by the model [9, 33]. More importantly, their
effectiveness sometimes transfers, which may severely hinder DNN-based applications especially in security critical
scenarios [23, 13, 36]. While such problems are alarming,
little attention has been paid to the threat model of commercially deployed vision-based systems, wherein deep learning models across different tasks are assembled to provide
fail-safe protection against evasion attacks. Such a threat
model is quite different from models that have been intensively studied in the aforementioned research.
Cross-task threat model. Computer vision (CV) based
detection mechanisms have been deployed extensively in
security-critical applications, such as content censorship
and authentication with facial biometrics, and readily available services are provided by cloud giants through APIs

940

