Robust Object Detection under Occlusion with
Context-Aware CompositionalNets
Angtian Wang∗ Yihong Sun∗ Adam Kortylewski† Alan Yuille†
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Detecting partially occluded objects is a difficult task.
Our experimental results show that deep learning approaches, such as Faster R-CNN, are not robust at object
detection under occlusion. Compositional convolutional
neural networks (CompositionalNets) have been shown to
be robust at classifying occluded objects by explicitly representing the object as a composition of parts. In this work,
we propose to overcome two limitations of CompositionalNets which will enable them to detect partially occluded objects: 1) CompositionalNets, as well as other DCNN architectures, do not explicitly separate the representation of the
context from the object itself. Under strong object occlusion, the influence of the context is amplified which can have
severe negative effects for detection at test time. In order
to overcome this, we propose to segment the context during
training via bounding box annotations. We then use the segmentation to learn a context-aware CompositionalNet that
disentangles the representation of the context and the object. 2) We extend the part-based voting scheme in CompositionalNets to vote for the corners of the object’s bounding
box, which enables the model to reliably estimate bounding
boxes for partially occluded objects. Our extensive experiments show that our proposed model can detect objects robustly, increasing the detection performance of strongly occluded vehicles from PASCAL3D+ and MS-COCO by 41%
and 35% respectively in absolute performance relative to
Faster R-CNN.

1. Introduction
In natural images, objects are surrounded and partially
occluded by other objects. Recognizing partially occluded
objects is a difficult task since the appearances and shapes
of occluders are highly variable. Recent work [42, 21] has
shown that deep learning approaches are significantly less
robust than humans at classifying partially occluded ob∗ Joint first authors
† Joint senior authors

Figure 1: Bicycle detection result for an image of the MSCOCO dataset. Blue box: ground truth; red box: detection result by Faster R-CNN; green box: detection result
by context-aware CompositionalNet. Probability maps of
three-point detection are to the right. The proposed contextaware CompositionalNet are able to detect the partially occluded object robustly.

jects. Our experimental results show that this limitation of
deep learning approaches is even amplified in object detection. In particular, we find that Faster R-CNN is not robust
under partial occlusion, even when it is trained with strong
data augmentation with partial occlusion. Our experiments
show that this is caused by two factors: 1) The proposal
network does not localize objects accurately under strong
occlusion. 2) The classification network does not classify
partially occluded objects robustly. Thus, our work highlights key limitations of deep learning approaches to object
detection under partial occlusion that need to be addressed.
In contrast to deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs), compositional models can robustly classify partially
occluded objects from a fixed viewpoint [11, 19] and detect
semantic parts of partially occluded object [34, 40]. These
models are inspired by the compositionality of human cognition [2, 33, 10, 3] and share similar characteristics with
biological vision systems, such as bottom-up sparse compositional encoding and top-down attentional modulations
found in the ventral stream [30, 29, 5]. Recent work [20]
proposed the Compositional Convolutional Neural Network

12645

