Regularizing CNN Transfer Learning with Randomised Regression
Yang Zhong
Atsuto Maki
Division of Robotics, Perception, and Learning
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
{yzhong, atsuto}@kth.se

Abstract
This paper is about regularizing deep convolutional networks (CNNs) based on an adaptive framework for transfer learning with limited training data in the target domain.
Recent advances of CNN regularization in this context are
commonly due to the use of additional regularization objectives. They guide the training away from the target task
using some forms of concrete tasks. Unlike those related
approaches, we suggest that an objective without a concrete goal can still serve well as a regularizer. In particular, we demonstrate Pseudo-task Regularization (PtR)
which dynamically regularizes a network by simply attempting to regress image representations to pseudo-regression
targets during fine-tuning. That is, a CNN is efficiently regularized without additional resources of data or prior domain expertise. In sum, the proposed PtR provides: a) an
alternative for network regularization without dependence
on the design of concrete regularization objectives or extra annotations; b) a dynamically adjusted and maintained
strength of regularization effect by balancing the gradient
norms between objectives on-line. Through numerous experiments, surprisingly, the improvements on classification
accuracy by PtR are shown greater or on a par to the recent
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently advanced the development of computer vision and
flourished in many large-scale computer vision applications [3, 22, 23, 16]. Since the introduction of AlexNet
[18], deeper and more complex network architectures, such
as VGG [31], Inception [33], ResNet [11], and DenseNet
[12], have been proposed. In addition, other contributions
have been made toward network optimization, which has
been helping the performance and efficiency of CNNs, e.g.
BatchNorm [13] and MiniBatchSGD [7]. Despite the improved effectiveness by those, one of the known open issues
is that CNNs are normally over-parameterized and would
demand a large-scale labeled dataset.

It is a common practice to exploit transfer learning which
adapts a model pre-trained on a source task to a new target task when given a small amount of labeled dataset.
Specifically, by leveraging the transferability of deep features [39] one can map images to a middle or high-level
feature through pre-trained model and therewith train target
specific classifiers [4, 28, 40], which is often called feature
selection. It is also viable to fine-tune a source model for
the target data. As fine-tuning aims to optimize the entire
network for the target task, it often achieves higher effectiveness and has therefore been a rule of thumb in CNN
transfer learning with a limited amount of domain data [1].
During fine-tuning, a source model needs to be mildly tuned
to avoid overfitting due to the fact that deep networks are yet
over-parameterized for small-scale target tasks.
One of the challenges during fine-tuning, which this paper also addresses, is to achieve network regularization for
an over-parameterized model with limited training samples. In the recent state-of-the-art transfer learning solutions, there is a trend of using an auxiliary training objective in a framework of multi-objective1 learning for improved regularization [6, 21, 20, 5]. These auxiliary objectives are designed in a concrete and target-specific manner,
through which models would enforce certain desired properties that facilitates multiple purposes in the learned image
representations. The key to the enhanced regularization on
the target task is then attributed to the improved generality
learned from the imposed auxiliary objectives through partial or entire source task data. However, the regularization
gain comes with a resource-dependent cost of the storage of
off-the-shelf predictions for multiple steps of network training [21], selecting qualified labeled data samples from the
source domain for a target task [6], using a complex network architecture during training [5], or recalling the source
model [20].
From a network training perspective, as another way to
understand the regularization, a basic effect of training with
1 For ease of discussions, we do not distinguish training “objectives”
from “tasks”; thus, multi-objective and multi-task learning may be used
interchangeably.

113637

