KeypointNet: A Large-scale 3D Keypoint Dataset
Aggregated from Numerous Human Annotations
Yang You, Yujing Lou,* Chengkun Li,* Zhoujun Cheng, Liangwei Li,
Lizhuang Ma, Cewu Lu, Weiming Wang†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Abstract
Detecting 3D objects keypoints is of great interest to the
areas of both graphics and computer vision. There have
been several 2D and 3D keypoint datasets aiming to address
this problem in a data-driven way. These datasets, however,
either lack scalability or bring ambiguity to the definition
of keypoints. Therefore, we present KeypointNet: the first
large-scale and diverse 3D keypoint dataset that contains
83,231 keypoints and 8,329 3D models from 16 object categories, by leveraging numerous human annotations. To
handle the inconsistency between annotations from different people, we propose a novel method to aggregate these
keypoints automatically, through minimization of a fidelity
loss. Finally, ten state-of-the-art methods are benchmarked
on our proposed dataset.

1. Introduction
Detection of 3D keypoints is essential in many applications such as object matching, object tracking, shape retrieval and registration [21, 6, 36]. Utilization of keypoints
to match 3D objects has its advantage of providing features
that are semantically significant and such keypoints are usually made invariant to rotations, scales and other transformations.
In the trend of deep learning, 2D semantic point detection has been boosted with the help of a large quantity of
high-quality datasets [3, 22]. However, there are few 3D
datasets focusing on the keypoint representation of an object. Dutagaci et al. [10] collect 43 models and label them
according to annotations from various persons. Annotations
from different persons are finally aggregated by geodesic
clustering. ShapeNetCore keypoint dataset [41], and a similar dataset [14], in another way, resort to an expert’s annotation on keypoints, making them vulnerable and biased.
In order to alleviate the bias of experts’ definitions on
* These authors contributed equally.
† Weiming Wang is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. We propose a large-scale KeypointNet dataset. It contains 8K+ models and 83K+ keypoint annotations.

keypoints, we ask a large group of people to annotate various keypoints according to their own understanding. Challenges rise in that different people may annotate different
keypoints and we need to identify the consensus and patterns in these annotations. Finding such patterns is not trivial when a large set of keypoints spread across the entire
model. A simple clustering would require a predefined distance threshold and fail to identify closely spaced keypoints.
As shown in Figure 1, there are four closely spaced keypoints on each airplane empennage and it is extremely hard
for simple clustering methods to distinguish them. Besides,
clustering algorithms do not give semantic labels of keypoints since it is ambiguous to link clustered groups with
each other. In addition, people’s annotations are not always exact and errors of annotated keypoint locations are
inevitable. In order to solve these problems, we propose a
novel method to aggregate a large number of keypoint annotations from distinct people, by optimizing a fidelity loss.
After this auto aggregation process, we verify these generated keypoints based on some simple priors such as symmetry.
In this paper, we build the first large-scale and diverse
113647

