From Depth What Can You See?
Depth Completion via Auxiliary Image Reconstruction
Kaiyue Lu* 1,2 , Nick Barnes1 , Saeed Anwar2,1 , and Liang Zheng1
1

The Australian National University

Abstract
Depth completion recovers dense depth from sparse measurements, e.g., LiDAR. Existing depth-only methods use
sparse depth as the only input. However, these methods
may fail to recover semantically consistent boundaries, or
small/thin objects due to 1) the sparse nature of depth points
and 2) the lack of images to provide semantic cues. This paper continues this line of research and aims to overcome the
above shortcomings. The unique design of our depth completion model is that it simultaneously outputs a reconstructed
image and a dense depth map. Specifically, we formulate
image reconstruction from sparse depth as an auxiliary task
during training that is supervised by the unlabelled grayscale images. During testing, our system accepts sparse
depth as the only input, i.e., the image is not required. Our
design allows the depth completion network to learn complementary image features that help to better understand
object structures. The extra supervision incurred by image
reconstruction is minimal, because no annotations other
than the image are needed. We evaluate our method on the
KITTI depth completion benchmark and show that depth
completion can be significantly improved via the auxiliary
supervision of image reconstruction. Our algorithm consistently outperforms depth-only methods and is also effective
for indoor scenes like NYUv2.

1. Introduction
Dense and accurate depth is beneﬁcial to many computer
vision tasks, e.g., 3D object detection [5, 39], optical ﬂow
estimation [31, 48], and semantic segmentation [42, 45].
However, depth maps acquired from sensors, like LiDAR,
are too sparse to fulﬁll practical needs. Depth completion
thus aims to recover dense depth from sparse measurements.
Existing studies for depth completion are generally classiﬁed into depth-only and multiple-input methods. Depth-only
methods use sparse depth as the only input [36, 26, 11].
However, they may fail to recover semantically consistent
boundaries, or small/thin objects due to the sparsity of in* Corresponding author: kaiyue.lu@data61.csiro.au

2

Data61, CSIRO

put depth points and the lack of images to provide semantic
cues (see Fig. 1). The intuitive solution is to take the RGB
image or its gray scale as an additional input to the model,
as used by multiple-input methods [40, 30, 7]. Nevertheless,
aggregating features from two modalities is challenging and
complicated [11, 30], and also, calibrating images to depth
maps can be expensive in practice [14, 20]. Further, for enduse systems, such as autonomous vehicles, incorporating
additional calibrated sensors, like the camera, and associated
processing modules may signiﬁcantly increase the cost.
The question arising from above is, can we continue the
depth-only paradigm but incorporate more image features
so as to provide richer semantics to overcome shortcomings
of this paradigm? To answer this, we start from an observation that, from sparse depth we can still roughly see some
object structures according to their general shape and depth
difference to the background, e.g., the car and pole examples
in Fig. 1. This motivates us into thinking if some image
semantics can be recovered from sparse depth, we will be
able to relax the need of taking the image as input.
Motivated by the above considerations, we propose a
depth completion model that takes sparse depth as the only
input and at the same time has the ability to learn from images features to provide semantic cues. Speciﬁcally, we
train the network to output a reconstructed image and a
dense depth map simultaneously, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a).
We formulate image reconstruction from sparse depth as
an auxiliary task during training that is supervised by the
unlabelled gray-scale images. During testing, no image is
required as input. The unique design of our model allows
the depth completion network to learn complementary image features that help to better understand object structures,
and thus, produce more semantically consistent and accurate
results than existing depth-only methods (see Fig. 1). Moreover, the extra supervision incurred by image reconstruction
at the training stage is minimal, because no annotations other
than the image are needed. Therefore, our method is practical in use. We evaluate our method on the KITTI depth
completion benchmark and show that depth completion can
be signiﬁcantly improved via the auxiliary learning of image
reconstruction.

11306

