Meshed-Memory Transformer for Image Captioning
Marcella Cornia∗

Matteo Stefanini∗ Lorenzo Baraldi∗
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

Rita Cucchiara

{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
Transformer-based architectures represent the state of
the art in sequence modeling tasks like machine translation and language understanding. Their applicability to
multi-modal contexts like image captioning, however, is
still largely under-explored. With the aim of filling this
gap, we present M2 – a Meshed Transformer with Memory for Image Captioning. The architecture improves both
the image encoding and the language generation steps: it
learns a multi-level representation of the relationships between image regions integrating learned a priori knowledge, and uses a mesh-like connectivity at decoding stage
to exploit low- and high-level features. Experimentally, we
investigate the performance of the M2 Transformer and
different fully-attentive models in comparison with recurrent ones. When tested on COCO, our proposal achieves
a new state of the art in single-model and ensemble configurations on the “Karpathy” test split and on the online test server. We also assess its performances when describing objects unseen in the training set. Trained models and code for reproducing the experiments are publicly
available at: https://github.com/aimagelab/
meshed-memory-transformer.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is the task of describing the visual content of an image in natural language. As such, it requires
an algorithm to understand and model the relationships between visual and textual elements, and to generate a sequence of output words. This has usually been tackled via
Recurrent Neural Network models [40, 15, 43, 42, 7], in
which the sequential nature of language is modeled with
the recurrent relations of either RNNs or LSTMs. Additive
attention or graph-like structures [46] are often added to the
recurrence [43, 12] in order to model the relationships between image regions, words, and eventually tags [20].
This schema has remained the dominant approach in
∗ Equal contribution.

A baseball player is
throwing a ball to
another player.

𝜎

Encoder
Layer 1

Encoder
Layer 2

…
Encoder
Layer N

Memory-Augmented Encoding

Decoder
Layer N

…

𝜎

Decoder
Layer 2

𝜎

Decoder
Layer 1

Meshed Decoding

Figure 1: Our image captioning approach encodes relationships between image regions exploiting learned a priori knowledge. Multi-level encodings of image regions are
connected to a language decoder through a meshed and
learnable connectivity.
the last few years, with the exception of the investigation
of Convolutional language models [5], which however did
not become a leading choice. The recent advent of fullyattentive models, in which the recurrent relation is abandoned in favour of the use of self-attention, offers unique
opportunities in terms of set and sequence modeling performances, as testified by the Transformer [37] and BERT [8]
models and their applications to retrieval [33] and video understanding [35]. Also, this setting offers novel architectural modeling capabilities, as for the first time the attention operator is used in a multi-layer and extensible fashion.
Nevertheless, the multi-modal nature of image captioning
demands for specific architectures, different from those employed for the understanding of a single modality.
Following this premise, we investigate the design of
a novel fully-attentive approach for image captioning.
Our architecture takes inspiration from the Transformer
model [37] for machine translation and incorporates two
key novelties with respect to all previous image captioning algorithms: (i) image regions and their relationships are

10578

