Copy and Paste GAN: Face Hallucination from Shaded Thumbnails
Yang Zhang1,2,3 , Ivor W. Tsang3 , Yawei Luo4 , Changhui Hu1,2,5 , Xiaobo Lu1,2∗, Xin Yu3,6
1 School of Automation, Southeast University, China
2 Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, China
3 Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
4 School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
5 School of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
6 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australian National University, Australia

Abstract
Existing face hallucination methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) have achieved impressive performance on low-resolution (LR) faces in a normal illumination condition. However, their performance
degrades dramatically when LR faces are captured in
low or non-uniform illumination conditions. This paper proposes a Copy and Paste Generative Adversarial
Network (CPGAN) to recover authentic high-resolution
(HR) face images while compensating for low and nonuniform illumination. To this end, we develop two key
components in our CPGAN: internal and external Copy
and Paste nets (CPnets). Specifically, our internal CPnet exploits facial information residing in the input image to enhance facial details; while our external CPnet
leverages an external HR face for illumination compensation. A new illumination compensation loss is thus developed to capture illumination from the external guided
face image effectively. Furthermore, our method offsets
illumination and upsamples facial details alternately
in a coarse-to-fine fashion, thus alleviating the correspondence ambiguity between LR inputs and external
HR inputs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method manifests authentic HR face images in a uniform
illumination condition and outperforms state-of-the-art
methods qualitatively and quantitatively.

Figure 1: Motivation of CPGAN. Internal and external CPnets are introduced to mimic the Clone Stamp
Tool. Internal CPnet copies good details to paste them
on shadow regions. External CPnet further retouches the
face using an external guided face from the UI-HR face
dataset during the upsampling process to compensate for
uneven illumination in the final HR face.
changes in daily activities. To acquire such information,
high-resolution and high-quality face images are often
desirable. Due to spacing distance and lighting conditions between cameras and humans, captured faces may
be tiny or in poor illumination conditions, thus hindering
human perception and computer analysis (Fig.2(a)).
Recently, many face hallucination techniques [32, 35,
41, 4, 5, 30, 37] have been proposed to visualize tiny
face images by assuming uniform illuminations on face
thumbnail databases, as seen in Fig.2(b) and Fig.2(c).
However, facial details in shaded thumbnails become
obscure in case of low/non-uniform illumination conditions, which leads to failures in hallucination due to
inconsistent intensities. For instance, as Fig.2(d) shows,
the hallucinated result generated by the state-of-the-art
face hallucination method [33] is semantically and per-

1. Introduction
Human faces are important information resources
since they carry information on identity and emotion
∗ Corresponding author (xblu2013@126.com).

This work was done when Yang Zhang (zhangyang201703@126.com) was
a visiting student at University of Technology Sydney.

7355

