Composing Good Shots by Exploiting Mutual Relations
Debang Li 1,2 , Junge Zhang1,2 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
4
University of California, Merced 5 Google Research
{debang.li,jgzhang, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Finding views with a good composition from an input
image is a common but challenging problem. There are
usually at least dozens of candidates (regions) in an image,
and how to evaluate these candidates is subjective. Most
existing methods only use the feature corresponding to each
candidate to evaluate the quality. However, the mutual relations between the candidates from an image play an essential role in composing a good shot due to the comparative
nature of this problem. Motivated by this, we propose a
graph-based module with a gated feature update to model
the relations between different candidates. The candidate
region features are propagated on a graph that models mutual relations between different regions for mining the useful
information such that the relation features and region features are adaptively fused. We design a multi-task loss to
train the model, especially, a regularization term is adopted
to incorporate the prior knowledge about the relations into
the graph. A data augmentation method is also developed
by mixing nodes from different graphs to improve the model
generalization ability. Experimental results show that the
proposed model performs favorably against state-of-the-art
methods, and comprehensive ablation studies demonstrate
the contribution of each module and graph-based inference
of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Image composition plays a critical role in generating visually appealing shots that involves finding views from an
image. In addition, finding a view is the key to numerous
tasks, e.g., image cropping [40, 48]. Automatically finding
good views can help save a lot of time and effort for users,
photographers, and designers, especially when dealing with
a large number of images.
In the past decades, numerous methods [1, 4, 5, 9, 10, 18,

Input Image

Good Views

Construct Graph &
Features Propagation

Candidate Views

Feature Similarity between Views

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed relation mining process
for finding good views. For a group of views from an input image, we construct a graph to model their relations and propagate
the features of these views on the graph. As such, the similarities between good (well-composed) views and bad views become
much smaller, thereby facilitating the task of finding good views.

19, 23, 33, 34, 40, 41, 44, 45, 48, 24] have been developed
for the automatic image cropping or good view recommendation. Existing methods mainly generate candidate regions
at the first stage and then score these generated candidates
based on the results of the saliency detection [1, 10, 2, 37,
31] or aesthetics assessment [45, 53, 33, 7, 26, 52, 51]. Recently, numerous data-driven methods [4, 5, 40, 41, 44] train
the CNN models directly with the annotated data [4, 44] for
this problem. The aforementioned methods mainly consider
the region features of candidates when scoring them, ignoring the mutual relations between different regions (views)
of an image. In contrast, we show that mining the relations
between different regions can significantly help to find good
views from an image.
In this work, we propose a graph-based model with the
gated feature update to model these relations and update the
region features with the mined relation features for finding good views (see Figure 1). The features of different
regions are propagated on a graph that models the mutual
relations through the graph convolution [21]. During the
feature propagation, the relation features of the candidate

4213

