Auxiliary Training: Towards Accurate and Robust Models
Linfeng Zhang12 , Muzhou Yu23 , Tong Chen1 , Zuoqiang Shi1 , Chenglong Bao1 *, Kaisheng Ma1 *
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Institute for interdisciplinary Information Core Technology
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
Training process is crucial for the deployment of the network in applications which have two strict requirements on
both accuracy and robustness. However, most existing approaches are in a dilemma, i.e. model accuracy and robustness forming an embarrassing tradeoff – the improvement
of one leads to the drop of the other. The challenge remains
for as we try to improve the accuracy and robustness simultaneously. In this paper, we propose a novel training
method via introducing the auxiliary classifiers for training
on corrupted samples, while the clean samples are normally
trained with the primary classifier. In the training stage, a
novel distillation method named input-aware self distillation is proposed to facilitate the primary classifier to learn
the robust information from auxiliary classifiers. Along with
it, a new normalization method - selective batch normalization is proposed to prevent the model from the negative
influence of corrupted images. At the end of the training period, a L2 -norm penalty is applied to the weights of primary
and auxiliary classifiers such that their weights are asymptotically identical. In the stage of inference, only the primary classifier is used and thus no extra computation and
storage are needed. Extensive experiments on CIFAR10,
CIFAR100 and ImageNet show that noticeable improvements on both accuracy and robustness can be observed
by the proposed auxiliary training. On average, auxiliary
training achieves 2.21% accuracy and 21.64% robustness
(measured by corruption error) improvements over traditional training methods on CIFAR100. Codes have been
released on github.

1. Introduction
Dramatic achievements have been attained with the help
of deep learning in various domains, including computer vision [17, 25, 35, 26], natural language processing [2, 40, 7]
and so on. However, image corruption, which can be widely
observed in real-world application scenarios like rotation,
∗Corresponding authors, {kaisheng,clbao}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

blurring, raining, and noises, leads to a severe accuracy
degradation due to the vulnerability of neural networks. A
simple and effective method to improve model robustness is
data augmentation [21, 38]. However, directly adding corrupted images into training set always leads to unacceptable
accuracy drop on clean images [47]. Moreover, model robustness for different kinds of corruptions always influences
each other. For instance, Gaussian noise data augmentation
leads to robustness increment on noise corruption but reduces model robustness on the images with different contrast and saturation [43]. Most recently, one research trend
is to improve model robustness without scarifying accuracy
on clean data [16, 27], yet, it’s still challenging to develop a
training approach that improves both accuracy and robustness simultaneously.
In this work, we propose a novel neural networks training framework named auxiliary training which consists of
two types of training samples. One is the clean images
from a dataset and the other is the corrupted images which
are generated by adding corruptions to clean images. The
corruptions in this paper consist of noise, blur and other
formats of image corruption. In our training framework,
given a network, the feature extraction layer is kept but auxiliary classifiers which are copies of the final classifier layer
(denoted as primary classifier) are introduced for helping
training the primary classifier. In the first stage of training, both two kinds of images are fed into the same convolutional layers to obtain representative features but each
individual classifier is only trained by samples from a certain kind of corruption. In the second stage, a L2 -norm loss
is applied for penalizing the weights between the primary
classifier and auxiliary classifiers such that they attain the
identical weights. As a result, the auxiliary classifiers can
be dropped and only the primary classifier is kept. Therefore, the original network architecture does not change and
extra computations and parameters are needless in the inference period. Figure 1 illustrates the flow of our approach.
Moreover, we propose the input-aware self distillation
and selective batch normalization to facilitate model training. The input-aware self distillation regards the primary
classifier as the teacher model, and auxiliary classifiers as

372

