Camera Trace Erasing
Chang Chen∗1 , Zhiwei Xiong 1 , Xiaoming Liu 2 , and Feng Wu1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Michigan State University
changc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zwxiong,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn, liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
Camera trace is a unique noise produced in digital imaging process. Most existing forensic methods analyze camera trace to identify image origins. In this paper, we address a new low-level vision problem, camera trace erasing,
to reveal the weakness of trace-based forensic methods. A
comprehensive investigation on existing anti-forensic methods reveals that it is non-trivial to effectively erase camera trace while avoiding the destruction of content signal.
To reconcile these two demands, we propose Siamese Trace
Erasing (SiamTE), in which a novel hybrid loss is designed
on the basis of Siamese architecture for network training.
Specifically, we propose embedded similarity, truncated fidelity, and cross identity to form the hybrid loss. Compared
with existing anti-forensic methods, SiamTE has a clear advantage for camera trace erasing, which is demonstrated in
three representative tasks. Code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/ngchc/CameraTE.

1. Introduction
Noise is inevitable in digital imaging process. Camera
trace is such a kind of noise that is unique to each type
of imaging device. Specifically, camera trace is produced
by the different response characteristics of camera sensor
to light [30], and then manipulated by the in-camera processing pipeline [34]. Therefore, camera trace implicitly
encodes information of camera type into the imaging results in a form of noise. Based on the analysis on camera trace, researches have proposed a variety of methods
for image forensic tasks, in terms of origin identification
[14, 29], tampering detection [7, 52, 53], and forgery localization [10, 32, 47], to name a few. These methods play an
important role in the steady development of image-based
social networks [51].
Nevertheless, there is little systematic research on the
performance of these forensic methods in an adversarial
case. In this paper, we address camera trace erasing in order
to reveal the weakness of trace-based forensic methods. As
∗ This work was partially done when Chang Chen was a visiting scholar
at Michigan State University.

(a) Original

(b) Filtering

(c) Denoising

(d) Ours

Figure 1. An example of camera trace erasing in the classification
task. (a) Given an image, the state-of-the-art classifier [29] can
predict the right image origin (red bar) with high confidence (measured by normalized logit value). (b) A median filter effectively
erases camera trace, which misleads the prediction (dark blue bar),
yet at the cost of signal destruction. (c) A real-world image denoising method [48], though gently removing the visible noise, is not
effective enough to erase camera trace. (d) Our proposed method,
SiamTE, effectively erases the camera trace without visible destruction of content signal. Zoom in for a better visual experience.

an example shown in Fig. 1, a median filter effectively degrades the classification accuracy of a forensic method [29],
yet at the cost of signal destruction. While a real-world
image denoiser [48] gently removes the visible noise, the
residual camera trace in the processed image is still sufficient for the classifier to make a right prediction. Therefore, it is non-trivial to effectively erase camera trace while
avoiding the destruction of content signal.
We propose Siamese Trace Erasing (SiamTE) to reconcile these two demands, which is implemented by a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Specifically, we design
a novel hybrid loss on the basis of Siamese architecture [9]
for network training. This hybrid loss contains three terms:
embedded similarity, truncated fidelity, and cross identity.
For the embedded similarity loss, we gather images captured by different types of cameras as a group of input, and
measure the similarity between network outputs. Theoretically, given a suitable metric for camera trace, the similarity of images captured by different types of cameras will
12950

