How Does Noise Help Robustness? Explanation and Exploration under the
Neural SDE Framework
Xuanqing Liu
UCLA

Tesi Xiao
UC Davis

Si Si
Google

Qin Cao
Google

xqliu@cs.ucla.edu

texiao@ucdavis.edu

sisidaisy@google.com

qincao@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google

Cho-Jui Hsieh
UCLA, Google

sanjivk@google.com

chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (Neural ODE)
has been proposed as a continuous approximation to the
ResNet architecture. Some commonly used regularization mechanisms in discrete neural networks (e.g., dropout,
Gaussian noise) are missing in current Neural ODE networks. In this paper, we propose a new continuous neural network framework called Neural Stochastic Differential Equation (Neural SDE), which naturally incorporates
various commonly used regularization mechanisms based
on random noise injection. For regularization purposes, our
framework includes multiple types of noise patterns, such as
dropout, additive, and multiplicative noise, which are common in plain neural networks. We provide some theoretical
analyses explaining the improved robustness of our models
against input perturbations. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that the Neural SDE network can achieve better generalization than the Neural ODE and is more resistant to adversarial and non-adversarial input perturbations.

1. Introduction
Despite the superhuman performance in many computer
vision tasks, recent findings [2, 8, 28] demonstrate that
deep neural networks remain to be more fragile than human or even shallow models. Existing work support such
phenomenon from different perspectives; for instance, on
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, [25] shows that the test accuracy
drops by 5% − 15% if we replace the original test set by a
new one. This experiment casts doubts on the brittleness of
generalization and implies that current classifiers are very
sensitive to minutiae of data cleaning process. Even on the
same test set, unnoticeable adversarial perturbations crafted
by specific algorithms [19] can make the test accuracy close
to zero. In the less challenging non-adversarial case, [11]

collects tens of different types of perturbations and corruptions, including motion blur or frog, to large scale image
dataset; they found that test accuracy drops considerably on
corrupted images. We summarize three settings above as
generalization, adversarial robustness, and non-adversarial
robustness. Ideally, we desire a model not only to be distributionally robust but also be resistant against adversarial
and non-adversarial perturbations. Unfortunately, previous
works only focus on one of these problems – e.g. they may
apply adversarial training technique [8, 19] to tackle adversarial examples but fall short of clean accuracy when no
perturbation exists. It is thus very interesting to see whether
there is a unified way to mitigate all the problems, and
whether we can find a theoretical explanation for it.
In this paper, we study the role of randomness for training a robust neural network. There are abundant sources of
randomness: 1) dropout layer [26] randomly disable some
neural connections and set the corresponding hidden features to zero; 2) similarly, drop block [7] selects a dense,
rectangular region to zero; 3) stochastic depth network [12]
removes some residual blocks as a whole during the training stage; and 4) random smoothing [4] adds i.i.d. Gaussian
noise to input images to be resistant to adversarial perturbations. As we will see later, all of these ideas are mostly the
same, which are composed of the deterministic part – a neural network, and the stochastic part – Bernoulli or Gaussian
random variables.
To study and understand how randomness stabilizes
neural networks, we propose a new continuous neural
network framework called Neural Stochastic Differential
Equation (Neural SDE), which models the continuous limits of ResNet based on the recent proposed Neural ODE
model [3] and adds stochastic diffusion and jump terms to
cover various commonly used regularization mechanisms
based on random noise, including Dropout, stochastic depth
and Gaussian smoothing. Inside the Neural SDE model,
1282

