BEDSR-Net: A Deep Shadow Removal Network from a Single Document Image
Yun-Hsuan Lin

Wen-Chin Chen
Yung-Yu Chuang*
National Taiwan University

Abstract
Removing shadows in document images enhances both
the visual quality and readability of digital copies of documents. Most existing shadow removal algorithms for
document images use hand-crafted heuristics and are often not robust to documents with different characteristics.
This paper proposes the Background Estimation Document
Shadow Removal Network (BEDSR-Net), the first deep network specifically designed for document image shadow removal. For taking advantage of specific properties of document images, a background estimation module is designed
for extracting the global background color of the document.
During the process of estimating the background color, the
module also learns information about the spatial distribution of background and non-background pixels. We encode
such information into an attention map. With the estimated
global background color and attention map, the shadow removal network can better recover the shadow-free image.
We also show that the model trained on synthetic images
remains effective for real photos, and provide a large set
of synthetic shadow images of documents along with their
corresponding shadow-free images and shadow masks. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on several
benchmarks show that the BEDSR-Net outperforms existing
methods in enhancing both the visual quality and readability of document images.

1. Introduction
Documents are indispensable and ubiquitous in our daily
life. Examples include newspapers, receipts, papers, reports, and many others. There are often needs to obtain
digital copies of documents. In the past, scanners were commonly used for digitizing documents with superior quality.
Along with the prevalence of mobile phones and the improvement of their cameras, more and more people tend to
use phone cameras in place of scanners for obtaining digital
copies of documents because of their easy availability.
* This work was supported by FIH Mobile Limited and Ministry of
Science and Technology (MOST) under grants 107-2221-E-002-147-MY3
and 109-2634-F-002-032.

(a) shadow image

(b) ground truth

(c) ours

(d) Kligler [16]

(e) Bako [1]

(f) ST-CGAN [28]

Figure 1. An example of document shadow removal. Previous
methods, Kligler et al.’s method [16], Bako et al.’s method [1], and
ST-CGAN [28], exhibit artifacts such as shadow edges (d), color
washout (e) and residual shadows (f) in their results. Our result
(c) has much fewer artifacts and is very close to the ground-truth
shadow-free image (b).

Compared with scanners, there are often two problems
with capturing documents using phone cameras. First, the
geometry of the document could be distorted and not rectangular due to the camera perspective. Besides, the document could be folded or curved. There exist methods for
rectifying and unwarping the captured documents so that
they become rectangular in shape [18, 27, 19]. Second,
the captured document images are vulnerable to shadows
because the light sources are often blocked by the camera
or user’s hand. Even without occluders, the illumination
is often uneven over the document when taking pictures in
the real world. Thus, the document images taken by phone
cameras often exhibit shadows and uneven shading, leading
to bad visual quality and readability. Users usually prefer
documents with uniform illumination, similar to what they
can obtain using scanners, which take pictures in a wellcontrolled lighting environment. This paper addresses the
shadow removal problem of document images for improving the quality and legibility of the captured documents.
Shadow removal is an important computer vision problem because shadows often degrade the performance of vi112905

