Graph Structured Network for Image-Text Matching
Chunxiao Liu1,2 , Zhendong Mao3,∗, Tianzhu Zhang3 , Hongtao Xie3 , Bin Wang4 , Yongdong Zhang3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China 4 Xiaomi AI Lab, Beijing, China
liuchunxiao@iie.ac.cn, maozhendong2008@gmail.com,
{tzzhang, htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, wangbin11@xiaomi.com

Abstract
Image-text matching has received growing interest since
it bridges vision and language. The key challenge lies
in how to learn correspondence between image and text.
Existing works learn coarse correspondence based on
object co-occurrence statistics, while failing to learn finegrained phrase correspondence. In this paper, we present
a novel Graph Structured Matching Network (GSMN) to
learn fine-grained correspondence. The GSMN explicitly
models object, relation and attribute as a structured phrase,
which not only allows to learn correspondence of object,
relation and attribute separately, but also benefits to learn
fine-grained correspondence of structured phrase. This is
achieved by node-level matching and structure-level matching. The node-level matching associates each node with
its relevant nodes from another modality, where the node
can be object, relation or attribute. The associated nodes
then jointly infer fine-grained correspondence by fusing
neighborhood associations at structure-level matching.
Comprehensive experiments show that GSMN outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on benchmarks, with relative Recall@1 improvements of nearly 7% and 2% on Flickr30K
and MSCOCO, respectively. Code will be released at:
https://github.com/CrossmodalGroup/GSMN .

1. Introduction
Image-text matching is an emerging task that matches
instance from one modality with instance from another
modality. This enables to bridge vision and language, which
has potential to improve the performance of other multimodal applications. The key challenge in image-text matching lies in learning correspondence of image and text, such
that can reflect similarity of image-text pairs accurately.
∗ Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

Figure 1: Illustration of coarse and fine-grained correspondence. In the left figure, the two dogs are coarsely correlated with the word “dog”, while neglecting their relation
and attribute (bite or being bitten? gray or brown?). In the
right figure, the gray and brown dogs are fine-grained correlated with finer textual details, which is achieved by learning phrase correspondence using a graph-based method.
Existing approaches either focus on learning global correspondence or local region-word correspondence. The
general framework of global correspondence learning methods is to jointly project the whole image and text into a common latent space, where corresponding image and text can
be unified into similar representations. Techniques to common space projection range from designing specific networks [23] to adding constraints, such as triplet loss [29],
adversarial loss [27] and classification loss [15]. Another
branch of image-text matching learns local region-word correspondence, which is used to infer the global similarity of

10921

