Reciprocal Learning Networks for Human Trajectory Prediction
Hao Sun, Zhiqun Zhao, and Zhihai He
University of Missouri
{hshq7,zzhv7,hezhi}@mail.missouri.edu

Abstract
We observe that the human trajectory is not only forward
predictable, but also backward predictable. Both forward
and backward trajectories follow the same social norms
and obey the same physical constraints with the only difference in their time directions. Based on this unique property, we develop a new approach, called reciprocal learning, for human trajectory prediction. Two networks, forward and backward prediction networks, are tightly coupled, satisfying the reciprocal constraint, which allows them
to be jointly learned. Based on this constraint, we borrow the concept of adversarial attacks of deep neural networks, which iteratively modifies the input of the network
to match the given or forced network output, and develop a
new method for network prediction, called reciprocal attack
for matched prediction. It further improves the prediction
accuracy. Our experimental results on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our new method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods for human trajectory prediction.

1. Introduction
Human motion trajectories and motion patterns are governed by human perception, behavioral reasoning, common
sense rules, social conventions, and interactions with others
and the surrounding environment. Human can effectively
predict short-term body motion of others and respond accordingly. The ability for a machine to learn these rules and
use them to understand and predict human motion in complex environments is highly valuable with a wide range of
applications in social robots, intelligent systems, and smart
environments [22, 24]. The central research question of
human trajectory prediction is: given observed motion trajectories of human, can we predict their future trajectories
within a short period of time, for example, 5 seconds, in the
future?
Predicting human motion and modeling their common
sense behaviors are a very challenging task [2]. An efficient
algorithm for human trajectory prediction needs to accomplish the following tasks: (1) obeying physical constraints

Figure 1. Illustration of our idea of reciprocal learning for human
trajectory prediction.

of the environment. To walk on a feasible terrain and avoid
obstacles or other physical constraints, we need to analyze
the local and global spatial information surrounding the person and pay attention to important elements in the environment. (2) Anticipating movements of other persons or
vehicles and their social behaviors. Some trajectories are
physically possible but socially unacceptable. Human motions are governed by social norms, such as yielding rightof-way or respecting personal space. (3) Finding multiple
feasible paths. There are often multiple choices of motion
trajectories to reach the destination. This uncertainty poses
significant challenges for accurate human trajectory prediction.
Recently, a number of methods based on deep neural networks have been developed for human trajectory prediction
[2, 20]. Earlier methods have been focused on learning dynamic patterns of moving agents (human and vehicles) [2]
and modeling the semantics of the navigation environment
[17]. Methods have been developed to model human-human
interactions [14], understand social acceptability [4, 1, 20],
and model the joint influence of all agents in the scene [12].
Efforts have also been taken to predict multiple feasible
paths of human [1, 20, 35].
In this work, we propose to explore the unique characteristics of human trajectories and develop a new approach,
called reciprocal learning for human trajectory prediction.
As illustrated in Figure 1, we observe that the human trajectory is not only forward predictable, but also backward
predictable. Imagine that the time is reversed and the person
is traveling backwards. As discussed in the above, the for-

7416

