End-to-End Adversarial-Attention Network for Multi-Modal Clustering
Runwu Zhou1,2 Yi-Dong Shen 1∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{zhourw, ydshen}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract
Multi-modal clustering aims to cluster data into different
groups by exploring complementary information from multiple modalities or views. Little work learns the deep fused
representations of multiple modalities and simultaneously
discovers the cluster structure with a discriminative loss. In
this paper, we present an End-to-end Adversarial-attention
network for Multi-modal Clustering (EAMC), where adversarial learning and attention mechanism are leveraged to
align the latent feature distributions and quantify the importance of modalities respectively. To benefit from the joint
training, we introduce a divergence-based clustering objective that not only encourages the separation and compactness of clusters but also enjoy a clear cluster structure by
embedding the simplex geometry of the output space into
the loss. The proposed network consists of modality-specific
feature learning, modality fusion and cluster assignment
three modules. It can be trained from scratch with batchmode based optimization and avoid an autoencoder pretraining stage. Comprehensive experiments conducted on
five real-world datasets show the superiority and effectiveness of the proposed clustering method.

1. Introduction
With the development of data collection techniques,
multi-modal or view data has become an important part of
current data resources in real-world applications. For example, in visual data, an image could be represented by different descriptor, such as SIFT, HoG and LBP, and a video contains audio signal and visual signal; in web news, a message
could be delivered by pictures and texts. Although each
modality has its own information and statistical properties,
distinct modalities usually admit the same cluster structure.
The rationale for using multi-modal data to learn the structured partition is that they can provide comprehensive estimation for the common pattern with the aid of the comple∗ Corresponding author

mentary information from modalities [33]. Recently, multimodal clustering has gained significant momentum in machine learning and computer vision communities [3, 47].
A straightforward way to group this kind of data is firstly
concatenating them into single-modal data and then resorting to single-modal clustering methods. However, this way
can not guarantee good performance and even obtains worse
results. As a consequence, the mainstream research is to
learn low-dimensional latent representations such that the
mutual agreement of modalities can be reached in the latent space. Recently, a variety of multi-modal clustering
methods have been proposed, including CCA-based methods [7, 39], matrix factorization based methods [5, 42, 37],
subspace learning based methods [44, 45, 48] and graph
model based methods [32, 34]. Although these proposed
methods have achieved promising results, they are greatly
limited due to the use of shallow and linear embedding functions, which are not able to capture the nonlinear nature of
complex data. To tackle this issue, some multiple kernel
learning based methods [11, 27] have been proposed. However, it is difficult to select the proper kernel functions.
With the rapid development of deep neural network
(DNN) models that are able to capture complex features
in single-modal scenarios, such as image clustering, DNN
has increasingly been exploited in multi-modal clustering
task. Existing DNN-based multi-modal clustering methods
fall into two categories. The first category regards multimodal feature learning and cluster assignment as separated
processes. The representative methods of this branch are
DCCA [2] and DMSC [1]. DCCA first maximizes the correlation between the projected deep features of two views
by CCA and then conducts the subsequent K-means clustering. DMSC takes convolutional neural networks for multimodal subspace learning and next does spectral clustering
based on the learned affinity graph. This kind of two-step
learning strategy may disconnect closely related processes
of feature learning and cluster assignment. The direct affect
is that the learned representations can not friendly adapt to
the predefined clustering algorithm. To close this gap, the
other category unifies these two processes into joint opti-

14619

