Recurrent Feature Reasoning for Image Inpainting
Jingyuan Li1 , Ning Wang1 , Lefei Zhang*1 , Bo Du1 , Dacheng Tao2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science
and Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Wuhan University, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{jingyuanli, wang ning, zhanglefei, dubo}@whu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Masked Image

Reconstructed Image

Attention Score

Reasoning

Attention Score

Reasoning

Attention Score

Reasoning

Reasoning

Decoding

Encoding

Convolutional Feature Map

The overview of our proposed inpainting scheme. The masked image is ﬁrst mapped into the convolutional feature space
and processed by a shared Feature Reasoning module recurrently. After the feature map is fully recovered, the generated
feature maps are merged together (Omitted in this ﬁgure) and the merged feature is translated back to a RGB image.

Abstract
Existing inpainting methods have achieved promising
performance for recovering regular or small image defects.
However, filling in large continuous holes remains difficult
due to the lack of constraints for the hole center. In this paper, we devise a Recurrent Feature Reasoning (RFR) network which is mainly constructed by a plug-and-play Recurrent Feature Reasoning module and a Knowledge Consistent Attention (KCA) module. Analogous to how humans
solve puzzles (i.e., first solve the easier parts and then use
the results as additional information to solve difficult parts),
the RFR module recurrently infers the hole boundaries of
the convolutional feature maps and then uses them as clues
for further inference. The module progressively strengthens
the constraints for the hole center and the results become
explicit. To capture information from distant places in the
feature map for RFR, we further develop KCA and incorporate it in RFR. Empirically, we first compare the proposed
RFR-Net with existing backbones, demonstrating that RFR∗ Corresponding Author

Net is more efficient (e.g., a 4% SSIM improvement for the
same model size). We then place the network in the context
of the current state-of-the-art, where it exhibits improved
performance. The corresponding source code is available at: https://github.com/jingyuanli001/
RFR-Inpainting

1. Introduction
Image inpainting aims to recover the missing regions
of damaged images with realistic contents. These algorithms have a wide range of applications in photo editing,
de-captioning and other scenarios where people might want
to remove unwanted objects from their photos [23, 22, 1, 4].
A successfully inpainted image should exhibit coherence in
both structure and texture between the estimated pixels and
the background [27, 17].
Recently, deep convolutional networks have been used to
solve the inpainting problem. Most state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods [29, 17, 25, 30] exploit an encoder-decoder architecture and assume that the damaged image, once encoded,

7760

