Inflated Episodic Memory with Region Self-Attention for
Long-Tailed Visual Recognition

1

Linchao Zhu1,2 and Yi Yang2∗
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
{linchao.zhu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
There have been increasing interests in modeling longtailed data. Unlike artificially collected datasets, longtailed data are naturally existed in the real-world and thus
more realistic. To deal with the class imbalance problem,
we introduce an Inflated Episodic Memory (IEM) for longtailed visual recognition. First, our IEM augments the convolutional neural networks with categorical representative
features for rapid learning on tail classes. In traditional
few-shot learning, a single prototype is usually leveraged to
represent a category. However, long-tailed data has higher
intra-class variances. It could be challenging to learn a
single prototype for one category. Thus, we introduce IEM
to store the most discriminative feature for each category
individually. Besides, the memory banks are updated independently, which further decreases the chance of learning skewed classifiers. Second, we introduce a novel region self-attention mechanism for multi-scale spatial feature map encoding. It is beneficial to incorporate more
discriminative features to improve generalization on tail
classes. We propose to encode local feature maps at multiple scales, and the spatial contextual information should be
aggregated at the same time. Equipped with IEM and region
self-attention, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on
four standard long-tailed image recognition benchmarks.
Besides, we validate the effectiveness of IEM on a longtailed video recognition benchmark, i.e., YouTube-8M.

1. Introduction
Recently, visual recognition models [18, 12] have
achieved significant success with the renaissance of deep
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets). These models
are usually trained on large datasets, e.g., ImageNet [28]
and Kinetics [16], demonstrating satisfying generalization
capabilities in various tasks, e.g., object detection [27], ob* This work was done when Linchao Zhu visited Baidu Research. Yi
Yang is the corresponding author.

…

Features memorization for each category

0.9

0.7

…

Goldfish
Is this a “goldfish”?

Mushroom

Ballplayer
Is this a “ballplayer”?

Is this a “mushroom”?

Test image

Figure 1: Illustration of inflated episodic memory. The
visual cues are stored separately based on their categorical
information.

ject segmentation [22], video localization [10], video question answering [42]. These datasets are artificially collected
to be balanced, where the number of training examples in
each category is roughly the same. However, data in realworld applications usually follow a “long-tailed” distribution [2, 6]. In this distribution, a large number of examples
are data-scarce with only a few training examples. Specifically, a few “head” classes contain thousands of examples
per category, while few instances exist for “tail” classes.
Human exhibits remarkable generalization capabilities in
recognizing rare examples. They can identify examples by
only observing objects a few times or even never seeing
them before. This generalization capability is essential in
deploying deep networks to real-world applications. Cur-

4344

