3D Part Guided Image Editing for Fine-grained Object Understanding
Zongdai Liu† 1 , Feixiang Lu† 2,6 , Peng Wang§ 2,5 , Hui Miao1 , Liangjun Zhang2,6 ,
Ruigang Yang2,3,6 and Bin Zhou∗ 1,4
1

2

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
Robotics and Autonomous Driving Laboratory, Baidu Research 3 University of Kentucky
4
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
ByteDance Research
6
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China

Abstract
Holistically understanding an object with its 3D movable
parts is essential for visual models of a robot to interact
with the world. For example, only by understanding many
possible part dynamics of other vehicles (e.g., door or trunk
opening, taillight blinking for changing lane), a self-driving
vehicle can be success in dealing with emergency cases.
However, existing visual models tackle rarely on these situations, but focus on bounding box detection. In this paper,
we fill this important missing piece in autonomous driving
by solving two critical issues. First, for dealing with data
scarcity, we propose an effective training data generation
process by fitting a 3D car model with dynamic parts to
cars in real images. This allows us to directly edit the real
images using the aligned 3D parts, yielding effective training data for learning robust deep neural networks (DNNs).
Secondly, to benchmark the quality of 3D part understanding, we collected a large dataset in real driving scenario
with cars in uncommon states (CUS), i.e. with door or trunk
opened etc., which demonstrates that our trained network
with edited images largely outperforms other baselines in
terms of 2D detection and instance segmentation accuracy.

1. Introduction
An object, e.g. a car or a person, is commonly composed with articulated and movable 3D parts [47, 24].
Understanding an object with its 3D parts and their future states within images or videos is essential for the vision/perception system of a robot to decide its actions to
interact with the world. For example, in the popular au† Joint first author
§ Partial work is done at Baidu Research
∗ Corresponding author: zhoubin@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1: Fine-grained parsing of cars in uncommon states
on various datasets. The results include 2D detection (red
bounding box), instance segmentation (orange mask), dynamic part segmentation (blue mask), and state description.
Note that the common-state cars are with green color.

tonomous driving (AD) scenario, when a car parking on the
road has its door opened, it will be very likely that someone would get off. As a response, the autonomous vehicle
should immediately slow down, turn the steering wheel, and
change line. Though, this case is not common, it is deadly
if there is no such understanding behind, and in real driving
scenario, there are many such cases as illustrated in Fig. 1.
However, the dominant visual perception systems with
deep neural networks, though achieved great success in
2D/3D detection [34, 12], instance segmentation [17] and
pose estimation [4, 22, 39], are based on coarse understanding of objects with bounding boxes or masks. In our opin-

11336

