Dynamic Hierarchical Mimicking Towards Consistent Optimization Objectives
Duo Li
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{duo.li@connect., cqf@}ust.hk

Abstract
While the depth of modern Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) surpasses that of the pioneering networks
with a significant margin, the traditional way of appending
supervision only over the final classifier and progressively
propagating gradient flow upstream remains the training
mainstay. Seminal Deeply-Supervised Networks (DSN)
were proposed to alleviate the difficulty of optimization arising from gradient flow through a long chain. However,
it is still vulnerable to issues including interference to the
hierarchical representation generation process and inconsistent optimization objectives, as illustrated theoretically
and empirically in this paper. Complementary to previous training strategies, we propose Dynamic Hierarchical
Mimicking, a generic feature learning mechanism, to advance CNN training with enhanced generalization ability.
Partially inspired by DSN, we fork delicately designed side
branches from the intermediate layers of a given neural network. Each branch can emerge from certain locations of
the main branch dynamically, which not only retains representation rooted in the backbone network but also generates more diverse representations along its own pathway. We go one step further to promote multi-level interactions among different branches through an optimization
formula with probabilistic prediction matching losses, thus
guaranteeing a more robust optimization process and better representation ability. Experiments on both category
and instance recognition tasks demonstrate the substantial improvements of our proposed method over its corresponding counterparts using diverse state-of-the-art CNN
architectures. Code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/d-li14/DHM .

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become the
mainstream models for tackling a wide array of computer
vision problems such as image classification [3, 33, 8, 14],
object detection [30, 29, 23] and semantic image segmentation [24, 43, 1]. The advent of AlexNet [18] that achieved

groundbreaking results in the ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Challenge 2012 [3] ignites the resurgence of
deep CNN architectures. Recently along with the growing abundance of computational resources and development
frameworks, a remarkable trend of modern CNN architectures is more and more convolutional layers are stacked
upon, interweaved with indispensable non-linear activation
layers and down-sampling layers. CNNs are now capable
of mining intrinsic characteristics of the images as superhuman image descriptors with tens of thousands of parameters
and engineered innovative connection topology [8, 14, 41].
Embracing these sophisticated CNNs as modeling tools, the
past years witnessed an unprecedented achievement on a variety of visual recognition competitions [3, 5, 22]. However
within the very deep network architectures, inappropriately
designed blocks would impede the gradient flow across layers, consequently causing critical gradient vanishing or parameter redundancy problems [15, 14].
The aforementioned nuisances motivate us to ease the
CNN model training and enhance generalization ability.
One promising line of exploration lays emphasis on the intermediate feature representation and hidden layer supervision. In the Inception series [36, 37], auxiliary classifiers
are connected to two intermediate layers. Although joint
optimization of the weighted auxiliary probabilistic prediction together with the original one can combat the gradient vanishing problem as expected, gain in model performance is relatively minor (around 0.5% [36] or 0.4% [37])
as announced by the authors. Another contemporary work
is DSN [20], which stacks a supervised MLP with very simple auxiliary classifiers, i.e., SVM or Softmax on top of each
hidden layer of the deep architecture. As [32] suggests, imposing a very discriminative hint for classification on intermediate layers might be too aggressive to achieve promising
performance at the top-most classifier. Analogously, more
recent MSDNet [13] empirically manifests that introducing early-exit classifiers to the intermediate layers will lead
to accuracy degradation of the final classifier and assumes
the phenomena is attributed to collapse of the progressive
bottom-up feature generation process.
Our reasoning arises from two critical standpoints pri17642

