D3Feat: Joint Learning of Dense Detection and Description of 3D Local Features
Xuyang Bai1
1

Zixin Luo1

Lei Zhou1

Hongbo Fu2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Long Quan1

City University of Hong Kong

{xbaiad,zluoag,lzhouai,quan,taicl}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
A successful point cloud registration often lies on robust
establishment of sparse matches through discriminative 3D
local features. Despite the fast evolution of learning-based
3D feature descriptors, little attention has been drawn to the
learning of 3D feature detectors, even less for a joint learning of the two tasks. In this paper, we leverage a 3D fully
convolutional network for 3D point clouds, and propose a
novel and practical learning mechanism that densely predicts both a detection score and a description feature for
each 3D point. In particular, we propose a keypoint selection strategy that overcomes the inherent density variations
of 3D point clouds, and further propose a self-supervised
detector loss guided by the on-the-fly feature matching results during training. Finally, our method achieves state-ofthe-art results in both indoor and outdoor scenarios, evaluated on 3DMatch and KITTI datasets, and shows its strong
generalization ability on the ETH dataset. Towards practical use, we show that by adopting a reliable feature detector, sampling a smaller number of features is sufficient
to achieve accurate and fast point cloud alignment. [code
release]

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration aims to find an optimal transformation between two partially overlapped point cloud fragments, which is a fundamental task in applications such as
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [23, 29]
and 3D Lidar-based mapping [31]. In above contexts, the
local keypoint detection and description serve as two keys
for obtaining robust point cloud alignment results.
The recent research on 3D local feature descriptors has
shifted to learning-based approaches. However, due to
the difficulty of acquiring ground-truth data, most existing works often overlook the keypoint detection learning
in point cloud matching, and instead randomly sample a
set of points for feature description. Apparently, this strategy might suffer from several drawbacks. First, the randomly sampled points are often poorly localized, result-

Chiew-Lan Tai1

hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk

ing in inaccurate transformation estimates during geometric
verification such as RANSAC [9]. Second, those random
points might appear in non-salient regions like smooth surfaces, which may lead to indiscriminative descriptors that
adversely introduce noise in later matching steps. Third, to
obtain a full scene coverage, an oversampling of random
points is required that considerably decreases the efficiency
of the whole matching process. In essence, we argue that a
small number of keypoints suffice to align point clouds successfully, and well-localized keypoints can further improve
the registration accuracy. The imbalance of detector and
descriptor learning motivates us to learn these two tightly
coupled components jointly.
However, the learning-based 3D keypoint detector has
not received much attention in previous studies. One attempt made by 3DFeat-Net [14] predicts a patch-wise detection score, whereas only limited spatial context is considered and a dense inference for the entire point cloud is
not applicable in practice. Another recent work USIP [16]
adopts an unsupervised learning scheme that encourages
keypoints to be covariant under arbitrary transformations.
However, without a joint learning of detection and description, the resulting detector might not match the capability
of the descriptor, thus preventing the release of the potential for a fully learned 3D feature. Instead, in this paper, we
seek for a joint learning framework that is able to not only
predict keypoints densely, but also tightly couple the detector with a descriptor with shared weights for fast inference.
To this end, we draw inspiration from D2-Net [7] in 2D
domain for a joint learning of a feature detector and descriptor. However, the extension of D2-Net for 3D point
clouds is non-trivial. First, a network that allows for dense
feature prediction in 3D is needed instead of previous patchbased architectures. In this work, we resort to KPConv [33],
a newly proposed convolutional operation on 3D point
clouds, to build a fully convolutional network to consume
an unstructured 3D point cloud directly. Second, we adapt
D2-Net to handle the inherent density variations of 3D point
clouds, which is the key to achieve highly repeatable keypoints in 3D domain. Third, observing that the original loss
in D2-Net does not guarantee convergence in our context,

6359

