Unbiased Scene Graph Generation from Biased Training
Kaihua Tang1 ,
1

Yulei Niu3 ,

Nanyang Technological University,

2

Jianqiang Huang1,2 ,

Damo Academy, Alibaba Group,

kaihua001@e.ntu.edu.sg,

3

Jiaxin Shi4 ,

Hanwang Zhang1
4

Renmin University of China,

niu@ruc.edu.cn,

Tsinghua University

jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com

shijx12@163.com, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Fraction

Sampling Fraction

0.4
0.3

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) [62] — a visual detection task of objects and their relationships in an image —
seems to have never fulfilled its promise: a comprehensive
visual scene representation that supports graph reasoning
for high-level tasks such as visual captioning [67, 65] and
VQA [54, 15]. Once equipped with SGG, these high-level
tasks have to abandon the ambiguous visual relationships
1 Our code is publicly available on GitHub: https://github.
com/KaihuaTang/Scene-Graph-Benchmark.pytorch

0.2
0.1
0

wheel1

(b) Distribution of Predicate Sampling Fraction

man1

has

building

near

wheel2 motorcycle

man2

wheel1

man1
motorcycle

has

behind

wheel2

man2

car

helmet

street

on
helmet

street

(c) Biased Generation

building

in front of

(a) Input Image

near

Today’s scene graph generation (SGG) task is still
far from practical, mainly due to the severe training
bias, e.g., collapsing diverse human walk on/ sit
on/lay on beach into human on beach. Given
such SGG, the down-stream tasks such as VQA can hardly
infer better scene structures than merely a bag of objects.
However, debiasing in SGG is not trivial because traditional debiasing methods cannot distinguish between the
good and bad bias, e.g., good context prior (e.g., person
read book rather than eat) and bad long-tailed bias
(e.g., near dominating behind/in front of). In this
paper, we present a novel SGG framework based on causal
inference but not the conventional likelihood. We first build
a causal graph for SGG, and perform traditional biased
training with the graph. Then, we propose to draw the
counterfactual causality from the trained graph to infer
the effect from the bad bias, which should be removed. In
particular, we use Total Direct Effect as the proposed final predicate score for unbiased SGG. Note that our framework is agnostic to any SGG model and thus can be widely
applied in the community who seeks unbiased predictions.
By using the proposed Scene Graph Diagnosis toolkit1 on
the SGG benchmark Visual Genome and several prevailing
models, we observed significant improvements over the previous state-of-the-art methods.

parked oncar

(d) Unbiased Generation

Figure 1. An example of scene graph generation (SGG). (a)
An input image with bounding boxes. (b) The distribution of
sample fraction for the most frequent 20 predicates in Visual
Genome [23]. (c) SGG from re-implemented MOTIFS [69]. (d)
SGG by the proposed unbiased prediction from the same model.

— yet on which are our core efforts made [69, 53, 6], then
pretend that there is a graph — nothing but a sparse object
layout with binary links, and finally shroud it into graph
neural networks [63] for merely more contextual object representations [65, 17, 54]. Although this is partly due to the
research gap in graph reasoning [2, 49, 16], the crux lies in
the biased relationship prediction.
Figure 1 visualizes the SGG results from a state-of-theart model [69]. We can see a frustrating scene: among almost perfectly detected objects, most of their visual relationships are trivial and less informative. For example in
Figure 1(c), except the trivial 2D spatial layouts, we know
little about the image from near, on, and has. Such
heavily biased generation comes from the biased training
data, more specifically, as shown in Figure 1(b), the highlyskewed long-tailed relationship annotations. For example,
if a model is trained for predicting on 1,000 times more than
standing on, then, during test, the former is more likely
to prevail over the latter. Therefore, to perform a sensible
graph reasoning, we need to distinguish more fine-grained
relationships from the ostensibly probable but trivial ones,
such as replacing near with behind/in front of,
and on with parking on/driving on in Figure 1(d).

3716

