Scene-Adaptive Video Frame Interpolation via Meta-Learning
Myungsub Choi1
Janghoon Choi1
Sungyong Baik1
Tae Hyun Kim2
Kyoung Mu Lee1
1
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University 2 Department of CS, Hanyang University
1

{cms6539, ultio791, dsybaik, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

2

taehyunkim@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Video frame interpolation is a challenging problem because there are different scenarios for each video depending on the variety of foreground and background motion,
frame rate, and occlusion. It is therefore difficult for a single network with fixed parameters to generalize across different videos. Ideally, one could have a different network
for each scenario, but this is computationally infeasible for
practical applications. In this work, we propose to adapt
the model to each video by making use of additional information that is readily available at test time and yet has not
been exploited in previous works. We first show the benefits of ‘test-time adaptation’ through simple fine-tuning of
a network, then we greatly improve its efficiency by incorporating meta-learning. We obtain significant performance
gains with only a single gradient update without any additional parameters. Finally, we show that our meta-learning
framework can be easily employed to any video frame interpolation network and can consistently improve its performance on multiple benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation aims to upscale the temporal
resolution of a video, by synthesizing intermediate frames
in-between the neighboring frames of the original input.
Owing to its wide range of applications, including slowmotion generation and frame-rate up-conversion that provide better visual experiences with more details and less
motion blur, video frame interpolation has gained substantial interest in the computer vision community. Recent advances of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for
video frame interpolation [16, 20, 29, 30, 31, 48] lead to
a significant boost in performance. However, generating
high-quality frames is still a challenging problem due to
large motion and occlusion in a diverse set of scenes.
Previous approaches to video frame interpolation [16,
20, 29, 30, 31, 48], as well as other learning-based video
processing models [6, 7, 40, 49, 50], typically require a
huge amount of data for training. However, videos in the

Frame Interpolation
Network f_

Test-time Adaptation

Frame Interpolation
Network f_

Frame Interpolation
Network f_

Scene-adapted Inference
Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed video frame interpolation
method. Our video frame interpolation framework incorporates a
test-time adaptation process followed by scene-adapted inference.
The adaptation process takes advantage of additional information
from the input frames and is quickly performed with only a single
gradient update to the network.

wild comprise of various distinctive scenes with many different types of low-level patterns. This makes it difficult for
a single model to perform well on all possible test cases,
even if trained with large datasets.
This problem can be alleviated by making the model
adaptive to the specific input data. Utilizing the additional
information only available at test time and customizing the
model to each of the test data samples has shown to be effective in numerous areas. Examples include single-image
super-resolution approaches exploiting self-similarities inherent in the target image [12, 14, 15, 24, 39], or many visual tracking methods where online adaptation to the input
video sequence is crucial in performance [8, 10, 27]. However, most works either increase the number of parameters
19444

