Attention Convolutional Binary Neural Tree for
Fine-Grained Visual Categorization
Ruyi Ji1,2,∗ , Longyin Wen3, ,* Libo Zhang1,†, Dawei Du4 ,
Yanjun Wu1 , Chen Zhao1 , Xianglong Liu5 , Feiyue Huang6
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, ISCAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
4
University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, NY, USA
5
Beihang University, Beijing, China
6
Tencent Youtu Lab, Beijing, China
{ruyi2017, libo, yanjun, zhaochen}@iscas.ac.cn,
longyin.wen@jd.com, cvdaviddo@gmail.com

Abstract
Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) is an important but challenging task due to high intra-class variances
and low inter-class variances caused by deformation, occlusion, illumination, etc. An attention convolutional binary neural tree is presented to address those problems
for weakly supervised FGVC. Specifically, we incorporate
convolutional operations along edges of the tree structure,
and use the routing functions in each node to determine
the root-to-leaf computational paths within the tree. The
final decision is computed as the summation of the predictions from leaf nodes. The deep convolutional operations learn to capture the representations of objects, and
the tree structure characterizes the coarse-to-fine hierarchical feature learning process. In addition, we use the attention transformer module to enforce the network to capture
discriminative features. Several experiments on the CUB200-2011, Stanford Cars and Aircraft datasets demonstrate
that our method performs favorably against the state-ofthe-arts. Code can be found at https://isrc.iscas.
ac.cn/gitlab/research/acnet.

* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Libo Zhang (libo@iscas.ac.cn). This work was

supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, Grant No.
61807033, the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS, Grant
No. ZDBS-LY-JSC038. Libo Zhang was supported by Youth Innovation
Promotion Association, CAS (2020111), and Outstanding Youth Scientist
Project of ISCAS.

Figure 1: Exemplars of fine-gained visual categorization. FGVC is
challenging due to two reasons: (a) high intra-class variances: the
birds belonging to the same category usually present significant
different appearance, such as illumination variations (the 1st column), view-point changes (the 2nd column), clutter background
(the 3rd column) and occlusion (the 4th column); (b) low interclass variances: the birds in different columns belong to different
categories, but share similar appearance in the same rows.

1. Introduction
Fine-Grained Visual Categorization (FGVC) aims to distinguish subordinate objects categories, such as different
species of birds [42, 52], and flowers [1]. The high intraclass and low inter-class visual variances caused by deformation, occlusion, and illumination, make FGVC to be a
highly challenging task.
Recently, the FGVC task is dominated by the convolutional neural network (CNN) due to its amazing classifica110468

