Zero-Reference Deep Curve Estimation for Low-Light Image Enhancement
Chunle Guo1,2∗ Chongyi Li1,2∗ Jichang Guo1†
Chen Change Loy3 Junhui Hou2 Sam Kwong2 Runmin Cong4
1

BIIT Lab, Tianjin University

2

City University of Hong Kong

3

Nanyang Technological University

{guochunle,lichongyi,jcguo}@tju.edu.cn
{jh.hou,cssamk}@cityu.edu.hk

4

Beijing Jiaotong University

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

rmcong@bjtu.edu.cn

https://li-chongyi.github.io/Proj_Zero-DCE.html/

Abstract
The paper presents a novel method, Zero-Reference
Deep Curve Estimation (Zero-DCE), which formulates light
enhancement as a task of image-specific curve estimation
with a deep network. Our method trains a lightweight deep
network, DCE-Net, to estimate pixel-wise and high-order
curves for dynamic range adjustment of a given image. The
curve estimation is specially designed, considering pixel
value range, monotonicity, and differentiability. Zero-DCE
is appealing in its relaxed assumption on reference images,
i.e., it does not require any paired or unpaired data during training. This is achieved through a set of carefully
formulated non-reference loss functions, which implicitly
measure the enhancement quality and drive the learning of
the network. Our method is efficient as image enhancement
can be achieved by an intuitive and simple nonlinear curve
mapping. Despite its simplicity, we show that it generalizes well to diverse lighting conditions. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate the advantages
of our method over state-of-the-art methods qualitatively
and quantitatively. Furthermore, the potential benefits of
our Zero-DCE to face detection in the dark are discussed.

(a) Raw

(b) Zero-DCE

(c) Wang et al. [28]

(d) EnlightenGAN [12]

Figure 1: Visual comparisons on a typical low-light image. The proposed Zero-DCE achieves visually pleasing
result in terms of brightness, color, contrast, and naturalness, while existing methods either fail to cope with the extreme back light or generate color artifacts. In contrast to
other deep learning-based methods, our approach is trained
without any reference image.

1. Introduction
Many photos are often captured under suboptimal lighting conditions due to inevitable environmental and/or technical constraints. These include inadequate and unbalanced
lighting conditions in the environment, incorrect placement
of objects against extreme back light, and under-exposure
during image capturing. Such low-light photos suffer from
compromised aesthetic quality and unsatisfactory transmission of information. The former affects viewers’ experience
while the latter leads to wrong message being communicated, such as inaccurate object/face recognition.
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Jichang Guo (jcguo@tju.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

In this study, we present a novel deep learning-based
method, Zero-Reference Deep Curve Estimation (ZeroDCE), for low-light image enhancement. It can cope with
diverse lighting conditions including nonuniform and poor
lighting cases. Instead of performing image-to-image mapping, we reformulate the task as an image-specific curve estimation problem. In particular, the proposed method takes
a low-light image as input and produces high-order curves
as its output. These curves are then used for pixel-wise adjustment on the dynamic range of the input to obtain an enhanced image. The curve estimation is carefully formulated
so that it maintains the range of the enhanced image and preserves the contrast of neighboring pixels. Importantly, it

1780

