Domain-aware Visual Bias Eliminating for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Shaobo Min1 , Hantao Yao2 , Hongtao Xie1∗, Chaoqun Wang1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1 , and Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{mbobo,cq14}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hantao.yao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {htxie,zhazj,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Deep learning has made great progress in many vision
tasks, such as image classification [16, 28, 29, 53, 54, 60],
object detection [22, 38], and semantic segmentation [6, 58,
59]. However, these remarkable technologies depend heavily on large-scale data of various classes, and it is infeasible to annotate them all. As a consequence, generalized
zero-shot learning (GZSL) has attracted increasing attention, which can recognize images from either seen or unseen classes.
∗ Corresponding author.

Entropy Detector

1. Introduction

Unseen

Generalized zero-shot learning aims to recognize images
from seen and unseen domains. Recent methods focus on
learning a unified semantic-aligned visual representation
to transfer knowledge between two domains, while ignoring the effect of semantic-free visual representation in alleviating the biased recognition problem. In this paper,
we propose a novel Domain-aware Visual Bias Eliminating
(DVBE) network that constructs two complementary visual
representations, i.e., semantic-free and semantic-aligned,
to treat seen and unseen domains separately. Specifically,
we explore cross-attentive second-order visual statistics to
compact the semantic-free representation, and design an
adaptive margin Softmax to maximize inter-class divergences. Thus, the semantic-free representation becomes
discriminative enough to not only predict seen class accurately but also filter out unseen images, i.e., domain detection, based on the predicted class entropy. For unseen images, we automatically search an optimal semantic-visual
alignment architecture, rather than manual designs, to predict unseen classes. With accurate domain detection, the biased recognition problem towards the seen domain is significantly reduced. Experiments on five benchmarks for classification and segmentation show that DVBE outperforms
existing methods by averaged 5.7% improvement.

Seen

Abstract

Visual Images

Semantic-Free



Seen Classes

0.64

“Leopard”

0.75

Semantic Labels

 “Tiger”

Semantic-Aligned

Unseen Classes

Figure 1. The inference framework of DVBE. Due to the weak
discrimination of semantic-aligned visual representation, DVBE
constructs an extra semantic-free visual representation to improve
seen class prediction and filter out unseen images correctly.

A general paradigm of GZSL is to align the visual images and semantic labels, e.g., category attributes [12], in
a joint semantic space, where the recognition becomes a
nearest neighbor searching problem [45, 48, 61]. In the
joint space, semantic embeddings and visual representations are treated as class anchors and input queries, respectively [1, 9]. However, the provided semantic labels are usually not discriminative [9, 37, 61], some of which are much
similar, e.g., 0.75 cosine similarity between “Tiger” and
“Leopard” in Figure 1. Thus, after semantic-visual alignment, the inter-class divergence between visual representations is inevitably weakened, which further results in the
biased recognition problem [9, 10, 41], i.e., unseen images
tend to be recognized as seen classes.
To address the above issue, recent methods [1, 5, 24, 41,
61, 62] focus on enlarging the visual representation discrimination. For example, SP-AEN [5] preserves the discriminative visual topology by reconstructing visual representations back to images. DLFZRL [41] factorizes an image
representation into several latent components to improve
model generalization. AREN [50] and VSE [61] explore
part-based embeddings to capture detailed visual clues. Although being effective, the visual representations of these
methods are ultimately aligned with semantic labels for
112664

