Quasi-Newton Solver for Robust Non-Rigid Registration
Yuxin Yao1 Bailin Deng2 Weiwei Xu3 Juyong Zhang1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Cardiff University 3 Zhejiang University
yaoyuxin@mail.ustc.edu.cn

DengB3@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
Imperfect data (noise, outliers and partial overlap) and
high degrees of freedom make non-rigid registration a classical challenging problem in computer vision. Existing
methods typically adopt the ℓp type robust estimator to
regularize the fitting and smoothness, and the proximal
operator is used to solve the resulting non-smooth problem. However, the slow convergence of these algorithms
limits its wide applications. In this paper, we propose a
formulation for robust non-rigid registration based on a
globally smooth robust estimator for data fitting and regularization, which can handle outliers and partial overlaps.
We apply the majorization-minimization algorithm to the
problem, which reduces each iteration to solving a simple
least-squares problem with L-BFGS. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for non-rigid
alignment between two shapes with outliers and partial overlap, with quantitative evaluation showing that it outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in terms of registration accuracy
and computational speed. The source code is available at
https://github.com/Juyong/Fast_RNRR.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of depth acquisition devices such as
Kinect, PrimeSense and the depth sensors on smartphones,
techniques for 3D object tracking and reconstruction from
point clouds have enabled various applications. Non-rigid
registration is a fundamental problem for such techniques,
especially for the reconstruction of dynamic objects. Since
depth maps obtained from structured light or time-of-flight
cameras often contain outliers and holes, a robust non-rigid
registration algorithm is needed to handle such data. Moreover, real-time applications require high computational efficiency for non-rigid registration.
Given two point clouds sampled from a source surface
and a target surface respectively, the aim of non-rigid registration is to find a transformation field for the source point
∗ Corresponding author

xww@cad.zju.edu.cn

juyong@ustc.edu.cn

cloud to align it with the target point cloud. This problem
is typically solved via optimization. The objective energy
often includes alignment terms that measure the deviation
between the two point clouds after the transformation, as
well as regularization terms that enforce smoothness of the
transformation field. Existing methods often formulate these
terms using the ℓ2 -norm, which penalizes alignment and
smoothness errors across the whole surface [1, 21, 20]. On
the other hand, the ground-truth alignment can potentially
induce large errors for these terms in some localized regions of the point clouds, due to noises, outliers, partial
overlaps, or articulated motions between the point clouds.
Such large localized errors will be inhibited by the ℓ2 formulations, which can lead to erroneous alignment results.
To improve the alignment accuracy, recent works have utilized sparsity-promoting norms for these terms, such as the
ℓ1 -norm [36, 22, 17] and the ℓ0 -norm [12]. The sparsity
optimization enforces small error metrics on most parts of
the point cloud while allowing for large errors in some local
regions, improving the robustness of the registration process.
However, these sparsity terms can lead to non-smooth problems that are more challenging to solve. Existing methods
often employ first-order solvers such as the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), which can suffer from
slow convergence to high-accuracy solutions [6].
In this paper, we propose a new approach for robust nonrigid registration with fast convergence. The key idea is
to enforce sparsity using the Welsch’s function [14], which
has been utilized for robust processing of images [13] and
meshes [37]. We formulate an optimization that applies the
Welsch’s function to both the alignment error and the regularization, to achieve robust registration. Unlike the ℓp -norms,
the Welsch’s function is smooth and does not induce nonsmooth optimization. We solve the optimization problem
using the majorization-minimization (MM) algorithm [19].
It iteratively constructs a surrogate function for the target
energy based on the current variable values and minimizes
the surrogate function to update the variables, and is guaranteed to converge to a local minimum. The Welsch’s function
enables us to derive a surrogate function in a simple leastsquares form, which can be solved efficiently using L-BFGS.
17600

