Auto-Tuning Structured Light by Optical Stochastic Gradient Descent
Wenzheng Chen1,2∗
Parsa Mirdehghan1∗
Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1
University of Toronto
Vector Institute2
Toronto, Canada

Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1
NVIDIA3

{wenzheng,parsa,fidler,kyros}@cs.toronto.edu
depth map

3D mesh

EpiScan3D [21]

LG projector
IDS camera

TI LightCrafter
C2B camera [22]

0-tolerance

0-tolerance

1-tolerance

avg spectrum
of patterns

avg spectrum
of patterns

avg spectrum
of patterns

scene under white pattern

LG-IDS auto-tuned for 0-tolerance

LG-IDS auto-tuned for L1

Abstract
We consider the problem of optimizing the performance of
an active imaging system by automatically discovering the
illuminations it should use, and the way to decode them.
Our approach tackles two seemingly incompatible goals:
(1) “tuning” the illuminations and decoding algorithm precisely to the devices at hand—to their optical transfer functions, non-linearities, spectral responses, image processing
pipelines—and (2) doing so without modeling or calibrating the system; without modeling the scenes of interest; and
without prior training data. The key idea is to formulate a
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimization procedure
that puts the actual system in the loop: projecting patterns,
capturing images, and calculating the gradient of expected
reconstruction error. We apply this idea to structured-light
triangulation to “auto-tune” several devices—from smartphones and laser projectors to advanced computational
cameras. Our experiments show that despite being modelfree and automatic, optical SGD can boost system 3D accuracy substantially over state-of-the-art coding schemes.

1 cm

1. Introduction
Fast and accurate structured-light imaging on your desk—or
in the palm of your hand—has been getting ever closer to reality over the last two decades [1–4]. Already, the high pixel
counts of today’s smartphones and home-theater projectors
theoretically allow 3D accuracies of 100 microns or less.
Similar advances are occurring in the domain of time-offlight (ToF) imaging as well, with inexpensive continuouswave ToF sensors, programmable lasers, and spatial modulators becoming increasingly available [5–13]. Unfortunately, despite the wide availability of all these devices,
achieving optimal performance with a given hardware system is still an open problem whose theoretical underpinnings have only recently attracted attention [14–20].
To address this challenge, we introduce optical SGD, a computational imaging technique that learns on the fly (1) a sequence of optimized illuminations for multi-shot depth acquisition with a given system, and (2) an optimized reconstruction function for depth map estimation.
Optical SGD achieves this by controlling in real-time the
system it is optimizing, and capturing images with it. The
only inputs to the optimization are the number of shots and
a function to penalize depth error at a pixel.
∗ Authors contributed equally

[15]
[16]
ours

pixels with no error avg error
9%
6.6
29%
196.2
65%
3.7

Figure 1: Top: Optimal structured light with smartphones. We
placed a randomly-colored board in front of an Optoma 4K projector and a Huawei P9 phone, let them auto-tune for five color-stripe
patterns and the 1-tolerance penalty (Table 1), and used the resulting patterns (middle) to reconstruct a scene (inset). Middle:
Auto-tuning systems for 4 patterns and various penalties. Note
the patterns’ distinct spatial structure and frequency content, especially for Episcan3D which employs a scanning-laser projector.
Bottom: Auto-tuning the same system for two different penalties
yields markedly different patterns, and disparity maps with very
different distribution of disparity errors (please zoom in). In both
cases, we obtain significant gains over the state of the art [15, 16].

To prepare a system for optical SGD, we adjust its settings
for the desired imaging conditions (e.g., exposure time,
light source brightness, etc.) and place a randomly-textured
“training board” in its field of view (Figure 1). The process runs automatically after that, minimizing a rigorouslyderived estimate of the expected reconstruction error for the
system at hand. Optical SGD requires no radiometric or geometric calibration; no manual initialization; no prior training data; and most importantly, no precise image formation
model for the system or the scenes of interest.

5970

