Learning a Neural 3D Texture Space from 2D Exemplars
Philipp Henzler1

Niloy J. Mitra1,2

Tobias Ritschel1

p.henzler@cs.ucl.ac.uk

n.mitra@cs.ucl.ac.uk

t.ritschel@ucl.ac.uk

1

2

University College London

Adobe Research

Abstract
We propose a generative model of 2D and 3D natural
textures with diversity, visual fidelity and at high computational efficiency. This is enabled by a family of methods that
extend ideas from classic stochastic procedural texturing
(Perlin noise) to learned, deep, non-linearities. The key idea
is a hard-coded, tunable and differentiable step that feeds
multiple transformed random 2D or 3D fields into an MLP
that can be sampled over infinite domains. Our model encodes all exemplars from a diverse set of textures without
a need to be re-trained for each exemplar. Applications include texture interpolation, and learning 3D textures from 2D
exemplars. Project website: https://geometry.cs.
ucl.ac.uk/projects/2020/neuraltexture.

Figure 1. Our approach allows casually-captured 2D textures (blue)
to be mapped to latent texture codes and support interpolation
(blue-to-red), projection, or synthesis of volumetric textures.

1. Introduction
Textures are stochastic variations of attributes over 2D
or 3D space with applications in both image understanding
and synthesis. This paper suggests a generative model of
natural textures. Previous texture models either capture a
single exemplar (e. g., wood) alone or address non-stochastic
(stationary) variation of appearance across space: Which
location on a chair should have a wood color? Which should
be cloth? Which metal? Our work combines these two
complementary views.
Requirements We design the family of methods with several requirements in mind: completeness, generativeness,
compactness, interpolation, infinite domains, diversity, infinite zoom, and high speed.
A space of textures is complete, if every natural texture
has a compact code z in that embedding. To be generative,
every texture code should map to a useful texture. This
is important for intuitive design where a user manipulates
the texture code and expects the outcome to be a texture.
Compactness is achieved if codes are low-dimensional. We
also demand the method to provide interpolation: texture

generated at coordinates between z1 and z2 should also be
valid. This is important for design or when storing texture
codes into a (low-resolution) 2D image, 3D volume or at
mesh vertices with the desire to interpolate. The first four
points are typical for generative modelling; achieving them
jointly while meeting more texture-specific requirements
(stochasticity, efficiency) is our key contribution.
First, we want to support infinite domains: Holding the
texture code e fixed, we want to be able to query this texture
so that a patch around any position x has the statistics of
the exemplar. This is important for querying textures in
graphics applications for extended virtual worlds, i. e., grass
on a football field where it extends the size of the texture.
Second, for visual fidelity, the statistics under which textures are similar to the exemplar. The Gram matrix of VGG
activations is one established metric for this similarity [5].
Third, infinite zoom means each texture should have variations on a wide range of scales and not be limited to any
fixed resolution that can be held in memory. This is required
to zoom into details of geometry and appreciate the fine variation such as wood grains, etc. In practice, we are limited by

8356

