Satellite Image Time Series Classification
with Pixel-Set Encoders and Temporal Self-Attention
V. Sainte Fare Garnot1 , L. Landrieu1 , S. Giordano1 , N. Chehata1,2
1

LASTIG, Univ Gustave Eiffel, ENSG, IGN, F-94160 Saint-Mande, France
2
EA G&E Bordeaux INP, Université Bordeaux Montaigne, France

Abstract
Satellite image time series, bolstered by their growing
availability, are at the forefront of an extensive effort towards automated Earth monitoring by international institutions. In particular, large-scale control of agricultural
parcels is an issue of major political and economic importance. In this regard, hybrid convolutional-recurrent neural architectures have shown promising results for the automated classification of satellite image time series.
We propose an alternative approach in which the convolutional layers are advantageously replaced with encoders
operating on unordered sets of pixels to exploit the typically coarse resolution of publicly available satellite images. We also propose to extract temporal features using
a bespoke neural architecture based on self-attention instead of recurrent networks. We demonstrate experimentally that our method not only outperforms previous stateof-the-art approaches in terms of precision, but also significantly decreases processing time and memory requirements.
Lastly, we release a large open-access annotated dataset as
a benchmark for future work on satellite image time series.

ropean Space Agency [10], and whose settings are particularly valuable for crop classification. Indeed, its high spectral resolution (13 bands) and short revisit time of 5 days
are well-suited to analysing crop phenology, i.e. the cyclical evolution of vegetation [40]. Additionally, the farmers’
yearly manual declarations provide a considerable amount
of annotated data (10 million parcels labelled each year in
France alone) to train learning algorithms. Such models
would have a wide array of applications beyond crop monitoring, for both public and private entities.
Practitioners mainly rely on traditional methods such as
Random Forest (RF) and Support Vector Machine (SVM),
which operate on handcrafted features for automated crop
classification [15, 47]. Recently, the gradual adoption of
deep learning methods such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) for
learning spatial and temporal attributes has brought significant improvements in classification performance. More
specifically, hybrid neural architectures combining convolutions and recurrent units in a single architecture are the
current state-of-the-art for crop type classification [31, 34].
In this paper, we argue that such hybrid recurrentconvolutional architectures fail to adapt to some key characteristics of the problem under consideration.

1. Introduction
The rising availability of high quality satellite data by
both state [43, 10] and private actors [37] opens up numerous high-impact applications for machine learning methods. Among these, crop type classification is a major challenge for agricultural and environmental policy makers. In
the European Union (EU), yearly crop maps are needed to
grant the Common Agricultural Policy subsidies, an endowment of over 50 billion euros each year [1]. Currently, European farmers declare the cultivated species manually on
a yearly basis. The EU’s Joint Research Center has thus
called for the development of efficient tools to achieve automated monitoring [2]. This push to automation is motivated in part by the launch of the Sentinel-2 satellite—
which became fully operational in mid-2017—by the Eu-

Spatial Encoding of Parcels: Sensors typically used for
crop classification, such as the Sentinel-2 satellites, have
a coarser spatial resolution (10m per pixel) than the typical agricultural textural information such as furrows or tree
rows. However, CNNs rely heavily on texture to extract spatial features [12]. Given this limitation, we propose to view
medium-resolution images of agricultural parcels as unordered sets of pixels. Indeed, recent advances in 3D point
cloud processing have spurred the development of powerful
encoders for data comprised of sets of unordered elements
[29, 45]. We show in this paper that set-based encoders can
successfully extract learned statistics of the distribution of
spectra across the spatial extent of the parcels. Furthermore,
we show that this approach handles the highly-variable size
of parcels in a more efficient way than CNNs.
112325

