Combining detection and tracking for human pose estimation in videos
Manchen Wang, Joseph Tighe, Davide Modolo
AWS Rekognition
manchenw,tighej,dmodolo@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a novel top-down approach that tackles the
problem of multi-person human pose estimation and tracking in videos. In contrast to existing top-down approaches,
our method is not limited by the performance of its person
detector and can predict the poses of person instances not
localized. It achieves this capability by propagating known
person locations forward and backward in time and searching for poses in those regions. Our approach consists of
three components: (i) a Clip Tracking Network that performs body joint detection and tracking simultaneously on
small video clips; (ii) a Video Tracking Pipeline that merges
the fixed-length tracklets produced by the Clip Tracking
Network to arbitrary length tracks; and (iii) a SpatialTemporal Merging procedure that refines the joint locations
based on spatial and temporal smoothing terms. Thanks to
the precision of our Clip Tracking Network and our merging procedure, our approach produces very accurate joint
predictions and can fix common mistakes on hard scenarios like heavily entangled people. Our approach achieves
state-of-the-art results on both joint detection and tracking,
on both the PoseTrack 2017 and 2018 datasets, and against
all top-down and bottom-down approaches.

1. Introduction
Multi-person human pose tracking is the dual-task of detecting the body joints of all the people in all video frames
and linking them correctly over time. The ability to detect body joints has improved considerably in the last several years [4, 5, 7, 14, 16, 21, 22, 24, 30, 33] thanks in
part to the availability of large scale public image datasets
like MPII [4] and MS COCO [19]. These approaches can
be mostly classified into two categories, depending on how
they operate: bottom-up approaches [4, 5, 16, 21, 24, 33]
first detect individual body joints and then group them into
people; while top-down approaches [7, 14, 30] first detect
every person in an image and then predict each person’s
body joints within their bounding box location.
Largely thanks to advancements in object class detection [9, 14, 28], top-down approaches [30] have achieved

Figure 1: Top-down approaches like HRNet rely heavily on the
performance of their person detector, which sometimes fails on
highly occluded people (frames 47, 60), and occasionally make
mistakes on highly entangled people (frame 67). Our approach
overcomes these limitations by propagating bounding boxes over
time (drawn with dotted lines) and by predicting multiple pose hypothesis for each person and smartly selecting the best one.

better pose estimation performance on images than bottomup methods. By taking advantage of robust person detectors, these approaches can focus on the task of joint detection within bounding box regions, and not have to deal with
large scale variations and the problem of grouping joints
into people that bottom-up methods do. Despite these positive results on image datasets, top-down methods do not
perform as well on videos and were recently outperformed
by a bottom-up approach [25]. We attribute this to the fact
that detecting people bounding boxes in videos is a much
harder task than on images. While images often capture
people “posing”, videos inherently contain atypical types of
occlusion, viewpoints, motion blur and poses that make object detectors occasionally fail (e.g., in fig. 1a, the detector
is not able to localize the highly occluded person instances
in the first two frames).
We propose a novel top-down approach that overcomes
these problems and enables us to reap the benefits of top
down methods for multi-person pose estimation in videos.
We detect person bounding boxes on each frame and then

11088

