Learning Multi-Object Tracking and Segmentation from Automatic Annotations
Lorenzo Porzi† , Markus Hofinger‡ , Idoia Ruiz∗ , Joan Serrat∗ , Samuel Rota Bulò† , Peter Kontschieder†
Mapillary Research† , Graz University of Technology‡ , Computer Vision Center, UAB∗
research@mapillary.com† , markus.hofinger@icg.tugraz.at‡ , {iruiz,joans}@cvc.uab.es∗

Figure 1: KITTI sub-sequences with automatically generated MOTS annotations as color-coded instance masks (left to right).

Abstract
In this work we contribute a novel pipeline to automatically generate training data, and to improve over stateof-the-art multi-object tracking and segmentation (MOTS)
methods. Our proposed track mining algorithm turns raw
street-level videos into high-fidelity MOTS training data, is
scalable and overcomes the need of expensive and timeconsuming manual annotation approaches. We leverage
state-of-the-art instance segmentation results in combination with optical flow predictions, also trained on automatically harvested training data. Our second major contribution is MOTSNet– a deep learning, tracking-by-detection
architecture for MOTS – deploying a novel mask-pooling
layer for improved object association over time. Training
MOTSNet with our automatically extracted data leads to
significantly improved sMOTSA scores on the novel KITTI
MOTS dataset (+1.9%/+7.5% on cars/pedestrians), and
MOTSNet improves by +4.1% over previously best methods
on the MOTSChallenge dataset. Our most impressive finding is that we can improve over previous best-performing
works, even in complete absence of manually annotated
MOTS training data.

1. Introduction and Motivation
We focus on the challenging task of multi-object tracking and segmentation (MOTS) [43], which was recently
introduced as an extension of bounding-box based multiobject tracking. Joining instance segmentation with tracking was shown to noticeably improve tracking performance,
as unlike bounding boxes, instance segmentation masks do
not suffer from overlapping issues but provide fine-grained,
pixel-level information about objects to be tracked.
While this finding is encouraging, it comes with the

downside of requiring pixel-level (typically polygon-based)
annotations, which are known to be time-consuming in generation and thus expensive to obtain. The works in [9, 29]
report annotation times of ≈90 minutes per image, to manually produce high-quality panoptic segmentation masks.
Analogously, it is highly demanding to produce datasets for
the MOTS task where instance segmentation masks need to
also contain tracking information across frames.
To avoid generating MOTS labels completely from
scratch and in a purely manual way, [43] has followed
the semi-automatic annotation procedure from [4], and extended the existing multi-object tracking datasets KITTI
tracking [11] (i.e. 21 sequences from the raw KITTI dataset)
and MOTChallenge [28] (4/7 sequences). These datasets
already provide bounding box-based tracks for cars and
pedestrians. Instance segmentation masks were generated
as follows. First, two segmentation masks per object were
generated by human annotators (which also had to chose
the objects based on diversity in the first place). Then,
DeepLabV3+ [6], i.e. a state-of-the-art semantic segmentation network, was trained on the initially generated masks
in a way to overfit these objects in a sequence-specific way,
thus yielding reasonable segmentation masks for the remaining objects in each track. The resulting segmentation
masks then underwent another manual correction step to fix
remaining errors. Finally, these automatic and manual steps
were iterated until convergence.
Including an automated segmentation algorithm is
clearly speeding up the MOTS dataset generation process,
but still has significant shortcomings. Most importantly,
the approach in [43] still depends on the availability of
bounding-box based, multi-object tracking information as
provided by datasets like [11, 28]. Also, their remaining human annotation effort for generating initial instance
16846

