MSG-GAN: Multi-Scale Gradients for Generative Adversarial Networks
Animesh Karnewar
TomTom

Oliver Wang
Adobe Research

animesh.karnewar@tomtom.com

owang@adobe.com

CelebA-HQ

FFHQ

Figure 1: Results of our proposed MSG-GAN technique where the generator synthesizes images at all resolutions simultaneously and gradients flow directly to all levels from a single discriminator. The first column has a resolution of 4x4 which
increases towards the right reaching the final output resolution of 1024x1024. Best viewed zoomed in on screen.

Abstract
While Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have
seen huge successes in image synthesis tasks, they are notoriously difficult to adapt to different datasets, in part due
to instability during training and sensitivity to hyperparameters. One commonly accepted reason for this instability is
that gradients passing from the discriminator to the generator become uninformative when there isn’t enough overlap in the supports of the real and fake distributions. In
this work, we propose the Multi-Scale Gradient Generative Adversarial Network (MSG-GAN), a simple but effective technique for addressing this by allowing the flow of
gradients from the discriminator to the generator at multiple scales. This technique provides a stable approach for
high resolution image synthesis, and serves as an alternative to the commonly used progressive growing technique.
We show that MSG-GAN converges stably on a variety of
image datasets of different sizes, resolutions and domains,
as well as different types of loss functions and architectures,
all with the same set of fixed hyperparameters. When compared to state-of-the-art GANs, our approach matches or
exceeds the performance in most of the cases we tried.

1. Introduction
Since their introduction by Goodfellow et al. [10], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have become the de
facto standard for high quality image synthesis. The success of GANs comes from the fact that they do not require
manually designed loss functions for optimization, and can
therefore learn to generate complex data distributions without the need to be able to explicitly define them. While
flow-based models such as [6, 7, 27, 18] and autoregressive
models such as [32, 31, 29] allow training generative models directly using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (explicitly and implicitly respectively), the fidelity of the generated
images has not yet been able to match that of the state-ofthe-art GAN models [15, 16, 17, 3]. However, GAN training suffers from two prominent problems: (1) mode collapse and (2) training instability.
The problem of mode collapse occurs when the generator network is only able to capture a subset of the variance
present in the data distribution. Although numerous works
[28, 41, 15, 21] have been proposed to address this problem,
it remains an open area of study. In this work, however, we
address the problem of training instability. This is a fundamental issue with GANs, and has been widely reported by

7799

