GIFnets: Differentiable GIF Encoding Framework
Innfarn Yoo, Xiyang Luo, Yilin Wang, Feng Yang, and Peyman Milanfar
Google Research - Mountain View, California
[innfarn, xyluo, yilin, fengyang, milanfar]@google.com

Abstract
Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) is a widely used image file format. Due to the limited number of palette colors, GIF encoding often introduces color banding artifacts.
Traditionally, dithering is applied to reduce color banding,
but introducing dotted-pattern artifacts. To reduce artifacts
and provide a better and more efficient GIF encoding, we
introduce a differentiable GIF encoding pipeline, which includes three novel neural networks: PaletteNet, DitherNet,
and BandingNet. Each of these three networks provides an
important functionality within the GIF encoding pipeline.
PaletteNet predicts a near-optimal color palette given an
input image. DitherNet manipulates the input image to reduce color banding artifacts and provides an alternative to
traditional dithering. Finally, BandingNet is designed to
detect color banding, and provides a new perceptual loss
specifically for GIF images. As far as we know, this is
the first fully differentiable GIF encoding pipeline based on
deep neural networks and compatible with existing GIF decoders. User study shows that our algorithm is better than
Floyd-Steinberg based GIF encoding.

1. Introduction
GIF is a widely used image file format. At its core, GIF
represents an image by applying color quantization. Each
pixel of an image is indexed by the nearest color in some
color palette. Finding an optimal color palette, which is
equivalent to clustering, is an NP-hard problem. A commonly used algorithm for palette extraction is the mediancut algorithm [15], due to its low cost and relatively high
quality. Better clustering algorithms such as k-means produce palettes of higher quality, but are much slower, and
have O(n2 ) time complexity [6, 21]. Nearly all classical
palette extraction methods involve an iterative procedure
over all the image pixels, and are therefore inefficient.
Another issue with GIF encoding is the color banding
artifacts brought by color quantization as shown in Figure 1b. A popular method for suppressing banding artifacts is dithering, a technique which adds small perturba-

(a) Original

(b) Palette

(c) Floyd-Steinberg

(d) Our Method

Figure 1: Comparison of our method against GIF encoding with no dithering and Floyd-Steinberg dithering. Compared to GIF without dithering (b) and Floyd-Steinberg (c),
our method (d) shows less banding artifacts as well as less
dotted noise artifacts. The examples are generated with 16
palette colors.
tions in an input image to make the color quantized version
of the input image look more visually appealing. Error diffusion is a classical method for dithering, which diffuses
quantization errors to nearby pixels [8, 11, 25]. While effective, these error diffusion methods also introduce artifacts of
their own, e.g., dotted noise artifacts as shown in Figure 1c.
Fundamentally, these methods are not aware of the higher
level semantics in an image, and are therefore incapable of
optimizing for higher level perceptual metrics.
To this end, we propose a differentiable GIF encoding
framework consisting of three novel neural networks: Palet-

14473

