C-Flow: Conditional Generative Flow Models for Images and 3D Point Clouds

Render

3D Reconstr.

Albert Pumarola1,∗
Stefan Popov2
Francesc Moreno-Noguer1
Vittorio Ferrari2
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain
2
Google Research, Zürich, Switzerland

Figure 1: We propose C-Flow, a conditioning scheme for flow-based generative models applicable to many different domains. The
figure shows the results of modeling the conditional distributions image ↔ 3D point cloud. In the top row we apply this model for 3D
reconstruction (image → point cloud), and in the bottom row for rendering new images (point cloud → image). Our model allows sampling
multiple times from this conditional distribution to generate several renderings of the same point cloud.

Abstract
Flow-based generative models have highly desirable
properties like exact log-likelihood evaluation and exact
latent-variable inference, however they are still in their infancy and have not received as much attention as alternative
generative models. In this paper, we introduce C-Flow, a
novel conditioning scheme that brings normalizing flows to
an entirely new scenario with great possibilities for multimodal data modeling. C-Flow is based on a parallel sequence of invertible mappings in which a source flow guides
the target flow at every step, enabling fine-grained control
over the generation process. We also devise a new strategy
to model unordered 3D point clouds that, in combination
with the conditioning scheme, makes it possible to address
3D reconstruction from a single image and its inverse problem of rendering an image given a point cloud. We demonstrate our conditioning method to be very adaptable, being
also applicable to image manipulation, style transfer and
multi-modal image-to-image mapping in a diversity of domains, including RGB images, segmentation maps and edge
masks.

1. Introduction
Generative models have become extremely popular in
the machine learning and computer vision communities.
Two main actors currently prevail in this scenario, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [26] and especially Generative
∗ Work done while interning at Google.

Adversarial Networks (GANs) [17]. In this paper we focus on a different family, the so-called flow-based generative models [13], which remain under the shadow of VAEs
and GANs despite offering very appealing properties. Compared to other generative method, flow-based models build
upon a sequence of reversible mappings between the input
and latent space that allow for (1) exact latent-variable inference and log-likelihoood evaluation, (2) efficient and parallelizable inference and synthesis and (3) useful and simple
data manipulation by operating directly on the latent space.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel approach
to condition normalizing flows, making it possible to perform multi-modality transfer tasks which have so far not
been explored under the umbrella of flow-based generative
models. For this purpose, we introduce C-Flow, a framework consisting of two parallel flow branches, interconnected across their reversible functions using conditional
coupling layers and trained with an invertible cycle consistency. This scheme allows guiding a source domain towards a target domain guaranteeing the satisfaction of the
aforementioned properties of flow-based models. Conditional inference is then implemented in a simple manner, by
(exactly) embedding the source sample into its latent space,
sampling a point from a Gaussian prior, and then propagating them through the learned normalizing flow. For example, for the application of synthesizing multiple plausible
photos given a semantic segmentation mask, each image is
generated by jointly propagating the segmentation embedding and a random point drawn from a prior distribution
across the learned flow.

7949

