Revisiting Pose-Normalization for Fine-Grained Few-Shot Recognition
Luming Tang

Davis Wertheimer
Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

{lt453,dww78,bh497}@cornell.edu

Abstract
Few-shot, fine-grained classification requires a model
to learn subtle, fine-grained distinctions between different
classes (e.g., birds) based on a few images alone. This
requires a remarkable degree of invariance to pose, articulation and background. A solution is to use posenormalized representations: first localize semantic parts
in each image, and then describe images by characterizing the appearance of each part. While such representations are out of favor for fully supervised classification,
we show that they are extremely effective for few-shot finegrained classification. With a minimal increase in model
capacity, pose normalization improves accuracy between
10 and 20 percentage points for shallow and deep architectures, generalizes better to new domains, and is effective for multiple few-shot algorithms and network backbones. Code is available at https://github.com/
Tsingularity/PoseNorm_Fewshot.

1. Introduction
The ability to generalize with minimal fine-tuning is a
crucial property for learned neural models, not just to unseen data but also to unseen types of data. Consider the task
shown in Figure 1. We are given just a single image (or a
very small number) from a few bird species, and from this
information alone we must learn to recognize them. Humans are known to be very good at this few-shot learning task [19], but machines struggle: in spite of dramatic
progress in visual recognition and two years of focused research, performance on several few-shot benchmarks remains far below that of fully supervised approaches.
This is a problem in practice, especially for fine-grained
classification problems (such as that in Figure 1). In this setting, distinct classes can number in the hundreds, while the
expertise and effort required to correctly label these classes
can make annotation expensive. Together, this makes the
collection of large labeled training sets for fine-grained classification difficult, sometimes prohibitively so. The ability
of neural networks to handle fine-grained, few-shot learning

can thus be crucial for real-world applications.
What is the reason behind the large gap between machine
and human performance on this task? An intuitive hypothesis is that humans use a much more stable feature representation, which is invariant to large spatial deformations. For
example, in the bird classification task, we might characterize a bird image using the attributes of its various parts:
the shape of the beak, the color of the wing, the presence
or absence of a crown. Such a characterization is invariant not just to changes in the image background, but also to
variation in camera pose and articulation, allowing us to effectively perceive similarities and differences across a wide
range of bird species, and individual images of them.
Such a featurization is “pose normalized”, and was explored as a promising direction for fine-grained classification before the re-discovery of convolutional networks [32].
Researchers found, however, that end-to-end training with
black-box architectures, and without pose normalization,
led to great improvement in the standard benchmarks (albeit with consistent modifications, such as bilinear pooling [16]). Indeed, in recent years, winners on the annual
fine-grained classification challenges [1] have mostly focused on these black-box architectures. The intuitive idea
of pose normalization has fallen by the wayside.
In contrast, we argue that the dominance of black-box architectures over pose-normalized representations is an artifact of the fully-supervised classification problem. In these
settings, all classes to be distinguished are known a priori,
and we have significant amounts of training data for each
class. This reduces the need for pose and background invariance, since the training data will likely include a broad
range of variation within each class. At the same time,
leveraging category-specific biases in pose and background
will likely be beneficial, since the representation need not
generalize to new classes. These factors act in favor of
black-box architectures with no built-in inductive biases.
However, if we want the learnt model to adapt to new
classes from limited data, as in few-shot learning, the intuitive invariance of pose normalization becomes more useful.
In this paper, we revisit pose normalization for the task
of few-shot, fine-grained classification, and demonstrate its

14352

