iTAML : An Incremental Task-Agnostic Meta-learning Approach
Jathushan Rajasegaran∗ , Salman Khan∗ , Munawar Hayat∗ , Fahad Shahbaz Khan∗‡ , Mubarak Shah†
∗

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

†

University of Central Florida, USA

‡

CVL, Linköping University, Sweden

{first.lastname}@inceptioniai.org, mshah@ucf.edu

Abstract
Humans can continuously learn new knowledge as their
experience grows. In contrast, previous learning in deep
neural networks can quickly fade out when they are trained
on a new task. In this paper, we hypothesize this problem
can be avoided by learning a set of generalized parameters,
that are neither specific to old nor new tasks. In this pursuit,
we introduce a novel meta-learning approach that seeks to
maintain an equilibrium between all the encountered tasks.
This is ensured by a new meta-update rule which avoids
catastrophic forgetting. In comparison to previous metalearning techniques, our approach is task-agnostic. When
presented with a continuum of data, our model automatically identifies the task and quickly adapts to it with just
a single update. We perform extensive experiments on five
datasets in a class-incremental setting, leading to significant improvements over the state of the art methods (e.g.,
a 21.3% boost on CIFAR100 with 10 incremental tasks).
Specifically, on large-scale datasets that generally prove
difficult cases for incremental learning, our approach delivers absolute gains as high as 19.1% and 7.4% on ImageNet and MS-Celeb datasets, respectively. Our codes are
available at: https://github.com/brjathu/iTAML .

Figure 1: We propose a task-agnostic meta-learning approach for class-incremental learning. In this setting, tasks
are observed sequentially where each task is a set of classes.
During training, iTAML incrementally learns new tasks with
meta-updates and tries to retain previous knowledge to learn
a generic model. At inference, given a data continuum,
iTAML first predicts the task and then quickly adapts to it. A
fixed-size memory buffer is kept to support the adaptation.

1. Introduction
Visual content is ever-evolving and its volume is rapidly
increasing each day. High-dimensionality and mass volume of visual media makes it impractical to store ephemeral
or streaming data and process it all at once. Incremental
Learning (IL) addresses this issue, and requires an agent to
continually learn new tasks, while preserving old knowledge with limited or no access to previous data. The goal
is to end-up with a single model, that performs well for all
the tasks. In this manner, incremental learning models offer
adaptation, gradual development and scalability capabilities
that are very central to human-inspired learning.
This paper studies class-incremental learning where
groups of classes are sequentially observed. This case
is fundamentally different from conventional classification
task due to two key factors, plasticity and stability. A plastic
network can quickly forget old tasks while performing well
on new ones (forgetting), and a stable network can impede

learning new tasks in an effort to keep old information (interference). Despite several attempts, catastrophic forgetting and interference are still challenging problems for deep
learning [20]. This paper takes a different approach to IL
based on the following principle: instead of a ‘one size fits
all’ approach that learns a single model well-suited for all
tasks, we propose to learn a generic meta-model which can
be quickly adapted to the desired task. The meta-learning
framework focuses on learning ‘how to rapidly learn?’ The
generality of the model arises from the ‘learning to learn’
training strategy, that focuses on figuring out the shared
parametric space common to all hitherto observed tasks.
Adapting meta-learning for IL involves numerous challenges. First, an incremental classifier keeps observing new
tasks, therefore it must maintain a balance between plasticity and stability. Current meta-learning algorithms such as
MAML (Model Agnostic Meta-Learning) [6], FOMAML

13588

