Visually Imbalanced Stereo Matching
Yicun Liu∗13†
Jimmy Ren∗1
Jiawei Zhang1
Jianbo Liu12
Mude Lin1
SenseTime Research1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong2
Columbia University3
{rensijie,zhangjiawei,linmude}@sensetime.com1

liujianbo@link.cuhk.edu.hk2

yicun.l@columbia.edu3

Abstract
Understanding of human vision system (HVS) has inspired many computer vision algorithms. Stereo matching,
which borrows the idea from human stereopsis, has been extensively studied in the existing literature. However, scant
attention has been drawn on a typical scenario where binocular inputs are qualitatively different (e.g., high-res master
camera and low-res slave camera in a dual-lens module).
Recent advances in human optometry reveal the capability of the human visual system to maintain coarse stereopsis under such visually imbalanced conditions. Bionically
aroused, it is natural to question that: do stereo machines
share the same capability? In this paper, we carry out a
systematic comparison to investigate the effect of various
imbalanced conditions on current popular stereo matching algorithms. We show that resembling the human visual system, those algorithms can handle limited degrees of
monocular downgrading but also prone to collapses beyond
a certain threshold. To avoid such collapse, we propose a
solution to recover the stereopsis by a joint guided-viewrestoration and stereo-reconstruction framework. We show
the superiority of our framework on KITTI dataset and its
extension on real-world applications.

1. Introduction
There have been remarkable signs of progress in understanding and mimicking the human vision system, and lots
of works are focusing on sensing the 3D structures surrounding us. In human’s visual brain, depth perception is interceded by a set of scale-variant spatial filters, where lowfrequency stimuli establish coarse stereopsis, and then highfrequency visual cues escalate stereo acuity [5]. Early researchers in computer vision define this problem as searching for corresponding pixels [3], edges [1], or patches [2]
among different views. Taxonomy and benchmark were
later constructed in [35]. With large datasets becoming
available, NN-based stereo algorithms exhibited superior
∗ Equal contribution. Code will be available at github.com/
DandilionLau/Visually-Imbalanced-Stereo
† Work was done during internship at SenseTime Research.

Figure 1. Illustration of visually imbalanced scenarios: (a) input
left view (b) Input downgraded right view, from top to bottom:
monocular blur, monocular blur with rectification error, monocular
noise. (c) Disparity predicted from mainstream monocular depth
(only left view as input)/stereo matching (stereo views as input)
algorithms: from top to bottom are DORN [9], PSMNet [7] and
CRL [31]. (d) Disparity generated from our proposed framework.

performance [45].
However, little attention has been drawn on the imbalanced condition between the stereo views. In many realworld cases, the visual quality of the left view and the right
view are not guaranteed to be matched. It is common for
human stereopsis to suffer from different degrees of anisometropia and astigmatism in binocular vision [6, 21]; or
for computer vision, the master and slave camera in a duallens module to have different resolution, lens blur, imaging
modality, noise tolerance, and rectification accuracy [43].
Not until recently, discovery in optometry reveals that it
is attainable for the human to maintain decent stereo acuity
with imbalanced binocular signals. In fact, the monocular
downgrading jeopardizes stereo acuity for high spatial frequencies components, but low-frequency targets like structures are merely affected through a natural process called
spatial frequency tuning [24]. With this unearthing in mind,
we tend to ask: are stereo machines able to handle qualitatively imbalanced inputs?
4321
2029

