Leveraging Photometric Consistency over Time for
Sparsely Supervised Hand-Object Reconstruction
Yana Hasson1,2 ∗
Ivan Laptev1,2
1

Bugra Tekin4
Marc Pollefeys3,4

Federica Bogo4
Cordelia Schmid1,5

Inria, 2 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University
3
ETH Zürich, 4 Microsoft, 5 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK

Abstract
Modeling hand-object manipulations is essential for understanding how humans interact with their environment.
While of practical importance, estimating the pose of hands
and objects during interactions is challenging due to the
large mutual occlusions that occur during manipulation.
Recent efforts have been directed towards fully-supervised
methods that require large amounts of labeled training samples. Collecting 3D ground-truth data for hand-object interactions, however, is costly, tedious, and error-prone. To
overcome this challenge we present a method to leverage
photometric consistency across time when annotations are
only available for a sparse subset of frames in a video. Our
model is trained end-to-end on color images to jointly reconstruct hands and objects in 3D by inferring their poses.
Given our estimated reconstructions, we differentiably render the optical flow between pairs of adjacent images and
use it within the network to warp one frame to another. We
then apply a self-supervised photometric loss that relies on
the visual consistency between nearby images. We achieve
state-of-the-art results on 3D hand-object reconstruction
benchmarks and demonstrate that our approach allows us
to improve the pose estimation accuracy by leveraging information from neighboring frames in low-data regimes.

1. Introduction
Understanding how hands interact with objects is crucial
for a semantically meaningful interpretation of human action and behavior. In recent years, impressive hand pose
estimation results have been demonstrated, but joint prediction of hand and object poses has received so far only limited attention, although unified 3D modeling of hands and
objects is essential for many applications in augmented reality, robotics and surveillance.
∗ This work was performed during an internship at Microsoft.

Figure 1. Our method provides accurate 3D hand-object reconstructions from monocular, sparsely annotated RGB videos. We
introduce a loss which exploits photometric consistency between
neighboring frames. The loss effectively propagates information
from a few annotated frames to the rest of the video.

Estimating the pose of hands during interaction with an
object is an extremely challenging problem due to mutual
occlusions. Joint 3D reconstruction of hands and objects is
even more challenging as this would require precise understanding of the subtle interactions that take place in cluttered real-world environments. Recent work in computer
vision has been able to tackle some of the challenges in
unified understanding of hands and objects for color input.
Pioneering works of [16, 24, 37] have proposed ways to recover hand motion during object manipulation, yet without
explicitly reasoning about the object pose. Recent few efforts to model hand-object interactions [12, 43], on the other
hand, have focused on joint 3D hand-object pose estimation
and reconstruction techniques. However, these methods require full-supervision on large datasets with 3D hand-object
pose annotations. Collecting such 3D ground-truth datasets
for hand-object interactions remains a challenging problem.
While motion capture datasets [6] can provide large
amounts of training samples with accurate annotations, they

571

