G2L-Net: Global to Local Network for Real-time 6D Pose Estimation with
Embedding Vector Features
Wei Chen 1,2

Xi Jia1

Hyung Jin Chang1

Jinming Duan1

Aleš Leonardis1

1

2

School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology
{ wxc795,X.Jia.1,h.j.chang,j.duan,a.leonardis}@cs.bham.ac.uk

In this paper, we propose a novel real-time 6D object
pose estimation framework, named G2L-Net. Our network
operates on point clouds from RGB-D detection in a divideand-conquer fashion. Specifically, our network consists of
three steps. First, we extract the coarse object point cloud
from the RGB-D image by 2D detection. Second, we feed
the coarse object point cloud to a translation localization
network to perform 3D segmentation and object translation
prediction. Third, via the predicted segmentation and translation, we transfer the fine object point cloud into a local
canonical coordinate, in which we train a rotation localization network to estimate initial object rotation. In the
third step, we define point-wise embedding vector features
to capture viewpoint-aware information. To calculate more
accurate rotation, we adopt a rotation residual estimator
to estimate the residual between initial rotation and ground
truth, which can boost initial pose estimation performance.
Our proposed G2L-Net is real-time despite the fact multiple steps are stacked via the proposed coarse-to-fine framework. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets
show that G2L-Net achieves state-of-the-art performance in
terms of both accuracy and speed. 1

1. Introduction
Real-time performance is important in many computer
vision tasks, such as, object detection [35, 23], semantic
segmentation [36, 10], object tracking [5, 11], and pose estimation [29, 38, 16]. In this paper, we are interested in
real-time 6D object pose estimation, which has significant
impacts on augmented reality [25, 26], smart medical and
robotic manipulation [47, 39].
1 Code: https://github.com/DC1991/G2L_Net.

RGB

Depth

Abstract
+

CNN

Global localization

3D
segmentation
& Translation
localization

Translation localization

Rotation
localization
with EVF
Rotation
residual
estimator
Rotation localization

Figure 1. Three steps of G2L-Net. We propose a novel real-time
point cloud based network for 6D object pose estimation called
G2L-Net. Our G2L-Net contains global localization, object translation localization and rotation localization. For the rotation localization, we propose point-wise embedding vector features (EVF)
and rotation residual estimator to access accurate rotation.

Deep learning methods have shown the state-of-the-art
performance in the pose estimation tasks, but many of them
[42, 33, 28, 21] cannot run in real-time. While there exist some real-time deep learning methods [29, 34, 38, 45]
(> 20fps), they use only RGB information from an image.
One major limitation of using RGB only is that features
learned from such information are sensitive to occlusion
and illumination changes, which precludes these methods
from being applied to complicated scenes. Deep learning
methods based on depth information [17, 21] are more suitable for realistically complicated scenes, but they are usually computation-intensive. One common issue for these
RGBD-based methods is that exploiting viewpoint information from depth information is not very effective, thus
reducing their pose estimation accuracy. To overcome this,
these methods tend to use a post-refinement mechanism or
a hypotheses generation/verification mechanism to enhance
pose estimation accuracy. This, however, reduces the inference speed for pose estimation.
In this paper, to overcome the existing problems in
depth-based methods, we propose a global to local realtime network (G2L-Net), with two added modules which

4233

