Normal Assisted Stereo Depth Estimation
Uday Kusupati1∗
1

Shuo Cheng2

The University of Texas at Austin
3

Rui Chen3∗
2

Hao Su2

University of California San Diego

Tsinghua University

uday@cs.utexas.edu, scheng@eng.ucsd.edu, chenr17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Accurate stereo depth estimation plays a critical role in
various 3D tasks in both indoor and outdoor environments.
Recently, learning-based multi-view stereo methods have
demonstrated competitive performance with limited number
of views. However, in challenging scenarios, especially
when building cross-view correspondences is hard, these
methods still cannot produce satisfying results. In this
paper, we study how to leverage a normal estimation model
and the predicted normal maps to improve the depth quality.
We couple the learning of a multi-view normal estimation
module and a multi-view depth estimation module. In
addition, we propose a novel consistency loss to train an
independent consistency module that refines the depths from
depth/normal pairs. We find that the joint learning can
improve both the prediction of normal and depth, and
the accuracy & smoothness can be further improved by
enforcing the consistency. Experiments on MVS, SUN3D,
RGBD and Scenes11 demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method and state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is one of the most fundamental
problems in computer vision and has been studied over
decades. Recently, learning-based MVS methods have
witnessed significant improvement against their traditional
counterparts [45, 23, 47, 7]. In general, these methods
formulate the task as an optimization problem, where
the target is to minimize the overall summation of pixelwise depth discrepancy. However, the lack of geometric
constraints leads to bumpy depth prediction especially in
areas with low texture or that are textureless as shown in
Fig. 1. Compared with depth that is a property of the
global geometry, surface normal represents a more local
geometric property and can be inferred more easily from
visual appearance. For instance, it is much easier for
∗ Work done while visiting University of California San Diego

Figure 1. Illustration of results of separate learning and joint
learning of depth and normal. While the normal prediction
is smooth and accurate, existing state-of-the-art stereo depth
prediction result is noisy. Our method improves the prediction
quality significantly by joint learning of depth and normal and
enforcing consistency. Color format. Best viewed on screen.

humans to estimate whether a wall is flat or not than the
absolute depth. Fig. 1 shows an example where learningbased MVS methods perform poorly on depth estimation
but significantly better on normal prediction.
Attempts have been made to incorporate the normal
based geometric constraints into the optimization to
improve the monocular depth prediction [49, 59]. One
simple form of enforcing a consistency constraint between
depth and normal is to enforce orthogonality between the
predicted normal and the tangent directions computed from
the predicted depths at every point. However, for usage
as regularizing loss function during training, we find that
a naive consistency method in the world coordinate space
is a very soft constraint as there are many sub-optimal
depth solutions that are consistent with a given normal.
Optimizing depths to be consistent with the normal as a
post processing[59] ensures local consistency; however, not
only this is an expensive step during inference time, but
also the post-processed result may lose grounding from
the input images. Therefore, we strive to propose a new
formulation of depth-normal consistency that can improve

2189

