Cost Volume Pyramid Based Depth Inference for Multi-View Stereo
Jiayu Yang1 , Wei Mao1 , Jose M. Alvarez2 , Miaomiao Liu1,3
1
Australian National University, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{jiayu.yang, wei.mao, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, josea@nvidia.com

R-MVSNet [43]

Point-MVSNet [5]

Ours

Figure 1: Point clouds reconstructed by state-of-the-art methods [5, 43] and our CVP-MVSNet. Best viewed on screen.

Abstract
We propose a cost volume-based neural network for
depth inference from multi-view images. We demonstrate
that building a cost volume pyramid in a coarse-to-fine
manner instead of constructing a cost volume at a fixed resolution leads to a compact, lightweight network and allows
us inferring high resolution depth maps to achieve better
reconstruction results. To this end, we first build a cost volume based on uniform sampling of fronto-parallel planes
across the entire depth range at the coarsest resolution of
an image. Then, given current depth estimate, we construct
new cost volumes iteratively on the pixelwise depth residual
to perform depth map refinement. While sharing similar insight with Point-MVSNet as predicting and refining depth
iteratively, we show that working on cost volume pyramid
can lead to a more compact, yet efficient network structure
compared with the Point-MVSNet on 3D points. We further
provide detailed analyses of the relation between (residual)
depth sampling and image resolution, which serves as a
principle for building compact cost volume pyramid. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that our
model can perform 6x faster and has similar performance
as state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/JiayuYANG/CVP-MVSNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct the 3D
model of a scene from a set of images captured by a cam-

era from multiple viewpoints. It is a fundamental problem
for computer vision community and has been studied extensively for decades [35]. While traditional methods before
deep learning era have great achievements on the reconstruction of a scene with Lambertian surfaces, they still suffer from illumination changes, low-texture regions, and reflections resulting in unreliable matching correspondences
for further reconstruction.
Recent learning-based approaches [5, 42, 43] adopt deep
CNNs to infer the depth map for each view followed by a
separate multiple-view fusion process for building 3D models. These methods allow the network to extract discriminative features encoding global and local information of a
scene to obtain robust feature matching for MVS. In particular, Yao et al. propose MVSNet [42] to infer a depth map
for each view. An essential step in [42] is to build a cost
volume based on a plane sweep process followed by multiscale 3D CNNs for regularization. While effective in depth
inference accuracy, its memory requirement is cubic to the
image resolution. To allow handling high resolution images,
they then adopt a recurrent cost volume regularization process [43]. However, the reduction in memory requirements
involves a longer run-time.
In order to achieve a computationally efficient network,
Chen et al. [5] work on 3D point clouds to iteratively predict the depth residual along visual rays using edge convolutions operating on the k nearest neighbors of each 3D point.
While this approach is efficient, its run-time increases almost linearly with the number of iteration levels.

4877

