Non-Adversarial Video Synthesis with Learned Priors
Abhishek Aich†,∗ , Akash Gupta†, *, Rameswar Panda‡ , Rakib Hyder† ,
M. Salman Asif† , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury†
University of California, Riverside† , IBM Research AI, Cambridge‡
{aaich001@, agupt013@, rpand002, rhyde001@, sasif@ece, amitrc@ece}.ucr.edu

1. Introduction
Video synthesis is an open and challenging problem in
computer vision. As literature suggests, a deeper understanding of spatio-temporal behavior of video frame sequences can directly provide insights in choosing priors,
future prediction, and feature learning [32, 34]. Much
progress has been made in developing variety of ways to
generate videos which can be classified into broadly two
categories: class of video generation methods which require
random latent vectors without any reference input pixel
[24, 31, 32], and class of video generation methods which
do depend on reference input pixels [10, 28, 34]. Current
literature contains methods mostly from the second class
which often requires some human intervention [10, 34].
In general, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8]
* Joint first authors
1 Project page: https://abhishekaich27.github.io/navsynth.html

Ours
(Non-Adversarial)

Most of the existing works in video synthesis focus on
generating videos using adversarial learning. Despite their
success, these methods often require input reference frame
or fail to generate diverse videos from the given data distribution, with little to no uniformity in the quality of videos
that can be generated. Different from these methods, we focus on the problem of generating videos from latent noise
vectors, without any reference input frames. To this end,
we develop a novel approach that jointly optimizes the input latent space, the weights of a recurrent neural network
and a generator through non-adversarial learning. Optimizing for the input latent space along with the network
weights allows us to generate videos in a controlled environment, i.e., we can faithfully generate all videos the model
has seen during the learning process as well as new unseen
videos. Extensive experiments on three challenging and diverse datasets well demonstrate that our proposed approach
generates superior quality videos compared to the existing
state-of-the-art methods.

MoCoGAN
(Adversarial)

Abstract

Figure 1: Comparison of proposed non-adversarial
approach to one representative adversarial approach
(MoCoGAN [31]) on the Chair-CAD [2] dataset. Top:
MoCoGAN often generates blurry frames including similar
type of chairs for different videos as the time step increases.
Bottom: Our approach1 , on the other hand, generates relatively sharper frames, maintaining consistency with the type
of chairs unique to each video in the dataset.
have shown remarkable success in various kinds of video
modality problems [13, 16, 18, 24]. Initially, video generation frameworks predominantly used GANs to synthesize
videos from latent noise vectors. For example, VGAN [32]
and TGAN [24] proposed generative models that synthesize videos from random latent vectors with deep convolutional GAN. Recently, MoCoGAN [31] proposed to decompose a video into content and motion parts using a generator
guided by two discriminators. During testing, these frameworks generate videos that are captured in the range of the
trained generator, by taking random latent vectors. While
all these methods have obtained reasonable performance on
commonly used benchmark datasets, they utilize adversarial
learning to train their models and hence, inherit the shortcomings of GANs. Specifically, GANs are often very sensitive to multiple factors such as random network initialization, and type of layers employed to build the network
[14, 25]. Some infamous drawbacks of GANs are modecollapse (i.e., able to generate only some parts of the data
16090

