Efficient and Robust Shape Correspondence via Sparsity-Enforced Quadratic
Assignment
Rui Xiang
Department of Mathematics
UC Irvine

Rongjie Lai
Department of Mathematics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Hongkai Zhao
Department of Mathematics
UC Irvine

xiangr1@uci.edu

lair@rpi.edu

zhao@uci.edu

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a novel local pairwise descriptor and then develop a simple, effective iterative
method to solve the resulting quadratic assignment through
sparsity control for shape correspondence between two approximate isometric surfaces. Our pairwise descriptor is
based on the stiffness and mass matrix of finite element approximation of the Laplace-Beltrami differential operator,
which is local in space, sparse to represent, and extremely
easy to compute while containing global information. It allows us to deal with open surfaces, partial matching, and
topological perturbations robustly. To solve the resulting
quadratic assignment problem efficiently, the two key ideas
of our iterative algorithm are: 1) select pairs with good (approximate) correspondence as anchor points, 2) solve a regularized quadratic assignment problem only in the neighborhood of selected anchor points through sparsity control.
These two ingredients can improve and increase the number of anchor points quickly while reducing the computation
cost in each quadratic assignment iteration significantly.
With enough high-quality anchor points, one may use various pointwise global features with reference to these anchor
points to further improve the dense shape correspondence.
We use various experiments to show the efficiency, quality,
and versatility of our method on large data sets, patches,
and point clouds (without global meshes).

1. Introduction
Geometric modeling and shape analysis is ubiquitous
in computer vision, computer graphics, medical imaging,
virtual reality, 3D prototyping and printing, data analysis,
etc. Shape correspondence is a basic task in shape registration, comparison, recognition, and retrieval. Unlike images, shapes do not have a canonical representation domain
or basis and do not form a linear space. Moreover, their
embedding can be highly ambiguous even for intrinsically

identical ones. Further complications in practice include
noise, topological perturbations (holes), partial shapes, and
lack of a good triangulation. These difficulties pose both
modeling and computational challenges for shape modeling
and analysis.
For dense shape correspondence, the first step is to design desirable descriptors, pointwise, or pairwise. Pointwise descriptors can be extrinsic and local (in space)
[39, 18, 14, 34], or intrinsic (invariant under isometric
transformation).
Extrinsic pointwise descriptors usually have difficulties in producing accurate dense correspondence, especially if there is non-rigid transformation involved. Many intrinsic pointwise descriptors in
the space domain, such as geodesics distance signatures
[41], heat kernel signatures [37], wave kernel signatures [5], and in spectrum domain using eigen-functions
of the Laplace-Beltrami operator (LBO) have been proposed [33, 27, 40, 10, 23, 24]. For example, functional
maps [29] aims to find proper linear combinations of truncated basis functions, e.g., eigen-functions of the LaplaceBeltrami operator, based on some prior knowledge, e.g.,
given landmarks and/or region correspondence, as the
pointwise descriptor. Then various nearest neighbor searching or linear assignment methods are used in the descriptor space to find the dense point correspondence. These
intrinsic pointwise descriptors are typically nonlocal and
require to solve certain partial differential equations, e.g.,
the Laplace-Beltrami equation, on a well-triangulated mesh.
Hence they can be sensitive to topological perturbations
and boundary conditions. Moreover, pointwise descriptors
based on a truncated basis in the spectrum domain lose fine
details in the geometry. On the other hand, using good
pairwise descriptors, such as pairwise geodesic distance
matrix[43] or kernel functions [42], to find shape correspondence is usually more robust and accurate since the matching needs to satisfy more and stricter constraints to minimize some kind of distortion. However, a very challenging
computational problem, a quadratic assignment problem
(QAP) which is NP-hard, needs to be solved [25]. Differ-

9513

