End-to-End Camera Calibration for Broadcast Videos
Long Sha

Jennifer Hobbs

Panna Felsen Xinyu Wei
Stats Perform

Patrick Lucey

Sujoy Ganguly

{long.sha,jennifer.hobbs,panna.felsen,xinyu.wei,patrick.lucey,sujoy.ganguly}@statsperform.com

Abstract
The increasing number of vision-based tracking systems
deployed in production has necessitated fast, robust camera calibration. In the domain of sport, the majority of current work focuses on sports where lines and intersections
are easy to extract, and appearance is relatively consistent
across venues. However, for more challenging sports like
basketball, those techniques are not sufficient. In this paper,
we propose an end-to-end approach for single moving camera calibration across challenging scenarios in sports. Our
method contains three key modules: 1) area-based court
segmentation, 2) camera pose estimation with embedded
templates, 3) homography prediction via a spatial transform network (STN). All three modules are connected, enabling end-to-end training. We evaluate our method on a
new college basketball dataset and demonstrate the state of
the art performance in variable and dynamic environments.
We also validate our method on the World Cup 2014 dataset
to show its competitive performance against the state-ofthe-art methods. Lastly, we show that our method is two
orders of magnitude faster than the previous state of the art
on both datasets.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is a fundamental task for computer
vision applications such as tracking systems, SLAM, and
augmented reality (AR). Recently, many professional sports
leagues have deployed some version of a vision-based
tracking system [26, 25]. Additionally, AR applications
(e.g., Virtual 3 in NBA [3], First Down Line in NFL [15])
used during video broadcasts to enhance audience’s engagement have become commonplace. All of these applications
require high-quality camera calibration systems. Presently,
most of these applications rely on multiple pre-calibrated
fixed cameras or the real-time feed of pan-tilt-zoom (PTZ)
parameters directly from the camera. However, as the most
widely available data source in the sports domain is broadcast videos, the ability to calibrate from a single, moving camera with unknown and changing camera parameters
would greatly expand the reach of player tracking data and

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Some of the critical challenges of camera calibration
in highly dynamic environments, like basketball, are the different
appearances from video to video, heavy occlusion on registration
features caused by players, and motion blur due to fast camera
movements (enlarge to see the blur). (b) In systems with moving
cameras, small camera movements generate large transformations.
Here the green lines are the projection caused by moving the camera a small amount. The changes in pan, tilt, and focal length are
less than 3◦ , 3◦ , and 300 pixels, respectively. The change in camera location is less than 3 feet in each axis.

fan-engagement solutions. Calibration of a single moving
camera remains a challenging task as the approach must be
accurate, fast, and generalizable to a variety of views and
appearances. Our solution enables us to determine the camera homography of a single moving camera with only the
frame and the sport.
Current approaches mainly follow a framework based on
field registration, template matching (i.e., camera pose initialization), and homography refinement. Although existing
approaches based on this framework [5, 24, 6] have proven
effective for specific sports, there are still some limitations
that prevent them from being applied to more challenging
scenarios. First, most of these approaches [5, 24, 6, 8, 9, 4]
focus on sports where semantic information (i.e., key court
113627

