Probabilistic Pixel-Adaptive Refinement Networks
Anne S. Wannenwetsch1,2 *
Stefan Roth2
1
2
Amazon, Germany
TU Darmstadt, Germany

Abstract
Encoder-decoder networks have found widespread use
in various dense prediction tasks. However, the strong reduction of spatial resolution in the encoder leads to a loss
of location information as well as boundary artifacts. To
address this, image-adaptive post-processing methods have
shown beneficial by leveraging the high-resolution input image(s) as guidance data. We extend such approaches by
considering an important orthogonal source of information:
the network’s confidence in its own predictions. We introduce probabilistic pixel-adaptive convolutions (PPACs),
which not only depend on image guidance data for filtering, but also respect the reliability of per-pixel predictions.
As such, PPACs allow for image-adaptive smoothing and
simultaneously propagating pixels of high confidence into
less reliable regions, while respecting object boundaries.
We demonstrate their utility in refinement networks for optical flow and semantic segmentation, where PPACs lead to
a clear reduction in boundary artifacts. Moreover, our proposed refinement step is able to substantially improve the
accuracy on various widely used benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become a
standard tool in computer vision. Especially in dense prediction tasks [7, 41, 49, 60], encoder-decoder or pyramidstructured CNNs are a common choice. While originating in unsupervised learning [21], such architectures have
become popular also in supervised settings. The encoder
builds a powerful feature representation, reducing the spatial resolution of the inputs to aggregate global information
[41]. The decoder takes the feature representation from the
bottleneck, enlarges its size, and transforms it into the desired output, e.g. a segmentation map or optical flow field.
While downsampling in the encoder increases the receptive field and allows to deal with large image sizes, it also
leads to a drastic loss in spatial resolution. As such, valuable location information is lost and boundary artifacts can
* This work was done at TU Darmstadt prior to Anne S. Wannenwetsch
joining Amazon.

(a) HD3 optical flow estimate

(d) Ground-truth optical flow

(b) HD3 confidence estimate

(e) Our refined optical flow estimate

(c) Error map of HD3 optical flow field

(f) Error map of our refined optical flow field

Figure 1. Our PPAC refinement method leverages the close relationship between estimated confidences and prediction errors to
refine and improve the prediction itself, here the optical flow field.

arise [18, 41], e.g. segmentation maps that are misaligned
w.r.t. the underlying objects. Moreover, the decoder typically yields low-resolution outputs and simple components
are used to upscale predictions to the input size. This often
results in blurry outputs since estimates of different objects
are combined, e.g. motion from background and foreground
objects is mixed as can be seen in Fig. 1.
Several approaches have been proposed to reduce these
disadvantages, e.g. skip connections [41, 49] or densely
connected blocks [24, 32]. Additionally, different types
of generalized convolutions, taking into account a highresolution RGB guidance image, have shown beneficial as
part of the decoder [25, 26] or in a separate upsampling
and/or refinement step [31, 48, 56, 58]. Many of the above
approaches require a large number of additional parameters,
are computationally expensive, or restrictive w.r.t. to the filtering method and the applicable guidance data. Most recently, pixel-adaptive convolutions (PACs) were introduced
by Su et al. [51]. PACs combine spatially-invariant convolution weights with a content-adaptive kernel that depends
on guidance data. In [51], PACs are shown to yield state-ofthe-art results in joint upsampling tasks.
In this paper, we argue that we can leverage another
source of information for refinement that is complementary

11642

