Video Playback Rate Perception for Self-supervised
Spatio-Temporal Representation Learning
Yuan Yao1∗, Chang Liu1∗, Dezhao Luo2 , Yu Zhou2 and Qixiang Ye1†
1

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yaoyuan17,liuchang615}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {luodezhao,zhouyu}@iie.ac.cn
qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Race

Abstract
In self-supervised spatio-temporal representation learning, the temporal resolution and long-short term characteristics are not yet fully explored, which limits representation
capabilities of learned models. In this paper, we propose
a novel self-supervised method, referred to as video Playback Rate Perception (PRP), to learn spatio-temporal representation in a simple-yet-effective way. PRP roots in a
dilated sampling strategy, which produces self-supervision
signals about video playback rates for representation model
learning. PRP is implemented with a feature encoder,
a classification module, and a reconstructing decoder, to
achieve spatio-temporal semantic retention in a collaborative discrimination-generation manner. The discriminative perception model follows a feature encoder to prefer
perceiving low temporal resolution and long-term representation by classifying fast-forward rates. The generative perception model acts as a feature decoder to focus
on comprehending high temporal resolution and short-term
representation by introducing a motion-attention mechanism. PRP is applied on typical video target tasks including action recognition and video retrieval. Experiments
show that PRP outperforms state-of-the-art self-supervised
models with significant margins. Code is available at
github.com/yuanyao366/PRP.

1. Introduction
Deep networks, i.e., Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [22], have achieved unprecedented success in computer vision area. This can be largely attributed to the
learned rich representation incorporating both low-level
fine-details and high-level semantics [35]. To realize rich
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

1

2

1

9

?
3

Long Jump 

8x
17

4x

Motion Details
7

9

11

Figure 1. With limited visible frames, video clips with different
playback rates (temporal resolutions) imply different semantics.
A video clip with normal playback rate (first row) can be misunderstood as “race”. With higher playback rate (second row), we
can see that it is in fact “long jump”, of which short-term motion
details can be perceived in the slow-down video (third row). Perceiving videos with different playback rates is crucial in learning
long-short term spatio-temporal representation.

representation, networks are typically pre-trained using
large-scale image/video datasets (e.g., ImageNet [16] and
Kinetics [18]) under accurate annotation supervision [19].
However, large-scale data annotation is laborious, expensive, or can be impractical, particularly for complex
data such as videos and concepts such as action analysis
and video retrieval [10, 18]. Considering the availability of
large-scale unlabelled data on the Web, self-supervised representation learning, which leverages intrinsic correspondence within unlabelled data to pre-train desired representation models, has attracted increasing attention.
Self-supervised representation learning defines an
annotation-free proxy task, which leverages easily developed supervision signals from data itself to train network

6548

