HCNAF: Hyper-Conditioned Neural Autoregressive Flow and its Application for
Probabilistic Occupancy Map Forecasting
Geunseob (GS) Oh
University of Michigan

Jean-Sébastien Valois
Uber ATG

gsoh@umich.edu

jsvalois@uber.com

Abstract
We introduce Hyper-Conditioned Neural Autoregressive Flow (HCNAF); a powerful universal distribution approximator designed to model arbitrarily complex conditional probability density functions. HCNAF consists of
a neural-net based conditional autoregressive flow (AF)
and a hyper-network that can take large conditions in nonautoregressive fashion and outputs the network parameters
of the AF. Like other flow models, HCNAF performs exact
likelihood inference. We conduct a number of density estimation tasks on toy experiments and MNIST to demonstrate the effectiveness and attributes of HCNAF, including
its generalization capability over unseen conditions and expressivity. Finally, we show that HCNAF scales up to complex high-dimensional prediction problems of the magnitude of self-driving and that HCNAF yields a state-of-theart performance in a public self-driving dataset.

1. Introduction
Recent autoregressive flow (AF) models [1–4] have
achieved state-of-the-art performances in density estimation tasks. They offer compelling properties such as exact likelihood inference and expressivity. Of those, [3, 4]
successfully unified AF models and neural networks, and
demonstrated an ability to capture complex multi-modal
data distributions while universally approximating continuous probability distributions.
However, due to scalability limitation, existing neural
AF models are ineffective at tackling problems with arbitrarily high-dimensional conditional terms. Scene prediction for autonomous driving is such a task where the benefits of AF models can be leveraged but where the contextual information (conditional terms) is too large (i.e. C >
R1,000,000 due to using many multi-channel spatio-temporal
maps). In contrast, the biggest experiment neural AF models reported is BSDS300 (R63 ) [5]. This may explain their
limited use in common problems despite demonstrating excellent performance in density estimations.

Figure 1: HCNAF used for probabilistic occupancy map
(POM) forecasting, demonstrating the network’s use of
high-dimensional conditions (C = R>1mil ). a) Inputs (conditions) are the spatio-temporal scene data. b) HCNAF consists of two neural-net based modules: a hyper-network fH
and a conditional AF f . fH can take arbitrarily large inputs
and produces the network parameters for f , which produces
the conditional probability p(X|C) precisely. c) Resulting
POMs for agent vehicle centers at t=2 and t=4 secs.
We propose a novel conditional density approximator called Hyper-Conditioned Neural Autoregressive Flow
(HCNAF) to address the aforementioned limitation. HCNAF performs an exact likelihood inference by precisely computing probability of complex target distributions
pmodel (X|C) ≈ p(X|C) with arbitrarily large C. By taking
advantage of the design, HCNAF grants neural AFs the ability to tackle wider range of scientific problems; which is
demonstrated by the autonomous driving prediction tasks.
Prediction tasks in autonomous driving involve transforming the history of high dimensional perception data up
to the current time into a representation of how the environment will evolve [6–15]. To be effective, advanced predic-

14550

