Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning of Transferable Meta-Skills
for Embodied Navigation
Juncheng Li1

Xin Wang2 Siliang Tang1 ∗ Haizhou Shi1 Fei Wu1
Yueting Zhuang1 William Yang Wang2
1
Zhejiang University 2 University of California, Santa Barbara

{junchengli, siliang, shihaizhou, wufei, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn , {xwang, william}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Visual navigation is a task of training an embodied agent
by intelligently navigating to a target object (e.g., television) using only visual observations. A key challenge for
current deep reinforcement learning models lies in the requirements for a large amount of training data. It is exceedingly expensive to construct sufficient 3D synthetic environments annotated with the target object information. In this
paper, we focus on visual navigation in the low-resource
setting, where we have only a few training environments
annotated with object information. We propose a novel unsupervised reinforcement learning approach to learn transferable meta-skills (e.g., bypass obstacles, go straight) from
unannotated environments without any supervisory signals.
The agent can then fast adapt to visual navigation through
learning a high-level master policy to combine these metaskills, when the visual-navigation-specified reward is provided. Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms the baseline by 53.34% relatively on
SPL, and further qualitative analysis demonstrates that our
method learns transferable motor primitives for visual navigation.

1. Introduction
Visual navigation is a task of training an embodied agent
that can intelligently navigate to an instance of an object
according to the natural-language name of the object. In
addition to being a fundamental scientific goal in computer
vision and artificial intelligence, navigation in a 3D environment is a crucial skill for the embodied agent. This task
may benefit many practical applications where an embodied agent improves the quality of life and augments human
∗ Siliang Tang is the correspondence author.

capability, such as in-home robots, personal assistants, and
hazard removal robots.
Recently, various deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
approaches [44, 26, 42, 41, 33, 46, 47, 13, 23, 48, 21] have
been proposed to improve the navigation models. However,
they are usually data inefficient and require a large amount
of training data. In order to train these deep models, we
need to construct a sufficient number of 3D synthetic environments and annotate the object information, which is
exceedingly expensive, time-consuming, and even infeasible in real-world applications. Furthermore, it is hard for
the trained embodied agent to transfer to different environments.
It is worth noticing that when humans encounter a new
task, they can quickly learn to solve it by transferring the
meta-skills learned in a wide variety of tasks throughout
their lives. This stands in stark contrast with the current deep reinforcement learning-based navigation methods, where the policy networks are learned from scratch.
Instead, humans have an inherent ability to transfer knowledge across tasks and cross-utilize their knowledge, which
offloads the burden of a large number of training samples.
Inspired by this fact, we seek the help of both metalearning [28, 9] that learn quickly using a small amount of
data and transfer learning [39, 43] that accelerate learning a
new task through transferring knowledge from a related task
that is already learned. In our work, we frame low-resource
visual navigation as a meta-learning problem. At the metatraining phase, the environments are not annotated with object information, and we assume access to a set of tasks that
we refer to as the meta-training tasks. From these tasks, the
embodied agent (we call it as meta-learner) then learns a set
of transferable sub-policies, each of which corresponds to
a specific meta-skill (also called as motor primitives, e.g.,
bypass obstacles, go straight) by performing a sequence
of primitive actions. At the meta-testing phase, a few an-

12123

