Unsupervised Multi-Modal Image Registration via Geometry Preserving
Image-to-Image Translation
Moab Arar Yiftach Ginger

Dov Danon Amit H. Bermano
Tel Aviv University

Mono-Modality
Metric

Abstract
Many applications, such as autonomous driving, heavily rely on multi-modal data where spatial alignment between the modalities is required. Most multi-modal registration methods struggle computing the spatial correspondence between the images using prevalent cross-modality
similarity measures. In this work, we bypass the difficulties
of developing cross-modality similarity measures, by training an image-to-image translation network on the two input
modalities. This learned translation allows training the registration network using simple and reliable mono-modality
metrics. We perform multi-modal registration using two
networks - a spatial transformation network and a translation network. We show that by encouraging our translation network to be geometry preserving, we manage to train
an accurate spatial transformation network. Compared to
state-of-the-art multi-modal methods our presented method
is unsupervised, requiring no pairs of aligned modalities
for training, and can be adapted to any pair of modalities.
We evaluate our method quantitatively and qualitatively on
commercial datasets, showing that it performs well on several modalities and achieves accurate alignment.

1. Introduction
Scene acquisition using different sensors is common
practice in various disciplines, from classical ones such as
medical imaging and remote sensing, to emerging tasks
such as autonomous driving. Multi-modal sensors allow
gathering a wide range of physical properties, which in
turn yields richer scene representations. For example, in
radiation planning, multi-modal data (e.g. Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
scans) is used for more accurate tumor contouring which reduces the risk of damaging healthy tissues in radiotherapy
treatment [25, 29]. More often than not, multi-modal sensors naturally have different extrinsic parameters between
modalities, such as lens parameters and relative position.
In these cases, non-rigid image registration is essential for
proper execution of the aforementioned downstream tasks.

Daniel Cohen-Or

Cross-Modality
Translation

Spatial
Registration

Cross-Modality
Metric

Figure 1: Method overview. Conventional methods (faded
dashed at the bottom) use cross-modality metrics (e.g., Normalized Cross Correlation) to optimize a spatial transformation function. Our method learns a cross-modality translation, mapping between the two modalities. This enables the
use of a reliable accurate mono-modality metric instead.

Classic multi-modal image registration techniques attempt to warp a source image to match a target one via a
non-linear optimization process, seeking to maximize a predefined similarity measure [40]. Besides a computational
disadvantage, which is critical for applications such as autonomous driving, effectively designing similarity measures
for such optimization has proven to be quite challenging.
This is true for both intensity-based measures, commonly
used in the medical imaging [10], and feature-based ones,
typically adapted for more detailed modalities (e.g Near
Infra-Red (NIR) and RGB) [32].
These difficulties gave rise to the recent development of
deep regression models. These types of models typically
have lengthy training time, either supervised or unsupervised, yet they offer expeditious inference that usually generalizes well. Since it is extremely hard to collect groundtruth data for the registration parameters, supervised multimodal registration methods commonly use synthesized data
in order to train a registration network [30, 37]. This makes
their robustness highly dependent on the similarity between
the artificial and real-life data distribution and appearance.
Unsupervised registration techniques, on the other-hand, often incorporate a spatial transform network (STN) [14] and
train an end-to-end network [7, 19, 16, 36, 8].

13410

