StarGAN v2: Diverse Image Synthesis for Multiple Domains
Yunjey Choi∗

Youngjung Uh∗

Jaejun Yoo∗

Jung-Woo Ha

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp.
Generated outputs (Male)

Generated outputs (Female)

AFHQ

CelebA-HQ

Input

Generated outputs (Dog)
Input
Generated outputs (Cat)
Generated outputs (Wildlife)
Figure 1. Diverse image synthesis results on the CelebA-HQ dataset and the newly collected animal faces (AFHQ) dataset. The first column
shows input images while the remaining columns are images synthesized by StarGAN v2.

Abstract
A good image-to-image translation model should learn a
mapping between different visual domains while satisfying
the following properties: 1) diversity of generated images
and 2) scalability over multiple domains. Existing methods
address either of the issues, having limited diversity or multiple models for all domains. We propose StarGAN v2, a single framework that tackles both and shows significantly improved results over the baselines. Experiments on CelebAHQ and a new animal faces dataset (AFHQ) validate our
superiority in terms of visual quality, diversity, and scalability. To better assess image-to-image translation models, we
release AFHQ, high-quality animal faces with large interand intra-domain differences. The code, pretrained models,
and dataset are available at clovaai/stargan-v2.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation aims to learn a mapping between different visual domains [16]. Here, domain implies
a set of images that can be grouped as a visually distinctive
category, and each image has a unique appearance, which
we call style. For example, we can set image domains
based on the gender of a person, in which case the style includes makeup, beard, and hairstyle (top half of Figure 1).
An ideal image-to-image translation method should be able
to synthesize images considering the diverse styles in each
domain. However, designing and learning such models become complicated as there can be arbitrarily large number
of styles and domains in the dataset.
* indicates equal contribution

18188

