What does Plate Glass Reveal about Camera Calibration?
Qian Zheng1∗ Jinnan Chen1 Zhan Lu1 Boxin Shi2,3 ∗ Xudong Jiang1 Kim-Hui Yap1 Ling-Yu Duan2,3 Alex C. Kot1
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Department of CS, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhengqian, exdjiang, ekhyap, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, {jinnan001, zlu015}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {shiboxin, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper aims to calibrate the orientation of glass and
the field of view of the camera from a single reflectioncontaminated image. We show how a reflective amplitude
coefficient map can be used as a calibration cue. Different
from existing methods, the proposed solution is free from
image contents. To reduce the impact of a noisy calibration cue estimated from a reflection-contaminated image,
we propose two strategies: an optimization-based method
that imposes part of though reliable entries on the map and
a learning-based method that fully exploits all entries. We
collect a dataset containing 320 samples as well as their
camera parameters for evaluation. We demonstrate that our
method not only facilitates a general single image camera
calibration method that leverages image contents but also
contributes to improving the performance of single image
reflection removal. Furthermore, we show our byproduct
output helps alleviate the ill-posed problem of estimating
the panorama from a single image.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration [65] has been a widely studied problem, due to its indispensability for a broad category of vision tasks such as scene understanding [50, 42], metrology [6], 3D inference [55, 8], and augmented reality [13,
15, 20]. Classic camera calibration requires multiple images containing specific objects or patterns (e.g., [26, 36]).
Calibrating a complete camera model using a single image
is a rather challenging problem. With comprehensive priors
(e.g., horizon line [16]) learned by deep neural networks,
recent progress shows a successful estimation of extrinsic
and intrinsic parameters (e.g., [32]) from a single noise-free
image in the wild.
The classical physically based formation of a reflectioncontaminated image can be formulated as [25, 53]1 ,
I = (1 − Ω) ◦ T + Ω ◦ R,

(1)

∗ Corresponding authors.
1 For simplicity, we consider the reflection image R can be blur or contain ghost effects which is consistent with prior works (e.g., [64, 49]).

where I, T, R are the reflection-contaminated image, transmission image, and reflection image, respectively. ‘◦’ denotes an element-wise multiplication operator. Ω is the reflective amplitude coefficient map. The Fresnel equations
describe the relative amplitude of transmission and reflection, based on which Kong et al. [25] derive a formation of
Ω for glass with double surfaces. One of the properties in
their formation is that Ω is a monotonically increasing function of the angle of incidence Θ (AoI, w.r.t. glass plane).
This property is widely studied in the topic of multi-image
reflection separation using polarization (e.g., [25, 54, 33]),
while seldom considered in the context of single image reflection separation (e.g., [7, 53]). On the other hand, thanks
to the rapid progress in studying single image reflection removal, recent methods (e.g., [64, 53] provide a reliable estimation of T, R) can be used to calculate Ω pixel-wisely.
In this paper, we observe that Ω or Θ reflects useful cues
for camera calibration which motivates us to estimate camera parameters from a single reflection-contaminated image
(formed by putting a piece of plate glass between the left
and right scenes in Figure 1 row 1 ). More specifically,
we attempt to solve for extrinsic (tilt, roll, w.r.t. the glass
plane) and intrinsic (focal length) parameters. In this paper,
these camera parameters are represented as the orientation
of glass n and the horizontal field of view (FoV) of camera H (Figure 1 row 2 ). Figure 1 row 3 intuitively shows
our observations about how these two parameters affect the
reflection. As can be observed, the orientation of glass n
affects the direction of reflective intensity change (left and
middle figures), the angle of H affects the magnitude of reflective intensity change (middle and right figures). Different from previous works of camera calibration that leverage
image contents from a noise-free image (e.g., [56, 16, 32]),
our method exploits Ω (free from image contents, Figure 1
row 4 ) as the calibration cue.
We solve for n and H by incorporating a reflection separation method (taking I as input) into a calibration algorithm
(taking an estimated Ω as the input). The major difficulty
is brought by the calibration cue Ω that may be inaccurate.
Based on our observation that estimating n and H from Ω is
to solve an over-determined system, we present two strategies to achieve robust calibration, i.e., an optimizationbased method that imposes part of though reliable entries of

3022

