Single-Stage Semantic Segmentation from Image Labels
Nikita Araslanov
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Recent years have seen a rapid growth in new approaches improving the accuracy of semantic segmentation
in a weakly supervised setting, i.e. with only image-level
labels available for training. However, this has come at
the cost of increased model complexity and sophisticated
multi-stage training procedures. This is in contrast to earlier work that used only a single stage – training one segmentation network on image labels – which was abandoned
due to inferior segmentation accuracy. In this work, we
first define three desirable properties of a weakly supervised
method: local consistency, semantic fidelity, and completeness. Using these properties as guidelines, we then develop
a segmentation-based network model and a self-supervised
training scheme to train for semantic masks from imagelevel annotations in a single stage. We show that despite
its simplicity, our method achieves results that are competitive with significantly more complex pipelines, substantially
outperforming earlier single-stage methods.

1. Introduction
Many applications of scene understanding require some
form of semantic localisation with pixel-level precision,
hence semantic segmentation has enjoyed enormous popularity. Despite the successes of supervised learning approaches [8, 36], their general applicability remains limited
due to their reliance on pixel-level annotations. We thus
consider the task of learning semantic segmentation from
image-level annotations alone, aiming to develop a practical approach. This problem setup is especially challenging
compared to other weakly supervised scenarios that assume
available localisation cues, such as bounding boxes, scribbles, and points [4, 10, 27, 33, 51].
Attention mechanisms, such Class Activation Maps
(CAM) [63], offer a partial solution: they localise the most
discriminative regions in the image using only a pre-trained
classification network. Such masks, however, are quite
Code is available at https://github.com/visinf/1-stage-wseg.

Figure 1. Our segmentation model can produce high-quality semantic masks (left) approaching the ground truth (right) in a single stage of training while using only image-level annotation. No
post-processing was applied to these examples.

coarse – they violate object boundaries, tend to be incomplete for large-scale objects and imprecise for small ones.
This is not surprising, since attention maps were not designed for segmentation in the first place. Nevertheless,
most methods for weakly supervised segmentation from image labels adopt attention maps (e.g., CAMs) as initial seeds
for further refinement. Yet the remarkable progress these
methods have achieved – currently reaching more than 80%
of fully supervised accuracy [3, 57] – has come along with
increased model and training complexity. While early methods consisted of a single stage, i.e. training one network
[17, 38, 40, 41], they were soon superseded by more advanced pipelines, employing multiple models, training cycles, and off-the-shelf saliency methods [24, 55, 57, 60].
In this work, we develop an effective single-stage approach for weakly supervised semantic segmentation that
streamlines previous multi-stage attempts, and uses neither
saliency estimation nor additional data. Our key insight is to
enable segmentation-aware training for classification. Consider Fig. 2 depicting typical limitations of attention maps:
(i) two areas in local proximity with similar appearance may
be assigned different classes, i.e. the semantic labelling may
be locally inconsistent; (ii) attention maps tend to be in-

4253

