Learning to Learn Cropping Models for Different Aspect Ratio Requirements
Debang Li 1,2 , Junge Zhang1,2 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{debang.li,jgzhang, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image cropping aims at improving the framing of an image by removing its extraneous outer areas, which is widely
used in the photography and printing industry. In some
cases, the aspect ratio of cropping results is specified depending on some conditions. In this paper, we propose a
meta-learning (learning to learn) based aspect ratio specified image cropping method called Mars, which can generate cropping results of different expected aspect ratios. In
the proposed method, a base model and two meta-learners
are obtained during the training stage. Given an aspect
ratio in the test stage, a new model with new parameters
can be generated from the base model. Specifically, the
two meta-learners predict the parameters of the base model
based on the given aspect ratio. The learning process of the
proposed method is learning how to learn cropping models for different aspect ratio requirements, which is a typical meta-learning process. In the experiments, the proposed
method is evaluated on three datasets and outperforms most
state-of-the-art methods in terms of accuracy and speed. In
addition, both the intermediate and final results show that
the proposed model can predict different cropping windows
for an image depending on different aspect ratio requirements.

1. Introduction
Image cropping is commonly used in image editing, trying to find a good view with a better composition than the
input image. Automatic image cropping can be widely applied in the photographic, printing industry, and other related fields for saving time. Depending on the application,
the aspect ratio of the cropped image may be specified and
vary with different conditions. As such, the aspect ratio
specified image cropping algorithms should be able to cover
a range of aspect ratios, an illustration of which is shown in
Figure 1.
Early researches on the general image cropping mostly

Figure 1. Illustration of the aspect ratio specified image cropping. The left image is the original image, and the three images
on the right are cropped images of different required aspect ratios.

focus on the two-stage methods [31, 32, 13, 6, 7, 19]. Many
candidates are generated at the first stage and ranked on
the second stage. These two-stage methods can be directly
transferred to the aspect ratio specified settings by adjusting the candidates. Since there are many candidates in an
image, the speed of these methods is inevitably slow. To
speed up, several methods [40, 25, 41, 26] obtain the cropping window directly without using the sliding window.
However, these methods rarely consider the aspect ratios.
In [12], an object detection based approach is proposed for
the aspect ratio specified image cropping by adding more
prediction heads.
In this paper, we regard generating the cropped images
of a specified aspect ratio as an isolated task and adopt a
single model to accomplish multiple such sub-tasks. The
model should be able to adapt to many environments with
different aspect ratio requirements. Therefore, we propose
a meta-learning (learning to learn) based aspect ratio specified image cropping approach (called Mars) to accomplish
this goal. In the proposed approach, we train a base model
and two meta-learners during the training process. In the
inference stage, a new model with new parameters is generated from the base model given a new aspect ratio. Specifically, some parameters of the base model are predicted by
the meta-learners depending on the required aspect ratio. As
the required aspect ratio is a continuous value, the number
of models with different parameters is infinite. The learning
process of the proposed method can be viewed as learning
how to learn cropping models for different aspect ratios. In
the base model, the parameters depending on the required
aspect ratio are the aspect ratio specified feature transfor-

12685

