Imitative Non-Autoregressive Modeling for Trajectory
Forecasting and Imputation
Mengshi Qi∗1,2 , Jie Qin4 , Yu Wu2,3 , and Yi Yang3
1

2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
Baidu Research, China
3
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
4
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAE

mengshi.qi@epfl.ch; qinjiebuaa@gmail.com; yu.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au; yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Trajectory forecasting and imputation are pivotal steps
towards understanding the movement of human and objects, which are quite challenging since the future trajectories and missing values in a temporal sequence are full
of uncertainties, and the spatial-temporally contextual correlation is hard to model. Yet, the relevance between sequence prediction and imputation is disregarded by existing
approaches. To this end, we propose a novel imitative nonautoregressive modeling method to simultaneously handle
the trajectory prediction task and the missing value imputation task. Specifically, our framework adopts an imitation learning paradigm, which contains a recurrent conditional variational autoencoder (RC-VAE) as a demonstrator, and a non-autoregressive transformation model (NART)
as a learner. By jointly optimizing the two models, RC-VAE
can predict the future trajectory and capture the temporal
relationship in the sequence to supervise the NART learner.
As a result, NART learns from the demonstrator and imputes
the missing value in a non-autoregressive strategy. We conduct extensive experiments on three popular datasets, and
the results show that our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance across all the datasets.

1. Introduction
Owing to the increasing demands of emerging artiﬁcial
intelligence applications, trajectory forecasting and imputation have surged as the intriguing topics in related ﬁelds. As
illustrated in Figure 1, the sequence prediction task refers
to generating the future trajectory given the previous movement, while sequence imputation aims to ﬁll the missing
value in a sequence based on a few discrete observations.
∗ Part of this work was done when M. Qi was visiting Baidu Research.

Figure 1. Trajectory forecasting and imputation. Given a 2D trajectory history of several moving agents in a basketball match, we
need to (a) predict the future trajectories (i.e., given a few prior
continuous observations, predicting the next values), and (b) impute the missing values (i.e., given some discrete observations, imputing the missing values). Circles and lines of different colors
refer to the position and movement of various players, where the
light-colored circles and dotted lines represent the missing values.

A large number of real-world issues can be leveraged as
the tasks of trajectory forecasting and imputation, such as
sports analysis [10, 23, 33], motion capture [37, 39], scene
understanding [32, 34], autonomous driving [25, 49], etc.
For example, robots or autonomous vehicles usually need
to predict the future movement of persons or cars, and then
promptly give feedback or take action. Meanwhile, due to
trajectory crossing or occlusion, how to reason the missing
value in a temporal sequence also plays a signiﬁcant role in
many crucial applications. Hence, adding the capability of
foreseeing what will happen and complement the missing
value in a sequence are imperative. Unfortunately, so far,
there is still a lack of promising solutions to these problems.
Several efforts have been devoted into the tasks of trajectory forecasting and imputation [1–3, 10, 13, 24, 51], of
which some methods adopt generative models (e.g., variational autoencoder (VAE) [10] or generative adversarial networks (GAN) [29, 46]) to generate future movement and
missing value, while others utilize intermediate variables

12736

