3DRegNet: A Deep Neural Network for 3D Point Registration
G. Dias Pais1 , Srikumar Ramalingam2 , Venu Madhav Govindu3 ,
Jacinto C. Nascimento1 , Rama Chellappa4 , and Pedro Miraldo1
1

Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa 2 Google Research, NY
3
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 4 University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
We present 3DRegNet, a novel deep learning architecture for the registration of 3D scans. Given a set of
3D point correspondences, we build a deep neural network to address the following two challenges: (i) classification of the point correspondences into inliers/outliers,
and (ii) regression of the motion parameters that align
the scans into a common reference frame. With regard
to regression, we present two alternative approaches: (i)
a Deep Neural Network (DNN) registration and (ii) a
Procrustes approach using SVD to estimate the transformation. Our correspondence-based approach achieves a
higher speedup compared to competing baselines. We further propose the use of a refinement network, which consists
of a smaller 3DRegNet as a refinement to improve the accuracy of the registration. Extensive experiments on two
challenging datasets demonstrate that we outperform other
methods and achieve state-of-the-art results. The code is
available at https://github.com/3DVisionISR/
3DRegNet.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of 3D registration, which is one
of the classical and fundamental problems in geometrical
computer vision due to its wide variety of vision, robotics,
and medical applications. In 3D registration, the 6 Degrees of Freedom (DoF) motion parameters between two
scans are computed given noisy (outliers) point correspondences. The standard approach is to use minimal solvers
that employ three-point correspondences (see [48, 39]) in
a RANSAC [17] framework, followed by refinement techniques such as the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [6]. In
this paper, we investigate if the registration problem can
be solved using a deep neural methodology. Specifically,
we study if deep learning methods can bring any complementary advantages over classical registration methods. In
particular, we wish to achieve speedup without compromis-

3DRegNet
(a) Inliers/outliers classification using the proposed 3DRegNet vs.

a RANSAC approach. Green and red colors indicate the inliers
and outliers, respectively.

FGR
(b) Results of the estimation of the transformation that aligns

two point clouds, 3DRegNet vs. the current state-of-the-art Fast
Global Registration method (FGR) [65].

Figure 1: Given a set of 3D point correspondences from two
scans with outliers, our proposed network 3DRegNet simultaneously classifies the point correspondences into inliers and outliers
(see (a)), and also computes the transformation (rotation, translation) for the alignment of the scans (see (b)). 3DRegNet is significantly faster and outperforms other standard geometric methods.

ing the registration accuracy in the presence of outliers. In
other words, the challenge is not in pose given point correspondences, but how can efficiently handle the outliers. Figure 1 illustrates the main goals of this paper. Figure 1(a) depicts the classification of noisy point correspondences into
inliers and outliers using 3DRegNet (left) and RANSAC
(right) for aligning two scans. Figure 1(b) shows the estimation of the transformation that aligns two point clouds
using the proposed 3DRegNet (left) and current state-ofthe-art FGR [65] (right).
In Fig. 2(a), we show our proposed architecture with
two sub-blocks: classification and registration. The for-

7193

