Composed Query Image Retrieval Using Locally Bounded Features
Mehrdad Hosseinzadeh and Yang Wang
University of Manitoba, Canada
{mehrdad, ywang}@cs.umanitoba.ca

Abstract
Composed query image retrieval is a new problem where
the query consists of an image together with a requested
modification expressed via a textual sentence. The goal is
then to retrieve the images that are generally similar to the
query image, but differ according to the requested modification. Previous methods usually consider the image as a
whole. In this paper, we propose a novel method that represents the image using a set of local areas in the image. The
relationship between each word in the modification text and
each area in the image is then explicitly established, allowing the model to accurately correlate the modification text
to parts of the image. We conduct extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets. The results show that our method
outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches by a considerable margin.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval [29, 19] problem has always been at the
heart of computer vision research for its practical applications in query-based systems. Image retrieval systems can
be used for many downstream tasks, such as person reidentification [39, 17, 9] and product search [11, 1]. A challenge of image retrieval is how to formulate the query in a
way that captures the user’s intention as much as possible.
A de facto paradigm in image retrieval systems is to take a
query/reference image, process it and return a set of candidate images as the most similar ones to the input query.
Despite the simplicity of formulating a user query this
way, it suffers from a fundamental problem – it requires
users to express precisely what they have in mind using a
single image. In many cases, it is not practical to assume
that the user’s intention can be conveyed using a single image as the query. In this paper, we consider the composed
query image retrieval problem first introduced in [35]. In
this problem setting, the query to an image retrieval system
consists of an image and the desired modification expressed
in terms of a sentence. This sentence states the changes
a user wants to be applied to the query image. This set-

ting gives the user the flexibility to express their intention
in a more natural and meaningful way – the user does not
need to express his/her query using only a query image. We
call it the composed query since the query is composed of
a reference image and an accompanying modification text.
Figure 1 shows an illustration of the composed query image
retrieval setting.
A modification text usually refers to one or more “entities” in the image that should be changed. For example, in
Fig. 1, the desired change (“make bottom right gray object
purple”) is only related to a few entities in the image (the
bottom right object in this case). This is the key motivation
for our proposed method. In contrast to other approaches
in the image retrieval domain [35, 29] which consider an
image as a whole, we propose to treat an image as a set of
local “entities”. We argue that grounding the input modification text to different semantic areas in the reference image
is crucial for the composed query image retrieval problem.
To this end, our proposed method first extracts the features for a set of local areas in the image. We name each
of these local regions an “entity”. The set of features
and the modification text are then processed using separate branches with self-attention layers. Later a cross-modal
module learns a joint representation of the query image and
the modification text by leveraging attention mechanism to
correlate each word to each entity in the image. During testing, a candidate target image is processed and represented
through its entities’ features. The joint representation of
the query and the target images are then compared to each
other for retrieval. Our proposed method also includes an
auxiliary module that enhances the representation learning
process through an additional objective function. The formulation of this module allows us to use it as a standalone
coarse retrieval network during inference. This module can
be used to quickly filter out the most dissimilar candidate
images for each query without passing them to the main
pipeline.
The contributions of this work are manifold:
• We propose a novel approach for the composed
query image retrieval task. Different from previous
work [35] that represents an image as a whole, our

3596

