Learning Formation of Physically-Based Face Attributes
Ruilong Li1,2∗
Pengda Xiang1,2
1

Karl Bladin1∗
Yajie Zhao1∗
1
Xinglei Ren Pratusha Prasad1

USC Institute for Creative Technologies

2

Chinmay Chinara1
Owen Ingraham1
1
Bipin Kishore Jun Xing1 Hao Li 1,2,3

University of Southern California

3

Pinscreen

Identity
Expression

TexNet

IdNet
Identity latent

ExpNet

Geometry
Map

Expression latent

(a)

Final Maps

(b)

(c)

(d)

We introduce a comprehensive framework for learning physically based face models from highly constrained facial scan data. Our deep
learning based approach for 3D morphable face modeling seizes the fidelity of nearly 4000 high resolution face scans encompassing
expression and identity separation (a). The model (b) combines a multitude of anatomical and physically based face attributes to generate
an infinite number of digitized faces (c). Our model generates faces at pore level geometry resolution (d).

Abstract
Based on a combined data set of 4000 high resolution
facial scans, we introduce a non-linear morphable face
model, capable of producing multifarious face geometry of
pore-level resolution, coupled with material attributes for
use in physically-based rendering. We aim to maximize the
variety of the participant’s face identities, while increasing
the robustness of correspondence between unique components, including middle-frequency geometry, albedo maps,
specular intensity maps and high-frequency displacement
details. Our deep learning based generative model learns to
correlate albedo and geometry, which ensures the anatomical correctness of the generated assets. We demonstrate
potential use of our generative model for novel identity generation, model fitting, interpolation, animation, high fidelity
data visualization, and low-to-high resolution data domain
transferring. We hope the release of this generative model
will encourage further cooperation between all graphics,
vision, and data focused professionals, while demonstrating
the cumulative value of every individual’s complete biometric profile.

∗ Joint first authors

1. Introduction
Graphical virtual representations of humans are at the
center of many endeavors in the fields of computer vision
and graphics, with applications ranging from cultural media such as video games, film, and telecommunication to
medical, biometric modeling, and forensics [6].
Designing, modeling, and acquiring high fidelity data for
face models of virtual characters is costly and requires specialized scanning equipment and a team of skilled artists
and engineers [17, 5, 37]. Due to limiting and restrictive
data policies of VFX studios, in conjunction with the absence of a shared platform that regards the sovereignty of,
and incentives for the individuals’ data contributions, there
is a large discrepancy in the fidelity of models trained on
publicly available data, and those used in large budget game
and film production. A single, unified model would democratize the use of generated assets, shorten production cycles
and boost quality and consistency, while incentivizing innovative applications in many markets and fields of research.
The unification of a facial scan data set in a 3D morphable face model (3DMM) [7, 12, 41, 6] promotes the favorable property of representing facial scan data in a compact form, retaining the statistical properties of the source

3410

