GroupFace: Learning Latent Groups and Constructing Group-based
Representations for Face Recognition
Yonghyun Kim1

Wonpyo Park2 Myung-Cheol Roh1
1
Kakao Enterprise, 2 Kakao Corp.

Jongju Shin1

Abstract
In the field of face recognition, a model learns to distinguish millions of face images with fewer dimensional embedding features, and such vast information may not be
properly encoded in the conventional model with a single
branch. We propose a novel face-recognition-specialized
architecture called GroupFace that utilizes multiple groupaware representations, simultaneously, to improve the quality of the embedding feature. The proposed method provides
self-distributed labels that balance the number of samples
belonging to each group without additional human annotations, and learns the group-aware representations that can
narrow down the search space of the target identity. We
prove the effectiveness of the proposed method by showing extensive ablation studies and visualizations. All the
components of the proposed method can be trained in an
end-to-end manner with a marginal increase of computational complexity. Finally, the proposed method achieves
the state-of-the-art results with significant improvements in
1:1 face verification and 1:N face identification tasks on
the following public datasets: LFW, YTF, CALFW, CPLFW,
CFP, AgeDB-30, MegaFace, IJB-B and IJB-C.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is a primary technique in computer vision to model and understand the real world. Many methods and enormous datasets [3, 10, 16, 25, 32, 41] have been
introduced, and recently, methods that use deep learning
[7, 9, 14, 19, 34, 35, 44] have greatly improved the face
recognition accuracy, but it still falls short of expectations.
To reduce the shortfall, most of the recent research in
face recognition focused on improving the loss function.
The streams from CenterLoss [35], CosFace [34], ArcFace [7] and RegularFace [44] all tried to minimize the
intra-class variation and maximize the inter-class variation.
These methods are effective and have gradually improved
the accuracy by elaborating the objective of learning.
Despite the development of loss functions, general-

Instance-based
Representation

Enriched Representation

Group-aware
Representation

Robert Downey Jr.

+*'#$% &"()!
Latent Groups

Figure 1. Conceptual scheme of the proposed method. The proposed method enhances the quality of the embedding feature by
supporting the instance-based representation of Robert Downey
Jr. using the group-aware representation considering Brownbeard Man Group.

purpose networks, not a network devised for a face recognition, can have difficulty in enabling effective training of
the network to recognize a huge number of person identities. Unlike common problems such as classification, in the
evaluation stage, a face-recognition model encounters new
identities, which are not included in the training set. Thus,
the model has to embed nearly 100k identities [10] in the
training set and also consider a huge number of unknown
identities. However, most of the existing methods just attach several fully-connected layers after widely-used backbone networks such as VGG [25] and ResNet [12] without
any designs for the characteristics of face recognition.
Grouping is a key idea to efficiently-and-flexibly embed
a significant number of people and briefly describe an unknown person. Each person has own characteristics in his or
her face. At the same time, they have common ones shared
in a group of people. In the real world, group-based description (man with deep, black eyes and red beard) that
involves common characteristics in the group, can be useful
to narrow down the set of candidates, even though it cannot
identify the exact person. Unfortunately, explicit grouping
requires manual categorizing on huge data and may be limited by the finite range of descriptions by human knowledge,
However, by adopting the concept of grouping, the recogni15621

