Noise Modeling, Synthesis and Classification for Generic Object Anti-Spoofing
Joel Stehouwer, Amin Jourabloo, Yaojie Liu, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{stehouw7, liuyaoj1, jourablo, liuxm}@msu.edu
Abstract
Using printed photograph and replaying videos of biometric modalities, such as iris, fingerprint and face, are
common attacks to fool the recognition systems for granting
access as the genuine user. With the growing online personto-person shopping (e.g., Ebay and Craigslist), such attacks
also threaten those services, where the online photo illustration might not be captured from real items but from paper
or digital screen. Thus, the study of anti-spoofing should be
extended from modality-specific solutions to generic-objectbased ones. In this work, we define and tackle the problem
of Generic Object Anti-Spoofing (GOAS) for the first time.
One significant cue to detect these attacks is the noise patterns introduced by the capture sensors and spoof mediums.
Different sensor/medium combinations can result in diverse
noise patterns. We propose a GAN-based architecture to
synthesize and identify the noise patterns from seen and unseen medium/sensor combinations. We show that the procedure of synthesis and identification are mutually beneficial.
We further demonstrate the learned GOAS models can directly contribute to modality-specific anti-spoofing without
domain transfer. The code and GOSet dataset are available
at cvlab.cse.msu.edu/project-goas.html.

1. Introduction
Anti-spoofing (i.e., spoof detection) is a long-standing
topic in the biometrics field that empowers recognition systems to detect samples from spoofing mediums, e.g., printed
paper or digital screen [2, 6, 8, 26]. A similar concern may
appear in online commerce websites, e.g., Ebay, Craigslist,
which provide services to enable direct user-to-user buying
and selling. For instance, when purchasing, a customer may
wonder, “Is that a picture of a real item he owns?” This scenario motivates a broader problem of anti-spoofing:
Given an image of a generic object, such as a cup
or a desk, can we automatically classify if this
was captured from the real object, or through a
medium, such as digital screen or printed paper?

Figure 1. Similarly to biometric anti-spoofing, GOAS determines
if an image of an object is captured from the real object or through
spoof mediums. Anti-spoofing algorithms can be sensitive to
device-specific noises. Given the challenge of capturing spoof data
with full combinations of sensors/mediums, we synthesize spoof
images at any combination (marked as X), which benefits GOAS.

We define this problem as Generic Object Anti-Spoofing
(GOAS). With the wider variety of objects, there are richer
appearance variations and greater challenges in GOAS, as
shown in Fig. 1, compared to individual biometric modalities. Successful solutions [2, 8, 23, 26, 27, 30, 31, 33] for
modality-specific anti-spoofing are likely ineffective for
GOAS. We find that capture sensors and spoofing mediums
bring certain texture patterns (e.g., Moiré pattern [32]) to all
captured images, regardless of the content. These patterns
are often low-energy and regarded as “noise”. However,
they are ubiquitous and consistent, since they result from
the physical properties of the sensors/mediums and environmental conditions, such as light reflection. We believe
a proper modeling of such noise patterns will lead to effective solutions for GOAS and may contribute to modalityspecific anti-spoofing tasks. In this work, we study the fundamental low-level vision problem of modeling, synthesizing, and classifying the noise patterns for tackling GOAS.
Modeling noise patterns is a promising, yet challenging,
approach for GOAS. In [9,10,39], the camera model identi17294

