GraspNet-1Billion: A Large-Scale Benchmark
for General Object Grasping
Hao-Shu Fang, Chenxi Wang, Minghao Gou. Cewu Lu1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
fhaoshu@gmail.com, {wcx1997,gmh2015,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Object grasping is critical for many applications, which
is also a challenging computer vision problem. However,
for cluttered scene, current researches suffer from the problems of insufficient training data and the lacking of evaluation benchmarks. In this work, we contribute a largescale grasp pose detection dataset with a unified evaluation
system. Our dataset contains 97,280 RGB-D image with
over one billion grasp poses. Meanwhile, our evaluation
system directly reports whether a grasping is successful by
analytic computation, which is able to evaluate any kind
of grasp poses without exhaustively labeling ground-truth.
In addition, we propose an end-to-end grasp pose prediction network given point cloud inputs, where we learn approaching direction and operation parameters in a decoupled manner. A novel grasp affinity field is also designed to
improve the grasping robustness. We conduct extensive experiments to show that our dataset and evaluation system
can align well with real-world experiments and our proposed network achieves the state-of-the-art performance.
Our dataset, source code and models are publicly available
at www.graspnet.net.

1. Introduction
Object grasping is a fundamental problem and has many
applications in industry, agriculture and service trade. The
key of grasping is to detect the grasp poses given visual inputs (image or point cloud) and it has drawn many attentions
in computer vision community [11, 30].
Though important, there are currently two main hindrances to obtaining further performance gains in this area.
Firstly, the grasp poses have different representations including rectangle [36] and 6D pose [41] representation and
are evaluated with different metrics [16, 14, 41] correspond1 Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China

Scene-level
Grasp Poses

Data

…
Object-level
Grasp Poses

Object 6D Poses

Figure 1. Our methodology for building the dataset. We collect
data with real-world sensors and annotate grasp poses for every
single object by analytic computation. Object 6D poses are manually annotated to project the grasp poses from object coordinate to
the scene coordinate. Such methodology greatly reduces the labor
of annotating grasp poses. Our dataset is both densely annotated
and visually coherent with real world.

ingly. The difference in evaluation metrics makes it difficult to compare these methods directly in a unified manner, while evaluating with real robots would dramatically
increase the evaluation cost. Secondly, it is difficult to
obtain large-scale high quality training data [5]. Previous
datasets annotated by human [16, 50, 7] are usually small
in scale and only provide sparse annotations. While obtaining training data from the simulated environment [26, 9, 48]
can generate large scale datasets, the visual domain gap between simulation and reality would inevitably degrade the
performance of algorithms in real-world application.
To form a solid foundation for algorithms built upon, it
is important for a benchmark to i) provide data that aligns
well with the visual perception from real world sensors, ii)
be densely and accurately annotated with large-scale grasp
pose ground-truth and iii) evaluate grasp poses with different representations in a unified manner. This is nontrivial,
especially when it comes to the data annotation. Given an
image or scene, it’s hard for us to manually annotate endless grasp poses in continuous space. We circumvent this
issue by exploring a new direction, that is, collecting data
111444

