Articulation-aware Canonical Surface Mapping
Nilesh Kulkarni1
Abhinav Gupta2,3
David F. Fouhey1
1
2
University of Michigan
Carnegie Mellon University
{nileshk, fouhey}@umich.edu

Shubham Tulsiani3
3
Facebook AI Research

abhinavg@cs.cmu.edu shubhtuls@fb.com

Figure 1: We tackle the tasks of: a) canonical surface mapping (CSM) i.e. mapping pixels to corresponding points on a template shape, and
b) predicting articulation of this template. Our approach allows learning these without relying on keypoint supervision, and we visualize
the results obtained across several categories. The color across the template 3D model on the left and image pixels represent the predicted
mapping among them, while the smaller 3D meshes represent our predicted articulations in camera (top) or a novel (bottom) view.

Abstract
We tackle the tasks of: 1) predicting a Canonical Surface
Mapping (CSM) that indicates the mapping from 2D pixels to corresponding points on a canonical template shape
, and 2) inferring the articulation and pose of the template corresponding to the input image. While previous
approaches rely on keypoint supervision for learning, we
present an approach that can learn without such annotations. Our key insight is that these tasks are geometrically
related, and we can obtain supervisory signal via enforcing consistency among the predictions. We present results
across a diverse set of animal object categories, showing
that our method can learn articulation and CSM prediction
from image collections using only foreground mask labels
for training. We empirically show that allowing articulation helps learn more accurate CSM prediction, and that
enforcing the consistency with predicted CSM is similarly
critical for learning meaningful articulation.

1. Introduction
We humans have a remarkable ability to associate our
2D percepts with 3D concepts, at both a global and a local
level. As an illustration, given a pixel around the nose of
the horse depicted in Figure 1 and an abstract 3D model,
we can easily map this pixel to its corresponding 3D point.
Further, we can also understand the global relation between
the two, e.g. the 3D structure in the image corresponds to
the template with the head bent down. In this work, we pursue these goals of a local and global 3D understanding, and
tackle the tasks of: a) canonical surface mapping (CSM) i.e.
mapping from 2D pixels to a 3D template, and b) predicting
this template’s articulation corresponding to the image.
While several prior works do address these tasks, they
do so independently, typically relying on large-scale annotation for providing supervisory signal. For example, Guler
et al. [2] show impressive mappings from pixels to a template human mesh, but at the cost of hundreds of thousands
of annotations. Similarly, approaches pursuing articulation
inference [16, 43] also rely on keypoint annotation to enable

452

