Superpixel Segmentation with Fully Convolutional Networks
Fengting Yang Qian Sun
The Pennsylvania State University

Hailin Jin
Adobe Research

Zihan Zhou
The Pennsylvania State University

fuy34@psu.edu, uestcqs@gmail.com

hljin@adobe.com

zzhou@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
In computer vision, superpixels have been widely used as
an effective way to reduce the number of image primitives
for subsequent processing. But only a few attempts have
been made to incorporate them into deep neural networks.
One main reason is that the standard convolution operation
is defined on regular grids and becomes inefficient when
applied to superpixels. Inspired by an initialization strategy
commonly adopted by traditional superpixel algorithms, we
present a novel method that employs a simple fully convolutional network to predict superpixels on a regular image
grid. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art superpixel segmentation performance while running at about 50fps. Based on
the predicted superpixels, we further develop a downsampling/upsampling scheme for deep networks with the goal
of generating high-resolution outputs for dense prediction
tasks. Specifically, we modify a popular network architecture for stereo matching to simultaneously predict superpixels and disparities. We show that improved disparity estimation accuracy can be obtained on public datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved great success in a wide range of computer vision
applications. The advance of novel neural architecture design and training schemes, however, often comes a greater
demand for computational resources in terms of both memory and time. Consider the stereo matching task as an example. It has been empirically shown that, compared to
traditional 2D convolution, 3D convolution on a 4D volume (height×width×disparity×feature channels) [17] can
better capture context information and learn representations
for each disparity level, resulting in superior disparity estimation results. But due to the extra feature dimension,
3D convolution is typically operating on spatial resolutions
that are lower than the original input image size for the
time and memory concern. For example, CSPN [8], the
top-1 method on the KITTI 2015 benchmark, conducts 3D

convolution at 1/4 of the input size and uses bilinear interpolation to upsample the predicted disparity volume for
final disparity regression. To handle high resolution images
(e.g., 2000 × 3000), HSM [42], the top-1 method on the
Middlebury-v3 benchmark, uses a multi-scale approach to
compute disparity volume at 1/8, 1/16, and 1/32 of the input size. Bilinear upsampling is again applied to generate
disparity maps at the full resolution. In both cases, object
boundaries and fine details are often not well preserved in
final disparity maps due to the upsampling operation.
In computer vision, superpixels provide a compact representation of image data by grouping perceptually similar
pixels together. As a way to effectively reduce the number of image primitives for subsequent processing, superpixels have been widely adopted in vision problems such as
saliency detection [41], object detection [32], tracking [37],
and semantic segmentation [12]. However, superpixels are
yet to be widely adopted in the DNNs for dimension reduction. One main reason is that, the standard convolution
operation in the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is
defined on a regular image grid. While a few attempts have
been made to modify deep architectures to incorporate superpixels [14, 11, 20, 34], performing convolution over an
irregular superpixel grid remains challenging.
To overcome this difficulty, we propose a deep learning
method to learn superpixels on the regular grid. Our key insight is that it is possible to associate each superpixel with a
regular image grid cell, a strategy commonly used by traditional superpixel algorithms [22, 36, 10, 1, 23, 25, 2] as an
initialization step (see Figure 2). Consequently, we cast superpixel segmentation as a task that aims to find association
scores between image pixels and regular grid cells, and use
a fully convolutional network (FCN) to directly predict such
scores. Note that recent work [16] also proposes an end-toend trainable network for this task, but this method uses a
deep network to extract pixel features, which are then fed to
a soft K-means clustering module to generate superpixels.
The key motivation for us to choose a standard FCN architecture is its simplicity as well as its ability to generate outputs on the regular grid. With the predicted superpixels, we further propose a general framework for down-

13964

