Hierarchical Human Parsing with Typed Part-Relation Reasoning
Wenguan Wang1,2∗, Hailong Zhu3∗ , Jifeng Dai4 , Yanwei Pang 3†, Jianbing Shen2 , Ling Shao 2
1
3

2

ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology, School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
4

SenseTime Research

wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, hlzhu2009@gmail.com
https://github.com/hlzhu09/Hierarchical-Human-Parsing

Abstract
Human parsing is for pixel-wise human semantic understanding. As human bodies are underlying hierarchically structured, how to model human structures is the
central theme in this task. Focusing on this, we seek
to simultaneously exploit the representational capacity of
deep graph networks and the hierarchical human structures. In particular, we provide following two contributions. First, three kinds of part relations, i.e., decomposition, composition, and dependency, are, for the first time,
completely and precisely described by three distinct relation networks. This is in stark contrast to previous parsers,
which only focus on a portion of the relations and adopt
a type-agnostic relation modeling strategy. More expressive relation information can be captured by explicitly imposing the parameters in the relation networks to satisfy
the specific characteristics of different relations. Second,
previous parsers largely ignore the need for an approximation algorithm over the loopy human hierarchy, while we
instead address an iterative reasoning process, by assimilating generic message-passing networks with their edgetyped, convolutional counterparts. With these efforts, our
parser lays the foundation for more sophisticated and flexible human relation patterns of reasoning. Comprehensive
experiments on five datasets demonstrate that our parser
sets a new state-of-the-art on each.

1. Introduction
Human parsing involves segmenting human bodies into
semantic parts, e.g., head, arm, leg, etc. It has attracted
tremendous attention in the literature, as it enables finegrained human understanding and finds a wide spectrum of
human-centric applications, such as human behavior analysis [50, 58, 14], human-robot interaction [16], etc.
Human bodies present a highly structured hierarchy
and body parts inherently interact with each other. As
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Yanwei Pang.

Figure 1: Illustration of our hierarchical human parser. (a) Input image. (b) The human hierarchy in (a), where
indicates
dependency relations and is de-/compositional relations. (c) In
our parser, three distinct relation networks are designed for addressing the specific characteristics of different part relations, i.e.,
, , and
stand for decompositional, compositional, and dependency relation networks, respectively. Iterative inference ( )
is performed for better approximation. For visual clarity, some
nodes are omitted. (d) Our hierarchical parsing results.

shown in Fig. 1(b), there are different relations between
parts [42, 60, 49]: decompositional and compositional
relations (full line: ) between constituent and entire parts
(e.g., {upper body, lower body} and full body), and dependency relations (dashed line: ) between kinematically
connected parts (e.g., hand and arm). Thus the central
problem in human parsing is how to model such relations. Recently, numerous structured human parsers have
been proposed [65, 15, 22, 64, 47, 74, 61, 20]. Their notable successes indeed demonstrate the benefit of exploiting the structure in this problem. However, three major limitations in human structure modeling are still observed. (1) The structural information utilized is typically
weak and relation types studied are incomplete. Most efforts [65, 15, 22, 64, 47] directly encode human pose information into the parsing model, causing them to suffer
from trivial structural information, not to mention the need
of extra pose annotations. In addition, previous structured
parsers focus on only one or two of the aforementioned part
relations, not all of them. For example, [20] only considers

8929

