Robust 3D Self-portraits in Seconds
Zhe Li1 , Tao Yu1 , Chuanyu Pan1 , Zerong Zheng1 , Yebin Liu1,2
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
Abstract
In this paper, we propose an efficient method for robust 3D self-portraits using a single RGBD camera. Benefiting from the proposed PIFusion and lightweight bundle
adjustment algorithm, our method can generate detailed
3D self-portraits in seconds and shows the ability to handle subjects wearing extremely loose clothes. To achieve
highly efficient and robust reconstruction, we propose PIFusion, which combines learning-based 3D recovery with volumetric non-rigid fusion to generate accurate sparse partial scans of the subject. Moreover, a non-rigid volumetric
deformation method is proposed to continuously refine the
learned shape prior. Finally, a lightweight bundle adjustment algorithm is proposed to guarantee that all the partial scans can not only “loop” with each other but also
remain consistent with the selected live key observations.
The results and experiments show that the proposed method
achieves more robust and efficient 3D self-portraits compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Human body 3D modeling, aiming at reconstructing the
dense 3D surface geometry and texture of the subject, is a
hot topic in both computer vision and graphics and is of
great importance in the area of body measurement, digital content creation, virtual try-ons, etc. Traditional human body 3D modeling methods usually rely on experts for
data capture and are therefore hard to use. Compared with
traditional 3D scanning methods, 3D self-portrait methods,
which allow users to capture their own portraits without any
assistance, have significant potential for wide usage.
Current 3D self-portrait methods can be classified into
3 categories: learning-based methods, fusion-based methods, and bundle-adjustment-based methods. Learningbased methods mainly focus on 3D human recovery from
a single RGB image ([13, 25]). Thus, the results are still
far from accurate due to occlusions and depth ambiguities.
Fusion-based methods reconstruct scene geometries in an
incremental manner, so error accumulation is inevitable, especially for non-rigid scenarios [20], which is detrimental
for loop closure reconstruction (e.g., 3D self-portraits). To
suppress the accumulated error in incremental fusion, an-

Figure 1: Our system reconstructs a detailed and textured portrait
after the subject self-rotates in front of an RGBD sensor.

other branch of 3D self-portrait methods also utilizes bundle adjustment algorithms [17, 29, 7, 8, 30, 31]. The whole
sequence is first segmented into several chunks, and then
fusion methods are applied to each chunk to fuse a smooth
partial scan. Finally, non-rigid bundle adjustment is used to
“loop” all the partial scans simultaneously by non-rigid registration based on explicit loop closure correspondences and
bundling correspondences. Although RGBD bundle adjustment methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance
for 3D self-portraits, they still suffer from complicated
hardware setups (e.g., relying on multiple sensors or electric
turntables [29, 1, 2] or low efficiency [17, 5, 8, 7, 30, 31]).
One of our observations is that a good combination of
non-rigid fusion and bundle adjustment should guarantee
both efficiency and accuracy. However, non-rigid fusion
methods (e.g., [20] etc.) usually suffer from heavy drifts
and error accumulation during tracking, which limit their
ability to generate accurate large partial scans. This limitation has led to the fact that previous bundle adjustment
methods have to be conducted on considerably large numbers of small partial scans, which significantly increase the
optimizing variables in the bundling step. For example, in
[8], 40-50 small partial scans need to be bundled together,
which takes approximately 5 hours.
To produce large and accurate partial scans by non-rigid
fusion, a complete shape prior is necessary. To this end, we
propose PIFusion, which utilizes learning-based 3D body
recovery (PIFu [25]) as an inner layer in non-rigid fusion
[20]. Specifically, in each frame, the inner layer generated
by learning-based methods acts as a strong shape prior to
improve the tracking accuracy and robustness, and the fused

1344

