Predicting Lymph Node Metastasis Using Histopathological Images Based on
Multiple Instance Learning with Deep Graph Convolution
Yu Zhao1,2∗, Fan Yang1∗ , Yuqi Fang3 , Hailing Liu4 , Niyun Zhou1 , Jun Zhang1 , Jiarui Sun1 , Sen Yang1 ,
Bjoern Menze2 , Xinjuan Fan4 and Jianhua Yao1
1
Tencent AI Lab, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
Multiple instance learning (MIL) is a typical weaklysupervised learning method where the label is associated
with a bag of instances instead of a single instance. Despite
extensive research over past years, effectively deploying
MIL remains an open and challenging problem, especially
when the commonly assumed standard multiple instance
(SMI) assumption is not satisfied. In this paper, we propose
a multiple instance learning method based on deep graph
convolutional network and feature selection (FS-GCN-MIL)
for histopathological image classification. The proposed
method consists of three components, including instancelevel feature extraction, instance-level feature selection,
and bag-level classification. We develop a self-supervised
learning mechanism to train the feature extractor based on
a combination model of variational autoencoder and generative adversarial network (VAE-GAN). Additionally, we
propose a novel instance-level feature selection method to
select the discriminative instance features. Furthermore,
we employ a graph convolutional network (GCN) for learning the bag-level representation and then performing the
classification. We apply the proposed method in the prediction of lymph node metastasis using histopathological
images of colorectal cancer. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method achieves superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, weakly-supervised learning (WSL) has gained
greater attention in the machine learning field since it significantly reduces the workload of human annotation. Multiinstance learning (MIL) is a typical weakly-supervised
learning [48], which has been widely employed in different tasks, including object detection [37, 38, 18], semantic
∗ Yu Zhao and Fan Yang contributed equally and Jianhua Yao is the
corresponding author (jianhuayao@tencent.com).

segmentation [43, 33], scene classification [42, 19], medical
diagnosis[5, 31], etc. In the MIL task, the training dataset
is composed of bags, where each bag contains a set of instances. The goal of MIL is to learn a model for predicting
the bag label. Different from conventional fully-supervised
machine learning problems, where each instance has a confident label, only the bag-level label is available in MIL.
Furthermore, instances in a bag are not necessarily relevant,
sometimes even providing confusing information. For example, some instances do not contain discriminative information related to the bag class, or they are more related to
other classes of bags.[2]
Based on which level the discriminative information is
at (instance-level or bag-level) and how the relevant information is extracted (implicitly or explicitly), MIL algorithms can be categorized into three groups, i.e., instancespace paradigm, bag-space paradigm, and embedded-space
paradigm [41, 2]. The instance-space paradigm tends to focus on local information, which learns instance classifier at
the first stage and then achieves the bag-level classifier by
simply aggregating instance-level results. These instancespace methods are mostly based on the standard multiple
instance (SMI) assumption [27], i.e., a bag is positive only
if it contains at least one positive instance and otherwise
is negative [46, 3, 30]. However, this key-instance based
SMI assumption is inappropriate in applications where the
classification is based on the global bag information instead
of an individual instance. The bag-space paradigm and
embedded-space paradigm, on the other hand, extract discriminative information from the whole bag. The difference
between these two paradigms lies in the way to exploit the
bag-level information. The bag-space paradigm implicitly
utilizes bag-to-bag distance/similarity, while the embeddedspace paradigm explicitly embeds the information of a bag
into a feature space [41].
In this paper, we propose a novel embedded-space multiple instance learning method with feature selection and
graph convolutional network for image classification. The
method has three major components: instance-level feature

4837

