A Spatial RNN Codec for End-To-End Image Compression
Chaoyi Lin, Jiabao Yao, Fangdong Chen, Li Wang
Hikvision Research Institute
Hangzhou, China
{linchaoyi, yaojiabao, chenfangdong, wangli7}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Recently, deep learning has been explored as a promising direction for image compression. Removing the spatial
redundancy of the image is crucial for image compression
and most learning based methods focus on removing the redundancy between adjacent pixels. Intuitively, to explore
larger pixel range beyond adjacent pixel is beneficial for removing the redundancy. In this paper, we propose a fast yet
effective method for end-to-end image compression by incorporating a novel spatial recurrent neural network. Block
based LSTM is utilized to remove the redundant information
between adjacent pixels and blocks. Besides, the proposed
method is a potential efficient system that parallel computation on individual blocks is possible. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed model outperforms state-ofthe-art traditional image compression standards and learning based image compression models in terms of both PSNR
and MS-SSIM metrics. It provides a 26.73% bits-saving
than High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC), which is the
current official state-of-the-art video codec.

1. Introduction
Image compression is an important technique for reducing communication traffic and saving data storage.
Most traditional lossy image compression standards such as
JPEG [25], WebP [4] and Better Portable Graphics (BPG)
[5] are based on transform coding [9] framework. In this
framework, a prediction transform module is used to map
image pixel into a quantized latent representation and then
compress the latents by entropy coding.
Recently, the deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown
their great advantages in various areas. Along with this
progress of deep learning, learning based image compression models also have derived significant interests [14, 8,
19, 17, 3, 18, 10, 1, 11]. Auto-encoder is usually applied in
image compression that an encoder transforms input image
into a latent representation, and the decoder inversely transforms a quantized latent representation into the reconstruc-

Figure 1. The effective of block based methods. In the blue region, both the correlation for adjacent pixels and adjacent blocks
are large. In the red region, due to the similar texture in different
blocks, the correlation between adjacent blocks are larger than that
between adjacent pixels.

tion of input image. The neural networks in auto-encoder
approximate nonlinear functions, which can map pixels into
a more compressible latent space than the linear transform
used by traditional image compression standards. Another
advantage of learning based image compression models is
that they can be easily optimized for specific metric such as
SSIM [26] and MS-SSIM [27] by changing the loss function.
Very recently, a few learning based image compression
models have outperformed the state-of-the-art traditional
image compression standard BPG in terms of PSNR metric [28, 13, 18, 7]. These works focus on removing the
redundant information between adjacent pixels by CNN.
However, in the latest developing image/video compression
standards, such as Versatile Video Coding (VVC) [6], block
based processing is preferred. By using the block based processing, the redundant information for both adjacent pixels and blocks can be removed through block based prediction transform [15]. Figure 1 illustrates the effective of
block based methods. High correlation for adjacent pixels and blocks can be found in the region marked by blue
line. In this case, both pixel based methods and block based
methods are effective. However, in the red region, the pixel

13269

