Source

Target

“Bed”
“Flower”

“Bottle”

Absent

Target

Inheritable
model

Towards Inheritable Models for Open-Set Domain Adaptation
Jogendra Nath Kundu∗ Naveen Venkat∗ Ambareesh Revanur Rahul M V R. Venkatesh Babu
Target
Video Analytics Lab, CDS, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

There has been a tremendous
progress in Domain Adap“Bed”
tation (DA) for visual recognition tasks. Particularly, openset DA has gained considerable attention wherein the tar“Bottle” unseen categories. Existing
get domain contains additional
open-set DA approaches demand access to a labeled source
dataset along with unlabeled target instances. However,
“Flower”
this reliance on co-existing
source and target data is highly
impractical in scenarios where data-sharing is restricted
due to its proprietary nature or privacy concerns. Addressing this, we introduce
a practical DA paradigm where a
Absent
source-trained model is used to facilitate adaptation in the
absence of the source dataset in future. To this end, we
formalize knowledge inheritability as a novel concept and
propose a simple yet effective solution to realize inheritable
models suitable for the above practical paradigm. Further,
we present an objective way to quantify inheritability to enable the selection of the most suitable source model for a
given target domain, even in the absence of the source data.
We provide theoretical insights followed by a thorough empirical evaluation demonstrating state-of-the-art open-set
domain adaptation performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/val-iisc/inheritune.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks perform remarkably well when the
training and the testing instances are drawn from the same
distributions. However, they lack the capacity to generalize
in the presence of a domain-shift [42] exhibiting alarming
levels of dataset bias or domain bias [45]. As a result, a
drop in performance is observed at test time if the training data (acquired from a source domain) is insufficient to
reliably characterize the test environment (the target domain). This challenge arises in several Computer Vision
tasks [32, 25, 18] where one is often confined to a limited
array of available source datasets, which are practically inadequate to represent a wide range of target domains. This
has motivated a line of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
(UDA) works that aim to generalize a model to an unlabeled
target domain, in the presence of a labeled source domain.
∗ Equal Contribution

A. Source domain

Vendor trains an inheritable model
on a labeled source domain
and shares it to the client

“Bed”

Inheritable
model

“Bottle”

B.

vendor

client

No data-exchange

Unlabeled
target domain

Client performs unsupervised
adaptation without vendor’s data
client

“Bed”
“Flower”

Source

“Flower”

Source
Abstract

“Bottle”

“unknown”
Label predictions after adaptation

Figure 1. A) We propose inheritable models to transfer the taskspecific knowledge from a model vendor to the client for, B) performing unsupervised open-set domain adaptation in the absence
of data-exchange between the vendor and the client.

In this work, we study UDA in the context of image
recognition. Notably, a large body of UDA methods is
inspired by the potential of deep CNN models to learn
transferable representations [52]. This has formed the basis of several UDA works that learn domain-agnostic feature representations [26, 44, 48] by aligning the marginal
distributions of the source and the target domains in the
latent feature space. Several other works learn domainspecific representations via independent domain transformations [47, 5, 32] to a common latent space on which the
classifier is learned. The latent space alignment of the two
domains permits the reuse of the source classifier for the
target domain. These methods however operate under the
assumption of a shared label-set (Cs = Ct ) between the two
domains (closed-set). This restricts their real-world applicability where a target domain often contains additional unseen categories beyond those found in the source domain.
Recently, open-set DA [35, 39] has gained much attention, wherein the target domain is assumed to have unshared
categories (Cs ⊂ Ct ), a.k.a category-shift. Target instances
from the unshared categories are assigned a single unknown
label [35] (see Fig. 1B). Open-set DA is more challenging,

12376

