On Joint Estimation of Pose, Geometry and svBRDF from a Handheld Scanner
Carolin Schmitt1,2,∗

Simon Donné1,2,∗ Gernot Riegler3 Vladlen Koltun3 Andreas Geiger1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2
3
University of Tübingen
Intel Intelligent Systems Lab

{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

{firstname.lastname}@intel.com

Abstract
We propose a novel formulation for joint recovery of
camera pose, object geometry and spatially-varying BRDF.
The input to our approach is a sequence of RGB-D images
captured by a mobile, hand-held scanner that actively illuminates the scene with point light sources. Compared to
previous works that jointly estimate geometry and materials from a hand-held scanner, we formulate this problem
using a single objective function that can be minimized using off-the-shelf gradient-based solvers. By integrating material clustering as a differentiable operation into the optimization process, we avoid pre-processing heuristics and
demonstrate that our model is able to determine the correct
number of specular materials independently. We provide a
study on the importance of each component in our formulation and on the requirements of the initial geometry. We
show that optimizing over the poses is crucial for accurately
recovering fine details and that our approach naturally results in a semantically meaningful material segmentation.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the shape and appearance of objects is
a long standing goal in computer vision and graphics with
numerous applications ranging from telepresence to training embodied agents in photo-realistic environments. While
novel depth sensing technology (e.g., Kinect) enabled largescale 3D reconstructions [12, 61, 87], the level of realism
provided is limited since physical light transport is not taken
into account. As a consequence, material properties are not
recovered and illumination effects such as specular reflections or shadows are merged into the texture component.
Material properties can be directly measured using dedicated light stages [26, 40, 49] or inferred from images by
assuming known [15, 36, 65] or flat [3, 4, 29, 76] object geometry. However, most setups are either restricted to lab
environments, planar geometries, or difficult to employ “in
the wild” as they assume aligned 3D models or scans.
∗ Joint first author with equal contribution.

Figure 1: Illustration. Based on images captured from a
handheld scanner with point light illumination, we jointly
optimize for the camera poses, the surface geometry and
spatially varying materials using a single objective function.
Ideally, object geometry and material properties are inferred jointly: a good model of light transport allows for recovering geometric detail using shading cues. An accurate
shape model, in turn, facilitates the estimation of material
properties. This is particularly relevant for shiny surfaces
where small changes in the geometry greatly impact the appearance and location of specular reflections. Yet joint optimization of these quantities (shown in Fig. 1) is challenging.
Several works have addressed this problem by assuming
multiple images from a static camera [16, 21, 23, 28, 105]
which is impractical for mobile scanning applications. Only
a few works consider the challenging problem of joint geometry and material estimation from a handheld device
[20, 24, 57]. However, existing approaches assume known
camera poses and leverage sophisticated pipelines, decomposing the problem into smaller problems using multiple
decoupled objectives and optimization algorithms that treat
geometry and materials separately. Furthermore the number
of base materials must be provided and/or pre-processing is
required to cluster the object surface accordingly.
13493

