FDA: Fourier Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Yanchao Yang
UCLA Vision Lab

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

yanchao.yang@cs.ucla.edu

soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We describe a simple method for unsupervised domain
adaptation, whereby the discrepancy between the source
and target distributions is reduced by swapping the lowfrequency spectrum of one with the other. We illustrate the
method in semantic segmentation, where densely annotated
images are aplenty in one domain (e.g., synthetic data), but
difficult to obtain in another (e.g., real images). Current
state-of-the-art methods are complex, some requiring adversarial optimization to render the backbone of a neural
network invariant to the discrete domain selection variable.
Our method does not require any training to perform the domain alignment, just a simple Fourier Transform and its inverse. Despite its simplicity, it achieves state-of-the-art performance in the current benchmarks, when integrated into
a relatively standard semantic segmentation model. Our results indicate that even simple procedures can discount nuisance variability in the data that more sophisticated methods struggle to learn away.1

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) refers to adapting a model trained with annotated samples from one distribution (source), to operate on a different (target) distribution for which no annotations are given. For example, the
source domain can consist of synthetic images and their corresponding pixel-level labels (semantic segmentation), and
the target can be real images with no ground-truth annotations. Simply training the model on the source data does
not yield satisfactory performance on the target data, due to
the covariate shift. In some cases, perceptually insignificant
changes in the low-level statistics can cause significant deterioration of the performance of the trained model, unless
UDA is performed.
State-of-the-art UDA methods train a deep neural network (DNN) model for a given task (say, semantic segmentation) plus an auxiliary loss designed to make the model
1 Code available at: https://github.com/YanchaoYang/FDA

invariant to the binary selection of source/target domain.
This requires difficult adversarial training. We explore the
hypothesis that simple alignment of the low-level statistics
between the source and target distributions can improve performance in UDA, without any need for training beyond the
primary task of semantic segmentation.
Our method is illustrated in Fig. 1: One simply computes
the (Fast) Fourier Transform (FFT) of each input image, and
replaces the low-level frequencies of the target images into
the source images before reconstituting the image for training, via the inverse FFT (iFFT), using the original annotations in the source domain.
To test our hypothesis, we use as a baseline (lower
bound) the performance on the target data of a model trained
on the source. As a paragon (upper bound), we use a
state-of-the-art model with adversarial training [19]. We
expect that such a simple, “zero-shot” alignment of lowlevel statistics would improve the baseline, and hopefully
come close to the paragon. However, the method actually
outperforms the paragon in semantic segmentation. We do
not take this to mean that our method is the way to perform UDA, in particular for general tasks beyond semantic
segmentation. However, the fact that such a simple method
outperforms sophisticated adversarial learning suggests that
these models are not effective at managing low-level nuisance variability.
Fourier domain adaptation requires selecting one free parameter, the size of the spectral neighborhood to be swapped
(green square in Fig. 1). We test a variety of sizes, as well
as a simple multi-scale method consisting of averaging the
results arising from different domain sizes.
The motivation for our approach stems from the observation that the low-level spectrum (amplitude) can vary significantly without affecting the perception of high-level semantics. Whether something is a vehicle or a person should
not depend on the characteristics of the sensor, or the illuminant, or other low-level sources of variability. Yet such
variability has significant impact on the spectrum, forcing
a learning-based model to “learn it away” along with other
nuisance variability. If this variability is not represented in
the training set, the models fail to generalize. However,

4085

