Local Class-Specific and Global Image-Level Generative Adversarial Networks
for Semantic-Guided Scene Generation

1

Hao Tang1 Dan Xu2 Yan Yan3 Philip H. S. Torr2 Nicu Sebe1,4
University of Trento 2 University of Oxford 3 Texas State University 4 Huawei Research Ireland

Abstract
In this paper, we address the task of semantic-guided
scene generation. One open challenge widely observed
in global image-level generation methods is the difficulty
of generating small objects and detailed local texture. To
tackle this issue, in this work we consider learning the
scene generation in a local context, and correspondingly
design a local class-specific generative network with semantic maps as a guidance, which separately constructs
and learns sub-generators concentrating on the generation
of different classes, and is able to provide more scene details. To learn more discriminative class-specific feature
representations for the local generation, a novel classification module is also proposed. To combine the advantage of
both global image-level and the local class-specific generation, a joint generation network is designed with an attention fusion module and a dual-discriminator structure embedded. Extensive experiments on two scene image generation tasks show superior generation performance of the
proposed model. State-of-the-art results are established
by large margins on both tasks and on challenging public
benchmarks. The source code and trained models are available at https://github.com/Ha0Tang/LGGAN .

1. Introduction
Semantic-guided scene generation is a hot research topic
covering several main-stream research directions, including
cross-view image translation [21, 55, 38, 39, 46, 40] and
semantic image synthesis [51, 8, 36, 34]. The cross-view
image translation task proposed in [38] is essentially an illposed problem due to the large ambiguity in the generation
if only a single RGB image is given as input. To alleviate
this problem, recent works such as SelectionGAN [46] try
to generate the target image based on an image of the scene
and several novel semantic maps, as shown in Fig. 1(bottom). Adding a semantic map allows the model to learn the
correspondences in the target view with appropriate object
relations and transformations. On the other side, the semantic image synthesis task aims to generate a photo-realistic

Figure 1: Examples of semantic image synthesis results on
Cityscapes (top) and cross-view image translation results on
Dayton (bottom) with different settings of our LGGAN.
image from a semantic map [51, 8, 36, 34], as shown in
Fig. 1(top). Recently, Park et al. [34] propose a spatiallyadaptive normalization for synthesizing photo-realistic images given an input semantic map. With the useful semantic information, existing methods on both tasks achieved
promising performance in scene generation.
However, one can still observe unsatisfying perspectives,
especially on the generation of local scene structure and details as well as small scale objects, which we believe are
mainly due to several reasons. First, existing methods on
both tasks are mostly based on a global image-level generation, which accepts a semantic map containing several
object classes and aims to generate the appearance of all the
different classes, by using the same network design or using
shared network parameters. In this case, all the classes are
treated equally by the network. While different semantic
classes have distinct properties, specific network learning
for different semantic classes intuitively would benefit the
complex multi-class generation. Second, we observe that
the number of training samples of different scene classes is
imbalanced. For instance, for the Dayton dataset [49], the
cars and buses only occupy less than 2% with respect to all

7870

