EcoNAS: Finding Proxies for Economical Neural Architecture Search
Dongzhan Zhou1∗ Xinchi Zhou1∗ Wenwei Zhang2 Chen Change Loy2
Shuai Yi3 Xuesen Zhang3 Wanli Ouyang1
1
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
2
Nanyang Technological University 3 SenseTime Research
{d.zhou, xinchi.zhou1, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au

{wenwei001, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

{yishuai, zhangxuesen}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) achieves signiﬁcant
progress in many computer vision tasks. While many methods have been proposed to improve the efﬁciency of NAS,
the search progress is still laborious because training and
evaluating plausible architectures over large search space
is time-consuming. Assessing network candidates under a
proxy (i.e., computationally reduced setting) thus becomes
inevitable. In this paper, we observe that most existing proxies exhibit different behaviors in maintaining the rank consistency among network candidates. In particular, some
proxies can be more reliable – the rank of candidates does
not differ much comparing their reduced setting performance and ﬁnal performance. In this paper, we systematically investigate some widely adopted reduction factors and
report our observations. Inspired by these observations, we
present a reliable proxy and further formulate a hierarchical proxy strategy. The strategy spends more computations
on candidate networks that are potentially more accurate,
while discards unpromising ones in early stage with a fast
proxy. This leads to an economical evolutionary-based NAS
(EcoNAS), which achieves an impressive 400× search time
reduction in comparison to the evolutionary-based state of
the art [19] (8 vs. 3150 GPU days). Some new proxies
led by our observations can also be applied to accelerate
other NAS methods while still able to discover good candidate networks with performance matching those found by
previous proxy strategies.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has received wide attention and achieved signiﬁcant progress in many computer
vision tasks, such as image classiﬁcation [9, 19, 26, 31],
detection [6, 8, 24], and semantic segmentation [13]. Al∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. The comparison of search cost and accuracy for different NAS methods on CIFAR-10 [12]. Simply replacing the original proxy with a more consistent and efﬁcient one could reduce
the search cost of DARTS [16] and AmoebaNet [19]. The proposed EcoNAS uses an efﬁcient proxy with a novel hierarchical
proxy strategy, reducing around 400× search cost and achieving
competitive performance comparing with AmoebaNet [19].

though recent NAS methods [14, 16, 18] improve the search
efﬁciency from earlier works [30], the search progress is
still time-consuming and requires vast computation overhead when searching in a large search space since all network candidates need to be trained and evaluated.
A widely adopted approach to alleviating this problem is
by training and evaluating network candidates under proxies (i.e., computationally reduced settings [16, 18, 19, 31]).
There are four common reduction factors, namely, the number of channels for CNNs (c), the resolution of input images (r), the number of training epochs (e), and the sample
ratio (s) of the full training set. These reduction factors
either reduce the computation costs of networks or reduce
the training iterations to save the search time. While introducing proxies sounds appealing, a caveat is that different reduction factors exhibit different behaviors in keeping
the rank consistency among network candidates. We observe that some architectures applied with certain reduction

11396

