SketchyCOCO: Image Generation from Freehand Scene Sketches
Chengying Gao1 Qi Liu1 Qi Xu1 Limin Wang2 Jianzhuang Liu3 Changqing Zou 4∗
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 4 HMI Lab, Huawei Technologies
mcsgcy@mail.sysu.edu.cn {liuq99, xuqi5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
07wanglimin@gmail.com liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com aaronzou1125@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce the first method for automatic image generation from scene-level freehand sketches. Our model allows for controllable image generation by specifying the
synthesis goal via freehand sketches. The key contribution
is an attribute vector bridged Generative Adversarial Network called EdgeGAN, which supports high visual-quality
object-level image content generation without using freehand sketches as training data. We have built a largescale composite dataset called SketchyCOCO to support
and evaluate the solution. We validate our approach on the
tasks of both object-level and scene-level image generation
on SketchyCOCO. Through quantitative, qualitative results,
human evaluation and ablation studies, we demonstrate the
method’s capacity to generate realistic complex scene-level
images from various freehand sketches.

1. Introduction
In recent years Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [16] have shown significant success in modeling
high dimensional distributions of visual data. In particular, high-fidelity images could be achieved by unconditional generative models trained on object-level data (e.g.,
animal pictures in [4]), class-specific datasets (e.g., indoor scenes [33]), or even a single image with repeated
textures [32]. For practical applications, automatic image synthesis which can generate images and videos in
response to specific requirements could be more useful.
This explains why there are increasingly studies on the
adversarial networks conditioned on another input signal
like texts [37, 20], semantic maps [2, 21, 6, 34, 27], layouts [2, 20, 38], and scene graphs [2, 23]. Compared to
these sources, a freehand sketch has its unique strength in
expressing the user’s idea in an intuitive and flexible way.
∗ Corresponding author.

Specifically, to describe an object or scene, sketches can
better convey the user’s intention than other sources since
they lessen the uncertainty by naturally providing more details such as object location, pose and shape.
In this paper, we extend the use of Generative Adversarial Networks into a new problem: controllably generating
realistic images with many objects and relationships from
a freehand scene-level sketch as shown in Figure 1. This
problem is extremely challenging because of several factors. Freehand sketches are characterized by various levels of abstractness, for which there are a thousand different appearances from a thousand users, which even express
the same common object, depending on the users’ depictive
abilities, thereby making it difficult for existing techniques
to model the mapping from a freehand scene sketch to realistic natural images that precisely meet the users’ intention. More importantly, freehand scene sketches are often
incomplete and contain a foreground and background. For
example, users often prefer to sketch the foreground object, which are most concerned, with specific detailed appearances and they would like the result to exactly satisfy
this requirement while they leave blank space and just draw
the background objects roughly without paying attention to
their details, thereby requiring the algorithm to be capable
of coping with the different requirements of users.
To make this challenging problem resolvable, we decompose it into two sequential stages, foreground and background generation, based on the characteristics of scenelevel sketching. The first stage focuses on foreground generation where the generated image content is supposed to
exactly meet the user’s specific requirement. The second
stage is responsible for background generation where the
generated image content may be loosely aligned with the
sketches. Since the appearance of each object in the foreground has been specified by the user, it is possible to generate realistic and reasonable image content from the individual foreground objects separately. Moreover, the generated
foreground can provide more constraints on the background

5174

