Rethinking Class-Balanced Methods for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
from a Domain Adaptation Perspective
Muhammad Abdullah Jamal†∗ Matthew Brown♯ Ming-Hsuan Yang‡♯ Liqiang Wang† Boqing Gong♯
†
University of Central Florida ‡ University of California at Merced ♯ Google

Abstract
Object frequency in the real world often follows a power
law, leading to a mismatch between datasets with longtailed class distributions seen by a machine learning model
and our expectation of the model to perform well on all
classes. We analyze this mismatch from a domain adaptation point of view. First of all, we connect existing classbalanced methods for long-tailed classification to target
shift, a well-studied scenario in domain adaptation. The
connection reveals that these methods implicitly assume
that the training data and test data share the same classconditioned distribution, which does not hold in general
and especially for the tail classes. While a head class
could contain abundant and diverse training examples that
well represent the expected data at inference time, the tail
classes are often short of representative training data. To
this end, we propose to augment the classic class-balanced
learning by explicitly estimating the differences between
the class-conditioned distributions with a meta-learning approach. We validate our approach with six benchmark
datasets and three loss functions.

Training
Test

King Eider

Common
Slider

Figure 1. The training set of iNaturalist 2018 exhibits a long-tailed
class distribution [1]. We connect domain adaptation with the mismatch between the long-tailed training set and our expectation of
the trained classifier to perform equally well in all classes. We also
view the prevalent class-balanced methods in long-tailed classification as the target shift in domain adaptation, i.e., Ps (y) 6= Pt (y)
and Ps (x|y) = Pt (x|y), where Ps and Pt are respectively the distributions of the source domain and the target domain, and x and y
respectively stand for the input and output of a classifier. We contend that the second part of the target shift assumption does not
hold for tail classes, e.g., Ps (x|King Eider) 6= Pt (x|King Eider),
because the limited training images of King Eider cannot well represent the data at inference time.

1. Introduction
Big curated datasets, deep learning, and unprecedented
computing power are often referred to as the three pillars of
recent advances in visual recognition [32, 44, 37]. As we
continue to build the big-dataset pillar, however, the power
law emerges as an inevitable challenge. Object frequency
in the real world often exhibits a long-tailed distribution
where a small number of classes dominate, such as plants
and animals [51, 1], landmarks around the globe [41], and
common and uncommon objects in contexts [35, 23].
In this paper, we propose to investigate long-tailed visual recognition from a domain adaptation point of view.
The long-tail challenge is essentially a mismatch problem
between datasets with long-tailed class distributions seen
by a machine learning model and our expectation of the
∗ Work done while M. Jamal was an intern at Google.

model to perform well on all classes (and not bias toward
the head classes). Conventional visual recognition methods,
for instance, training neural networks by a cross-entropy
loss, overly fit the dominant classes and fail in the underrepresented tail classes as they implicitly assume that the
test sets are drawn i.i.d. from the same underlying distribution as the long-tailed training set. Domain adaptation explicitly breaks the assumption [46, 45, 21]. It discloses the
inference-time data or distribution (target domain) to the
machine learning models when they learn from the training
data (source domain).
Denote by Ps (x, y) and Pt (x, y) the distributions of a
source domain and a target domain, respectively, where x
and y are respectively an instance and its class label. In
long-tailed visual recognition, the marginal class distribution Ps (y) of the source domain is long-tailed, and yet the
17610

