Where, What, Whether: Multi-modal Learning Meets Pedestrian Detection
Yan Luo1 , Chongyang Zhang 1,2, ∗, Muming Zhao1 , Hao Zhou1 , Jun Sun1
1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
∗
Corresponding author: Chongyang Zhang, sunny zhang@sjtu.edu.cn

Where is the target?
Front View

Bird View

What is the scale of the target?
Scale----Depth

Whether the target is actually a pedestrian?
Vision----Language

Height

Head?
Arm?
Body?
Leg?

ࡻ

Depth

3

Figure 1. W Net decouples the pedestrian detection into Where, What and Whether problem as illustrated above from left to right, which
enables us to generate robust representations against occlusion and scale variation.

Abstract
Pedestrian detection benefits greatly from deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, it is inherently
hard for CNNs to handle situations in the presence of occlusion and scale variation. In this paper, we propose W3 Net,
which attempts to address above challenges by decomposing the pedestrian detection task into Where, What and
Whether problem directing against pedestrian localization,
scale prediction and classification correspondingly. Specifically, for a pedestrian instance, we formulate its feature by
three steps. i) We generate a bird view map, which is naturally free from occlusion issues, and scan all points on it to
look for suitable locations for each pedestrian instance. ii)
Instead of utilizing pre-fixed anchors, we model the interdependency between depth and scale aiming at generating
depth-guided scales at different locations for better matching instances of different sizes. iii) We learn a latent vector
shared by both visual and corpus space, by which false positives with similar vertical structure but lacking human partial features would be filtered out. We achieve state-of-theart results on widely used datasets (Citypersons and Caltech). In particular. when evaluating on heavy occlusion
subset, our results reduce MR−2 from 49.3% to 18.7% on
Citypersons, and from 45.18% to 28.33% on Caltech.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a fundamental topic in computer
vision. Generally speaking, the design of pedestrian detector is deeply influenced by the development of object detection, which is used to tell where the object is, and how big
it is [24]. Most modern anchor-based detectors [4] [29] [28]
get stuck in a paradigm, namely, expertise-based techniques
to generate a series of anchors and then identify whether it
is a pedestrian or not. It is undeniable that this method has
a extensive impact and is widely used as a powerful baseline, but a large number of redundant and low-quality proposals it introduces also limit the accuracy and speed. In
contrast, our work falls into the anchor-free fashion, which
takes multi-modal data as input to predict where the target
is, what the scale is, and whether the target is actually a
pedestrian, instead of utilizing pre-fixed anchors.
Where - Object detection actually starts from a basic
problem: where is the target? In previous successful practices, such as Faster RCNN [19] or SSD [15], this process
is mostly determined by a set of pre-defined anchors, based
on a implicit dependency that objects are evenly distributed
on the image, which is much similar to exhaustion. The recently popular anchor-free methods shake of the yoke (predefined anchors) and detect objects directly from an image,
which makes the detection a more natural way. One of the
typical and effective anchor-free practice in pedestrian de-

14065

