Deep White-Balance Editing
Mahmoud Afifi1,2∗
Michael S. Brown1
1
Samsung AI Center (SAIC) – Toronto 2 York University
{mafifi, mbrown}@eecs.yorku.ca

1. Introduction and related work
White balance (WB) is a fundamental low-level computer vision task applied to all camera images. WB is performed to ensure that scene objects appear as the same color
even when imaged under different illumination conditions.
Conceptually, WB is intended to normalize the effect of the
captured scene’s illumination such that all objects appear as
if they were captured under ideal “white light”. WB is one
of the first color manipulation steps applied to the sensor’s
unprocessed raw-RGB image by the camera’s onboard integrated signal processor (ISP). After WB is performed, a
number of additional color rendering steps are applied by
the ISP to further process the raw-RGB image to its final
∗ Mahmoud contributed to this work during his internship at the SAIC.

2850K

(A) Incorrect AWB

(B) Correct AWB

(D) KNN-WB [3] result
applied to (A)

(E) Our deep-WB
correction applied to (A)

3800K

5500K

7500K

(C) WB presets

sRGB WB edits

We introduce a deep learning approach to realistically
edit an sRGB image’s white balance. Cameras capture sensor images that are rendered by their integrated signal processor (ISP) to a standard RGB (sRGB) color space encoding. The ISP rendering begins with a white-balance procedure that is used to remove the color cast of the scene’s
illumination. The ISP then applies a series of nonlinear
color manipulations to enhance the visual quality of the final sRGB image. Recent work by [3] showed that sRGB
images that were rendered with the incorrect white balance
cannot be easily corrected due to the ISP’s nonlinear rendering. The work in [3] proposed a k-nearest neighbor
(KNN) solution based on tens of thousands of image pairs.
We propose to solve this problem with a deep neural network (DNN) architecture trained in an end-to-end manner
to learn the correct white balance. Our DNN maps an input
image to two additional white-balance settings corresponding to indoor and outdoor illuminations. Our solution not
only is more accurate than the KNN approach in terms of
correcting a wrong white-balance setting but also provides
the user the freedom to edit the white balance in the sRGB
image to other illumination settings.

Camera sRGB outputs

Abstract

2850K

3800K

5500K

7500K

(F) Our deep-WB
edits applied to (A)

Figure 1: Top row: (A)-(C) are sRGB images produced by
a camera’s ISP with different WB settings. (A) An incorrect WB representing a failed AWB. (B) A correct AWB
for the scene. (C) Results of the camera’s manual presets.
Bottom row: (D)-(F) are post-capture edits of sRGB image
(A)’s WB. (D) Result from the recent KNN-WB correction
method [3]. (E) Our result to correct the WB in (A). (F)
Our results to produce different outputs corresponding to
the camera’s presets.
standard RGB (sRGB) encoding. While the goal of WB
is intended to normalize the effect of the scene’s illumination, ISPs often incorporate aesthetic considerations in their
color rendering based on photographic preferences. Such
preferences do not always conform to the white light assumption and can vary based on different factors, such as
cultural preference and scene content [8, 13, 22, 31].
Most digital cameras provide an option to adjust the WB
settings during image capturing. However, once the WB
setting has been selected and the image is fully processed
by the ISP to its final sRGB encoding it becomes challenging to perform WB editing without access to the original
11397

