Towards Visually Explaining Variational Autoencoders
Wenqian Liu1∗ , Runze Li2∗ , Meng Zheng3 , Srikrishna Karanam4 , Ziyan Wu4 ,
Bir Bhanu2 , Richard J. Radke3 , and Octavia Camps1
1
Northeastern University, Boston MA 2 University of California Riverside, Riverside CA
3
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy NY 4 United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge MA
liu.wenqi@husky.neu.edu,rli047@ucr.edu,zhengm3@rpi.edu,{first.last}@united-imaging.com
bhanu@cris.ucr.edu,rjradke@ecse.rpi.edu,camps@ece.neu.edu

Sample A

Abstract
Recent advances in convolutional neural network (CNN)
model interpretability have led to impressive progress in visualizing and understanding model predictions. In particular, gradient-based visual attention methods have driven
much recent effort in using visual attention maps as a means
for visual explanations. A key problem, however, is these
methods are designed for classification and categorization
tasks, and their extension to explaining generative models,
e.g., variational autoencoders (VAE) is not trivial. In this
work, we take a step towards bridging this crucial gap,
proposing the first technique to visually explain VAEs by
means of gradient-based attention. We present methods to
generate visual attention from the learned latent space, and
also demonstrate such attention explanations serve more
than just explaining VAE predictions. We show how these
attention maps can be used to localize anomalies in images,
demonstrating state-of-the-art performance on the MVTecAD dataset. We also show how they can be infused into
model training, helping bootstrap the VAE into learning improved latent space disentanglement, demonstrated on the
Dsprites dataset.

1. Introduction
Dramatic progress in computer vision, driven by deep
learning [22, 13, 15], has led to widespread adoption of
the associated algorithms in real-world tasks, including
healthcare, robotics, and autonomous driving [17, 50, 23]
among others. Applications in many such safety-critical
and consumer-focusing areas demand a clear understanding of the reasoning behind an algorithm’s predictions, in
addition certainly to robustness and performance guarantees. Consequently, there has been substantial recent interest in devising ways to understand and explain the underly∗ Wenqian Liu and Runze Li contributed equally to this work.

Sample B

Sample C

Explanation

z1
z2
z3
Figure 1. We propose to visually explain variational autoencoders.
Each element in the latent vector (here z1 − z3 ) can be explained
separately with our attention maps, visualizing consistent explanations across different samples.

ing why driving the output what.
Following the work of Zeiler and Fergus [40], much recent effort has been expended in developing ways to visualize feature activations in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). One line of work that has seen increasing adoption involves network attention [47, 33], typically visualized
by means of attention maps that highlight feature regions
considered (by the trained model) to be important for satisfying the training criterion. Given a trained CNN model,
these techniques are able to generate attention maps that visualize where a certain object, e.g., a cat, is in the image,
helping explain why this image is classified as belonging to
the cat category. Some extensions [24, 36] provide ways to
use the generated attention maps as part of trainable constraints that are enforced during model training, showing
improved model generalizability as well as visual explainability. While Zheng et al. [45] used a classification module
to show how one can generate a pair of such attention maps
to explain why two images of people are similar/dissimilar,

8642

