Detecting Attended Visual Targets in Video
Eunji Chong1
1

Yongxin Wang2

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

Nataniel Ruiz3

Carnegie Mellon University

James M. Rehg1
3

Boston University

{eunjichong,rehg}@gatech.edu, yongxinw@andrew.cmu.edu, nruiz9@bu.edu

https://github.com/ejcgt/attention-target-detection

Figure 1: Visual attention target detection over time. We propose to solve the problem of identifying gaze targets in video.
The goal of this problem is to predict the location of visually attended region (circle) in every frame, given a track of an
individual’s head (bounding box). It includes the cases where such target is out of frame (row-col: 1-2, 1-3, 2-1), in which
case the model should correctly infer its absence.

Abstract
We address the problem of detecting attention targets in
video. Our goal is to identify where each person in each
frame of a video is looking, and correctly handle the case
where the gaze target is out-of-frame. Our novel architecture models the dynamic interaction between the scene
and head features and infers time-varying attention targets.
We introduce a new annotated dataset, VideoAttentionTarget, containing complex and dynamic patterns of real-world
gaze behavior. Our experiments show that our model can effectively infer dynamic attention in videos. In addition, we
apply our predicted attention maps to two social gaze behavior recognition tasks, and show that the resulting classifiers significantly outperform existing methods. We achieve
state-of-the-art performance on three datasets: GazeFollow
(static images), VideoAttentionTarget (videos), and VideoCoAtt (videos), and obtain the first results for automatically
classifying clinically-relevant gaze behavior without wearable cameras or eye trackers.

1. Introduction
Gaze behavior is a critically-important aspect of human
social behavior, visual navigation, and interaction with the
3D environment [26, 27]. While monitor-based and wear-

able eye trackers are widely-available, they are not sufficient to support the large-scale collection of naturalistic
gaze data in contexts such as face-to-face social interactions
or object manipulation in 3D environments. Wearable eye
trackers are burdensome to participants and bring issues of
calibration, compliance, cost, and battery life.
Recent works have demonstrated the ability to estimate
the gaze target directly from images, with the potential to
greatly increase the scalability of naturalistic gaze measurement. A key step in this direction was the work by Recasens et al. [44], which demonstrated the ability to detect the attention target of each person within a single image. This approach was extended in [11] to handle the
case of out-of-frame gaze targets. Other related works include [45, 48, 28, 54, 18]. These approaches are attractive
because they can leverage head pose features, as well as the
saliency of potential gaze targets, in order to resolve ambiguities in gaze estimation.
This paper develops a spatiotemporal approach to gaze
target prediction which models the dynamics of gaze from
video data. Fig 1 illustrates our goal: For each person in
each video frame we estimate where they are looking, including the correct treatment of out-of-frame gaze targets.
By identifying the visually-attended region in every frame,
our method produces a dense measurement of a person’s
natural gaze behavior. Furthermore, this approach it has the

5396

