Mitigating Bias in Face Recognition using Skewness-Aware Reinforcement
Learning
Mei Wang, Weihong Deng*
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{wangmei1, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Racial equality is an important theme of international
human rights law, but it has been largely obscured when the
overall face recognition accuracy is pursued blindly. More
facts indicate racial bias indeed degrades the fairness of
recognition system and the error rates on non-Caucasians
are usually much higher than Caucasians. To encourage
fairness, we introduce the idea of adaptive margin to learn
balanced performance for different races based on large
margin losses. A reinforcement learning based race balance network (RL-RBN) is proposed. We formulate the process of finding the optimal margins for non-Caucasians as
a Markov decision process and employ deep Q-learning to
learn policies for an agent to select appropriate margin by
approximating the Q-value function. Guided by the agent, the skewness of feature scatter between races can be reduced. Besides, we provide two ethnicity aware training
datasets, called BUPT-Globalface and BUPT-Balancedface
dataset, which can be utilized to study racial bias from both
data and algorithm aspects. Extensive experiments on RFW
database show that RL-RBN successfully mitigates racial
bias and learns more balanced performance.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the emergence of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) [26, 43, 46, 19, 20], the performance of
face recognition (FR) [49, 45, 42] is dramatically boosted.
However, as its wider and wider application, its potential
for unfairness is raising alarm [8, 5, 1, 2]. For instance,
according to [14], a year-long research investigation across
100 police departments revealed that African-American individuals are more likely to be stopped by law enforcement.
As stated in the Universal Declaration Human Rights [7],
all are equal before the law and are entitled without any
discrimination to equal protection. Obviously, the development and deployment of fair and unbiased FR systems is
crucial to prevent any unintended side effects and to ensure

the long-term acceptance of these FR algorithms. Previous
studies [50, 54] have shown that racial bias comes on both
data and algorithm aspects. Unfortunately, there are still no
sufficient research efforts on the fairness of face recognition algorithms [38, 39, 13], as well as building balanced
databases [50], in the literature.
Adaptive margin
for Caucasians

Action

Reward
Fairness

Adaptive margin
for African

Guide
Feedback

Race aware training datasets

..

Debiased algorithms

Figure 1. We provide two ethnicity aware training datasets and a
debiased algorithm to reduce bias from data and algorithm aspects.

A major driver of bias in face recognition, as well as
other AI tasks, is the training data. Deep face recognition
networks are often trained on large-scale training datasets,
such as CASIA-WebFace [52], VGGFace2 [10] and MSCeleb-1M [17], which are typically constructed by scraping
websites like Google Images. Such data collecting methods can unintentionally produce data that encode gender,
ethnic and culture biases. Thus, social awareness must be
brought to the building of datasets for training. In this work,
we take steps to ensure such datasets are diverse and do
not under represent particular groups by constructing two
new training datasets, i.e. BUPT-Globalface and BUPTBalancedface dataset. One is built up according to the population ratio of ethnicity in the world, and the other strictly
balances the number of samples in ethnicity.
Another source of bias can be traced to the algorithms themselves. The state-of-the-art (SOTA) face recognition
methods, such as Sphereface [30], Cosface [48] and Arcface
[12], apply a margin between classes to maximize overall
prediction accuracy for the training data. If a specific group
of faces appears more frequently than others in the training
data, the method will optimize for those individuals because

9322

