Accurate Estimation of Body Height from a Single Depth Image
via a Four-Stage Developing Network
Fukun Yin*
Shizhe Zhou*
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,
Hunan University, Changsha, China
* joint first authors:

yfk@hnu.edu.cn, shizhe@hnu.edu.cn (corresponding author)

Abstract
Non-contact measurement of human body height can be
very difficult under some circumstances. In this paper we
address the problem of accurately estimating the height of
a person with arbitrary postures from a single depth image.
By introducing a novel part-based intermediate representation plus a four-stage increasingly complex deep neural
network, we manage to achieve significantly higher accuracy than previous methods. We first describe the human body
in the form of a segmentation of human torso as four nearly
rigid parts and then predict their lengths respectively by 3
CNNs. Instead of directly adding the lengths of these parts
together, we further construct another independent developing CNN that combines the intermediate representation,
part lengths and depth information together to finally predict the body height results.Here we develop an increasingly
complex network architecture and adopt a hybrid pooling to
optimize training process. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first method that estimates height only from a single
depth image. In experiments our average accuracy reaches
at 99.1% for people in various positions and postures.

1. Introduction
In the ﬁeld of three-dimensional reconstruction, medical
treatment, clothes sizing, etc., human height data is indispensable. In most of the cases, we will require the tested
person to stand up straight, and then use a meter or other
tools to measure the height, which will consume a lot of
time and manpower. Especially in actual application, it will
be very hard to measure the height if we lack the measuring tools or if the measured person is a child or is injured
who cannot stand up straight. Our method can effectively
solve these problems as it only needs a single depth image
and then outputs reliable results with an average accuracy of
99.1% in milliseconds, saving a lot of manpower and time.
More importantly, we do not require the measured person to

stand in a ﬁxed place or a standard posture. They can stand
in various postures such as walking, bending, sitting, etc.,
within a valid range that the depth camera can collect.
We propose a novel method for estimating human body
height from a single depth image. We ﬁrst use a Kinect [32]
to capture an RGB-D image, but discard its color data and
only use the depth image to estimate the height, because
we ﬁnd the prediction result that only using depth image
is better than using RGB or RGB-D image. Secondly, we
segment the human torso from the depth image by using
FCN [25]. In order to make the edge information more accurate, we enhance the depth image using high-frequency
information. After obtaining the torso image, we propose a
novel part-based intermediate representation. The torso image and depth image are input to the same network architecture to get the body parts segmentation that the human torso is divided into four local parts: head, upper body, thigh
and calf. We verify that using this intermediate representation approach can signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of
estimation. After that, we modify the fully connected layer
of VGG16 [35] to make it more adaptable to our problem.
Then the body parts segmentation and depth information are
entered into this network to get intermediate estimation of
lengths of the four body parts. After obtaining the intermediate representation above, we design a novel network
architecture for the ﬁnal height prediction.
Even though complex neural networks have very long
training time, large number of parameters, and easy to overﬁt [6][15][20][30], generally, they can ﬁt the data better
than the shallow neural network and the prediction may be
more accurate. So we propose an increasingly complex
deep neural network which we called developing network
architecture. At the beginning of the network, we only use
a small number of convolutional layers to train, then output the predicted values through the fully connected layer.
When the network basically converges, we add new convolutional layers, and continue to train the network. Repeating
this process until the network can accurately estimate. Experiments show that the accuracy of network trained by this

8267

