Multi-Dimensional Pruning: A Unified Framework for Model Compression
Jinyang Guo
Wanli Ouyang
Dong Xu
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
{jinyang.guo,wanli.ouyang,dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
In this work, we propose a unified model compression
framework called Multi-Dimensional Pruning (MDP) to simultaneously compress the convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) on multiple dimensions. In contrast to the existing
model compression methods that only aim to reduce the redundancy along either the spatial/spatial-temporal dimension (e.g., spatial dimension for 2D CNNs, spatial and temporal dimensions for 3D CNNs) or the channel dimension,
our newly proposed approach can simultaneously reduce
the spatial/spatial-temporal and the channel redundancies
for CNNs. Specifically, in order to reduce the redundancy
along the spatial/spatial-temporal dimension, we downsample the input tensor of a convolutional layer, in which the
scaling factor for the downsampling operation is adaptively
selected by our approach. After the convolution operation,
the output tensor is upsampled to the original size to ensure the unchanged input size for the subsequent CNN layers. To reduce the channel-wise redundancy, we introduce a
gate for each channel of the output tensor as its importance
score, in which the gate value is automatically learned. The
channels with small importance scores will be removed after the model compression process. Our comprehensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that our
MDP framework outperforms the existing methods when
pruning both 2D CNNs and 3D CNNs.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) for various computer vision applications, several
model compression technologies were developed (see Sec.
2 for more details) to deploy CNNs on resource constrained
platforms. Among these techniques, the channel pruning
methods [8, 23, 38] aim to reduce the redundancy along the
channel dimension of CNNs. However, substantial redundancy also exists on the spatial/spatial-temporal dimension
of CNNs (i.e., spatial dimension for 2D CNNs, spatial and
temporal dimensions for 3D CNNs), which is not considered by the existing channel pruning methods.
Figure 1(a) shows the output feature maps of four con-

(a)

Downsampling

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Feature maps of four consecutive frames generated from the output tensor of the first convolutional layer
(the C3D model [31] is used for illustration). The hand position of the person is mostly identical in these frames. (b)
The downsampled tensor, in which the information is almost the same as the original output tensor.
secutive frames generated from the output tensor of the first
convolutional layer in the C3D model [31]. This figure
shows the scenario that a person is diving, with the spatial
resolution of 112 × 112 per frame. From Figure 1(a), we
notice that there is minimal information in the background
(the blue part) and the person (the red part) is mostly identical in the four frames, which indicates that the redundancies
in CNNs also exist along the spatial and temporal dimensions. We downsample this output tensor on both spatial
and temporal dimensions. As shown in Figure 1(b), after downsampling, the spatial resolution of each frame is
halved (i.e., from 112 × 112 to 56 × 56) and four consecutive frames are reduced to two frames. The information in
Figure 1(b) is almost the same as Figure 1(a) and we can
still recognize that the person is diving after the downsampling operation, which indicates that the spatial-temporal
redundancy (STR) can be reduced with minimal information loss by downsampling the tensors in CNNs.
In order to reduce the redundancies along multiple dimensions, one can perform different model compression
algorithms in a step-by-step fashion by firstly pruning the
channels and then reducing the STR. However, this solution
is often sub-optimal because the dependency from different
pruning stages is not well explored in the step-by-step pruning process. For exmaple, if we prune the channels in the
first step and then reduce the STR in the next step, the chan11508

