Cross-domain Object Detection through Coarse-to-Fine Feature Adaptation
Yangtao Zheng1, 2, 3 Di Huang1, 2, 3∗ Songtao Liu1, 2, 3 Yunhong Wang1, 3
1
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{ytzheng,dhuang,liusongtao,yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed great progress in deep
learning based object detection. However, due to the domain shift problem, applying off-the-shelf detectors to an
unseen domain leads to significant performance drop. To
address such an issue, this paper proposes a novel coarseto-fine feature adaptation approach to cross-domain object detection. At the coarse-grained stage, different from
the rough image-level or instance-level feature alignment
used in the literature, foreground regions are extracted by
adopting the attention mechanism, and aligned according
to their marginal distributions via multi-layer adversarial
learning in the common feature space. At the fine-grained
stage, we conduct conditional distribution alignment of
foregrounds by minimizing the distance of global prototypes
with the same category but from different domains. Thanks
to this coarse-to-fine feature adaptation, domain knowledge
in foreground regions can be effectively transferred. Extensive experiments are carried out in various cross-domain
detection scenarios. The results are state-of-the-art, which
demonstrate the broad applicability and effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) based methods have significantly improved the accuracies of plenty of computer vision tasks [21, 38, 49].
These remarkable gains often rely on large-scale benchmarks, such as ImageNet [11] and MS COCO [35]. Due to
a phenomenon known as domain shift or dataset bias [59],
current CNN models suffer from performance degradation
when they are directly applied to novel scenes. In practice,
we are able to alleviate such an impact by building a taskspecific dataset that covers sufficiently diverse samples. Unfortunately, it is rather expensive and time-consuming to an∗ corresponding author

Source Domain

ARTAASD
ARTAASD

Adapted Domain

Target Domain
Attention-based
Region Transfer (ART)
source sample

target sample

Prototype-based
Semantic Alignment (PSA)
background

foregrounds

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed coarse-to-fine feature adaptation approach. It consists of two components, i.e., Attention-based
Region Transfer (ART) and Prototype-based Semantic Alignment
(PSA). The ART module figures out foregrounds from entire images in different domains and then aligns the marginal distributions on them. Further, the PSA module builds the prototype for
each category to achieve semantic alignment. (Best viewed in
color.)

notate a large number of high-quality ground truths.
To address this dilemma, one promising way is to introduce Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) to transfer essential knowledge from an off-the-shelf labeled domain (referred to as the source domain) to a related unseen but unlabeled one (the target domain) [44]. Recently,
UDA methods have been greatly advanced by deep learning
techniques, and they mostly focus on generating domaininvariant deep representation by reducing cross-domain discrepancy (e.g. Maximum Mean Discrepancy [20] or Hdivergence [1]), which have proved very competent at image classification [40, 15, 51, 12, 27] and semantic segmentation [23, 42, 64, 6]. Compared to them, object detection
is more complex, which is required to locate and classify all
instances of different objects within images; therefore, how
to effectively adapt a detector is indeed a challenging issue.
In the literature, there are many solutions tackling this
problem, including Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) based
[4], pixel-level adaptation based [31, 25, 50], and feature-

13766

