Norm-Aware Embedding for Efficient Person Search
Di Chen1,3 , Shanshan Zhang1∗, Jian Yang1,2∗ , Bernt Schiele 3
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2

Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

{dichen, shanshan.zhang, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, {dichen, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Person Search is a practically relevant task that aims to
jointly solve Person Detection and Person Re-identification
(re-ID). Specifically, it requires to find and locate all instances with the same identity as the query person in a set
of panoramic gallery images. One major challenge comes
from the contradictory goals of the two sub-tasks, i.e., person detection focuses on finding the commonness of all persons while person re-ID handles the differences among multiple identities. Therefore, it is crucial to reconcile the relationship between the two sub-tasks in a joint person search
model. To this end, we present a novel approach called
Norm-Aware Embedding to disentangle the person embedding into norm and angle for detection and re-ID respectively, allowing for both effective and efficient multi-task
training. We further extend the proposal-level person embedding to pixel-level, whose discrimination ability is less
affected by misalignment. We outperform other one-step
methods by a large margin and achieve comparable performance to two-step methods on both CUHK-SYSU and PRW.
Also, our method is easy to train and resource-friendly, running at 12 fps on a single GPU.

1. Introduction
In visual surveillance systems, the most fundamental
problems are 1) how to locate persons within images, and
2) how to determine, if a query person is present in a particular set of images, typically across different cameras.
The above two problems are usually investigated as the two
independent tasks of Pedestrian Detection and Person Reidentification (re-ID). However, in practical applications, it
is favorable to solve them in a joint framework, not only for
convenience and high efficiency, but also for better performance. The task of Person Search, as introduced in [46],
∗ Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration on how person and background representations are scattered in the embedding space. Black arrows denote background while colorful ones denote persons with different
identities. Gray surfaces are the decision boundary for person and
background. (a) For L2 normalized embeddings, the inter-class
angle distances for different persons are squeezed by backgrounds.
(b) Norm-aware embeddings separate persons and background by
norms and discriminate person identities by angles, thus the constrain on inter-class distances is relaxed.

has the goal to retrieve a query person from a gallery of
uncropped images captured by different cameras. Person
search inherits difficulties from both re-ID and detection,
e.g. viewpoint and illumination variance, cluttered background, occlusion, changing poses, etc., and is thus more
challenging than either of the two tasks alone.
A standard way to address person search is to use a twostep strategy, i.e., cascading a pedestrian detector and a reID feature extractor trained separately (e.g. [61, 3, 21, 16]).
All candidate persons are cropped from the gallery images
according to the detector, and fed into a standard person reID model. In contrast, others propose to share the backbone
network between detection and re-ID [44, 42, 26, 2, 30, 47].
Given an uncropped image, these models output bounding
box coordinates and the corresponding L2 normalized identity embeddings for all the persons within. These works extend e.g. Faster R-CNN [34] by stacking an additional fully-

12615

