UC-Net: Uncertainty Inspired RGB-D Saliency Detection
via Conditional Variational Autoencoders
3

Jing Zhang1,4,5 Deng-Ping Fan2,6,∗ Yuchao Dai Saeed Anwar1,5
Fatemeh Sadat Saleh1,4 Tong Zhang1 Nick Barnes1
1
Australian National University 2 CS, Nankai University 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
4
ACRV 5 Data61 6 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the first framework (UCNet) to employ uncertainty for RGB-D saliency detection
by learning from the data labeling process. Existing RGBD saliency detection methods treat the saliency detection
task as a point estimation problem, and produce a single
saliency map following a deterministic learning pipeline.
Inspired by the saliency data labeling process, we propose
probabilistic RGB-D saliency detection network via conditional variational autoencoders to model human annotation uncertainty and generate multiple saliency maps for
each input image by sampling in the latent space. With the
proposed saliency consensus process, we are able to generate an accurate saliency map based on these multiple predictions. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on six
challenging benchmark datasets against 18 competing algorithms demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
learning the distribution of saliency maps, leading to a new
state-of-the-art in RGB-D saliency detection1 .

1. Introduction
Object-level visual saliency detection involves separating the most conspicuous objects that attract humans from
the background [27, 2, 55, 63, 38, 29, 62]. Recently, visual saliency detection from RGB-D images have attracted
lots of interest due to the importance of depth information
in human vision system and the popularity of depth sensing
technologies [61, 64]. Given a pair of RGB-D images, the
task of RGB-D saliency detection aims to predict a saliency
map by exploring the complementary information between
color image and depth data.
The de-facto standard for RGB-D saliency detection is
to train a deep neural network using ground truth (GT)
∗ Corresponding author: Deng-Ping Fan (dengpfan@gmail.com)
1 Our code is publicly available at:
JingZhang617/UCNet.

https://github.com/

Image

Depth

GT

Ours (1)

Ours (2)

Figure 1. Provided GT compared with UC-Net (ours) predicted
saliency maps. For images with a single salient object (1 st row),
we can produce consistent prediction. When multiple salient objects exist (2nd row), we can produce diverse predictions.

saliency maps provided by the corresponding benchmark
datasets, where the GT saliency maps are obtained through
human consensus or by the dataset creators [18]. Building
upon large scale RGB-D datasets, deep convolutional neural
network based models [21, 61, 6, 24] have made profound
progress in learning the mapping from an RGB-D image
pair to the corresponding GT saliency map. Considering the
progress for RGB-D saliency detection under this pipeline,
in this paper, we would like to argue that this pipeline fails
to capture the uncertainty in labeling the GT saliency maps.
According to research in human visual perception [33],
visual saliency detection is subjective to some extent. Each
person could have specific preferences in labeling the
saliency map (which has been previous discussed in userspecific saliency detection [26]). Existing approaches to
RGB-D saliency detection treat saliency detection as a point
estimation problem, and produce a single saliency map for
each input image pair following a deterministic learning
pipeline, which fails to capture the stochastic characteristic of saliency, and may lead to a partisan saliency model as
shown in second row of Fig. 1. Instead of obtaining only
a single saliency prediction (point estimation), we are interested in how the network produces multiple predictions
(distribution estimation), which are then processed further
to generate a single prediction in a similar way to how the
GT saliency maps are created.
In this paper, inspired by human perceptual uncertainty,

8582

