NMS by Representative Region: Towards Crowded Pedestrian Detection by
Proposal Pairing
Xin Huang1∗, Zheng Ge1∗ , Zequn Jie2 , Osamu Yoshie1
1
Waseda University, 2 Tencent AI Lab
koushin@toki.waseda.jp;jokerzz@fuji.waseda.jp;zequn.nus@gmail.com;yoshie@waseda.jp

Abstract
Although significant progress has been made in pedestrian detection recently, pedestrian detection in crowded
scenes is still challenging. The heavy occlusion between
pedestrians imposes great challenges to the standard NonMaximum Suppression (NMS). A relative low threshold of
intersection over union (IoU) leads to missing highly overlapped pedestrians, while a higher one brings in plenty of
false positives. To avoid such a dilemma, this paper proposes a novel Representative Region NMS (R2 NMS) approach leveraging the less occluded visible parts, effectively
removing the redundant boxes without bringing in many
false positives. To acquire the visible parts, a novel PairedBox Model (PBM) is proposed to simultaneously predict
the full and visible boxes of a pedestrian. The full and
visible boxes constitute a pair serving as the sample unit
of the model, thus guaranteeing a strong correspondence
between the two boxes throughout the detection pipeline.
Moreover, convenient feature integration of the two boxes is
allowed for the better performance on both full and visible
pedestrian detection tasks. Experiments on the challenging
CrowdHuman [20] and CityPersons [24] benchmarks sufficiently validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
on pedestrian detection in the crowded situation.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a critical component of various
real-world applications such as self-driving cars, and intelligent video surveillance. In recent years, the performance of
pedestrian detectors has been rapidly improved with the rise
of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 7, 8].
However, pedestrian detection in the occluded situation remains challenging. Occlusion can be usually categorized
into inter-class occlusion and intra-class occlusion. In interclass occlusion, part of the human body is shielded by background objects such as pillar, car, trash box, and others. The
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Illustration of R2 NMS. The image on the left shows two
detected results before NMS. Red BBoxes are full body predictions and green BBoxes are visible body predictions. Two small
images on the right show the final results which is processed by
original NMS and R2 NMS. The red solid BBox represents the preserved BBoxes while red dotted BBox indicates the reduced true
positive BBox. Arrows represent the IoU calculation. The IoU
of their full body prediction is 0.63 while the IoU of their visible
body is only 0.18. Thus, original NMS will reduce the red dotted
BBox but R2 NMS is able to keep it.

feature of background objects confuses the model, leading
to a high missing rate in this situation. A common solution
to alleviate the inter-class occlusion is modeling based on
instance parts [14, 27, 15]. Visible parts can provide more
discriminative and confident cues to guide the full-body detector. In intra-class occlusion, pedestrians have large overlaps with each other, so features of different instances will
make detectors difficult to discriminate instance boundaries.
As a result, detectors may give a lot of positives in overlapped area mistakenly. To solve this problem, Repulsion
Loss [23] and AggLoss [25] propose additional penalties to
the BBoxes which appear in the middle of the two persons.
The proposals are forced to locate firmly and compactly to
the ground-truth objects.
However, even though the detectors succeed in identifying different human instances in a crowd, the highly
overlapped results may also be suppressed by the postprocessing of non-maximum suppression (NMS). This
makes the current pedestrian detectors trapped in a
dilemma: a lower threshold of intersection over union (IoU)
resulting in the miss of highly overlapped pedestrians while

10750

