Learning Geocentric Object Pose in Oblique Monocular Images
Gordon Christie1,∗

Rodrigo Rene Rai Munoz Abujder1,∗
Kevin Foster1
Shea Hagstrom1
Gregory D. Hager2
Myron Z. Brown1
1
The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory 2 The Johns Hopkins University
{gordon.christie,rai.munoz,kevin.foster, shea.hagstrom, myron.brown}@jhuapl.edu
hager@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
An object’s geocentric pose, defined as the height above
ground and orientation with respect to gravity, is a powerful representation of real-world structure for object detection, segmentation, and localization tasks using RGBD
images. For close-range vision tasks, height and orientation have been derived directly from stereo-computed depth
and more recently from monocular depth predicted by deep
networks. For long-range vision tasks such as Earth observation, depth cannot be reliably estimated with monocular
images. Inspired by recent work in monocular height above
ground prediction and optical flow prediction from static
images, we develop an encoding of geocentric pose to address this challenge and train a deep network to compute
the representation densely, supervised by publicly available
airborne lidar. We exploit these attributes to rectify oblique
images and remove observed object parallax to dramatically improve the accuracy of localization and to enable
accurate alignment of multiple images taken from very different oblique viewpoints. We demonstrate the value of our
approach by extending two large-scale public datasets for
semantic segmentation in oblique satellite images. All of
our data and code are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of rectifying oblique
monocular images from overhead cameras to remove observed object parallax with respect to ground, enabling accurate object localization for Earth observation tasks including semantic mapping [6], map alignment [32, 3], change
detection [7], and vision-aided navigation [11]. Current
state-of-the-art methods for these tasks focus on near-nadir
images without the confounding effect of parallax; however,
the vast majority of overhead imagery is oblique. For re1 https://github.com/pubgeo/monocular-geocentric-pose

* denotes equal contribution

Figure 1: Our method takes monocular RGB images, predicts object height (meters) and geocentric pose, and rectifies height to geospatially accurate 3D models suitable for
reliable alignment by a conventional method.
sponse to natural disasters and other dynamic world events,
often only oblique images can be made available in a timely
manner. The ability to rectify oblique monocular images to
remove parallax will enable a dramatic increase in utility of
these methods to address real-world problems.
To address this very challenging problem, we first draw
inspiration from Gupta et al. [12] who proposed geocentric
pose, or height above ground and orientation with respect
to gravity, as a powerful representation to impose real-world
structure on object detection, segmentation, and localization
tasks using RGBD images. Hand-crafted features based on
114512

