Online Joint Multi-Metric Adaptation from Frequent Sharing-Subset Mining for
Person Re-Identification

1

Jiahuan Zhou1 , Bing Su2 , Ying Wu1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, US
2
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Science, China
zhoujh09@gmail.com, subingats@gmail.com, yingwu@northwestern.edu

Hard Gallery Distractors

Abstract
Person Re-IDentification (P-RID), as an instance-level
recognition problem, still remains challenging in computer
vision community. Many P-RID works aim to learn faithful and discriminative features/metrics from offline training data and directly use them for the unseen online testing
data. However, their performance is largely limited due to
the severe data shifting issue between training and testing
data. Therefore, we propose an online joint multi-metric
adaptation model to adapt the offline learned P-RID models for the online data by learning a series of metrics for all
the sharing-subsets. Each sharing-subset is obtained from
the proposed novel frequent sharing-subset mining module
and contains a group of testing samples which share strong
visual similarity relationships to each other. Unlike existing
online P-RID methods, our model simultaneously takes both
the sample-specific discriminant and the set-based visual
similarity among testing samples into consideration so that
the adapted multiple metrics can refine the discriminant of
all the given testing samples jointly via a multi-kernel late
fusion framework. Our proposed model is generally suitable to any offline learned P-RID baselines for online boosting, the performance improvement by our model is not only
verified by extensive experiments on several widely-used
P-RID benchmarks (CUHK03, Market1501, DukeMTMCreID and MSMT17) and state-of-the-art P-RID baselines
but also guaranteed by the provided in-depth theoretical
analyses.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (P-RID), aiming to retrieve the
same identity images of a query probe from a gallery set,
is not only an attractive research task in computer vision
community, but also a critical link to the practical applications such as public camera surveillance. A popular solution to P-RID is to perform supervised feature/metric learn-

Training-Testing Data
Distribution Shifting

True Match

Ori

RR
query
Ours
Rank1

Rank10

Figure 1. The normalized pair-wise distance distributions of
both training and testing samples based on the well-trained
HA-CNN model on Market1501 dataset demonstrate the severe
training-testing data distribution shifting issue, where the extremely challenging hard negative distractors (in blue box) will
significantly influence the retrieval accuracy (the Original top-10
retrieval results). Even using the state-of-the-art online re-ranking
method [45] (RR), the ground-truth (in red box) still has a lower
rank than the distractors. Our method succeeds in handling the
distractors so that the true-match is successfully re-ranked to the
top position in the list (Ours).

ing [2, 29, 18, 30, 6, 40, 12] from the offline training data,
then directly apply them to the online unsupervised testing
data for evaluation. However, due to the severe trainingtesting data distribution shifting (testing data are drawn
from totally different classes against the training data as
shown in Fig. 1) caused by large variations in visual appearance, human pose, camera viewpoint, illumination change,
and background clutter, the performance of offline learned
models is limited indeed.
The root of such a limited performance is its treatment
regardless of the information of online testing data themselves. So a straightforward solution is adapting the offline learned models for the online testing data to narrow the distribution gap. Recently, various online PRID methods are proposed which can be roughly categorized into two branches. The set-centric re-ranking approaches [35, 9, 43, 3, 1] focus on optimizing the ranking
list of queries based on the similarity relationships among
12909

