Graph-guided Architecture Search for Real-time Semantic Segmentation
Peiwen Lin1,∗
1

Peng Sun2,∗

Guangliang Cheng1

2

3

SenseTime Research

Zhejiang University

Sirui Xie3

Xi Li2,†

Jianping Shi1,†

University of California, Los Angeles

{linpeiwen,chengguangliang,shijianping}@sensetime.com
{sunpeng1996,xilizju}@zju.edu.cn

srxie@ucla.edu

Abstract
Designing a lightweight semantic segmentation network
often requires researchers to find a trade-off between performance and speed, which is always empirical due to
the limited interpretability of neural networks. In order
to release researchers from these tedious mechanical trials, we propose a Graph-guided Architecture Search (GAS)
pipeline to automatically search real-time semantic segmentation networks. Unlike previous works that use a simplified search space and stack a repeatable cell to form a
network, we introduce a novel search mechanism with a
new search space where a lightweight model can be effectively explored through the cell-level diversity and latencyoriented constraint. Specifically, to produce the cell-level
diversity, the cell-sharing constraint is eliminated through
the cell-independent manner. Then a graph convolution
network (GCN) is seamlessly integrated as a communication mechanism between cells. Finally, a latency-oriented
constraint is endowed into the search process to balance
the speed and performance. Extensive experiments on
Cityscapes and CamVid datasets demonstrate that GAS
achieves the new state-of-the-art trade-off between accuracy and speed. In particular, on Cityscapes dataset, GAS
achieves the new best performance of 73.5% mIoU with
speed of 108.4 FPS on Titan Xp.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental topic in computer vision, semantic
segmentation [26, 51, 9, 7] aims at predicting pixel-level
labels for images. Leveraging the strong ability of CNNs
[38, 18, 19, 12], many works have achieved remarkable
performance on public semantic segmentation benchmarks
[13, 15, 4]. To pursue higher accuracy, state-of-the-art models become increasingly larger and deeper, and thus require
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The inference speed and mIoU for different networks
on the Cityscapes test set with only fine training data. Our GAS
achieves the state-of-the-art trade-off between speed and performance. The Mark ∗ denotes the speed is remeasured on Titan Xp.
Best viewed in color.

high computational resources and large memory overhead,
which makes it difficult to deploy on resource-constrained
platforms, such as mobile devices, robotics, self-driving
cars, etc.
Recently, many researches have focused on designing
and improving CNN models with light computation cost
and satisfactory segmentation accuracy. For example, some
works [1, 34] reduce the computation cost via the pruning
algorithms, and ICNet [50] uses an image cascade network
to incorporate multi-resolution inputs. BiSeNet [47] and
DFANet [22] utilize a light-weight backbone to speed up,
and is equipped with a well-designed feature fusion or aggregation module to remedy the accuracy drop. To achieve
such design, researchers acquire expertise in architecture
design through enormous trial and error to carefully balance
the accuracy and resource-efficiency.
To design more effective segmentation networks, some

4203

