StyleRig: Rigging StyleGAN for 3D Control over Portrait Images
Ayush Tewari1 Mohamed Elgharib1 Gaurav Bharaj2 Florian Bernard1
Hans-Peter Seidel1 Patrick Pérez3 Michael Zollhöfer4 Christian Theobalt1
1

MPI Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

2

Technicolor

3

Valeo.ai

4

Stanford University

Figure 1: StyleRig allows for face rig-like control over StyleGAN generated portrait images, by translating semantic edits on
3D face meshes to the input space of StyleGAN.

Abstract
StyleGAN [18] generates photorealistic portrait images
of faces with eyes, teeth, hair and context (neck, shoulders,
background), but lacks a rig-like control over semantic face
parameters that are interpretable in 3D, such as face pose,
expressions, and scene illumination. Three-dimensional morphable face models (3DMMs) [10] on the other hand offer
control over the semantic parameters, but lack photorealism
when rendered and only model the face interior, not other
parts of a portrait image (hair, mouth interior, background).
We present the first method to provide a face rig-like control
over a pretrained and fixed StyleGAN via a 3DMM. A new
rigging network, RigNet is trained between the 3DMM’s
semantic parameters and StyleGAN’s input. The network
is trained in a self-supervised manner, without the need for
manual annotations. At test time, our method generates portrait images with the photorealism of StyleGAN and provides
explicit control over the 3D semantic parameters of the face.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic synthesis of portrait face images finds many
applications in several fields including special effects, extended reality, virtual worlds, and next-generation communication. During the content creation process for such applications, artist control over the face rig’s semantic parameters,
such as geometric identity, expressions, reflectance, or scene

illumination is desired. The computer vision and graphics communities have a rich history of modeling face rigs
[21, 25, 26, 31]. These models provide artist-friendly control (often called a face rig), while navigating the various
parameters of a morphable face model (3DMM) [3, 4]. Such
methods are often limited by the lack of training data, and
more importantly, lack of photorealism in the final rendering.
Through 3D face scanning techniques high-quality face
geometry datasets can be obtained [5, 21]. However, models derived from these datasets are bound by the diversity
of faces scanned and may limit the generalization over the
rich set of human faces’ semantic parameterization. Further, deep learning-based models trained on in-the-wild data
[31, 32, 35] also often rely on data-driven priors and other
forms of regularization obtained from scan-based datasets.
With respect to photorealism, perceptual losses recently
showed an improvement of face modeling quality [9, 35]
over existing methods. However, they still do not engender
photorealistic face renders. Mouth interiors, hair, or eyes,
let alone image background are often not modeled by such
approaches. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [14]
have lately achieved photorealism [15, 17], especially for
faces. Karras et al. [17] show that through a progressive
growth of GAN’s generator and discriminator, one can better stabilize and speed up training. When trained on the
CelebA-HQ [17] dataset this yields a remarkable level of
photorealism for faces. Their approach also shows how photorealistic face images of non-existent people can be sampled
from the learned GAN distribution. Building on Karras et

6142

