Novel View Synthesis of Dynamic Scenes with Globally Coherent Depths
from a Monocular Camera
Jae Shin Yoon† Kihwan Kim♯
†
University of Minnesota

Orazio Gallo♯

Hyun Soo Park†
♯
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz♯

Figure 1: Dynamic Scene View Synthesis: (Left) A dynamic scene is captured from a monocular camera from the locations
V0 to Vk . Each image captures people jumping at each time step (t = 0 to t = k). (Middle) A novel view from an arbitrary
location between V0 and V1 (denoted as an orange frame) is synthesized with the dynamic contents observed at the time
t = k. The estimated depth at Vk is shown in the inset. (Right) For the novel view (orange frame), we can also synthesize
the dynamic content that appeared across any views in different time (traces of the foreground in each time step are shown).
More results are shown in Sec. 5 and the supplementary document and video.

Abstract
This paper presents a new method to synthesize an image from arbitrary views and times given a collection of images of a dynamic scene. A key challenge for the novel view
synthesis arises from dynamic scene reconstruction where
epipolar geometry does not apply to the local motion of dynamic contents. To address this challenge, we propose to
combine the depth from single view (DSV) and the depth
from multi-view stereo (DMV), where DSV is complete, i.e.,
a depth is assigned to every pixel, yet view-variant in its
scale, while DMV is view-invariant yet incomplete. Our insight is that although its scale and quality are inconsistent
with other views, the depth estimation from a single view
can be used to reason about the globally coherent geometry
of dynamic contents. We cast this problem as learning to
correct the scale of DSV, and to refine each depth with locally consistent motions between views to form a coherent
depth estimation. We integrate these tasks into a depth fusion network in a self-supervised fashion. Given the fused
depth maps, we synthesize a photorealistic virtual view in a
specific location and time with our deep blending network
that completes the scene and renders the virtual view. We
evaluate our method of depth estimation and view synthesis on diverse real-world dynamic scenes and show the outstanding performance over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis [8] is one of the core tasks in computer vision and graphics, and has been used for many visual effects and content creation applications such as cinemagraph [4, 26], video stabilization [28, 21], and bullet
time visual effect [60]. In this paper, we focus on view synthesis of dynamic scenes observed from a moving monocular camera as shown in Figure 1. Until now, most of existing view synthesis methods are largely limited to static
scenes [8, 60, 9, 11, 56, 59] because they commonly rely on
geometric assumptions: in principle, dynamic visual content such as people, pets, and vehicles are considered outliers despite being a major focus in videography on social
media and otherwise.
Our problem shares the challenge of dynamic scene reconstruction: recovering the underlying 3D geometry of dynamic contents from a moving monocular camera is fundamentally ill-posed [33]. We address this challenge by leveraging the following complementary visual and motion cues.
(1) Multi-view images can be combined to reconstruct incomplete yet view-invariant static scene geometry1 , which
enables synthesizing a novel view image of static contents
in a geometrically consistent way.
(2) Relative depth predicted from a single image provides
view-variant [6] yet complete dynamic scene geometry,
which allows enforcing locally consistent 3D scene flow for
the foreground dynamic contents.
1 Its fixed scale chosen from SfM pipeline is consistent across different
views from initial triangulation [15].

5336

