Learning to Simulate Dynamic Environments with GameGAN
Seung Wook Kim1,2,3∗ Yuhao Zhou2† Jonah Philion1,2,3
Antonio Torralba4
Sanja Fidler1,2,3∗
1
2
3
4
NVIDIA
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
MIT
{seungwookk,jphilion,sfidler}@nvidia.com

henryzhou@cs.toronto.edu

torralba@mit.edu

Abstract
Simulation is a crucial component of any robotic system.
In order to simulate correctly, we need to write complex
rules of the environment: how dynamic agents behave, and
how the actions of each of the agents affect the behavior of
others. In this paper, we aim to learn a simulator by simply watching an agent interact with an environment. We
focus on graphics games as a proxy of the real environment.
We introduce GameGAN, a generative model that learns
to visually imitate a desired game by ingesting screenplay
and keyboard actions during training. Given a key pressed
by the agent, GameGAN “renders” the next screen using
a carefully designed generative adversarial network. Our
approach offers key advantages over existing work: we design a memory module that builds an internal map of the
environment, allowing for the agent to return to previously
visited locations with high visual consistency. In addition,
GameGAN is able to disentangle static and dynamic components within an image making the behavior of the model
more interpretable, and relevant for downstream tasks that
require explicit reasoning over dynamic elements. This enables many interesting applications such as swapping different components of the game to build new games that do
not exist. We will release the code, enabling human players
to play generated games with our GameGAN.

1. Introduction
Before deployment to the real world, an artificial agent
needs to undergo extensive testing in challenging simulated
environments. Designing good simulators is thus extremely
important. This is traditionally done by writing procedural
models to generate valid and diverse scenes, and complex
behavior trees that specify how each actor in the scene behaves and reacts to actions made by other actors, including
the ego agent. However, writing simulators that encompass
a large number of diverse scenarios is extremely time consuming and requires highly skilled graphics experts. Learn∗ Correspondence to {seungwookk,sfidler}@nvidia.com
† YZ worked on this project during his internship at NVIDIA.

Figure 1. If you look at the person on the left picture, you might think
she is playing Pacman of Toru Iwatani, but she is not! She is actually
playing with a GAN generated version of Pacman. In this paper, we introduce GameGAN that learns to reproduce games by just observing lots
of playing rounds. Moreover, our model can disentangle background from
dynamic objects, allowing us to create new games by swapping components as shown in the center and right images.

ing to simulate by simply observing the dynamics of the real
world is the most scaleable way going forward.
A plethora of existing work aims at learning behavior
models [2, 28, 16, 3]. However, these typically assume a
significant amount of supervision such as access to agents’
ground-truth trajectories. We aim to learn a simulator by
simply watching an agent interact with an environment. To
simplify the problem, we frame this as a 2D image generation problem. Given sequences of observed image frames
and the corresponding actions the agent took, we wish to
emulate image creation as if “rendered” from a real dynamic
environment that is reacting to the agent’s actions.
We focus on graphics games as a proxy of the real environment. Our goal is to replace the graphics engine at
test time, by visually imitating the game using a learned
model. This is a challenging problem: different games have
different number of components as well as different physical dynamics. Furthermore, many games require long-term
consistency in the environment. For example, imagine a
game where an agent navigates through a maze. When the
agent moves away and later returns to a location, it expects
the scene to look consistent with what it has encountered
before. In visual SLAM, detecting loop closure (returning
to a previous location) is already known to be challenging,
let alone generating one. Last but not least, both deterministic and stochastic behaviors typically exist in a game, and
modeling the latter is known to be particularly hard.
In this paper, we introduce GameGAN, a generative
11231

