DeepEMD: Few-Shot Image Classification with Differentiable Earth Mover’s
Distance and Structured Classifiers

1

Chi Zhang1 , Yujun Cai1 , Guosheng Lin1∗, Chunhua Shen2
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
The University of Adelaide, Australia
E-mail: chi007@e.ntu.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

…

Deep neural networks have achieved breakthroughs in a
wide range of visual understanding tasks in the past few
years. However, its data-driven nature often makes it struggle when no sufficiently large labeled training data is available. Meta learning, on the other hand, is proposed to learn
a model that can quickly generalize to new tasks with minor
adaption steps. One of the most well-studied test-bed for
meta-learning algorithms is few-shot image classification,
which aims to perform classification on new image categories with only a small amount of labeled training data.
To address this problem, a line of the previous litera-

…

1. Introduction

…

In this paper, we address the few-shot classification task
from a new perspective of optimal matching between image regions. We adopt the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD)
as a metric to compute a structural distance between dense
image representations to determine image relevance. The
EMD generates the optimal matching flows between structural elements that have the minimum matching cost, which
is used to represent the image distance for classification.
To generate the important weights of elements in the EMD
formulation, we design a cross-reference mechanism, which
can effectively minimize the impact caused by the cluttered
background and large intra-class appearance variations.
To handle k-shot classification, we propose to learn a structured fully connected layer that can directly classify dense
image representations with the EMD. Based on the implicit
function theorem, the EMD can be inserted as a layer into
the network for end-to-end training. We conduct comprehensive experiments to validate our algorithm and we set
new state-of-the-art performance on four popular few-shot
classification benchmarks, namely miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, Fewshot-CIFAR100 (FC100) and Caltech-UCSD
Birds-200-2011 (CUB).

…

Abstract

Figure 1: Illustration of using Earth Mover’s Distance for one-shot image
classification. Our algorithm uses optimal matching cost between image
regions to represent the image distance.

ture adopts metric-based methods [30,43,63,66,67,73] that
learn to represent image data in an appropriate feature space
and use a distance function to predict image labels. Following the formulation of the standard image classification
networks [16, 24, 62], metric-based methods often employ
a convolution neural network to learn image feature representations, but replace the fully connected layer with a
distance function, e.g., cosine distance and Euclidean distance. Such distance functions directly compute the distance between the embeddings of the test images and training images for classification, which bypasses the difficult
optimization problem in learning a classifier for the fewshot setting. The network is trained by sampling from a distribution of tasks, in the hopes of acquiring generalization
ability to unseen but similar tasks.
Despite their promising results, we observe that the cluttered background and large intra-class appearance variations may drive the image-level embeddings from the same
category far apart in a given metric space. Although the
problem can be alleviated by the neural network under the
fully supervised training, thanks to the activation functions
and abundant training images, it is almost inevitably am-

12203

