Towards High-Fidelity 3D Face Reconstruction from In-the-Wild Images Using
Graph Convolutional Networks
Tianjia Shao, Kun Zhou
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China

{linjiangke, yuanyi}@corp.netease.com

tianjiashao@gmail.com, kunzhou@acm.org

CNN + 3DMM

Jiangke Lin, Yi Yuan∗
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab
Hangzhou, China

Project

Face Shape and
Coarse Texture

Input Image

Fine Texture

Project to Image

Figure 1: From left to right: the input image, the reconstructed face shape and coarse texture, the fine detailed texture, and
the 3D face projected to the input image.

Abstract
3D Morphable Model (3DMM) based methods have
achieved great success in recovering 3D face shapes from
single-view images. However, the facial textures recovered
by such methods lack the fidelity as exhibited in the input images. Recent work demonstrates high-quality facial texture
recovering with generative networks trained from a largescale database of high-resolution UV maps of face textures,
which is hard to prepare and not publicly available. In
this paper, we introduce a method to reconstruct 3D facial shapes with high-fidelity textures from single-view images in-the-wild, without the need to capture a large-scale
face texture database. The main idea is to refine the initial texture generated by a 3DMM based method with facial details from the input image. To this end, we propose
to use graph convolutional networks to reconstruct the detailed colors for the mesh vertices instead of reconstructing
∗ Corresponding author

the UV map. Experiments show that our method can generate high-quality results and outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both qualitative and quantitative comparisons.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D facial shape and texture from a
single image is a vital problem in computer vision and
graphics. The seminal work of Blanz and Vetter [3] illustrates the power of the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM),
which is a statistical model of facial shape and texture built
from hundreds of scanned faces. The 3DMM and its variants [4, 6, 14, 18, 23] make it possible to recover the facial shape and albedo from a single image [11, 13, 31, 36].
However, the fidelity of the texture recovered from the
3DMM coefficients is still not high enough. It is mainly
because that the texture computed from 3DMM cannot capture the face details of the input image, especially for the

5891

