Robust Reference-based Super-Resolution
with Similarity-Aware Deformable Convolution
Gyumin Shim
Jinsun Park
In So Kweon
Robotics and Computer Vision Laboratory
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
{shimgyumin, zzangjinsun, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

Ref
GT

In this paper, we propose a novel and efficient reference feature extraction module referred to as the Similarity Search and Extraction Network (SSEN) for referencebased super-resolution (RefSR) tasks. The proposed module extracts aligned relevant features from a reference image to increase the performance over single image superresolution (SISR) methods. In contrast to conventional algorithms which utilize brute-force searches or optical flow
estimations, the proposed algorithm is end-to-end trainable
without any additional supervision or heavy computation,
predicting the best match with a single network forward operation. Moreover, the proposed module is aware of not
only the best matching position but also the relevancy of
the best match. This makes our algorithm substantially robust when irrelevant reference images are given, overcoming the major cause of the performance degradation when
using existing RefSR methods. Furthermore, our module
can be utilized for self-similarity SR if no reference image
is available. Experimental results demonstrate the superior
performance of the proposed algorithm compared to previous works both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution
(LR) image. Despite its notorious difficulty, SISR [34, 9]
has received substantial attention due to its importance and
practicality. As the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
has demonstrated its capability in various research areas,
including SISR, numerous deep learning-based SISR methods have been proposed [5, 14, 18] and have shown substantial performance improvements, especially with respect to
reconstruction accuracy. To achieve a high peak signal-tonoise ratio (PSNR), the optimization process is typically defined as the minimization of the mean-squared-error (MSE)
or the mean-absolute-error (MAE) between a ground truth

Ref
GT

Similarity:

XH

H

M

L

XL

Figure 1: RefSR results with reference images with varying
levels of similarity. XH, H, M, L, and XL denote very-high,
high, middle, low, and very-low similarity levels, respectively.
image and a predicted high-resolution image. This type of
algorithm has a critical limitation in that the generated solution is the mean or median of possible high-resolution images, with a lack of high-frequency details and a blurred
visual quality level.
In order to obtain high-resolution images with realistic textures, high-level feature similarity between the highresolution and reconstructed images is enforced. Perceptual
loss [12] or Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based
algorithms [17, 24] are proposed for better output perceptual quality levels in SR. Specifically, adversarial learning
helps a generator network to synthesize more realistic images while competing with a discriminator which attempts
to differentiate super-resolved and original HR images. Although those algorithms provide visually pleasing outputs,
they do not ensure an accurate reconstruction of the original
high-resolution image, and this leads to PSNR degradation.
18425

