MineGAN: effective knowledge transfer from GANs to target domains with few
images
Yaxing Wang1 , Abel Gonzalez-Garcia1 , David Berga1
Luis Herranz1 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,3 , Joost van de Weijer1
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 3 CVL, Linköping University, Sweden
{yaxing,agonzalez,dberga,lherranz,joost}@cvc.uab.es, fahad.khan@liu.se

Abstract
One of the attractive characteristics of deep neural networks is their ability to transfer knowledge obtained in one
domain to other related domains. As a result, high-quality
networks can be trained in domains with relatively little
training data. This property has been extensively studied
for discriminative networks but has received significantly
less attention for generative models. Given the often enormous effort required to train GANs, both computationally
as well as in the dataset collection, the re-use of pretrained
GANs is a desirable objective. We propose a novel knowledge transfer method for generative models based on mining the knowledge that is most beneficial to a specific target
domain, either from a single or multiple pretrained GANs.
This is done using a miner network that identifies which
part of the generative distribution of each pretrained GAN
outputs samples closest to the target domain. Mining effectively steers GAN sampling towards suitable regions of
the latent space, which facilitates the posterior finetuning
and avoids pathologies of other methods such as mode collapse and lack of flexibility. We perform experiments on
several complex datasets using various GAN architectures
(BigGAN, Progressive GAN) and show that the proposed
method, called MineGAN, effectively transfers knowledge
to domains with few target images, outperforming existing
methods. In addition, MineGAN can successfully transfer
knowledge from multiple pretrained GANs. Our code is
available at: https:// github.com/ yaxingwang/ MineGAN.

It is known that high-quality GANs require a significant
amount of training data and time. For example, Progressive
GANs [14] are trained on 30K images and are reported to
require a month of training on one NVIDIA Tesla V100.
Being able to exploit these high-quality pretrained models, not just to generate the distribution on which they are
trained, but also to combine them with other models and
adjust them to a target distribution is a desirable objective.
For instance, it might be desirable to only generate women
using a GAN trained to generate men and women alike. Alternatively, one may want to generate smiling people from
two pretrained generative models, one for men and one for
women. The focus of this paper is on performing these operations using only a small target set of images, and without
access to the large datasets used to pretrain the models.

1. Introduction

Transferring knowledge to domains with limited data has
been extensively studied for discriminative models [7, 26,
27, 32], enabling the re-use of high-quality networks. However, knowledge transfer for generative models has received
significantly less attention, possibly due to its great difficulty, especially when transferring to target domains with
few images. Only recently,Wang et al. [33] studied finetuning from a single pretrained generative model and showed
that it is beneficial for domains with scarce data. However, Noguchi and Harada [25] observed that this technique
leads to mode collapse. Instead, they proposed to reduce
the number of trainable parameters, and only finetune the
learnable parameters for the batch normalization (scale and
shift) of the generator. Despite being less prone to overfitting, their approach severely limits the flexibility of the
knowledge transfer.

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) can learn the
complex underlying distribution of image collections [10].
They have been shown to generate high-quality realistic images [14, 15, 4] and are used in many applications including
image manipulation [13, 38], style transfer [9], compression [31], and colorization [36].

In this paper, we address knowledge transfer by adapting a trained generative model for targeted image generation given a small sample of the target distribution. We introduce the process of mining of GANs. This is performed
by a miner network that transforms a multivariate normal
distribution into a distribution on the input space of the pre-

9332

