Exemplar Normalization for Learning Deep Representation
Ruimao Zhang1∗, Zhanglin Peng1∗ , Lingyun Wu1 , Zhen Li3,4 , Ping Luo2
1
SenseTime Research, 2 The University of Hong Kong,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), 4 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
{zhangruimao, pengzhanglin, wulingyun}@sensetime.com, lizhen@cuhk.edu.cn, pluo.lhi@gmail.com

Abstract
Normalization techniques are important in different advanced neural networks and different tasks. This work
investigates a novel dynamic learning-to-normalize (L2N)
problem by proposing Exemplar Normalization (EN), which
is able to learn different normalization methods for different convolutional layers and image samples of a deep network. EN significantly improves flexibility of the recently proposed switchable normalization (SN), which solves
a static L2N problem by linearly combining several normalizers in each normalization layer (the combination is
the same for all samples). Instead of directly employing a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to learn data-dependant parameters as conditional batch normalization (cBN) did, the
internal architecture of EN is carefully designed to stabilize
its optimization, leading to many appealing benefits. (1) EN
enables different convolutional layers, image samples, categories, benchmarks, and tasks to use different normalization methods, shedding light on analyzing them in a holistic
view. (2) EN is effective for various network architectures
and tasks. (3) It could replace any normalization layers in
a deep network and still produce stable model training. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of EN in
wide spectrum of tasks including image recognition, noisy
label learning, and semantic segmentation. For example, by
replacing BN in the ordinary ResNet50, improvement produced by EN is 300% more than that of SN on both ImageNet and the noisy WebVision dataset.

1. Introduction
Normalization techniques are one of the most essential
components to improve performance and accelerate training of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Recently, a family of normalization methods is proposed including batch normalization (BN) [14], instance normalization
(IN) [36], layer normalization (LN) [1] and group normal∗ Equal contribution

(a) The learning dynamic of EN ratios of four categories in three layers.

(b) Performance of EN and its counterparts on various CV tasks.

Figure 1. (a) The proposed Exemplar Normalization (EN) enables
different categories to learn to select different normalizers in different layers. The four categories of ImageNet (i.e. flute, bald eagle, newfoundland and castle) in three layers (i.e. bottom, middle
and top) of ResNet50 are presented. (b) EN outperforms its counterparts on various computer vision tasks ( i.e. image classification,
noisy-supervised classification and semantic image segmentation
) by using different network architectures.

ization (GN) [39]. As these methods were designed for different tasks, they often normalize feature maps of CNNs
from different dimensions.
To combine advantages of the above methods, switchable normalization (SN) [23] and its variant [33] were proposed to learn linear combination of normalizers for each
convolutional layer in an end-to-end manner. We term this
normalization setting as static ‘learning-to-normalize’. Despite the successes of these methods, once a CNN is optimized by using them, it employed the same combination
ratios of the normalization methods for all image samples in
a dataset, incapable to adapt to different instances and thus

12726

