Better Captioning with Sequence-Level Exploration
Jia Chen
Carnegie Mellon University
Language Technology Institute

Qin Jin∗
Renmin University of China
School of Information

marshimarocj@gmail.com

qjin@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Sequence-level learning objective has been widely used
in captioning tasks to achieve the state-of-the-art performance for many models. In this objective, the model is
trained by the reward on the quality of its generated captions (sequence-level). In this work, we show the limitation
of the current sequence-level learning objective for captioning tasks from both theory and empirical result. In theory,
we show that the current objective is equivalent to only optimizing the precision side of the caption set generated by the
model and therefore overlooks the recall side. Empirical
result shows that the model trained by this objective tends
to get lower score on the recall side. We propose to add a
sequence-level exploration term to the current objective to
boost recall. It guides the model to explore more plausible
captions in the training. In this way, the proposed objective
takes both the precision and recall sides of generated captions into account. Experiments show the effectiveness of
the proposed method on both video and image captioning
datasets.

1. Introduction
Captioning is one of the core tasks in vision and language fields. The input is an image or video and the output is a descriptive sentence. In terms of the output structure, the descriptive sentence is actually a sequence, which
is more complex than the output of classification and detection tasks and therefore poses a challenge for the learning objective in captioning tasks. Furthermore, there exists multiple correct captions for the same input and it is
impossible to enumerate all the correct captions when collecting the groundtruth. The above two unique properties,
sequence structure and multiple correct grountruth captions,
make captioning tasks difficult and worth special treatment
for its own learning/training objective.
Most caption models [32, 24, 2] are based on the

a man and a woman sitting on a desk
a man and a woman sitting on a table with a laptop computer
a man and a woman sitting on a desk with a laptop computer
a man and a woman sitting on a desk with a laptop computer
a man and a woman sitting on a desk with a laptop computer

Figure 1: Illustration on limitations of current sequencelevel learning: 5 captions randomly sampled from the
model [24] are almost identical, which indicates that the
model is not likely to have high recall.
encoder-decoder architecture and we will only talk about
training objectives associated with this architecture. The
original training objective is cross-entropy loss [32], which
does word-level supervision. To be specific, the decoder is
fed with the word from the groundtruth caption at each step
and predicts the word at next step. Thus, the decoder is
trained to focus on the correctness of predicting each word
separately. However, at each step in the test stage, the decoder is fed with the word predicted from the previous step
rather than the groundtruth word. This leads to the gap between training and test and limits the performance in the
test. Later, sequence-level learning objective is proposed
by researchers to address this gap [23, 24]. In this objective, only after the whole sentence is generated by the decoder, the quality of the caption is evaluated by a score and
that score is used to guide the model training. That is, the
decoder predicts the word at each step based on the word
predicted at last step in both training and test stages. The
sequence-level learning objective [23, 24] is shown to im-

∗ corresponding author

110890

