Guided Variational Autoencoder for Disentanglement Learning
Zheng Ding∗,1,2 , Yifan Xu∗,2 , Weijian Xu2 , Gaurav Parmar2 , Yang Yang3 , Max Welling3,4 , Zhuowen Tu2
1
2
3
4
Tsinghua University
UC San Diego
Qualcomm, Inc.
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We propose an algorithm, guided variational autoencoder (Guided-VAE), that is able to learn a controllable
generative model by performing latent representation disentanglement learning. The learning objective is achieved by
providing signals to the latent encoding/embedding in VAE
without changing its main backbone architecture, hence retaining the desirable properties of the VAE. We design an
unsupervised strategy and a supervised strategy in GuidedVAE and observe enhanced modeling and controlling capability over the vanilla VAE. In the unsupervised strategy,
we guide the VAE learning by introducing a lightweight decoder that learns latent geometric transformation and principal components; in the supervised strategy, we use an adversarial excitation and inhibition mechanism to encourage
the disentanglement of the latent variables. Guided-VAE
enjoys its transparency and simplicity for the general representation learning task, as well as disentanglement learning. On a number of experiments for representation learning, improved synthesis/sampling, better disentanglement
for classification, and reduced classification errors in meta
learning have been observed.

1. Introduction
The resurgence of autoencoders (AE) [34, 6, 21] is an
important component in the rapid development of modern
deep learning [17]. Autoencoders have been widely adopted
for modeling signals and images [46, 50]. Its statistical
counterpart, the variational autoencoder (VAE) [29], has led
to a recent wave of development in generative modeling due
to its two-in-one capability, both representation and statistical learning in a single framework. Another exploding direction in generative modeling includes generative adversarial networks (GAN) [18], but GANs focus on the generation process and are not aimed at representation learning
(without an encoder at least in its vanilla version).
Compared with classical dimensionality reduction methods like principal component analysis (PCA) [22, 27] and
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Laplacian eigenmaps [4], VAEs have demonstrated their unprecedented power in modeling high dimensional data of
real-world complexity. However, there is still a large room
to improve for VAEs to achieve a high quality reconstruction/synthesis. Additionally, it is desirable to make the VAE
representation learning more transparent, interpretable, and
controllable.
In this paper, we attempt to learn a transparent representation by introducing guidance to the latent variables in
a VAE. We design two strategies for our Guided-VAE, an
unsupervised version (Fig. 1.a) and a supervised version
(Fig. 1.b). The main motivation behind Guided-VAE is to
encourage the latent representation to be semantically interpretable, while maintaining the integrity of the basic VAE
architecture. Guided-VAE is learned in a multi-task learning fashion. The objective is achieved by taking advantage
of the modeling flexibility and the large solution space of
the VAE under a lightweight target. Thus the two tasks,
learning a good VAE and making the latent variables controllable, become companions rather than conflicts.
In unsupervised Guided-VAE, in addition to the standard VAE backbone, we also explicitly force the latent variables to go through a lightweight encoder that learns a deformable PCA. As seen in Fig. 1.a, two decoders exist, both
trying to reconstruct the input data x: The main decoder,
denoted as Decmain , functions regularly as in the standard
VAE [29]; the secondary decoder, denoted as Decsub , explicitly learns a geometric deformation together with a linear subspace. In supervised Guided-VAE, we introduce a
subtask for the VAE by forcing one latent variable to be
discriminative (minimizing the classification error) while
making the rest of the latent variable to be adversarially
discriminative (maximizing the minimal classification error). This subtask is achieved using an adversarial excitation and inhibition formulation. Similar to the unsupervised
Guided-VAE, the training process is carried out in an endto-end multi-task learning manner. The result is a regular
generative model that keeps the original VAE properties intact, while having the specified latent variable semantically
meaningful and capable of controlling/synthesizing a specific attribute. We apply Guided-VAE to the data modeling
and few-shot learning problems and show favorable results

7920

