Benchmarking Adversarial Robustness on Image Classification
Yinpeng Dong1 , Qi-An Fu1 , Xiao Yang1 , Tianyu Pang1 , Hang Su1∗ , Zihao Xiao2 , Jun Zhu1∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, THBI Lab
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China 2 RealAI
{dyp17, fqa19, yangxiao19, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn, zihao.xiao@realai.ai

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which becomes one of the most important research
problems in the development of deep learning. While a lot of
efforts have been made in recent years, it is of great significance to perform correct and complete evaluations of the
adversarial attack and defense algorithms. In this paper, we
establish a comprehensive, rigorous, and coherent benchmark to evaluate adversarial robustness on image classification tasks. After briefly reviewing plenty of representative
attack and defense methods, we perform large-scale experiments with two robustness curves as the fair-minded evaluation criteria to fully understand the performance of these
methods. Based on the evaluation results, we draw several
important findings that can provide insights for future research, including: 1) The relative robustness between models can change across different attack configurations, thus it
is encouraged to adopt the robustness curves to evaluate adversarial robustness; 2) As one of the most effective defense
techniques, adversarial training can generalize across different threat models; 3) Randomization-based defenses are
more robust to query-based black-box attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) models are vulnerable to adversarial
examples [53, 19], which are maliciously generated to induce erroneous predictions. As DL models have been integrated into various security-sensitive applications (e.g., autonomous driving, healthcare, and finance), the study of the
adversarial robustness issue has attracted increasing attention with an enormous number of adversarial attack and defense methods proposed. Therefore, it is crucial to conduct
correct and rigorous evaluations of these methods for understanding their pros and cons, comparing their performance,
and providing insights for building new methods [5].
The research on adversarial robustness is faced with an
“arms race” between attacks and defenses, i.e., a defense
∗ Hang Su and Jun Zhu are corresponding authors.

method proposed to prevent the existing attacks was soon
evaded by new attacks, and vice versa [6, 7, 22, 1, 55, 65].
For instance, defensive distillation [41] was proposed to improve adversarial robustness, but was later shown to be ineffective against a strong attack [7]. Many methods were introduced to build robust models by causing obfuscated gradients, which can be defeated by the adaptive ones [1, 55].
As a result, it is particularly challenging to understand their
effects, identify the real progress, and advance the field.
Moreover, the current attacks and defenses are often
evaluated incompletely. First, most defenses are only tested
against a small set of attacks under limited threat models,
and many attacks are evaluated on a few models or defenses.
Second, the robustness evaluation metrics are too simple to
show the performance of these methods. The accuracy of
a defense against an attack for a given perturbation budget [29] and the minimum distance of the adversarial perturbation [4] are used as the primary evaluation metrics, which
are often insufficient to totally characterize the behaviour
of the attacks and defenses. Consequently, the incomplete
evaluation cannot provide a comprehensive understanding
of the strengths and limitations of these methods.
In this paper, we establish a comprehensive, rigorous,
and coherent benchmark to evaluate adversarial robustness,
which can provide a detailed understanding of the effects
of the existing methods under different scenarios, with a
hope to facilitate future research. In particular, we focus on
the robustness of image classifiers under the ℓp norm threat
models where a large body of works have been devoted. We
incorporate a lot of typical and state-of-the-art attack and
defense methods for robustness evaluation, including 15 attack methods and 16 defense models—8 on CIFAR-10 [27]
and 8 on ImageNet [46]. To fully demonstrate the performance of these methods, we adopt two complementary robustness curves as the major evaluation metrics to present
the results. Then, we carry out large-scale experiments on
the cross evaluation of the attack and defense methods under complete threat models, including 1) untargeted and targeted attacks; 2) ℓ∞ and ℓ2 attacks; 3) white-box, transferbased, score-based, and decision-based attacks.

321

