Iteratively-Refined Interactive 3D Medical Image Segmentation
with Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Xuan Liao1 , Wenhao Li∗2 , Qisen Xu∗2 , Xiangfeng Wang2 ,
Bo Jin2 , Xiaoyun Zhang1 , Yanfeng Wang1 , and Ya Zhang1
1

2

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Multi-agent Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, East China Normal University

{liaoxuan, xiaoyun.zhang, wangyanfeng, ya zhang} @sjtu.edu.cn, {51164500105@stu,
51184501067@stu, xfwang@sei, bjin@cs} .ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing automatic 3D image segmentation methods usually fail to meet the clinic use. Many studies have explored an interactive strategy to improve the image segmentation performance by iteratively incorporating user hints.
However, the dynamic process for successive interactions
is largely ignored. We here propose to model the dynamic
process of iterative interactive image segmentation as a
Markov decision process (MDP) and solve it with reinforcement learning (RL). Unfortunately, it is intractable to use
single-agent RL for voxel-wise prediction due to the large
exploration space. To reduce the exploration space to a
tractable size, we treat each voxel as an agent with a shared
voxel-level behavior strategy so that it can be solved with
multi-agent reinforcement learning. An additional advantage of this multi-agent model is to capture the dependency
among voxels for segmentation task. Meanwhile, to enrich
the information of previous segmentations, we reserve the
prediction uncertainty in the state space of MDP and derive
an adjustment action space leading to a more precise and
finer segmentation. In addition, to improve the efficiency of
exploration, we design a relative cross-entropy gain-based
reward to update the policy in a constrained direction. Experimental results on various medical datasets have shown
that our method significantly outperforms existing state-ofthe-art methods, with the advantage of fewer interactions
and a faster convergence.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation has been widely recognized
as an essential procedure for subsequent medical image processes such as structural and functional analysis, diagnosis
and treatment. The traditional dense manual annotation is
extremely inefficient for 3D medical images and its performance highly depends on the physician’s experience. With
the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
automatic segmentation has greatly improved the efficiency
∗ Equal contribution

of medical image process [13, 16, 23]. However, the accuracy and robustness for the current automatic methods still
need to be improved for practical clinic use.
To get a better segmentation, interactive image segmentation [5, 7, 20] is introduced to integrate user hints (mostly
in the form of points, scribbles and bounding boxes). This
kind of interactive methods has become a popular research
direction because it improves the performance of segmentation by adding new labeling constraints to the prediction
model. Normally, a one-time interaction might not ensure
the segmentation accuracy. Therefore, many existing methods are compatible with the iteratively-refined mode: the
operator provides new hints according to the current result
to refine the segmentation until it is satisfactory. Moreover,
to reduce the number of interactions, the existing works
introduce the idea of replacing the initial hints with an
automatically-obtained coarse segmentation [5, 20]. Note
that in this paper, we refer to such methods incorporating a
coarse segmentation in the initial input as update methods
and we will focus on this kind of methods in this paper.
Concerning the current update methods, there exist two
main issues: 1) They usually ignore the dynamic process
for successive interactions. Although the segmentation can
be iteratively refined, the model always treat the segmentation of each refinement step in isolation, with an absence
of the previous information. 2) Another problem is the loss
of prediction uncertainty when using the binary segmentation result, instead of a segmentation probability for each
voxel, as part of the model input. The rounding from dense
segmentation probability to binary segmentation prediction
may cause quantization error and accuracy loss.
To tackle the above two issues, this paper proposes
a novel interactive medical image segmentation update
method called Iteratively-Refined interactive 3D medical
image segmentation via Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning (IteR-MRL). We formulate the dynamic process of iterative interactive image segmentation as an MDP. Specifically, at each refinement step, the model needs to decide
the labels of all voxels, according to the previous segmenta-

9394

