Modeling the Background for Incremental Learning in Semantic Segmentation
Fabio Cermelli1,2 , Massimiliano Mancini2,3,4 , Samuel Rota Bulò5 , Elisa Ricci3,6 , Barbara Caputo1,2
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Italian Institute of Technology, 3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler,
4
Sapienza University of Rome, 5 Mapillary Research, 6 University of Trento
{fabio.cermelli, barbara.caputo}@polito.it, mancini@diag.uniroma1.it,
samuel@mapillary.com, eliricci@fbk.eu

Abstract
Despite their effectiveness in a wide range of tasks, deep
architectures suffer from some important limitations. In
particular, they are vulnerable to catastrophic forgetting,
i.e. they perform poorly when they are required to update
their model as new classes are available but the original
training set is not retained. This paper addresses this problem in the context of semantic segmentation. Current strategies fail on this task because they do not consider a peculiar
aspect of semantic segmentation: since each training step
provides annotation only for a subset of all possible classes,
pixels of the background class (i.e. pixels that do not belong
to any other classes) exhibit a semantic distribution shift.
In this work we revisit classical incremental learning methods, proposing a new distillation-based framework which
explicitly accounts for this shift. Furthermore, we introduce a novel strategy to initialize classifier’s parameters,
thus preventing biased predictions toward the background
class. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
with an extensive evaluation on the Pascal-VOC 2012 and
ADE20K datasets, significantly outperforming state of the
art incremental learning methods. Code can be found at
https://github.com/fcdl94/MiB.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in
computer vision. In the last years, thanks to the emergence
of deep neural networks and to the availability of largescale human-annotated datasets [11, 39], the state of the art
has improved significantly [20, 8, 38, 19, 37]. Current approaches are derived by extending deep architectures from
image-level to pixel-level classification, taking advantage
of Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [20]. Over the
years, semantic segmentation models based on FCNs have
been improved in several ways, e.g. by exploiting multiscale
representations [19, 37], modeling spatial dependencies and
contextual cues [6, 5, 8] or considering attention models [7].

Figure 1: Illustration of the semantic shift of the background class in incremental learning for semantic segmentation. Yellow boxes denote the ground truth provided in the
learning step, while grey boxes denote classes not labeled.
As different learning steps have different label spaces, at
step t old classes (e.g. person) and unseen ones (e.g. car)
might be labeled as background in the current ground truth.
Here we show the specific case of single class learning
steps, but we address the general case where an arbitrary
number of classes is added.
Still, existing semantic segmentation methods are not
designed to incrementally update their inner classification
model when new categories are discovered. While deep nets
are undoubtedly powerful, it is well known that their capabilities in an incremental learning setting are limited [16].
In fact, deep architectures struggle in updating their parameters for learning new categories whilst preserving good performance on the old ones (catastrophic forgetting [23]).
While the problem of incremental learning has been traditionally addressed in object recognition [18, 17, 4, 28, 15]
and detection [32], much less attention has been devoted
to semantic segmentation. Here we fill this gap, proposing
an incremental class learning (ICL) approach for semantic
segmentation. Inspired by previous methods on image classification [18, 28, 3], we cope with catastrophic forgetting
by resorting to knowledge distillation [14]. However, we
argue (and experimentally demonstrate) that a naive application of previous knowledge distillation strategies would
19233

