3DSSD: Point-based 3D Single Stage Object Detector
Zetong Yang1
Yanan Sun2
Shu Liu3
Jiaya Jia1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
SmartMore
{tomztyang, now.syn}@gmail.com

sliu@smartmore.com

Abstract
Prevalence of voxel-based 3D single-stage detectors
contrast with underexplored point-based methods. In this
paper, we present a lightweight point-based 3D single stage
object detector 3DSSD to achieve decent balance of accuracy and efficiency. In this paradigm, all upsampling layers
and the refinement stage, which are indispensable in all existing point-based methods, are abandoned. We instead propose a fusion sampling strategy in downsampling process
to make detection on less representative points feasible. A
delicate box prediction network, including a candidate generation layer and an anchor-free regression head with a 3D
center-ness assignment strategy, is developed to meet the
demand of high accuracy and speed. Our 3DSSD paradigm
is an elegant single-stage anchor-free one. We evaluate it on
widely used KITTI dataset and more challenging nuScenes
dataset. Our method outperforms all state-of-the-art voxelbased single-stage methods by a large margin, and even
yields comparable performance with two-stage point-based
methods, with amazing inference speed of 25+ FPS, 2⇥
faster than former state-of-the-art point-based methods.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding has attracted much attention
since it benefits many applications, such as autonomous
driving [7] and augmented reality [17]. In this paper, we focus on the fundamental task of 3D object detection, which
predicts 3D bounding boxes and class labels for each instance within a point cloud.
Although great breakthrough has been made in 2D detection, it is still not possible to directly apply these 2D
methods to 3D because of the unique characteristics of point
cloud. Compared with 2D images, point cloud is sparse, unordered and locality sensitive, making it hard to use convolution neural networks (CNNs) for parsing. How to convert
and utilize raw point cloud data has become the primary
problem in the detection task.
Several existing methods convert point clouds from

leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

sparse formation to compact representations by projecting
them to images [4, 11, 8, 18, 5], or subdividing them to
equally distributed voxels [16, 26, 33, 29, 28, 12]. We call
these methods voxel-based ones, which require voxelization
on the whole point cloud. Features in each voxel are generated by either PointNet-like backbones [21, 22] or handcrafted features. Then a variety of 2D detection paradigms
can be applied in the compact voxel space. Although these
methods are straightforward and efficient, they suffer from
information loss during voxelization and encounter performance bottleneck.
Another stream is with point-based methods [31, 32, 23].
They take raw point clouds as input, and predict bounding
boxes based on each point. Specifically, they are composed
of two stages. In the first stage, set abstraction (SA) layers
are used for downsampling and extracting context features.
Afterwards, feature propagation (FP) layers are applied for
upsampling and broadcasting features to points, which are
discarded during downsampling. A 3D region proposal network (RPN) is then applied for generating proposals centered at each point. Based on these proposals, a refinement
module is developed in the second stage to give final prediction. These methods achieve better performance. But
inference usually takes much longer time.
Our Contributions Different from all previous methods,
we develop a lightweight and efficient point-based 3D single stage object detection framework. Our key observation
is that in point-based methods, FP layers and the refinement stage consume half of the inference time. However,
it is non-trivial to abandon FP layers. Under the current
sampling strategy in SA with only furthest-point-sampling
based on 3D Euclidean distance (D-FPS), foreground instances with only a few interior points may be lost after
sampling. Consequently, it is impossible for them to be detected, which leads to huge performance drop.
In STD [32], without upsampling and only conducting
detection on remaining downsampled points, the performance drops by about 9%. That is why FP layers must be
used for point upsampling, albeit a large amount of extra
computation is consumed. To deal with this issue, we first
111040

