From Paris to Berlin: Discovering Fashion Style Influences Around the World
Ziad Al-Halah1

Kristen Grauman1,2

ziadlhlh@gmail.com
1

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

The University of Texas at Austin

2

Facebook AI Research

1. Introduction
“The influence of Paris, for instance, is now minimal. Yet
a lot is written about Paris fashion.”—Geoffrey Beene
The clothes people wear are a function of personal factors like comfort, taste, and occasion—but also wider and
more subtle influences from the world around them, like
changing social norms, art, the political climate, celebrities
and style icons, the weather, and the mood of the city in
which they live. Fashion itself is an evolving phenomenon
because of these changing influences. What gets worn continues to change, in ways fast, slow, and sometimes cyclical.
Pinpointing the influences in fashion, however, is nontrivial. To what extent did the runway styles in Paris last
year affect what U.S. consumers wore this year? How
much did the designs by J. Crew influence those created six
months later by Everlane, and vice versa? How long does
it take for certain trends favored in New York City to migrate to Austin, if they do at all? And how did the infamous
cerulean sweater worn by the protagonist in the movie The

Paris
Milan

Style Popularity

The evolution of clothing styles and their migration
across the world is intriguing, yet difficult to describe quantitatively. We propose to discover and quantify fashion influences from everyday images of people wearing clothes.
We introduce an approach that detects which cities influence which other cities in terms of propagating their styles.
We then leverage the discovered influence patterns to inform a forecasting model that predicts the popularity of any
given style at any given city into the future. Demonstrating our idea with GeoStyle—a large-scale dataset of 7.7M
images covering 44 major world cities, we present the discovered influence relationships, revealing how cities exert
and receive fashion influence for an array of 50 observed
visual styles. Furthermore, the proposed forecasting model
achieves state-of-the-art results for a challenging style forecasting task, showing the advantage of grounding visual
style evolution both spatially and temporally.

Fashion Style 𝑆

Abstract

𝑀𝑡1

𝑀𝑡2
𝑃𝑡1+ℎ

𝑃𝑡2+ℎ

history

Fashion Influence Relations

future

Time

Figure 1: Styles propagate according to certain patterns of
influence around the world. For example, the trajectory of a
given style’s popularity in Milan may foreshadow its trajectory in Paris some months later. Our idea is to discover style
influence relations worldwide (left) and leverage them to accurately forecast future trends per location (right). Whereas
forecasting without regard to geographic influence can falter in the presence of complex trends (red curve), using discovered influence information (e.g., Milan influences Paris
in fashion style S) yields better forecasts (purple curve).
Devil Wears Prada make its way into her closet?1
To quantitatively answer such questions would be valuable to both social science and business forecasts, yet it remains challenging. Clothing sales records or social media
“likes” offer some signal about how tastes are shifting, but
they are indirect and do not reveal the sources of influence.
We contend that images are exactly the right data to answer such questions. Unlike vendors’ purchase data, other
non-visual metadata, or hype from haute couture designers,
everyday photos of what people are wearing in their daily
life provide a unfiltered glimpse of current clothing styles
“on the ground”. Our idea is to discover fashion influence
patterns in community photo collections (e.g., Instagram,
Flickr), and leverage those influence patterns to forecast
future style trends conditioned on the place in the world.
1 The Devil Wears Prada: Cerulean https://bit.ly/3dBAQ5W

110136

