Pixel Consensus Voting for Panoptic Segmentation
Haochen Wang
Carnegie Mellon University

Ruotian Luo
TTI-Chicago

Michael Maire
University of Chicago

Greg Shakhnarovich
TTI-Chicago

whcw@cmu.edu

rluo@ttic.edu

mmaire@uchicago.edu

greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
The core of our approach, Pixel Consensus Voting, is a
framework for instance segmentation based on the Generalized Hough transform. Pixels cast discretized, probabilistic
votes for the likely regions that contain instance centroids.
At the detected peaks that emerge in the voting heatmap,
backprojection is applied to collect pixels and produce instance masks. Unlike a sliding window detector that densely
enumerates object proposals, our method detects instances
as a result of the consensus among pixel-wise votes. We
implement vote aggregation and backprojection using native operators of a convolutional neural network. The discretization of centroid voting reduces the training of instance segmentation to pixel labeling, analogous and complementary to FCN-style semantic segmentation, leading
to an efficient and unified architecture that jointly models
things and stuff. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
pipeline on COCO and Cityscapes Panoptic Segmentation
and obtain competitive results. Code will be open-sourced.

1. Introduction
The development of visual recognition algorithms has
followed the evolution of recognition benchmarks. PASCAL VOC [13] standardizes the task of bounding box object detection and the associated IoU/Average Precision
metrics. At the time, the approaches defining the state-ofthe-art, DPM [14] and later the R-CNN family [17, 48],
address object detection by reasoning about densely enumerated box proposals, following the sliding window classification approach of earlier detectors [52, 51]. SDS [19]
expands the scope of object detection to include instance
mask segmentation, and introduces early versions of the
mAPbbox and mAPmask , subsequently popularized by the
COCO dataset [35]. Bounding boxes, however, remain the
primary vehicle for object reasoning.
The more recently introduced task of panoptic segmentation [24] removes the notion of boxes altogether. It treats
both “things” and “stuff” in a unified format, in which
ground truth and predictions are expressed as labelled segment masks: instance and category for objects (“things”),

and category only for “stuff” [5].
Our work focuses on this particular framework of image
understanding. We propose an approach, Pixel Consensus
Voting (PCV), that in line with this updated task definition,
elevates pixels to first class citizen status. Every pixel contributes evidence for the presence, identity, and location of
an object to which it may belong, as well as for an object or
stuff category label. PCV aggregates and backprojects this
evidence, in a Hough transform-like framework, so that detections emerge from the consensus among pixels that vote
for consistent object hypotheses. Figure 1 summarizes our
approach.
Notably, and in contrast to the currently dominant line
of detection work derived from the R-CNN family [17,
48, 20, 7], our approach does not involve reasoning about
bounding boxes. It can be seen as a descendant of early
Hough-based methods such as the Implicit Shape Model
(ISM) [27, 28]. Such methods traditionally have been referred to as “bottom-up”. Different from earlier work, PCV
leverages the power of convolutional networks to extract
rich image features. Since these features have large receptive fields and presumably capture high-level semantic concepts, it is unclear whether the bottom-up designation remains appropriate. Another distinction from prior attempts
to use voting is in our representation of those votes. Traditional methods treat voting as offset regression, and suffers from the problem of “regressing to the mean”, where
prediction is conflated with uncertainty. In PCV, we treat
voting for object location as classification over discretized
spatial cells. This allows for the representation of uncertainty and for “abstention” votes by non-object pixels. It
also lends itself to efficient vote aggregation and backprojection using (dilated [56]) convolutional mechanisms.
Despite its simplicity, PCV achieves competitive quantitative results on COCO and Cityscapes panoptic segmentation benchmarks. On COCO, PCV outperforms all existing
proposal-free or single-stage detection methods. Our work
revisits a classic idea from a modern perspective, and we expect that future research extending our approach will yield
major performance gains and novel insights.

9464

