Painting Many Pasts: Synthesizing Time Lapse Videos of Paintings
Amy Zhao
MIT

Guha Balakrishnan
MIT

Kathleen M. Lewis
MIT

xamyzhao@mit.edu

balakg@mit.edu

kmlewis@mit.edu

Frédo Durand
MIT

John V. Guttag
MIT

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT, MGH

fredo@mit.edu

guttag@mit.edu

adalca@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new video synthesis task: synthesizing
time lapse videos depicting how a given painting might have
been created. Artists paint using unique combinations of
brushes, strokes, and colors. There are often many possible
ways to create a given painting. Our goal is to learn to
capture this rich range of possibilities.
Creating distributions of long-term videos is a challenge
for learning-based video synthesis methods. We present a
probabilistic model that, given a single image of a completed painting, recurrently synthesizes steps of the painting
process. We implement this model as a convolutional neural
network, and introduce a novel training scheme to enable
learning from a limited dataset of painting time lapses. We
demonstrate that this model can be used to sample many
time steps, enabling long-term stochastic video synthesis.
We evaluate our method on digital and watercolor paintings collected from video websites, and show that human
raters find our synthetic videos to be similar to time lapse
videos produced by real artists. Our code is available at
https://xamyzhao.github.io/timecraft.

1. Introduction
Skilled artists can often look at a piece of artwork and determine how to recreate it. In this work, we explore whether
we can use machine learning and computer vision to mimic
this ability. We define a new video synthesis problem: given
a painting, can we synthesize a time lapse video depicting
how an artist might have painted it?
Artistic time lapses present many challenges for video
synthesis methods. There is a great deal of variation in how
people create art. Suppose two artists are asked to paint the
same landscape. One artist might start with the sky, while
the other might start with the mountains in the distance. One
might finish each object before moving onto the next, while

Input

Synthesized

Figure 1: We present a probabilistic model for synthesizing
time lapse videos of paintings. We demonstrate our model
on Still Life with a Watermelon and Pomegranates by Paul
Cezanne (top), and Wheat Field with Cypresses by Vincent
van Gogh (bottom).
the other might work a little at a time on each object. During
the painting process, there are often few visual cues indicating where the artist will apply the next stroke. The painting process is also long, often spanning hundreds of paint
strokes and dozens of minutes.
In this work, we present a solution to the painting time
lapse synthesis problem. We begin by defining the problem and describing its unique challenges. We then derive a
principled, learning-based model to capture a distribution of
steps that a human might use to create a given painting. We
introduce a training scheme that encourages the method to
produce realistic changes over many time steps. We demonstrate that our model can learn to solve this task, even when
trained using a small, noisy dataset of painting time lapses
collected from the web. We show that human evaluators
almost always prefer our method to an existing video synthesis baseline, and often find our results indistinguishable
from time lapses produced by real artists.
This work presents several technical contributions:
1. We use a probabilistic model to capture stochastic decisions made by artists, thereby capturing a distribution
of plausible ways to create a painting.
2. Unlike work in future frame prediction or frame interpolation, we synthesize long-term videos spanning dozens
18435

