Assessing Eye Aesthetics for Automatic Multi-Reference Eye In-Painting
Bo Yan ∗, Qing Lin, Weimin Tan, Shili Zhou
Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{byan, 18210240028, wmtan14, 15307130270}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
With the wide use of artistic images, aesthetic quality assessment has been widely concerned. How to integrate aesthetics into image editing is still a problem worthy of discussion. In this paper, aesthetic assessment is introduced
into eye in-painting task for the first time. We construct
an eye aesthetic dataset, and train the eye aesthetic assessment network on this basis. Then we propose a novel eye
aesthetic and face semantic guided multi-reference eye inpainting GAN approach (AesGAN), which automatically selects the best reference under the guidance of eye aesthetics.
A new aesthetic loss has also been introduced into the network to learn the eye aesthetic features and generate highquality eyes. We prove the effectiveness of eye aesthetic assessment in our experiments, which may inspire more applications of aesthetics assessment. Both qualitative and
quantitative experimental results show that the proposed
AesGAN can produce more natural and visually attractive
eyes compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Aesthetic quality assessment [14, 15] has been gaining
increasing demands with the wide applications of digital
images in social, communication, entertainment, and shopping, etc. The aesthetic quality of an image largely determines its using possibility due to the nature of human loving
aesthetic things. Assessing image aesthetic quality is essential for screening beautiful pictures from massive online images, recommending beautiful pictures that users enjoy, and
understanding image attributes such as image composition,
contrast, and lighting. Eye aesthetic assessment, a branch
of image aesthetic assessment, aims at using computational
methods to evaluate the “aesthetic feeling” of face images
by simulating human perception and cognition of beauty.
Eye aesthetic quality has a great influence on users’ satis∗ This work was supported by NSFC (Grant No.: 61772137).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Eye in-painting results. Columns represent: (a) Image
to in-paint, (b) The commercial state-of-the-art eye opening algorithm in Adobe Photoshop Elements 2019, (c) ExGAN result [7]
and (d) Our AesGAN result.

faction with photos. Knowing eye aesthetic quality is also
useful for selecting better face images. In addition, it can be
used as a guide to restore poor-quality eyes to high-quality
ones, i.e., eye in-painting.
Eye aesthetic quality assessment is a challenging task
due to its extremely subjective nature. Assessing eye aesthetic quality cannot simply use objective quality assessment methods such as PSNR, MSE, and SSIM [25], which
are commonly used to assess the distortions of image. In
contrast, the assessment of eye aesthetic quality needs a lot
of manual marking due to people’s preferences. Currently,
there has been no research on the assessment of eye aesthetic quality. In addition, the eye aesthetic quality assessment can help us know the quality of the eyes in a face image. Not satisfied with just knowing the aesthetic quality
of the eyes, we also hope that we can use this as a guide
to make the poor eyes more realistic. As a result, eye inpainting is produced, which can be seen as an application
of eye aesthetics.
There are few researches on eye in-painting. Figure 1

13509

