SESS: Self-Ensembling Semi-Supervised 3D Object Detection
Na Zhao Tat-Seng Chua Gim Hee Lee
Deaprtment of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{nazhao, chuats, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Labeled point clouds

Abstract
The performance of existing point cloud-based 3D object detection methods heavily relies on large-scale highquality 3D annotations. However, such annotations are often tedious and expensive to collect. Semi-supervised learning is a good alternative to mitigate the data annotation
issue, but has remained largely unexplored in 3D object detection. Inspired by the recent success of self-ensembling
technique in semi-supervised image classification task, we
propose SESS, a self-ensembling semi-supervised 3D object detection framework. Specifically, we design a thorough perturbation scheme to enhance generalization of the
network on unlabeled and new unseen data. Furthermore,
we propose three consistency losses to enforce the consistency between two sets of predicted 3D object proposals,
to facilitate the learning of structure and semantic invariances of objects. Extensive experiments conducted on SUN
RGB-D and ScanNet datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of SESS in both inductive and transductive semi-supervised
3D object detection. Our SESS achieves competitive performance compared to the state-of-the-art fully-supervised
method by using only 50% labeled data. Our code is available at https:// github.com/ Na-Z/ sess.

1. Introduction
Point cloud-based 3D object detection is the task to estimate the object category and oriented 3D bounding box for
all objects in the scene. This task has always been a great
interest to computer vision and robotics communities due to
its potential real-world applications in many areas such as
autonomous driving, domestic robotics, augmented/virtual
reality, etc. In recent years, many deep learning-based approaches for point cloud-based 3D object detection [1, 7, 9,
11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 24, 27, 29] have emerged and achieved
high performances on various benchmark datasets [2, 3, 19].
Despite the impressive performances, most of the existing
deep learning-based approaches for 3D object detection on
point clouds are strongly supervised and require the availability of a large amount of well-annotated 3D data that is

Testing point cloud
train

infer

SESS
train

Unlabeled point clouds

infer

Detected results

Figure 1: Semi-supervised 3D object detection pipeline. Our
SESS can predict 3D bounding boxes and semantic labels of objects for an unlabeled scene after training with a mixture of labeled
data and unlabeled data.

often time-consuming and expensive to collect.
Semi-supervised learning is a promising alternative to
strongly supervised learning for point cloud-based 3D object detection. This is because semi-supervised learning requires only few labeled data, and this largely alleviates the
difficulty to collect enormous amount of labeled data. Furthermore, the available few strong labels can still provide
the necessary supervision to guide the deep network into
learning the correct information for 3D object detection.
Information from the few strong labels can also be propagated to the unlabeled data to improve learning. A complete
removal of strong labels in the training data would be extremely challenging for the deep network to learn anything
meaningful. This is due to the inherent difficulty for a deep
network to precisely detect 3D bounding boxes of objects
in the point cloud, where points are sparsely distributed,
and/or the scene is partially visible and incomplete due to
occlusions and 3D amodal perception. To the best of our
knowledge, [21] is currently the only existing work to learn
a deep network for point cloud-based 3D object detection
without strong supervision. More specifically, they propose
a cross-category semi-supervised learning where 3D ground
truth labels are needed for a set of object classes, and 2D
ground truth labels are required for all object classes. Although promising results are achieved in [21], the approach
requires RGB-D input and does not work on pure 3D point

11079

