15 Keypoints Is All You Need
Michael Snower: * Asim Kadav; Farley Lai; Hans Peter Graf;
:
Brown University ; NEC Labs America
michael snower@brown.edu

{asim,farleylai,hpg}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Pose tracking is an important problem that requires identifying unique human pose-instances and matching them
temporally across different frames of a video. However,
existing pose tracking methods are unable to accurately
model temporal relationships and require significant computation, often computing the tracks offline. We present
an efficient multi-person pose tracking method, KeyTrack,
that only relies on keypoint information without using any
RGB or optical flow information to track human keypoints
in real-time. Keypoints are tracked using our Pose Entailment method, in which, first, a pair of pose estimates is sampled from different frames in a video and tokenized. Then,
a Transformer-based network makes a binary classification
as to whether one pose temporally follows another. Furthermore, we improve our top-down pose estimation method
with a novel, parameter-free, keypoint refinement technique
that improves the keypoint estimates used during the Pose
Entailment step. We achieve state-of-the-art results on the
PoseTrack’17 and the PoseTrack’18 benchmarks while using only a fraction of the computation required by most
other methods for computing the tracking information.

1. Introduction
Multi-person Pose Tracking is an important problem for
human action recognition and video understanding. It occurs in two steps: first, estimation, where keypoints of individual persons are localized; second, the tracking step,
where each keypoint is assigned to a unique person. Pose
tracking methods rely on deep convolutional neural networks for the first step [48, 47, 57, 52], but approaches in
the second step vary. This is a challenging problem because
tracks must be created for each unique person, while overcoming occlusion and complex motion. Moreover, individuals may appear visually similar because they are wearing the same uniform. It is also important for tracking
to be performed online. Commonly used methods, such
* Work done as a NEC Labs intern

Figure 1. They look alike, how do we decide who's who? In
the Pose Entailment framework, given a video frame, we track
individuals by comparing pairs of poses, using temporal motion
cues to determine who’s who. Using a novel tokenization scheme
to create pose pair inputs interpretable by Transformers [49], our
network divides its attention equally between both poses in matching pairs, and focuses more on a single pose in non-matching pairs
because motion cues between keypoints are not present. We visualize this above; bright red keypoints correspond to high attention.

as optical flow and graph convolutional networks (GCNs)
are effective at modeling spatio-temporal keypoint relationships [45], [35], but are dependent on high spatial resolution, making them computationally costly. Non-learning
based methods, such as spatial consistency, are faster than
the convolution-based methods, but are not as accurate.
To address the above limitations, we propose an efficient
pose tracking method, KeyTrack, that leverages temporal
relationships to improve multi-person pose estimation and
tracking. Hence, KeyTrack follows the tracking by detection approach by first localizing humans, estimating human
pose keypoints and then encoding the keypoint information in a novel entailment setting using transformer building blocks [49]. Similar to the textual entailment task where
one has to predict if one sentence follows one another, we
propose the Pose Entailment task, where the model learns
to make a binary classification if two keypoint poses temporally follow or entail each other. Hence, rather than extracting information from a high-dimensional image representation using deep CNNs, we extract information from a
sentence of 15 tokens, and each token corresponds to a key16738

