Salience-Guided Cascaded Suppression Network for Person Re-identification
Xuesong Chen * 1, 2
Canmiao Fu 3
Yong Zhao 1
Feng Zheng † 2
Jingkuan Song 6
Rongrong Ji4, 7
Yi Yang 5
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
2
Southern University of Science and Technology, China 3 Tencent, China 4 Xiamen University, China
5
The ReLER Lab, Centre for AI, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
6
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China 7 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{cedarchen,fcm,yongzhao}@pku.edu.cn, zhengf@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Employing attention mechanisms to model both global
and local features as a final pedestrian representation has
become a trend for person re-identification (Re-ID) algorithms. A potential limitation of these methods is that they
focus on the most salient features, but the re-identification
of a person may rely on diverse clues masked by the most
salient features in different situations, e.g., body, clothes or
even shoes. To handle this limitation, we propose a novel
Salience-guided Cascaded Suppression Network (SCSN)
which enables the model to mine diverse salient features
and integrate these features into the final representation by
a cascaded manner.
Our work makes the following contributions: (i) We observe that the previously learned salient features may hinder
the network from learning other important information. To
tackle this limitation, we introduce a cascaded suppression
strategy, which enables the network to mine diverse potential useful features that be masked by the other salient features stage-by-stage and each stage integrates different feature embedding for the last discriminative pedestrian representation. (ii) We propose a Salient Feature Extraction
(SFE) unit, which can suppress the salient features learned
in the previous cascaded stage and then adaptively extracts
other potential salient feature to obtain different clues of
pedestrians. (iii) We develop an efficient feature aggregation strategy that fully increases the network’s capacity for
all potential salience features. Finally, experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on four large-scale datasets.
Especially, our approach exceeds the current best method
by over 7% on the CUHK03 dataset.
* This work was done when Xuesong Chen visited to Feng Zheng Lab
at SUSTech.
† Corresponding author.

CNN

s
Salience
Mask
-

+

s
Salience
Mask

s

+

Training

...

-

Concat
-

Loss

Testing

- Suppression + Boost

Stage I (base)

s

Stage II

Stage III

Stage IV

SFE Unit

Figure 1. The insight of the Salience-guided Cascaded Suppression Network (SCSN). For training, each stage is guided by the
gradient from the loss function. During testing, different stage’s
features will be concatenated to generate the final diverse pedestrian representation. Benefiting from the suppression strategy, potential important features can stand out in the next stage, which
enables different stages to discover diverse clues of pedestrians.

1. Introduction
Given a probe person image, the Person Re-identification
(Re-ID) task aims to search the picture that most likely belongs to the same pedestrian from the gallery (the candidate
picture set). It is commonly applied to address the issues of
cross-camera tracking and surveillance security and can be
considered as an image retrieval problem.
To this end, most existing Re-ID methods focus on learning discriminative and robust features to match the pair of
images in response to various challenges, including varying
viewing angles, lighting intensity and body pose variations.
Specifically, recent studies [9, 12, 27, 32] have shown that
combining part-based local features with global features is
an effective strategy to enhance the feature representation.
In general, considering a whole image, the global feature is
robust to the appearance changes and spatial location variations. However, lacking the supervision of fine-grained
characterizations, global features may focus on interference
information, such as backgrounds, which is not expected.
Besides, global features are prone to ignore the information of some small regions which can make contributions
for discriminative pedestrian representation. Motivated by
such observations, the attention mechanism and part-based

3300

