D2Det: Towards High Quality Object Detection and Instance Segmentation
Jiale Cao1∗, Hisham Cholakkal2∗ , Rao Muhammad Anwer2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2 ,
Yanwei Pang1†, Ling Shao2
1
2
Tianjin University
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE‡
1

{connor,pyw}@tju.edu.cn,2 {hisham.cholakkal,rao.anwer,fahad.khan,ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
We propose a novel two-stage detection method, D2Det,
that collectively addresses both precise localization and accurate classification. For precise localization, we introduce
a dense local regression that predicts multiple dense box
offsets for an object proposal. Different from traditional regression and keypoint-based localization employed in twostage detectors, our dense local regression is not limited to
a quantized set of keypoints within a fixed region and has
the ability to regress position-sensitive real number dense
offsets, leading to more precise localization. The dense local regression is further improved by a binary overlap prediction strategy that reduces the influence of background region on the final box regression. For accurate classification,
we introduce a discriminative RoI pooling scheme that samples from various sub-regions of a proposal and performs
adaptive weighting to obtain discriminative features.
On MS COCO test-dev, our D2Det outperforms existing two-stage methods, with a single-model performance
of 45.4 AP, using ResNet101 backbone. When using multiscale training and inference, D2Det obtains AP of 50.1. In
addition to detection, we adapt D2Det for instance segmentation, achieving a mask AP of 40.2 with a two-fold
speedup, compared to the state-of-the-art. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our D2Det on airborne sensors
by performing experiments for object detection in UAV images (UAVDT dataset) and instance segmentation in satellite images (iSAID dataset). Source code is available at
https://github.com/JialeCao001/D2Det.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed formidable progress in object detection thanks to the advances in deep neural networks. Modern object detectors can be broadly divided
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Work done at IIAI during J. Cao’s research visit.

into single-stage [35, 42, 40, 29, 27, 4] and two-stage methods [18, 43, 17, 41, 8, 21]. Two-stage detection approaches
work by first generating a set of candidate proposals followed by classification and regression of these proposals.
On the other hand, single-stage methods perform a direct
regression and classification of default anchors into boxes
by regular sampling grids on the image. Generally, twostage methods dominate in terms of accuracy on standard
benchmarks, compared to their single-stage counterparts.
High quality object detection requires both precise localization (bounding box) and accurate classification of the
target object. Most existing two-stage detectors [43, 31, 15]
share a similar design for the bounding box localization
module. A typical design choice is a regression module,
employed in most two-stage detectors, including the popular Faster R-CNN [43]. The regression module utilizes
several fully connected layers to predict a single box offset of the candidate proposal. Recently, Grid R-CNN [36]
extends Faster R-CNN by separating the classification and
regression into two branches, as opposed to a shared network. Instead of the regression utilized in Faster R-CNN,
Grid R-CNN introduces a localization scheme, based on a
fully convolutional network, that searches for a set of keypoints in a fixed-sized region to identify an object boundary.
In this work, we introduce dense local regression for
precise target localization. Different from the traditional
regression employed in Faster R-CNN [43] that predicts
a single global offset by a fully-connected network, our
dense local regression predicts multiple local box offsets,
termed as dense box offsets, by a fully convolutional network. Compared to the keypoint-based localization in Grid
R-CNN [36], our dense local regression can more accurately localize an object due to its ability to regress any real
number offset and is therefore not limited to a quantized set
of keypoints within a fixed-sized region. In addition, while
Grid R-CNN aims to improve localization capabilities, our
method collectively addresses both precise localization and
accurate classification of target object. For classification,
we introduce a discriminative RoI pooling that extracts features from various sub-regions of a proposal and performs
111485

