Memory Enhanced Global-Local Aggregation for Video Object Detection
Yihong Chen1,4∗ Yue Cao3 Han Hu3 Liwei Wang1,2
1
Center of Data Science, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Microsoft Research Asia 4 Zhejiang Lab
chenyihong@pku.edu.cn

{yuecao,hanhu}@microsoft.com

wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
...

...

How do humans recognize an object in a piece of video?
Due to the deteriorated quality of single frame, it may be
hard for people to identify an occluded object in this frame
by just utilizing information within one image. We argue
that there are two important cues for humans to recognize
objects in videos: the global semantic information and the
local localization information. Recently, plenty of methods
adopt the self-attention mechanisms to enhance the features
in key frame with either global semantic information or local localization information. In this paper we introduce
memory enhanced global-local aggregation (MEGA) network, which is among the first trials that takes full consideration of both global and local information. Furthermore,
empowered by a novel and carefully-designed Long Range
Memory (LRM) module, our proposed MEGA could enable
the key frame to get access to much more content than any
previous methods. Enhanced by these two sources of information, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on ImageNet VID dataset. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Scalsol/mega.pytorch.

...

...

(a) video object detection with full connection.
...

...

(b) the aggregation size of local aggregation methods.
...

...

(c) the aggregation size of global aggregation methods.
base model
...

...

MEGA
...

...

(d) the aggregation size of our proposed methods.

1. Introduction
key frame

What differs detecting objects in videos from detecting
them in static images? A quick answer is the information
lies in the temporal dimension. When isolated frame may
suffer from problems such as motion blur, occlusion or out
of focus, it is natural for humans to find clues from the entire
video to identify objects.
When people are not certain about the identity of an object, they would seek to find a distinct object from other
frames that shares high semantic similarity with current object and assign them together. We refer this clue as global
semantic information for every frame in the video could be
∗ This work is done when Yihong Chen is an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

local frame

global frame

set of candidate boxes

global semantic connection
local semantic&localization connection
connection empowered by long range memory (global and local)

Figure 1. The aggregation size of different methods for addressing
video object detection.

reference to. But semantic information alone fails in the
case if we are not sure about whether an object exists or
not, e.g., a black cat walking in the dark. We could not rely
on the semantic information to tell us where it is, as the existence of the instance has not been approved in key frame
yet. This problem could be alleviated if nearby frames were
given. With information such as motion calculated by the

10337

