DeeperForensics-1.0: A Large-Scale Dataset for
Real-World Face Forgery Detection
Liming Jiang1 Ren Li2 Wayne Wu1,2 Chen Qian2 Chen Change Loy1†
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research
liming002@ntu.edu.sg
tomo.blade.lee@hotmail.com
wuwenyan@sensetime.com
qianchen@sensetime.com
ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We present our on-going effort of constructing a largescale benchmark for face forgery detection. The ﬁrst version of this benchmark, DeeperForensics-1.0, represents the
largest face forgery detection dataset by far, with 60, 000
videos constituted by a total of 17.6 million frames, 10
times larger than existing datasets of the same kind. Extensive real-world perturbations are applied to obtain a more
challenging benchmark of larger scale and higher diversity.
All source videos in DeeperForensics-1.0 are carefully collected, and fake videos are generated by a newly proposed
end-to-end face swapping framework. The quality of generated videos outperforms those in existing datasets, validated by user studies. The benchmark features a hidden test
set, which contains manipulated videos achieving high deceptive scores in human evaluations. We further contribute
a comprehensive study that evaluates ﬁve representative detection baselines and make a thorough analysis of different
settings. 1, 2

1. Introduction
Face swapping has become an emerging topic in computer vision and graphics. Indeed, many works [1, 2, 4]
on automatic face swapping have been proposed in recent
years. These efforts have circumvented the cumbersome
and tedious manual face editing processes, hence expediting the advancement in face editing. At the same time, such
enabling technology has sparked legitimate concerns, particularly on its potential for being misused and abused. The
popularization of “Deepfakes” on the internet has further
set off alarm bells among the general public and authorities, in view of the conceivable perilous implications. Accordingly, there is a dire need for countermeasures to be in
place promptly, particularly innovations that can effectively
detect videos that have been manipulated.
Working towards forgery detection, various groups have
1 GitHub: https://github.com/EndlessSora/DeeperForensics-1.0.
2 Project page: https://liming-jiang.com/projects/DrF1/DrF1.html.

† Corresponding author.

Figure 1: DeeperForensics-1.0 dataset is a new large-scale dataset
for real-world face forgery detection.

contributed datasets (e.g., FaceForensics++ [33], Deep Fake
Detection [9] and DFDC [14]) comprising manipulated
video footages. The availability of these datasets has
undoubtedly provided essential avenues for research into
forgery detection. Nonetheless, the aforementioned datasets
suffer several drawbacks. Videos in these datasets are either of a small number, of low quality, or overly artiﬁcial. Understandably, these datasets are inadequate to train
a good model for effective forgery detection in real-world
scenarios. This is particularly true when current advances
in human face editing are able to produce extremely realistic videos, rendering forgery detection a highly challenging
task. On another note, we observe high similarity between
training and test videos, in terms of their distribution, in certain works [26, 33]. Their actual efﬁcacy in detecting realworld face forgery cases, which are much more variable and
unpredictable, remains to be further elucidated.
We believe that forgery detection models can only be
enhanced when trained with a dataset that is exhaustive
enough to encompass as many potential real-world variations as possible. To this end, we propose a large-scale
dataset named DeeperForensics-1.0 consisting of 60, 000
videos with a total of 17.6 million frames for real-world face
forgery detection. The main steps of our dataset construction are shown in Figure 1. We set forth three yardsticks
when constructing this dataset: 1) Quality. The dataset shall
contain videos more realistic and much closer to the distribution of real-world detection scenarios. (Section 3.1 and
3.2) 2) Scale. The dataset shall be made up of a large-scale
video sets. (Section 3.3) 3) Diversity. There shall be sufﬁcient variations in the video footages (e.g., compression,
blurry, transmission errors) to match those that may be en-

2889

