Blurry Video Frame Interpolation
Wang Shen Wenbo Bao Guangtao Zhai∗ Li Chen Xiongkuo Min Zhiyong Gao
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Abstract
Existing works reduce motion blur and up-convert frame
rate through two separate ways, including frame deblurring and frame interpolation. However, few studies have
approached the joint video enhancement problem, namely
synthesizing high-frame-rate clear results from low-framerate blurry inputs. In this paper, we propose a blurry video
frame interpolation method to reduce motion blur and upconvert frame rate simultaneously. Specifically, we develop
a pyramid module to cyclically synthesize clear intermediate frames. The pyramid module features adjustable spatial receptive field and temporal scope, thus contributing
to controllable computational complexity and restoration
ability. Besides, we propose an inter-pyramid recurrent
module to connect sequential models to exploit the temporal relationship. The pyramid module integrates a recurrent module, thus can iteratively synthesize temporally
smooth results without significantly increasing the model
size. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our
method performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods. The source code and pre-trained model are available
at https://github.com/laomao0/BIN .

1. Introduction
Shutter speed and exposure time of camera sensors are
two fundamental factors that affect the quality of captured
videos [33]. Slow shutter speed and long exposure time
may lead to two kinds of degradations: motion blur and low
frame rate. Eliminating these degradations is critical for enhancing the quality of captured videos. However, few studies have approached the joint problem, namely synthesizing
high-frame-rate clear results from low-frame-rate blurry inputs. Existing methods may help address this problem by
image deblurring and frame interpolation, but are often suboptimal due to the lack of a joint formulation.
Frame interpolation aims to recover unseen intermediate frames from the captured ones [1, 9, 2, 3]. It can upconvert frame rate and improve visual smoothness. Most
state-of-the-art frame interpolation methods [1, 9, 2] first
estimate objects’ motion, and then perform frame warping
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Examples of synthesizing an intermediate frame
from blurry inputs. We show the results of (a) overlapped blurry
inputs, (b) cascaded interpolation and deblurring model, (c) cascaded deblurring and interpolation model, (d) our model.

to synthesize pixels using reference frames. However, if the
original reference frames are degraded by motion blur, the
motion estimation may not be accurate. Consequently, it is
challenging to restore clear intermediate frames via existing
frame interpolation approaches.
Considering the above problems introduced by motion blur, some existing methods generally employ a predeblurring procedure [32, 35, 30]. A straightforward approach is to perform frame deblurring, followed by the
frame interpolation, which we refer to as the cascade
scheme. However, this approach is sub-optimal in terms of
interpolation quality. First, the interpolation performance
is highly dependent on the quality of the deblurred images. The pixel errors introduced in the deblurring stage
will be propagated to the interpolation stage, thus degrading the overall performance. Second, most of the frame interpolation methods use two consecutive frames as a reference, namely those methods have a temporal scope of
two. However, given imperfect deblurred frames in the cascade scheme, the interpolation model with a short temporal scope can hardly maintain the long-term motion consistency among adjacent frames. An alternative strategy is
to perform frame interpolation and then frame deblurring.
However, the overall quality deteriorates because the interpolated frames suffer from blurry textures of the inputs, as
shown in Figure 1.
In this paper, we formulate the joint video enhancement
problem with a unified degradation model. Then we pro-

5114

