Rotation Equivariant Graph Convolutional Network for Spherical Image
Classification
Qin Yang1 , Chenglin Li1 , Wenrui Dai1 , Junni Zou1 , Guo-Jun Qi2 , Hongkai Xiong1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Futurewei Technologies
{yangqin, lcl1985, daiwenrui, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn, guojunq@gmail.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) designed for
low-dimensional regular grids will unfortunately lead to
non-optimal solutions for analyzing spherical images, due
to their different geometrical properties from planar images. In this paper, we generalize the grid-based CNNs to
a non-Euclidean space by taking into account the geometry of spherical surfaces and propose a Spherical Graph
Convolutional Network (SGCN) to encode rotation equivariant representations. Specifically, we propose a spherical
graph construction criterion showing that a graph needs
to be regular by evenly covering the spherical surfaces in
order to design a rotation equivariant graph convolutional
layer. For the practical case where the perfectly regular graph does not exist, we design two quantitative measures to evaluate the degree of irregularity for a spherical
graph. The Geodesic ICOsahedral Pixelation (GICOPix)
is adopted to construct spherical graphs with the minimum
degree of irregularity compared to the current popular pixelation schemes. In addition, we design a hierarchical pooling layer to keep the rotation-equivariance, followed by a
transition layer to enforce the invariance to the rotations
for spherical image classification. We evaluate the proposed graph convolutional layers with different pixelations
schemes in terms of equivariance errors. We also assess the
effectiveness of the proposed SGCN1 in fulfilling rotationinvariance by the invariance error of the transition layers
and recognizing the spherical images and 3D objects.

1. Introduction
Omnidirectional cameras generate spherical images with
360-degree view of the scenes that enable an immersive
experience for users by freely adjusting their viewing orientations. Recently, omnidirectional cameras have become
1 Code is aviable at https://github.com/QinYang12/SGCN.
This work was supported in part by the NSFC under Grants 61931023,
61871267, 61972256, 61720106001, 61831018, and 91838303.

popular in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR)
systems for applications ranging from robots [23, 27] to autonomous cars [15, 16], which results in an increasing demand for the analysis of spherical images. Convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have achieved significant improvement in analysis tasks related to planar images, e.g., image
recognition [10], object detection [8], and image segmentation [9]. However, it is still challenging to generalize CNNs
to analyzing spherical images defined on the non-Euclidean
spheres, as distortions may be incurred when spherical images are projected onto a flat Euclidean surface to accommodate the grid-based architectures in CNNs [3].
CNNs commonly adapt to the non-Euclidean spherical
images in two different ways. The first approach projects
the spherical images into the planar format that can be
processed directly by CNNs. Various projection methods
have been studied, including the equirectangular projection
(ERP) and the cube map projection [24], which lead to the
inevitable projection distortions. For ERP, filter kernels are
further designed for CNNs to compensate for the projection distortion [5, 26, 32]. [26] proposed to learn different
kernels with variable size for each row in the projected images, however, the model size increases dramatically with
the growth of image resolution. In [5, 32], the sampling
location of filter kernel is changed to adapt to the distortion level. Without the guidance of rotation-equivariance,
although model parameters could be reduced by sharing the
kernels across all pixels, the model performance declines
inevitably.
The other approaches [3, 7] extend CNNs to nonEuclidean domains to avoid the projection distortions. Although CNNs have strong capability to exploit the local
translation equivariance and some works seek to capture
various transformation equivariant representations of regular 2D images [20, 21, 30], they do not adapt to the 3D rotation of spherical images properly. Therefore, it is important
to explore rotation-equivariance in spherical image analysis. [3] and [7] develop spherical CNNs by introducing the
rotation-equivariant spherical cross-correlation in the spectral domain. However, Fourier transform is required for the

4303

