PatchVAE: Learning Local Latent Codes for Recognition
Kamal Gupta1
1

Saurabh Singh2

Abhinav Shrivastava1
2

University of Maryland, College Park
{kampta,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu

saurabhsingh@google.com

Image

Abstract
Unsupervised representation learning holds the promise
of exploiting large amounts of unlabeled data to learn general representations. A promising technique for unsupervised learning is the framework of Variational Auto-encoders
(VAEs). However, unsupervised representations learned by
VAEs are significantly outperformed by those learned by supervised learning for recognition. Our hypothesis is that to
learn useful representations for recognition the model needs
to be encouraged to learn about repeating and consistent
patterns in data. Drawing inspiration from the mid-level
representation discovery work, we propose PatchVAE, that
reasons about images at patch level. Our key contribution
is a bottleneck formulation that encourages mid-level style
representations in the VAE framework. Our experiments
demonstrate that representations learned by our method perform much better on the recognition tasks compared to those
learned by vanilla VAEs.

1. Introduction
Due to the availability of large labeled visual datasets,
supervised learning has become the dominant paradigm for
visual recognition. That is, to learn about any new concept,
the modus operandi is to collect thousands of labeled examples for that concept and train a powerful classifier, such as
a deep neural network. This is necessary because the current
generation of models based on deep neural networks require
large amounts of labeled data [33]. This is in stark contrast
to the insights that we have from developmental psychology
on how infants develop perception and cognition without any
explicit supervision [31]. Moreover, the supervised learning
paradigm is ill-suited for applications, such as health care
and robotics, where annotated data is hard to obtain either
due to privacy concerns or high cost of expert human annotators. In such cases, learning from very few labeled images
or discovering underlying natural patterns in large amounts
of unlabeled data can have a large number of potential applications. Discovering such patterns from unlabeled data is

Google Research

Part Occurrence Map

Part samples

Example parts discovered by PatchVAE

Figure 1: PatchVAE learns to encode repetitive parts across a
dataset, by modeling their appearance and occurrence. (top) Given
an image, the occurrence map of a particular part learned by PatchVAE is shown in the middle, capturing the head/beak of the birds.
Samples of the same part from other images are shown on the right,
indicating consistent appearance. (bottom) More examples of parts
discovered by our PatchVAE framework.

the standard setup of unsupervised learning.
Over the past few years, the field of unsupervised learning in computer vision has followed two seemingly different
tracks with different goals: generative modeling and selfsupervised learning. The goal of generative modeling is
to learn the probability distribution from which data was
generated, given some training data. Such models, learned
using reconstruction-based losses, can draw samples from
the same distribution or evaluate the likelihoods of new data,
and are useful for learning compact representation of images.
However, we argue that these representations are not as useful for visual recognition. This is not surprising since the task
of reconstructing images does not require the bottleneck representation to sort out meaningful data useful for recognition
and discard the rest; on the contrary, it encourages preserving
as much information as possible for reconstruction.
In comparison, the goal in self-supervised learning is to
learn representations that are useful for recognition. The
standard paradigm is to establish proxy tasks that don’t
require human-supervision but can provide signals useful
14746

