G-TAD: Sub-Graph Localization for Temporal Action Detection
https://www.deepgcns.org/app/g-tad

Mengmeng Xu, Chen Zhao, David S. Rojas, Ali Thabet, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
{mengmeng.xu, chen.zhao, davidsantiago.blanco, ali.thabet, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Temporal action detection is a fundamental yet challenging task in video understanding. Video context is a critical
cue to effectively detect actions, but current works mainly
focus on temporal context, while neglecting semantic context as well as other important context properties. In this
work, we propose a graph convolutional network (GCN)
model to adaptively incorporate multi-level semantic context into video features and cast temporal action detection
as a sub-graph localization problem. Specifically, we formulate video snippets as graph nodes, snippet-snippet correlations as edges, and actions associated with context as
target sub-graphs. With graph convolution as the basic
operation, we design a GCN block called GCNeXt, which
learns the features of each node by aggregating its context
and dynamically updates the edges in the graph. To localize each sub-graph, we also design an SGAlign layer to embed each sub-graph into the Euclidean space. Extensive experiments show that G-TAD is capable of finding effective
video context without extra supervision and achieves stateof-the-art performance on two detection benchmarks. On
ActivityNet-1.3, it obtains an average mAP of 34.09%; on
THUMOS14, it reaches 51.6% at IoU@0.5 when combined
with a proposal processing method. G-TAD code is publicly
available at https://github.com/frostinassiky/gtad.

1. Introduction
Video understanding has gained much attention from
both academia and industry over recent years, given the
rapid growth of videos published in online platforms. Temporal action detection is one of the interesting but challenging tasks in this area. It involves detecting the start and end
frames of action instances, as well as predicting their class
labels. This is onerous especially in long untrimmed videos.
Video context is an important cue to effectively detect
actions. Here, we refer to context as frames that do not belong to the target action but carry its valuable indicative information. Using video context to infer potential actions is

Yellow: Background

t
Red: Start
Blue: End
Green: Action
Grey: Dependency

Figure 1. Graph formulation of a video. Nodes: video snippets (a
video snippet is defined as consecutive frames within a short time
period). Edges: snippet-snippet correlations. Sub-graphs: actions
associated with context. There are 4 types of nodes: action, start,
end, and background, shown as colored dots. There are 2 types of
edges: (1) temporal edges, which are pre-defined according to the
snippets’ temporal order; (2) semantic edges, which are learned
from node features.

natural for human beings. In fact, empirical evidence shows
that humans can reliably guess or predict the occurrence of
a certain type of action by only looking at short video snippets where the action does not happen [1, 2]. Therefore,
incorporating context into temporal action detection has become an important strategy to boost detection accuracy in
the recent literature [11, 15, 9, 33, 44, 56, 30]. Researchers
have proposed various ways to take advantage of video context, such as extending temporal action boundaries by a predefined ratio [11, 15, 44, 56, 30], using dilated convolution
to encode context into features [9], and aggregating context features implicitly by way of a Gaussian curve [33].
All these methods only utilize temporal context, which precedes or follows an action instance in its immediate temporal neighborhood. However, real-world videos vary dramatically in temporal extent, action content, and even editing
preferences. Temporal context does not fully exploit the rich
merits of video context, and it may even impair detection
accuracy if not properly designed for underlying videos.
So, what properties characterize desirable video context
for the purpose of accurate action detection? First, context
should be semantically correlated to the target action other

10156

