MCFlow: Monte Carlo Flow Models for Data Imputation
Trevor W. Richardson

Wencheng Wu

Lei Lin

Beilei Xu

Edgar A. Bernal

Rochester Data Science Consortium, University of Rochester
260 E. Main St. Suite 6108, Rochester, NY 14604
{trevor.richardson, wencheng.wu, lei.lin, beilei.xu, edgar.bernal}@rochester.edu

Abstract
We consider the topic of data imputation, a foundational
task in machine learning that addresses issues with missing data. To that end, we propose MCFlow, a deep framework for imputation that leverages normalizing flow generative models and Monte Carlo sampling. We address the
causality dilemma that arises when training models with incomplete data by introducing an iterative learning scheme
which alternately updates the density estimate and the values of the missing entries in the training data. We provide extensive empirical validation of the effectiveness of
the proposed method on standard multivariate and image
datasets, and benchmark its performance against state-ofthe-art alternatives. We demonstrate that MCFlow is superior to competing methods in terms of the quality of the
imputed data, as well as with regards to its ability to preserve the semantic structure of the data.

1. Introduction
Missing data is a widespread problem in real-life machine learning problems. Because most of the existing
data analysis frameworks require complete datasets, imputation methods are indispensable to practitioners in the field.
As a consequence, data imputation has been the focus of
extensive research in recent decades [30, 45]. Moreover,
much of the recent research in data imputation has leveraged advanced machine learning techniques. This has resulted in the development of numerous shallow [44, 46, 42]
and deep learning frameworks [40, 49, 29, 33] which have
continuously pushed the state-of-the-art envelope. A pervasive shortcoming of traditional learning-based imputation methods is that their training relies on fully observed
data [15, 40]. A more reasonable assumption, however, is
that the training data itself may have missing entries, a limitation addressed by recently proposed methods [49, 29, 33].
In this paper, we propose a data imputation framework that
leverages deep generative models and incorporates mechanisms that provide more accurate estimates of the miss-

ing data as compared to existing frameworks. In contrast to
competing methods that are based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [49, 29] and on Deep Latent Variable
Models (DLVM) [33], our framework leverages normalizing flow models [10, 11, 23]. In particular, we take advantage of the exact log-likelihood evaluation, latent variable
inference, and data sample reconstruction afforded by normalizing flow models in order to explicitly learn complex,
high-dimensional data distributions.
We address the causality dilemma that arises when attempting to construct probabilistic models of incomplete
data by adopting an alternating learning strategy inspired
by model-based multiple imputation approaches [31] such
as those based on Expectation Maximization [8] and Monte
Carlo Markov Chain [43] techniques. Recent examples of
related alternating techniques include applications to training generator networks [19, 14]. The overarching idea behind the proposed framework is to alternately sample the
data and update the density estimate until a good approximation of the true empirical distribution is attained. This iterative process is enabled by the exact sampling and density
evaluation aspects afforded by the normalizing flow model
framework referenced above. We note that although accurate density estimation is central to our framework, and autoregressive models achieve state-of-the-art performance in
that field [47, 5, 38], their slow sampling time would be a
significance hindrance to our algorithm. In order to address
the problem of missing data, we introduce a new imputation
algorithm called MCFlow. The proposed iterative learning
scheme calls for alternately optimizing two different objective functions: (i) the traditional log-likelihood loss involved in training flow models, required to update the density estimate based on the complete data including imputed
values; and, (ii) a maximum-likelihood criterion involved
in sampling the latent flow space in order to find the optimal values of the missing data given the current estimate of
the data distribution. While the former can be achieved by
implementing known backpropagation techniques, we introduce a novel non-iterative approach to address the latter,
114205

