Towards Better Generalization: Joint Depth-Pose Learning without PoseNet
Wang Zhao Shaohui Liu Yezhi Shu Yong-Jin Liu∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zhao-w19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, b1ueber2y@gmail.com,
shuyz19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the essential problem of scale inconsistency for self-supervised joint depth-pose learning.
Most existing methods assume that a consistent scale of
depth and pose can be learned across all input samples,
which makes the learning problem harder, resulting in degraded performance and limited generalization in indoor
environments and long-sequence visual odometry application. To address this issue, we propose a novel system that
explicitly disentangles scale from the network estimation.
Instead of relying on PoseNet architecture, our method recovers relative pose by directly solving fundamental matrix
from dense optical flow correspondence and makes use of
a two-view triangulation module to recover an up-to-scale
3D structure. Then, we align the scale of the depth prediction with the triangulated point cloud and use the transformed depth map for depth error computation and dense
reprojection check. Our whole system can be jointly trained
end-to-end. Extensive experiments show that our system not
only reaches state-of-the-art performance on KITTI depth
and flow estimation, but also significantly improves the
generalization ability of existing self-supervised depth-pose
learning methods under a variety of challenging scenarios,
and achieves state-of-the-art results among self-supervised
learning-based methods on KITTI Odometry and NYUv2
dataset. Furthermore, we present some interesting findings
on the limitation of PoseNet-based relative pose estimation
methods in terms of generalization ability. Code is available at https://github.com/B1ueber2y/TrianFlow.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the underlying 3D scenes from a collection of video frames or multi-view images has been a longstanding fundamental topic named structure-from-motion
(SfM), which serves as an essential module to many realworld applications such as autonomous vehicles, robotics,
augmented reality, etc. While traditional methods are built
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visual odometry results on sampled sequence 09 and 10
from KITTI Odometry dataset. We sample the original sequences
with large stride (stride=3) to simulate fast camera ego-motion
that is unseen during training. Surprisingly, all tested PoseNetbased methods get similar failure on trajectory estimation under
this challenging scenario. Our system significantly improves the
generalization ability and robustness and still works reasonably
well on both sequences. See more discussions in Sec 4.4.

on the golden rule of feature correspondence and multi-view
geometry, a recent trend of deep learning based methods
[42, 15, 66] try to jointly learn the prediction of monocular
depth and ego-motion in a self-supervised manner, aiming
to make use of the great learning ability of deep networks to
learn geometric priors from large amount of training data.
The key to those self-supervised learning methods is to
build a task consistency for training separated CNN networks, where depth and pose predictions are jointly constrained by depth reprojection and image reconstruction
error. While achieving fairly good results, most existing methods assume that a consistent scale of CNN-based
monocular depth prediction and relative pose estimation
can be learned across all input samples, since relative pose
estimation inherently has scale ambiguity. Although several recent proposals manage to mitigate this scale problem [2, 12], this strong hypothesis still makes the learning problem difficult and leads to severely degraded performance, especially in long-sequence visual odometry applications and indoor environments, where the changes of
relative pose across sequences are significantly remarkable.

9151

