AdaCoF: Adaptive Collaboration of Flows for Video Frame Interpolation
Hyeongmin Lee1

Taeoh Kim1
1

Tae-young Chung1

Daehyun Pak1
2

Yonsei University

Yuseok Ban2

Sangyoun Lee1∗

Agency for Defense Development

{minimonia,kto,tato0220,koasing,syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

ban@add.re.kr

Abstract
Video frame interpolation is one of the most challenging
tasks in video processing research. Recently, many studies
based on deep learning have been suggested. Most of these
methods focus on finding locations with useful information
to estimate each output pixel using their own frame warping operations. However, many of them have Degrees of
Freedom (DoF) limitations and fail to deal with the complex motions found in real world videos. To solve this
problem, we propose a new warping module named Adaptive Collaboration of Flows (AdaCoF). Our method estimates both kernel weights and offset vectors for each target pixel to synthesize the output frame. AdaCoF is one of
the most generalized warping modules compared to other
approaches, and covers most of them as special cases of
it. Therefore, it can deal with a significantly wide domain
of complex motions. To further improve our framework
and synthesize more realistic outputs, we introduce dualframe adversarial loss which is applicable only to video
frame interpolation tasks. The experimental results show
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
for both fixed training set environments and the Middlebury
benchmark. Our source code is available at https://
github.com/HyeongminLEE/AdaCoF-pytorch.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing the intermediate frame when consecutive
frames have been provided is one of the main research topics in the video processing area. Using a frame interpolation algorithm, we can obtain slow-motion videos from ordinary videos without using professional high-speed cameras. In addition, we can freely convert the frame rates of
the videos so it can be applied to the video coding system.
To interpolate the intermediate frame of a video requires an
understanding of motion, unlike image pixel interpolation.
Unfortunately, real world videos contain not only simple
motions, but also large and complex ones, making the task

𝐼𝑡−1

𝐼𝑡

𝐼𝑡+1

𝐼𝑡−1

𝐼𝑡

𝐼𝑡+1

(b) The Flow-Based Approach

𝐼𝑡−1

𝐼𝑡

𝐼𝑡+1

𝐼𝑡−1

(d) Ours

𝐼𝑡

𝐼𝑡+1

(a) The Kernel-Based Approach

(c) Kernel and Flow Combined

Figure 1: Overall description of the main streams and our
method. The blue parts of each figure represent the reference points for generating the target pixel.
significantly more difficult.
Most of the approaches define video frame interpolation
as a problem of finding reference locations in input frames
which include information for estimating each output pixel
value. This can be seen as a motion estimation process, because the task involves tracking the path of the target pixel.
Therefore, each algorithm covers its own motion domain,
and this area is directly related to the performance. To handle motion in real world videos, we need a generalized operation that can refer to any number of pixels in any location in the input frames. However, most of the existing
approaches have a variety of limitations in Degrees of Freedom (DoF).
One is the kernel-based approach (Figure 1 (a)) [34, 35],
which adaptively estimates the large-sized kernel for each
pixel and synthesizes the intermediate frame by convolving
the kernels with the input. This approach finds the proper
reference location by assigning large weights to the pixels

5316

