MaskFlownet: Asymmetric Feature Matching with Learnable Occlusion Mask
Shengyu Zhao* Yilun Sheng* Yue Dong

Abstract

Eric I-Chao Chang

Image 2

Feature warping is a core technique in optical flow estimation; however, the ambiguity caused by occluded areas during warping is a major problem that remains unsolved. In this paper, we propose an asymmetric occlusionaware feature matching module, which can learn a rough
occlusion mask that filters useless (occluded) areas immediately after feature warping without any explicit supervision. The proposed module can be easily integrated into
end-to-end network architectures and enjoys performance
gains while introducing negligible computational cost. The
learned occlusion mask can be further fed into a subsequent
network cascade with dual feature pyramids with which we
achieve state-of-the-art performance. At the time of submission, our method, called MaskFlownet, surpasses all
published optical flow methods on the MPI Sintel, KITTI
2012 and 2015 benchmarks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/MaskFlownet.

Warped Image

Yan Xu†

Flow

Learnable Occlusion Mask

Masked Image

(a) Image warping and masking.
Image 2 Features

Warped Features

Flow

Learnable Occlusion Mask

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a core problem in computer
vision and a fundamental building block in many realworld applications [2, 22, 29]. Recent development towards
fast, accurate optical flow estimation has witnessed great
progress of learning-based methods using a principled network design — feature pyramid, warping, and cost volume
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author (xuyan04@gmail.com).

Shengyu Zhao, Yilun Sheng, and Yue Dong are with Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China. Shengyu Zhao, Yilun Sheng, Eric I-Chao Chang, and Yan Xu are
with Microsoft Research, Beijing 100080, China. Yan Xu is with State Key
Laboratory of Software Development Environment and Key Laboratory
of Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Ministry of Education and Research Institute of Beihang University in Shenzhen and Beijing Advanced
Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China.
This work is supported by the National Science and Technology Major
Project of the Ministry of Science and Technology in China under Grant
2017YFC0110903, Microsoft Research under the eHealth program, the
National Natural Science Foundation in China under Grant 81771910, the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China under
Grant SKLSDE-2017ZX-08 from the State Key Laboratory of Software
Development Environment in Beihang University in China, the 111 Project
in China under Grant B13003.

Masked Features

(b) Feature warping and masking.

Figure 1. Motivation of the learnable occlusion mask. (a) Image
warping induces ambiguity in the occluded areas (see the doubled
hands). (b) The same problem exists in the feature warping process. Such areas can be masked without any explicit supervision.

— proposed by PWC-Net [32] and LiteFlowNet [11], and
used in many follow-up works [12, 13, 18, 24, 31]. Feature warping effectively resolves the long-range matching
problem between the extracted feature maps for the subsequent cost volume computation. However, we observe that
a major problem of the warping operation is that it introduces unreliable information in the presence of occlusions.
As shown in Fig. 1, the warped image as well as the warped
feature map can be even “doubled” at the occluded areas
(also called the ghosting effect). It remains unclear that

6278

