ALFRED
A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instructions for Everyday Tasks
Mohit Shridhar1
Winson Han3

Jesse Thomason1
Daniel Gordon1
1,3
Roozbeh Mottaghi
Luke Zettlemoyer1
AskForALFRED.com

Abstract
We present ALFRED (Action Learning From Realistic
Environments and Directives), a benchmark for learning
a mapping from natural language instructions and egocentric vision to sequences of actions for household tasks.
ALFRED includes long, compositional tasks with nonreversible state changes to shrink the gap between research
benchmarks and real-world applications. ALFRED consists of expert demonstrations in interactive visual environments for 25k natural language directives. These directives contain both high-level goals like “Rinse off a mug
and place it in the coffee maker.” and low-level language
instructions like “Walk to the coffee maker on the right.”
ALFRED tasks are more complex in terms of sequence
length, action space, and language than existing visionand-language task datasets. We show that a baseline model
based on recent embodied vision-and-language tasks performs poorly on ALFRED, suggesting that there is significant room for developing innovative grounded visual language understanding models with this benchmark.

1. Introduction
A robot operating in human spaces must learn to connect natural language to the world. This symbol grounding [21] problem has largely focused on connecting language to static images. However, robots need to understand
task-oriented language, for example “Rinse off a mug and
place it in the coffee maker,” as illustrated in Figure 1.
Platforms for translating language to action have become
increasingly popular, spawning new test-beds [3, 12, 14,
41]. These benchmarks include language-driven navigation
and embodied question answering, which have seen dramatic improvements in modeling thanks to environments
like Matterport 3D [3, 11], AI2-THOR [25], and AI Habitat [44]. However, these datasets ignore complexities arising from describing task-oriented behaviors with objects.
We introduce ALFRED, a new benchmark for con1 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Sci. & Eng., Univ. of Washington
2 Language Technologies Institute @ Carnegie Mellon University
3 Allen Institute for AI 4 NVIDIA

Yonatan Bisk1,2,3
Dieter Fox1,4

Goal: "Rinse off a mug and place it in the coffee maker"
2
1

t =0
4

"pick up the dirty mug
from the coffee maker"

3

"turn and walk to the sink"

"walk to the coffee
maker on the right"

visual navigation

t =10 object interaction
5

"wash the mug in the sink"

t = 27 object interaction
state changes

"pick up the mug and go
back to the coffee maker"

t = 36 visual navigation

t = 21 visual navigation
6

"put the clean mug
in the coffee maker"

t = 50 object interaction

memory

Figure 1: ALFRED consists of 25k language directives
corresponding to expert demonstrations of household tasks.
We highlight several frames corresponding to portions of
the accompanying language instruction. ALFRED involves interactions with objects, keeping track of state
changes, and references to previous instructions.
necting human language to actions, behaviors, and objects
in interactive visual environments. Planner-based expert
demonstrations are accompanied by both high- and lowlevel human language instructions in 120 indoor scenes in
AI2-THOR 2.0 [25]. These demonstrations involve partial
observability, long action horizons, underspecified natural
language, and irreversible actions.
ALFRED includes 25,743 English language directives
describing 8,055 expert demonstrations averaging 50 steps
each, resulting in 428,322 image-action pairs. Motivated
by work in robotics on segmentation-based grasping [36],
agents in ALFRED interact with objects visually, specifying a pixelwise interaction mask of the target object. This
inference is more realistic than simple object class prediction, where localization is treated as a solved problem.
Existing beam-search [17, 47, 52] and backtracking solutions [24, 28] are infeasible due to the larger action and state
spaces, long horizon, and inability to undo certain actions.

10740

