Deep Learning for Handling Kernel/model Uncertainty in Image Deconvolution
Yuesong Nan and Hui Ji
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
nanyuesong@u.nus.edu and matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Most existing non-blind image deconvolution methods
assume that the given blurring kernel is error-free. In practice, blurring kernel often is estimated via some blind deblurring algorithm which is not exactly the truth. Also,
the convolution model is only an approximation to practical
blurring effect. It is known that non-blind deconvolution is
susceptible to such a kernel/model error. Based on an errorin-variable (EIV) model of image blurring that takes kernel
error into consideration, this paper presents a deep learning method for deconvolution, which unrolls a total-leastsquares (TLS) estimator whose relating priors are learned
by neural networks (NNs). The experiments showed that the
proposed method is robust to kernel/model error. It noticeably outperformed existing solutions when deblurring images using noisy kernels, e.g. the ones estimated from existing blind motion deblurring methods.

1. Introduction
Image blurring is one prime loss of image quality in practice, which often is modeled by a convolution process:
y = k ⊗ x + n,

(1)

where y denotes the blurred image, x denotes the latent image, k represents the kernel and n represents noise. The operator ’⊗’ stands for the discrete convolution. Image deconvolution is about recovering x from y by solving (1). Depending on the availability of k, image deconvolution can
be classified into (1) blind image deblurring which needs
to estimate both k and x, and (2) non-blind image deconvolution which takes k as input and only estimates x. For
example, removing motion blur from images is a typical
blind image deblurring problem whose blur kernel needs to
be estimated for individual image.
In the past, many methods have been proposed for tackling blind motion deblurring; see e.g. [12, 3, 23, 7, 45, 20,
40, 47, 31, 30, ?]. Most of them take an iterative scheme
to alternatively estimate the kernel k and the latent image
x. Although non-blind image deconvolution is called inside

(a) Blurry input

(b) Latent clear image

(c) Result from truth kernel (d) Result from estimated kernel
Figure 1: Sensitivity of image deconvolution to kernel error. (a)(b): Noisy blurred input (σ = 1%) and the truth sharp image; (c)(d): The results when using the non-blind deconvolution method
Krishnan and Fergus [19] to deblur the input shown in (a) using
truth kernel and the kernel estimated by Cho and Lee [7].

the iteration, the iteration focuses on the estimation of the
kernel k. For such a purpose, it is actually a good practice to
only recover partial salient structures in those intermediate
estimates of image x; e.g. [7, 45, 47, 30]. At last, once the
kernel is determined, an non-blind deconvolution method is
called to recover the image x with all details.

1.1. Deconvolution is sensitive to kernel/model error
Blind motion deblurring remains a challenge problem,
and motion-blur kernel estimated by existing methods is
hardly error-free. Furthermore, convolution-based model of
motion-blurring holds true only if scene depths are roughly
constant and camera movement is the translation on image
plane. Same as image noise, without specific treatment, the
kernel/model error will cause severe artifacts in the result.
Re-writing (1) in the form of matrix-vector, we have
y = Kx + n.

2388

