There and Back Again: Revisiting Backpropagation Saliency Methods
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi ∗
Ruth Fong∗
Xu Ji∗
Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{srebuffi, ruthfong, xuji, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Saliency methods seek to explain the predictions of a
model by producing an importance map across each input sample. A popular class of such methods is based on
backpropagating a signal and analyzing the resulting gradient. Despite much research on such methods, relatively
little work has been done to clarify the differences between
such methods as well as the desiderata of these techniques.
Thus, there is a need for rigorously understanding the relationships between different methods as well as their failure modes. In this work, we conduct a thorough analysis
of backpropagation-based saliency methods and propose a
single framework under which several such methods can be
unified. As a result of our study, we make three additional
contributions. First, we use our framework to propose NormGrad, a novel saliency method based on the spatial contribution of gradients of convolutional weights. Second, we
combine saliency maps at different layers to test the ability
of saliency methods to extract complementary information
at different network levels (e.g. trading off spatial resolution and distinctiveness) and we explain why some methods
fail at specific layers (e.g., Grad-CAM anywhere besides
the last convolutional layer). Third, we introduce a classsensitivity metric and a meta-learning inspired paradigm
applicable to any saliency method for improving sensitivity
to the output class being explained.

1. Introduction
The adoption of deep learning methods by high-risk applications, such as healthcare and automated driving, gives
rise to a need for tools that help machine learning practitioners understand model behavior. Given the highlyparameterized, opaque nature of deep neural networks, developing such methods is non-trivial, and there are many
possible approaches. In the basic case, even the predictions
of the model itself, either unaltered or after being distilled
into a simpler function [11, 3], can be used to shed light on
∗ indicates equal contribution

its behaviour.
Saliency is the specific branch of interpretability concerned with determining not what the behaviour of a model
is for whole input samples, but which parts of samples contribute the most to that behaviour. Thus by definition, determining saliency - or attribution - necessarily involves reversing the model’s inference process in some manner [20].
Propagating a signal from the output layer of a neural network model back to the input layer is one way of explicitly
achieving this.
The number of diverse works based on using signal backpropagation for interpretability in computer vision [37, 27,
4, 38] is testimony to the power of this simple principle.
Typically, these techniques produce a heatmap for any given
input image that ranks its pixels according to some metric of
importance for the model’s decision. Inspired by the work
of [1], we propose to delve deeper into such methods by
discussing some of the similarities, differences and potential improvements that can be illustrated.
We begin with presenting a framework that unifies several backpropagation-based saliency methods by dividing
the process of generating a saliency map into two phases:
extraction of the contribution of the gradient of network
parameters at each spatial location in a particular network
layer, and aggregation of such spatial information into a 2D
heatmap. GradCAM [27], linear approximation [17] and
gradient [29] can all be cast as such processes. Noting that
no appropriate technique has yet been proposed for properly
aggregating contributions from convolutional layers, we introduce NormGrad, which uses the Frobenius norm for aggregation. We introduce identity layers to allow for the generation of saliency heatmaps at all spatially-grounded layers in the network (i.e. even after ReLU), since NormGrad
computes saliency given a parameterised network layer.
We conduct a thorough analysis of backpropagationbased saliency methods in general, with evaluation based on
utilising saliency heatmaps for weak localisation. Notably,
we conduct an investigation into simple techniques for combining saliency maps taken from different network layers
- in contrast to the popular practice of computing maps at
the input layer [29] - and find that using a weighted aver-

8839

