Cross-view Correspondence Reasoning based on Bipartite Graph Convolutional
Network for Mammogram Mass Detection
Fandong Zhang2 Qianyi Zhang1 Siwen Wang1 Yizhou Wang3 Yizhou Yu1,∗
1
Deepwise AI Lab 2 Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Dept. of Computer Science & Technology,
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University

Yuhang Liu1

{liuyuhang, zhangqianyi, wangsiwen, yuyizhou}@deepwise.com
{fd.zhang, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Mammogram mass detection is of great clinical significance due to the high proportion of breast cancers. The information from cross views (i.e., mediolateral-oblique and
cranio-caudal) is highly related and complementary, and
is helpful to make comprehensive decisions. However, unlike radiologists who can recognize masses with reasoning ability in cross-view images, most existing methods lack
the ability to reason under the guidance of domain knowledge, thus it limits the performance. In this paper, we introduce the bipartite graph convolutional network to endow existing methods with cross-view reasoning ability of
radiologists in mammogram mass detection. The bipartite node sets are constructed by cross-view images respectively to represent relatively consistent regions in breasts,
while the bipartite edge learns to model both inherent crossview geometric constraints and appearance similarities between correspondences. Based on the bipartite graph, the
information propagates methodically through correspondences and enables spatial visual features equipped with
customized cross-view reasoning ability. Experimental results on DDSM dataset demonstrate the proposed algorithm
achieves state-of-the-art performance. Besides, visual analysis shows the model has a clear physical meaning, which
is helpful to radiologists in clinical interpretation.

1. Introduction
Breast cancer continues to have the highest incidence
and mortality rates among women worldwide [49]. Screening mammography has been proved to effectively reduce
breast cancer mortality [48]. Mass is one of the most important signs of breast cancer. However, mammogram mass
∗ Corresponding author.

detection is challenging for both radiologists and computeraided detection (CAD) system, since masses can be partially obscured by high-intensity compacted glands especially in dense breasts. In clinical practice, cross-view images (i.e, as shown in Figure 1, cranio-caudal (CC) view
which is a top-down view of the breast, and mediolateral
oblique (MLO) view which is a side view of the breast taken
at a certain angle) provide related and complementary information [46], and help to make comprehensive decisions.
To exploit relations of cross-view mammogram images,
an intuitive idea is to adopt [21, 54] to model inter-image
non-local relations. For example, CVR-RCNN [32] adds a
relation module to the second stage of Faster RCNN [42] to
learn inter-proposal relations. However, unlike radiologists
who are able to reason with domain knowledge, the constraints of the relation learning is implicit and uncontrolled,
while cross-view geometric constraints and semantic relations are not explicitly considered. Thus, the learned relations may be incorrect. Besides, the relation module relies
on the quality of stage-one proposals. It may fail under severe gland occlusions, which also lead to poor performance.
We argue that the key issue is how to endow the current detection methods with the power of reasoning. When
identifying masses, radiologists take the reasoning procedure explicitly. First extract suspicious regions in the examined image. And then search the regions in the auxiliary
view with compatible locations and appearances. If reasonable correspondences are found, regions in both views are
more likely to be mass, and vice versa. Therefore, the crossview region-based reasoning procedure is helpful for mass
detection.
Motivated by the above observations, in this paper, we
introduce a novel Bipartite Graph convolutional Network
(BGN) to provide the reasoning ability in mammogram
mass detection. BGN can be embedded into any object
detection frameworks [42, 18, 59]. It takes backbone im13812

