Semantic Correspondence as an Optimal Transport Problem
Yanbin Liu1 , Linchao Zhu1 , Makoto Yamada2,3 , Yi Yang1
1
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, 2 RIKEN AIP, 3 Kyoto University
csyanbin@gmail.com, {linchao.zhu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au, makoto.yamada@riken.jp

Abstract
Establishing dense correspondences across semantically
similar images is a challenging task. Due to the large
intra-class variation and background clutter, two common
issues occur in current approaches. First, many pixels in
a source image are assigned to one target pixel, i.e., many
to one matching. Second, some object pixels are assigned
to the background pixels, i.e., background matching. We
solve the first issue by global feature matching, which maximizes the total matching correlations between images to
obtain a global optimal matching matrix. The row sum
and column sum constraints are enforced on the matching matrix to induce a balanced solution, thus suppressing
many to one matching. We solve the second issue by applying a staircase function on the class activation maps to
re-weight the importance of pixels into four levels from foreground to background. The whole procedure is combined
into a unified optimal transport algorithm by converting the
maximization problem to the optimal transport formulation
and incorporating the staircase weights into optimal transport algorithm to act as empirical distributions. The proposed algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on
four benchmark datasets. Notably, a 26% relative improvement is achieved on the large-scale SPair-71k dataset.

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences across semantically
similar images is one of the fundamental tasks in computer
vision that has potential applications such as semantic segmentation [35, 40], image registration [24], and image editing [7, 39]. This is a challenging task due to the large intraclass variation, viewpoint changes and background clutter.
Recent methods employ powerful image features from
convolutional neural networks. Semantic flow approaches
attempt to establish a flow field between images based on
single [4, 33, 34] or multiple layers [30] feature maps. Semantic alignment methods cast semantic correspondence
as a geometric alignment problem to regress the global
transformation parameters using self-supervised [18, 32],

HPF

Ours

(a) Many to one matching.

HPF

Ours

(b) Background matching.

Figure 1: We solve two problems caused by current approaches, such as HPF [30]. (a) Many pixels in a source
image are assigned to one target pixel. (b) Some object pixels are assigned to the background pixels.

weakly-supervised [21, 33] or keypoints [24] supervision.
However, many to one matching problem and background matching problem hinder the development of semantic correspondence.
First, many to one matching occurs when many pixels in
a source image are assigned to one target pixel. We solve
this problem by global feature matching, which maximizes
the total matching correlations between images. Most existing approaches [4, 19, 30, 33] for semantic correspondence
rely on the correlation map which is computed by individual
feature matching. The individual matching scheme does not
care about the mutual relation between features, thus is sensitive to large intra-class variations and repetitive patterns.
For example, in Figure 1a (Left), due to repetitive pattern
in left bottle, the individual matching assigns many source
pixels to one target pixel. Although, semantic alignment
methods [21, 24, 32] try to suppress many to one matching
by estimating the global transformation parameters, they are
easily distracted by occlusion and non-rigid deformations.
14463

