4D Association Graph for Realtime Multi-person Motion Capture
Using Multiple Video Cameras
Yuxiang Zhang1∗, Liang An1∗ , Tao Yu1 , Xiu Li1 , Kun Li2 , Yebin Liu1,3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 Tianjin University
3
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University

1

Abstract
This paper contributes a novel realtime multi-person motion capture algorithm using multiview video inputs. Due
to the heavy occlusions and closely interacting motions in
each view, joint optimization on the multiview images and
multiple temporal frames is indispensable, which brings up
the essential challenge of realtime efficiency. To this end,
for the first time, we unify per-view parsing, cross-view
matching, and temporal tracking into a single optimization framework, i.e., a 4D association graph that each dimension (image space, viewpoint and time) can be treated
equally and simultaneously. To solve the 4D association
graph efficiently, we further contribute the idea of 4D limb
bundle parsing based on heuristic searching, followed with
limb bundle assembling by proposing a bundle Kruskal’s
algorithm. Our method enables a realtime motion capture
system running at 30fps using 5 cameras on a 5-person
scene. Benefiting from the unified parsing, matching and
tracking constraints, our method is robust to noisy detection due to severe occlusions and close interacting motions, and achieves high-quality online pose reconstruction
quality. The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art
methods quantitatively without using high-level appearance
information.

1. Introduction
Markerless motion capture of multi-person in a scene
is important for many industry applications but still challenging and far from being solved. Although the literatures have reported single view 2D and 3D pose estimation methods [41, 36, 11, 12, 18, 17, 28, 34, 44, 45, 33],
they suffer from heavy occlusions and produce low-fidelity
results. Comparably, multi-view cameras provide more
than one views to alleviate occlusion, as well as stereo
cues for accurate 3D triangulation, therefore are indispensable inputs for markerless motion capture of multi-person
∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1. Our method enables multi-person motion capture system working at 30fps for 5 persons using 5 RGB cameras, while
achieving high quality skeleton reconstruction results.

scenes. While remarkable advances have been made in
many kinds of multi-camera motion capture systems for human [30, 31, 24] or even animals [4], most of them fail to
achieve the goals of realtime performance and high quality
capture under extremely close interactions.
Given the 4D (2D spatial, 1D viewpoint and 1D temporal) multiview video input, the key to the success of realtime and high quality multi-person motion capture is how
to leverage the rich data input, i.e., how to operate on the
4D data structure to achieve high accuracy while maintaining realtime performance. Essentially, based on the human
body part features pre-detected in the separate 2D views using state-of-the-art CNN methods [11], three kinds of basic associations can be defined on this 4D structure. These
include single image association (i.e., parsing) [11, 20] to
form human skeletons in a single image, cross-view association (i.e., matching) to establish correspondences among
different views, and temporal association (i.e. tracking) to
build correspondences between sequential frames.
Existing methods struggle to deal with all these association simultaneously and efficiently. They consider only

1324

