Self-supervised Learning of Interpretable Keypoints from Unlabelled Videos
Tomas Jakab

Ankush Gupta

Hakan Bilen

Andrea Vedaldi

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
tomj@robots.ox.ac.uk

DeepMind, London
ankushgupta@google.com

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
hbilen@ed.ac.uk

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a new method for recognizing the pose of
objects from a single image that for learning uses only unlabelled videos and a weak empirical prior on the object poses.
Video frames differ primarily in the pose of the objects they
contain, so our method distils the pose information by analyzing the differences between frames. The distillation uses
a new dual representation of the geometry of objects as a
set of 2D keypoints, and as a pictorial representation, i.e.
a skeleton image. This has three benefits: (1) it provides a
tight ‘geometric bottleneck’ which disentangles pose from
appearance, (2) it can leverage powerful image-to-image
translation networks to map between photometry and geometry, and (3) it allows to incorporate empirical pose priors
in the learning process. The pose priors are obtained from
unpaired data, such as from a different dataset or modality such as mocap, such that no annotated image is ever
used in learning the pose recognition network. In standard benchmarks for pose recognition for humans and faces,
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance among
methods that do not require any labelled images for training. Project page: http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/
˜vgg/research/unsupervised_pose/

1. Introduction
Learning with limited or no external supervision is one
of the most significant open challenges in machine learning.
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning the 2D geometry of object categories such as humans and faces using
raw videos and as little additional supervision as possible. In
particular, given as input a number of videos centred on the
object, the goal is to learn automatically a neural network
that can predict the pose of the object from a single image.
Learning from unlabelled images requires a suitable supervisory signal. Recently, [25] noted that during a video an
object usually maintains its intrinsic appearance but changes
its pose. Hence, the concept of pose can be learned by
modelling the differences between video frames. They for-

Our approach
Unpaired pose prior

Unlabelled videos

Self-supervised
methods

,

Predicted landmarks Predicted landmarks

Figure 1. Learning landmark detectors from unpaired data. We
learn to directly predict human-interpretable landmarks of an object
using only unlabelled videos and a prior on the possible landmark
configurations [left]. The prior can be obtained from unpaired supervision or from a different modality, such as mocap data. Our
method obtains state-of-the-art landmark detection performance
for approaches that use unlabelled images for supervision. In contrast, self-supervised landmark detectors [25, 33, 54, 74] can only
learn to discover keypoints [right] that are not human-interpretable
(predictions from [25]) and require supervised post-processing.

mulate this as conditional image generation. They extract
a small amount of information from a given target video
frame via a tight bottleneck which retains pose information
while discarding appearance. For supervision, they reconstruct the target frame from the extracted pose, similar to an
auto-encoder. However, since pose alone does not contain
sufficient information to reconstruct the appearance of the
object, they also pass to the generator a second video frame
from which the appearance can be observed.
In this paper, we also consider a conditional image generation approach, but we introduce a whole new design for the
model and for the ‘pose bottleneck’. In particular, we adopt a
dual representation of pose as a set of 2D object coordinates,
and as a pictorial representation of the 2D coordinates in the
form of a skeleton image. We also define a differentiable

8787

