Dynamic Refinement Network for Oriented and
Densely Packed Object Detection
Xingjia Pan1,2 Yuqiang Ren3 Kekai Sheng3 Weiming Dong1,2,4∗
Haolei Yuan3 Xiaowei Guo3 Chongyang Ma5 Changsheng Xu1,2,4
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent 4 CASIA-LLVision Joint Lab 5 Y-Tech, Kuaishou Technology
{panxingjia2015, weiming.dong, changsheng.xu}@ia.ac.cn, chongyangma@kuaishou.com
{condiren, saulsheng, harryyuan, scorpioguo}@tencent.com

Abstract
Object detection has achieved remarkable progress in the
past decade. However, the detection of oriented and densely
packed objects remains challenging because of following
inherent reasons: (1) receptive fields of neurons are all
axis-aligned and of the same shape, whereas objects are
usually of diverse shapes and align along various directions;
(2) detection models are typically trained with generic
knowledge and may not generalize well to handle specific
objects at test time; (3) the limited dataset hinders the
development on this task. To resolve the first two issues,
we present a dynamic refinement network which consists
of two novel components, i.e., a feature selection module
(FSM) and a dynamic refinement head (DRH). Our FSM
enables neurons to adjust receptive fields in accordance
with the shapes and orientations of target objects, whereas
the DRH empowers our model to refine the prediction
dynamically in an object-aware manner. To address the
limited availability of related benchmarks, we collect an
extensive and fully annotated dataset, namely, SKU110K-R,
which is relabeled with oriented bounding boxes based on
SKU110K. We perform quantitative evaluations on several
publicly available benchmarks including DOTA, HRSC2016,
SKU110K, and our own SKU110K-R dataset. Experimental
results show that our method achieves consistent and
substantial gains compared with baseline approaches. Our
source code and dataset will be released to encourage followup research.

1. Introduction
Object detection has achieved remarkable progress on
a few benchmarks (e.g., VOC [6] and COCO [24]) with
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Classification

(b) Regression

Figure 1. Illustrations of dynamic refinement on classification (a)
and regression (b). Each solid dot represents a sample. With
the general knowledge learned in training procedure, classifiers
and regressors make predictions while suffering from lack of
flexibility. Model should changes over samples. The arrows show
the promising refinements for improved performance.

the help of deep learning. Numerous well-designed methods [35, 44, 46, 34, 3] have demonstrated promising results.
However, majority of these detectors encounter problems
when objects, such as those in aerial images, are in arbitrary
orientations and present dense distribution. Moreover,
almost all detectors optimize model parameters on the
training set and keep them fixed afterward. This static
paradigm, which uses general knowledge, may not be
flexible enough to detect specific samples during test time.
Most of the recent progress on oriented object detection
is based on R-CNN series frameworks [8, 7, 35]. These
methods first generate numerous horizontal bounding boxes
as region of interests (RoIs) and then predict classification
and location on the basis of regional features. Unfortunately,
horizontal RoIs typically suffer from severe misalignment between the bounding boxes and oriented objects [40, 29]. For
example, objects in aerial images are usually with arbitrary
orientations and densely packed, leading to artifacts wherein
several instances are often crowded and contained by a single
111207

