Disentangling and Unifying Graph Convolutions
for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Ziyu Liu1,3 , Hongwen Zhang2 , Zhenghao Chen1 , Zhiyong Wang1 , Wanli Ouyang1,3
The University of Sydney 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences & CASIA
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia

1

{zliu6676@uni.,zhenghao.chen@,zhiyong.wang@,wanli.ouyang@}sydney.edu.au,hongwen.zhang@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Spatial-temporal graphs have been widely used by
skeleton-based action recognition algorithms to model human action dynamics. To capture robust movement patterns
from these graphs, long-range and multi-scale context aggregation and spatial-temporal dependency modeling are
critical aspects of a powerful feature extractor. However,
existing methods have limitations in achieving (1) unbiased long-range joint relationship modeling under multiscale operators and (2) unobstructed cross-spacetime information flow for capturing complex spatial-temporal dependencies. In this work, we present (1) a simple method to
disentangle multi-scale graph convolutions and (2) a unified spatial-temporal graph convolutional operator named
G3D. The proposed multi-scale aggregation scheme disentangles the importance of nodes in different neighborhoods for effective long-range modeling. The proposed
G3D module leverages dense cross-spacetime edges as skip
connections for direct information propagation across the
spatial-temporal graph. By coupling these proposals, we
develop a powerful feature extractor named MS-G3D based
on which our model1 outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods on three large-scale datasets: NTU RGB+D 60,
NTU RGB+D 120, and Kinetics Skeleton 400.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is an important task with
many real-world applications. In particular, skeleton-based
human action recognition involves predicting actions from
skeleton representations of human bodies instead of raw
RGB videos, and the significant results seen in recent
work [50, 33, 32, 34, 21, 20, 54, 35] have proven its merits.
In contrast to RGB representations, skeleton data contain
only the 2D [50, 15] or 3D [31, 25] positions of the human
key joints, providing highly abstract information that is also
1 Code is available at github.com/kenziyuliu/ms-g3d

Spatial
Information
Flow

(a)

Temporal
Information Flow

(b)

Spatial-Temporal
Information Flow

(c)

Disentangled MultiScale Aggregation

Figure 1: (a) Factorized spatial and temporal modeling on skeleton
graph sequences causes indirect information flow. (b) In this work,
we propose to capture cross-spacetime correlations with unified
spatial-temporal graph convolutions. (c) Disentangling node features at separate spatial-temporal neighborhoods (yellow, blue, red
at different distances, partially colored for clarity) is pivotal for effective multi-scale learning in the spatial-temporal domain.

free of environmental noises (e.g. background clutter, lighting conditions, clothing), allowing action recognition algorithms to focus on the robust features of the action.
Earlier approaches to skeleton-based action recognition
treat human joints as a set of independent features, and they
model the spatial and temporal joint correlations through
hand-crafted [42, 43] or learned [31, 6, 48, 54] aggregations of these features. However, these methods overlook
the inherent relationships between the human joints, which
are best captured with human skeleton graphs with joints as
nodes and their natural connectivity (i.e. “bones”) as edges.
For this reason, recent approaches [50, 19, 34, 35, 32] model
the joint movement patterns of an action with a skeleton
spatial-temporal graph, which is a series of disjoint and
isomorphic skeleton graphs at different time steps carrying
information in both spatial and temporal dimensions.
For robust action recognition from skeleton graphs, an
ideal algorithm should look beyond the local joint connectivity and extract multi-scale structural features and
long-range dependencies, since joints that are structurally
apart can also have strong correlations. Many existing approaches achieve this by performing graph convolutions

143

