Camera On-boarding for Person Re-identification using Hypothesis Transfer
Learning

1

Sk Miraj Ahmed1,∗, Aske R Lejbølle2,∗,†, Rameswar Panda2 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
University of California, Riverside, 2 Aalborg University, Denmark, 3 IBM Research AI, Cambridge
{sahme047@, alejboel@, rpand002@, amitrc@ece}.ucr.edu

Abstract

∗ Equal Contribution
† This work was done while AL was a visiting student at UC Riverside.

𝐶#

Learned models , source
data discarded

𝑀"#

𝑀!#
Onboard new camera

(𝐶$ )

𝐶"

𝐶"
Source data used for pairwise
training of existing network

𝑀!"

𝐶!

𝐶#

Provided pairwise metrics
without access to source data
New camera with new limited
pairwise labeled data with
existing cameras

𝑀"#

𝑀!#

=?

Person re-identification (re-id), which addresses the
problem of matching people across different cameras, has
attracted intense attention in recent years [7, 29, 51]. Much
progress has been made in developing a variety of methods
to learn features [16, 21, 22] or distance metrics by exploiting unlabeled and/or manually labeled data. Recently, deep
learning methods have also shown significant performance

𝐶#

#

1. Introduction

𝑀!"

𝐶!
𝐶!

𝑀$

Most of the existing approaches for person reidentification consider a static setting where the number of
cameras in the network is fixed. An interesting direction,
which has received little attention, is to explore the dynamic
nature of a camera network, where one tries to adapt the existing re-identification models after on-boarding new cameras, with little additional effort. There have been a few
recent methods proposed in person re-identification that attempt to address this problem by assuming the labeled data
in the existing network is still available while adding new
cameras. This is a strong assumption since there may exist
some privacy issues for which one may not have access to
those data. Rather, based on the fact that it is easy to store
the learned re-identifications models, which mitigates any
data privacy concern, we develop an efficient model adaptation approach using hypothesis transfer learning that aims
to transfer the knowledge using only source models and
limited labeled data, but without using any source camera data from the existing network. Our approach minimizes the effect of negative transfer by finding an optimal
weighted combination of multiple source models for transferring the knowledge. Extensive experiments on four challenging benchmark datasets with a variable number of cameras well demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed approach
over state-of-the-art methods.

𝑀$" = ?
𝐶"

𝑀$ ! =

?

𝐶$

New limited labeled data
(colors indicate
corresponding camera)

Figure 1: Consider a three camera (C1 , C2 and C3 ) network, where we have only three pairwise distance metrics
(M12 , M23 and M13 ) available for matching persons, and
no access to the labeled data due to privacy concerns. A new
camera, C4 , needs to be added into the system quickly, thus,
allowing us to have only very limited labeled data across
the new camera and the existing ones. Our goal in this paper is to learn the pairwise distance metrics (M41 , M42 and
M43 ) between the newly inserted camera(s) and the existing
cameras, using the learned source metrics from the existing
network and a small amount of labeled data available after
installing the new camera(s).
improvement on person re-id [1, 15, 31, 32, 44, 52]. However, with the notable exception of [25, 26], most of these
works have not yet considered the dynamic nature of a camera network, where new cameras can be introduced at any
time to cover a certain related area that is not well-covered
by the existing network of cameras. To build a more scalable person re-identification system, it is very essential to
consider the problem of how to on-board new cameras into
an existing network with little additional effort.
Let us consider K number
 of cameras in a network for
which we have learned K
2 number of optimal pairwise
112144

