Towards Learning a Generic Agent for
Vision-and-Language Navigation via Pre-training
Weituo Hao1†‡ , Chunyuan Li2†∗, Xiujun Li2 , Lawrence Carin1 , Jianfeng Gao2
1
Duke University 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond
{weituo.hao, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
Learning to navigate in a visual environment following natural-language instructions is a challenging task, because the multimodal inputs to the agent are highly variable, and the training data on a new task is often limited.
We present the first pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm
for vision-and-language navigation (VLN) tasks. By training on a large amount of image-text-action triplets in a
self-supervised learning manner, the pre-trained model provides generic representations of visual environments and
language instructions. It can be easily used as a drop-in
for existing VLN frameworks, leading to the proposed agent
P REVALENT1 . It learns more effectively in new tasks and
generalizes better in a previously unseen environment. The
performance is validated on three VLN tasks. On the Roomto-Room [3] benchmark, our model improves the state-ofthe-art from 47% to 51% on success rate weighted by path
length. Further, the learned representation is transferable
to other VLN tasks. On two recent tasks, vision-and-dialog
navigation [30] and “Help, Anna!” [22], the proposed
P REVALENT leads to significant improvement over existing
methods, achieving a new state of the art.

1. Introduction
Learning to navigate in a photorealistic home environment based on natural language instructions has attracted
increasing research interest [23, 14, 7, 3, 6], as it provides insight into core scientific questions about multimodal
representations. It also takes a step toward real-world applications, such as personal assistants and in-home robots.
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) presents a challenging reasoning problem for agents, as the multimodal inputs
are highly variable, inherently ambiguous, and often underspecified.
∗ Corresponding author † Equal Contribution ‡ Work performed during an internship at MSR
1 P RE - TRAINED VISION - AND - LANGUAGE BASED NAVIGATOR

{chunyl,xiul,jfgao}@microsoft.com

Most previous methods build on the sequence-tosequence architecture [26], where the instruction is encoded
as a sequence of words, and the navigation trajectory is decoded as a sequence of actions, enhanced with attention
mechanisms [3, 32, 18] and beam search [9]. While a number of methods [20, 21, 33] have been proposed to improve
language understanding, common to all existing work is that
the agent learns to understand each instruction from scratch
or in isolation, without collectively leveraging prior visiongrounded domain knowledge.
However, each instruction in practice only loosely aligns
with the desired navigation path, making it imperfect for
the existing paradigm of learning to understand the instruction from scratch. This is because (i) every instruction only
partially characterizes the trajectory. It can be ambiguous
to interpret the instructions, without grounding on the visual states. (ii) The objects in visual states and language instructions may share various common forms/relationships,
and therefore it is natural to build an informative joint representation beforehand, and use this “common knowleldge”
for transfer learning in downstream tasks.
To address this natural ambiguity of instructions more
effectively, we propose to pre-train an encoder to align language instructions and visual states for joint representations. The image-text-action triplets at each time step are
independently fed into the model, which is trained to predict the masked word tokens and next actions, thus formulating the VLN pre-training in the self-learning paradigm.
The complexity of VLN learning can then be reduced by
eliminating language understandings which lack consensus
from visual states. The pre-trained model plays the role
of providing generic image-text representations, and is applicable to most existing approaches to VLN, leading to
our agent P REVALENT. We consider three VLN scenarios
as downstream tasks: Room-to-room (R2R) [3], cooperative vision-and-dialog navigation (CVDN) [30], and “Help,
Anna!” (HANNA) [22]. The overall pre-training and finetuning pipeline is shown in Figure 1.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate strong empirical performance of P REVALENT. The proposed P REVA 113137

