Social-STGCNN: A Social Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Neural
Network for Human Trajectory Prediction
Abduallah Mohamed1 , Kun Qian1
Mohamed Elhoseiny2,3, ** , Christian Claudel1, **
1
2
3
The University of Texas at Austin
KAUST
Stanford University
{abduallah.mohamed,kunqian,christian.claudel}@utexas.edu, mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

Social-STGCNN Model

Abstract
Better machine understanding of pedestrian behaviors
enables faster progress in modeling interactions between
agents such as autonomous vehicles and humans. Pedestrian
trajectories are not only influenced by the pedestrian itself
but also by interaction with surrounding objects. Previous
methods modeled these interactions by using a variety of
aggregation methods that integrate different learned pedestrians states. We propose the Social Spatio-Temporal Graph
Convolutional Neural Network (Social-STGCNN), which
substitutes the need of aggregation methods by modeling the
interactions as a graph. Our results show an improvement
over the state of art by 20% on the Final Displacement Error
(FDE) and an improvement on the Average Displacement Error (ADE) with 8.5 times less parameters and up to 48 times
faster inference speed than previously reported methods. In
addition, our model is data efficient, and exceeds previous
state of the art on the ADE metric with only 20% of the training data. We propose a kernel function to embed the social interactions between pedestrians within the adjacency matrix.
Through qualitative analysis, we show that our model inherited social behaviors that can be expected between pedestrians trajectories. Code is available at https://github.
com/abduallahmohamed/Social-STGCNN .

1. Introduction
Predicting pedestrian trajectories is of major importance
for several applications including autonomous driving and
surveillance systems. In autonomous driving, an accurate
prediction of pedestrians trajectories enables the controller
to plan ahead the motion of the vehicle in an adversarial environment. For example, it is a critical component
for collision avoidance systems or emergency braking systems [2, 18, 16, 22]. In surveillance systems, forecasting
** Equal advising.

Predicted future trajectories

Single Pass
Spatio-Temporal graph of
observed trajectories

Figure 1. Pedestrian future trajectories prediction using the SocialSTGCNN model. The social interactions between pedestrians and
their temporal dynamics are represented by a spatio-temporal graph.
We predict the future trajectories in a single pass.

pedestrian trajectories is critical in helping identifying suspicious activities [15, 28, 20].
The trajectory of a pedestrian is challenging to predict,
due to the complex interactions between the pedestrian with
the environment. Objects potentially influencing the trajectory of a pedestrian include physical obstacles such as trees
or roads, and moving objects including vehicles and other
pedestrians. According to [19], 70% of pedestrians tend to
walk in groups. The interactions between pedestrians are
mainly driven by common sense and social conventions. The
complexity of pedestrian trajectory prediction comes from
different social behaviors such as walking in parallel with
others, within a group, collision avoidance and merging from
different directions into a specific point. Another source of
complexity is the randomness of the motion, given that the
target destination and intended path of the pedestrian are
unknown.
The social attributes of pedestrian motions encouraged
researchers in this area to focus on inventing deep methods
to model social interactions between pedestrians. In the
Social-LSTM [1] article, deep learning based model is applied to predict the pedestrians trajectories by modeling each
pedestrian trajectory via a recurrent deep model. The outputs
of recurrent models are made to interact with each other via
a pooling layer. Several articles [17, 14, 30] followed this
direction. Social-LSTM [1] modeled the pedestrian trajec-

14424

