Multi-Domain Learning for Accurate and Few-Shot Color Constancy
Jin Xiao1,∗
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
csjxiao@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Shuhang Gu2,∗
2

CVL, ETH Zürich

shuhanggu@gmail.com

Lei Zhang1,3,†
3

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Color constancy is an important process in camera
pipeline to remove the color bias of captured image caused
by scene illumination. Recently, significant improvements
in color constancy accuracy have been achieved by using
deep neural networks (DNNs). However, existing DNNbased color constancy methods learn distinct mappings
for different cameras, which require a costly data acquisition process for each camera device. In this paper, we
start a pioneer work to introduce multi-domain learning
to color constancy area. For different camera devices,
we train a branch of networks which share the same feature extractor and illuminant estimator, and only employ a
camera-specific channel re-weighting module to adapt to
the camera-specific characteristics. Such a multi-domain
learning strategy enables us to take benefit from crossdevice training data. The proposed multi-domain learning
color constancy method achieved state-of-the-art performance on three commonly used benchmark datasets. Furthermore, we also validate the proposed method in a fewshot color constancy setting. Given a new unseen device
with limited number of training samples, our method is
capable of delivering accurate color constancy by merely
learning the camera-specific parameters from the few-shot
dataset. Our project page is publicly available at https:
//github.com/msxiaojin/MDLCC.

1. Introduction
Human vision system naturally has the ability to compensate for different illuminants to a scene, named color
constancy. The color of images captured by cameras, however are easily affected by different illuminants, and might
appear “blueish” under sunlight and “yellowish” under indoor incandescent light. Aiming at estimating the scene illuminant from the captured image, color constancy is an
important unit in camera pipeline to correct the color of cap∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by China NSFC grant
(no. 61672446) and Hong Kong RGC RIF grant (R5001-18).

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed multi-domain learning color
constancy method. We train color constancy networks for different
devices simultaneously. Different networks share the same feature
extractor and illuminant estimator with shared parameter θ0 , and
only have their individual channel re-weighting module with parameters θA , θB and θK , respectively.

tured images.
Classical color constancy methods utilize image statistics or physical properties to estimate illuminant of the
scene. The performance of these approaches is highly dependent on the assumptions and these methods falter in
cases where assumptions fail to hold [31]. In the last
decade, another category of methods, i.e., the learningbased methods, have become more popular. Early learningbased methods [20, 15] adopt hand-crafted features and
only learn the estimating function from the training data.
Inspired by the success of deep neural networks (DNN) in
other low-level vision tasks [25, 24, 16, 38], recently proposed DNN based approaches [9, 37, 26] learn image representation as well as the estimating function jointly, and
have achieved state-of-the-art estimation accuracy.
DNN-based methods directly learn a mapping function
between the input image and ground truth illuminant label.
Given enough training data, they are able to use highly complex nonlinear function to capture the relationship between
input images and the corresponding illuminants. However,
the acquisition of data for training color constancy network
is often costly: firstly, images, each contains the physical
calibration objects, in a large variety of scenes under various illuminants must be collected; and then, ground-truth
illuminant in each image needs to be estimated through the

3258

