Interactive Object Segmentation with Inside-Outside Guidance
Shiyin Zhang1,2 , Jun Hao Liew3 , Yunchao Wei4 , Shikui Wei1,2∗, Yao Zhao1,2
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3

National University of Singapore 4 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

https://github.com/shiyinzhang/Inside-Outside-Guidance

Abstract
This paper explores how to harvest precise object segmentation masks while minimizing the human interaction
cost. To achieve this, we propose an Inside-Outside Guidance (IOG) approach in this work. Concretely, we leverage an inside point that is clicked near the object center
and two outside points at the symmetrical corner locations
(top-left and bottom-right or top-right and bottom-left) of a
tight bounding box that encloses the target object. This results in a total of one foreground click and four background
clicks for segmentation. The advantages of our IOG are
four-fold: 1) the two outside points can help to remove distractions from other objects or background; 2) the inside
point can help to eliminate the unrelated regions inside the
bounding box; 3) the inside and outside points are easily
identified, reducing the confusion raised by the state-of-theart DEXTR in labeling some extreme samples; 4) our approach naturally supports additional clicks annotations for
further correction. Despite its simplicity, our IOG not only
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several popular
benchmarks, but also demonstrates strong generalization
capability across different domains such as street scenes,
aerial imagery and medical images, without fine-tuning. In
addition, we also propose a simple two-stage solution that
enables our IOG to produce high quality instance segmentation masks from existing datasets with off-the-shelf bounding boxes such as ImageNet and Open Images, demonstrating the superiority of our IOG as an annotation tool.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, we have witnessed a revolutionary advancement in semantic [44, 40, 68, 69, 10, 11, 12,
30, 15, 31] and instance segmentation [25, 36, 8, 60, 13,
65, 34, 4, 9, 43, 29] for different domains, such as general
scenes [20, 41, 70], autonomous driving [17, 48, 21], aerial
imagery [57, 16], medical diagnosis [22, 56], etc. Suc∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)
Ground truth
Segmentation
Network

(c)

Cropped
sub-region

Figure 1. (a) User inputs of DEXTR [46]. (b) User inputs of the
proposed IOG method. (c) An overview of our IOG framework.

cessful segmentation models are usually built on the shoulders of large volumes of high-quality training data. However, the process to create the pixel-level training data necessary to build these models is often expensive, laborious
and time-consuming. Thus, interactive segmentation, which
allows the human annotators to quickly extract the objectof-interest by providing some user inputs such as bounding
boxes [66, 52, 64] or clicks [67, 38, 45, 37], appears to be an
attractive and efficient way to reduce the annotation effort.
Recently, Maninis et al. [46] explored the use to extreme
points of an object (left-most, right-most, top, bottom pixels) for interactive image segmentation. Despite its simplicity, the extreme points have demonstrated fast interactive annotation speed and high segmentation quality across
different application domains. Nevertheless, we argue that
the clicking paradigm of extreme points also brings some
issues: 1) annotating extreme points requires users to carefully click at the object boundaries, which usually consumes
much more time as compared to the common clicking setting where users can click at any of the interior and exterior
of object regions; 2) the annotation process can sometimes
be confusing when multiple extreme points appear at similar spatial locations (pencil in Figure 1(a)) or when there
are unrelated objects or background lying inside the target
object (dog in Figure 1(a)).
To tackle the aforementioned issues as well as to pro-

12234

