Adaptive Hierarchical Down-Sampling for Point Cloud Classification
Ehsan Nezhadarya, Ehsan Taghavi, Ryan Razani, Bingbing Liu and Jun Luo
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies Inc.
Toronto, Canada
{ehsan.nezhadarya, ehsan.taghavi, ryan.razani, liu.bingbing, jun.luo1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Deterministic down-sampling of an unordered point
cloud in a deep neural network has not been rigorously
studied so far. Existing methods down-sample the points
regardless of their importance to the network output. As
a result, some important points in the point cloud may be
removed, while less valuable points may be passed to next
layers. In contrast, the proposed adaptive down-sampling
method samples the points by taking into account the importance of each point, which varies according to application, task and training data. In this paper, we propose a
novel deterministic, adaptive, permutation-invariant downsampling layer, called Critical Points Layer (CPL), which
learns to reduce the number of points in an unordered point
cloud while retaining the important (critical) ones. Unlike
most graph-based point cloud down-sampling methods that
use k-NN to ﬁnd the neighboring points, CPL is a global
down-sampling method, rendering it computationally very
efﬁcient. The proposed layer can be used along with a
graph-based point cloud convolution layer to form a convolutional neural network, dubbed CP-Net in this paper. We
introduce a CP-Net for 3D object classiﬁcation task that
achieves high accuracy for the ModelNet40 dataset among
point cloud based methods, which validates the effectiveness of the CPL.

1. Introduction
In most robotic applications, laser point cloud data plays
a key role in perception of the surrounding environment.
Autonomous mobile robotic systems in particular use point
cloud data to train deep models to solve different problems,
such as dynamic object detection, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), path planning, etc. With the
introduction of many new methods, such as PointNet [19],
PointNet++ [20], DGCNN [26], PointCNN [11], and SONet [10], extracting features from unordered point cloud
with deep neural networks has become a highly active ﬁeld
of research. These methods are shown to be quite suc-

cessful in point cloud classiﬁcation benchmarks, such as
ModelNet40 [27].
In practical scenarios, the number of points in the point
cloud associated with an object may be quite large, especially as a result of using high density sensors such as
Velodyne-64 [16]. One possible way to reduce computation is to down-sample the points in the point cloud as it
gets passed through the network. A class of methods are
proposed in which k-NN search [18] is used to ﬁnd the
neighbourhood for each point and down-sample according
to these neighbourhoods. Such methods, however, trade one
kind of expensive computation (neighbourhood search) for
another one (processing large point cloud).
In another family of works such as [19] and [20], the
3D point cloud is processed directly, while other works
transform point cloud to regular voxels such as methods in
[27, 14, 6]. Transforming to regular voxels however, leads
to loss of goemetric information and high computational
complexity. Recently, the method introduced in RS-CNN
[12] attempts to learn irregular CNN-like ﬁlters to capture
local point cloud features which achieves the state-of-theart accuracy in classiﬁcation. In addition to these papers,
a deep learning network for point cloud sampling is presented in [5]. This method produces a down-sampled point
cloud from raw and unordered input point cloud which is
not guaranteed to be a subset of the original one. Therefore, a post-processing matching step is required, leading to
a more complex system.
In order to fully leverage a down-sampling method, what
is highly needed is a deterministic content-sensitive but fast
way of down-sampling an unordered point cloud that can
be integrated into a deep neural network – a technique similarly effective and efﬁcient as max pooling in conventional
CNN. In this paper, we introduce the Critical Points Layer
(CPL), which meets these requirements.
Unlike previous down-sampling methods that generate a
set of points different from the input points, CPL not only
selects the output points from the input, but also downsamples the points within the network in a way that the
critical ones are not lost in this process. Unlike random

12956

