Context-Aware Group Captioning via Self-Attention and Contrastive Features
Zhuowan Li1∗, Quan Tran2 , Long Mai2 , Zhe Lin2 , and Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Adobe Research
{zli110, alan.yuille}@jhu.edu {qtran, malong, zlin}@adobe.com

Abstract
While image captioning has progressed rapidly, existing works focus mainly on describing single images. In
this paper, we introduce a new task, context-aware group
captioning, which aims to describe a group of target images in the context of another group of related reference
images. Context-aware group captioning requires not only
summarizing information from both the target and reference image group but also contrasting between them. To
solve this problem, we propose a framework combining selfattention mechanism with contrastive feature construction
to effectively summarize common information from each image group while capturing discriminative information between them. To build the dataset for this task, we propose to
group the images and generate the group captions based on
single image captions using scene graphs matching. Our
datasets are constructed on top of the public Conceptual
Captions dataset and our new Stock Captions dataset. Experiments on the two datasets show the effectiveness of our
method on this new task. 1

1. Introduction
Generating natural language descriptions from images,
the task commonly known as image captioning, has long
been an important problem in computer vision research [3,
15, 29]. It requires a high level of understanding from both
language and vision. Image captioning has attracted a lot of
research attention in recent years thanks to the advances in
joint language-vision understanding models [1, 19, 39, 54].
While image captioning has progressed rapidly, existing
works mostly focus on describing individual images. There
are practical scenarios in which captioning images in group
is desirable. Examples include summarizing personal photo
albums for social sharing or understanding web user intention from their viewed or clicked images. Moreover, it is often the case that the target image group to be captioned nat∗ This work has been done during the first author’s internship at Adobe.
1 Related Datasets and code are released at https://lizw14.
github.io/project/groupcap.

Target group caption: woman with cowboy hat

Context
Figure 1. Context-ware group captioning. Given a group of target images (shown in orange boxes) and a group of reference images which provide the context (woman), the goal is to generate
a language description (woman with cowboy hat) that best
describes the target group while taking into account the context
depicted by the reference group.

urally belongs to a larger set that provides the context. For
instance, in text-based image retrieval applications, given a
group of user-interested images and other images returned
by the search engine, we could predict the user hidden preferences by contrasting the two groups and suggest a new
search query accordingly. Figure 1 shows an example of
such scenario. Among all the images returned by search
query woman, the user can indicate his/her interest in some
of the images (in orange boxes). The objective is to recognize that the user wants woman with cowboy hat and
suggest the query accordingly.
Inspired by these real-world applications, we propose the
novel problem of context-aware group captioning: given a
group of target images and a group of reference images, our
goal is to generate a language description that best describes
the target group in the context of the reference group. Compared to the conventional setting of single-image based captioning, our new problem poses two fundamental requirements. First, the captioning model needs to effectively summarize the common properties of the image groups. Second, the model needs to accurately describe the distinguish13440

