Grid-GCN for Fast and Scalable Point Cloud Learning
Qiangeng Xu1
Xudong Sun2
Cho-Ying Wu1
1
University of Southern California
{qiangenx,choyingw,uneumann}@usc.edu

Panqu Wang2
Ulrich Neumann1
2
Tusimple, Inc

{xudong.sun,panqu.wang}@tusimple.ai

Abstract
Due to the sparsity and irregularity of the point cloud
data, methods that directly consume points have become
popular. Among all point-based models, graph convolutional networks (GCN) lead to notable performance by fully
preserving the data granularity and exploiting point interrelation. However, point-based networks spend a significant amount of time on data structuring (e.g., Farthest
Point Sampling (FPS) and neighbor points querying), which
limit the speed and scalability. In this paper, we present a
method, named Grid-GCN, for fast and scalable point cloud
learning. Grid-GCN uses a novel data structuring strategy,
Coverage-Aware Grid Query (CAGQ). By leveraging the
efficiency of grid space, CAGQ improves spatial coverage
while reducing the theoretical time complexity. Compared
with popular sampling methods such as Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) and Ball Query, CAGQ achieves up to 50×
speed-up. With a Grid Context Aggregation (GCA) module,
Grid-GCN achieves state-of-the-art performance on major point cloud classification and segmentation benchmarks
with significantly faster runtime than previous studies. Remarkably, Grid-GCN achieves the inference speed of 50fps
on ScanNet using 81920 points as input. The supplementary
1
and the code 2 are released.

1. Introduction
Point cloud data is popular in applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Currently, LiDAR sensors can generate millions of points
a second, providing dense real-time representations of the
world. Many approaches are used for point cloud data processing. Volumetric models are a family of models that
transfer point cloud to spatially quantized voxel grids and
use a volumetric convolution to perform computation in the
grid space [28, 45, 28]. Using grids as data structuring
methods, volumetric approaches associate points to locations in grids, and 3D convolutional kernels gather information from neighboring voxels. Although grid data struc1 https://xharlie.github.io/papers/GGCN supCamReady.pdf
2 https://github.com/xharlie/Grid-GCN

Figure 1: Overview of the Grid-GCN model. (a) Illustration
of the network architecture for point cloud segmentation. Our
model consists of several GridConv layers, and each can be
used in either a downsampling or an upsampling process. A
GridConv layer includes two stages: (b) For the data structuring stage, a Coverage-Aware Grid Query (CAGQ) module
achieves efficient data structuring and provides point groups
for efficient computation. (c) For the convolution stage, a Grid
Context Aggregation (GCA) module conducts graph convolution on the point groups by aggregating local context.
tures are efficient, high voxel resolution is required to preserve the granularity of the data location. Since computation and memory usage grows cubically with the voxel
resolution, it is costly to process large point clouds. In addition, since approximately 90% of the voxels are empty for
most point clouds[51], significant computation power may
be consumed by processing no information.
Another family of models for point cloud data processing is Point-based models. In contrast to volumetric models,
point-based models enable efficient computation but suffer from inefficient data structuring. For example, PointNet [29] consumes the point cloud directly without quantization and aggregates the information at the last stage of
the network, so the accurate data locations are intact but
the computation cost grows linearly with the number of
points. Later studies [30, 47, 41, 37, 46] apply a downsampling strategy at each layer to aggregate information
15661

