Structure Preserving Generative Cross-Domain Learning
Haifeng Xia♯ , Zhengming Ding†
♯
Department of ECE, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis
†
Department of CIT, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis
{haifxia,zd2}@iu.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) casts a light
when dealing with insufficient or no labeled data in the target domain by exploring the well-annotated source knowledge in different distributions. Most research efforts on
UDA explore to seek a domain-invariant classifier over
source supervision. However, due to the scarcity of label
information in the target domain, such a classifier has a
lack of ground-truth target supervision, which dramatically
obstructs the robustness and discrimination of the classifier. To this end, we develop a novel Generative crossdomain learning via Structure-Preserving (GSP), which attempts to transform target data into the source domain in
order to take advantage of source supervision. Specifically,
a novel cross-domain graph alignment is developed to capture the intrinsic relationship across two domains during
target-source translation. Simultaneously, two distinct classifiers are trained to trigger the domain-invariant feature
learning both guided with source supervision, one is a traditional source classifier and the other is a source-supervised
target classifier. Extensive experimental results on several
cross-domain visual benchmarks have demonstrated the effectiveness of our model by comparing with other state-ofthe-art UDA algorithms.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved an increasing number of successes in computer vision community with a great
deal of well-labeled data, which allows deep learning models to easily capture abstract and complex relationship between feature and category [44]. In reality, however, collecting abundant data with annotation becomes too difficult
and expensive in many learning tasks. The intuitive motivation to address the realistic issue is to apply knowledge
extracted from model trained with available annotated samples into target tasks. Such a strategy frequently tends to
be vulnerable for the problem of domain shift [11] as the
trained model is more likely to be invalid when assessed

on unlabeled target domain having various distribution with
training source. Specifically, for visual data, domain shift
results from distinctions of light condition occlusions and
background [4].
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is a promising
technique to train a model obtaining lower risk when evaluated on target domain [13, 8, 9, 41, 18]. Existing UDA
methods [28, 21, 7] generally minimize the risk on source
data firstly and then employ appropriate statistical property
to eliminate cross-domain discrepancy. There are two common manners to measure discrepancy between distributions
of two domains, i.e., discrepancy measurement [20, 22]
and domain adversarial confusion [44, 19]. Specifically,
discrepancy measurement like maximum mean discrepancy
employs statistical indication (mean of distribution) to measure cross-domain difference and aligns the distribution of
two domains by constraining this indication. While domain
adversarial confusion aims to seek a domain invariant feature generator for both domains with a domain confusion
discriminator in an adversarial training manner. However,
these methods still remain restrictive in the alignment between feature and category due to the neglect of class-level
information [23]. They generally suffer from two challenging issues: 1) mis-alignment of cross-domain samples from
various classes and 2) the learned classifier would lack of
generalization on target domain [14].
To alleviate these disadvantages, target pseudo labels are
introduced to effectively enhance class-level alignment during the training process [42, 37]. Moreover, [40] considers the class prior probability defined on two domains as
class-specific weight and modifies original MMD with auxiliary weights to promote discriminative ability of classifier for target domain. Similarly, a novel metric measure
formulated in [14] includes intra-class domain discrepancy
and inter-class domain discrepancy. On the other hand, recent studies [25, 15] pay more attention to the second issue,
which attempts to make the learned decision boundary robust for target domain. The common strategy to address
this challenge designs two domain-specific classifiers. Subsequently, [30] regards two classifiers as various views for

4364

