SEED: Semantics Enhanced Encoder-Decoder Framework for Scene Text
Recognition
Zhi Qiao1,2 Yu Zhou1∗ Dongbao Yang1 Yucan Zhou1 Weiping Wang1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
1

{qiaozhi, zhouyu, yangdongbao, zhouyucan, wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Scene text recognition is a hot research topic in computer vision. Recently, many recognition methods based on
the encoder-decoder framework have been proposed, and
they can handle scene texts of perspective distortion and
curve shape. Nevertheless, they still face lots of challenges
like image blur, uneven illumination, and incomplete characters. We argue that most encoder-decoder methods are
based on local visual features without explicit global semantic information. In this work, we propose a semantics
enhanced encoder-decoder framework to robustly recognize
low-quality scene texts. The semantic information is used
both in the encoder module for supervision and in the decoder module for initializing. In particular, the state-of-theart ASTER method is integrated into the proposed framework as an exemplar. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed framework is more robust for low-quality
text images, and achieves state-of-the-art results on several
benchmark datasets. The source code will be available.†

Low Quality Images Existing Encoder-Decoder
Framework

Ours

you

body

theatro

theatre

hird

hard

hour

house

reval

royal

promos

promod

Figure 1. The comparison of our SEED with the existing encoderdecoder framework such as [45]. The first column shows the examples of some challenging scene text including image blur, occlusion,
and background interference. The second column is the results of
the existing encoder-decoder framework and the third column gives
the predictions of our approach. It shows that our proposed method
is more robust to the low-quality images.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection and recognition have attracted great
attention in recent years owing to its various applications
such as autonomous driving, road sign recognition, helping visual impaired and so on. Inspired by object detection [27, 40, 26, 58], scene text detection [24, 48, 60, 38, 6]
achieved convincing performance. Despite the maturity of
conventional text recognition in documents, scene text recognition is still a challenging task.
With the development of deep learning, recent works [16,
15, 43, 46, 22, 44, 45, 54, 7, 8, 2, 23, 25, 57, 52, 32, 53] on
scene text recognition have shown promising results. However, existing methods are still facing various problems when
dealing with image blur, background interference, occlusion
∗ The corresponding author
† https://github.com/Pay20Y/SEED

and incomplete characters as shown in Fig. 1.
Recently, inspired by neural machine translation of
the natural language processing field, the encoder-decoder
framework with attention mechanism has been widely
used in scene text recognition. For regular text recognition [22, 7, 10], the encoder is based on CNN with RNN
and another RNN with attention mechanism is used as
the decoder to predict character at each time step. For
irregular text recognition, the rectification based methods [44, 45, 28, 57, 32, 53], the multi-direction encoding
method [8] and the 2D-attention based methods [54, 23] are
proposed. Rectification based methods first rectify the irregular images, then the following pipeline is as those of regular
recognition. The multi-direction encoding method uses CNN
with two LSTMs to encode four different directions. The

13528

