On the Regularization Properties of Structured Dropout
Ambar Pal
Connor Lane
René Vidal
Benjamin D. Haeffele
Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
{ambar, clane, rvidal, bhaeffele}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Dropout and its extensions (e.g. DropBlock and DropConnect) are popular heuristics for training neural networks, which have been shown to improve generalization
performance in practice. However, a theoretical understanding of their optimization and regularization properties remains elusive. Recent work shows that in the case of
single hidden-layer linear networks, Dropout is a stochastic gradient descent method for minimizing a regularized
loss, and that the regularizer induces solutions that are lowrank and balanced. In this work we show that for single
hidden-layer linear networks, DropBlock induces spectral
k-support norm regularization, and promotes solutions that
are low-rank and have factors with equal norm. We also
show that the global minimizer for DropBlock can be computed in closed form, and that DropConnect is equivalent
to Dropout. We then show that some of these results can
be extended to a general class of Dropout-strategies, and,
with some assumptions, to deep non-linear networks when
Dropout is applied to the last layer. We verify our theoretical claims and assumptions experimentally with commonly
used network architectures.

1. Introduction
Dropout is a widely-used heuristic for training deep neural networks (NN), which involves setting to zero the output
of a random subset of hidden neurons at each training iteration. The improved generalization performance of Dropout
in practice has led to many variants of dropout [3, 4, 5, 9],
[10, 12, 13, 14]. However, despite the popularity and improved empirical performance of Dropout-style techniques,
several theoretical questions remain regarding their optimization and regularization properties, e.g.: What objective
function is minimized by general Dropout-style techniques?
Do these techniques converge to a global minimum? Does
Dropout-style regularization induce an explicit regularizer?
What is the inductive bias of Dropout-style regularization?
Related Work. Recent work has considered some of these
questions in the case of single-layer linear neural networks
trained with the squared loss. For example, [2] shows that

Dropout is a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method for
minimizing the following objective:
2

1
min Ez Y − Udiag(z)V⊤ X .
U,V
θ
F

(1)

Here X ∈ Rb×N and Y ∈ Ra×N denote a training set with
N training points, U ∈ Ra×d and V ∈ Rb×d are the output and input weight matrices, respectively, d is number of
hidden neurons, and z is a d-dimensional vector of Dropout
variables whose ith entry zi ∼ Ber(θ) is i.i.d. Bernoulli
with parameter θ. In addition, [2] shows that Dropout induces explicit regularization in the form of a squared nuclear norm, which is known to induce low-rank solutions.
Specifically, [2] shows that the optimization problem (1) reduces to
d

min kY − UV⊤ Xk2F +
U,V

1−θ X
kui k22 kX⊤ vi k22 , (2)
θ i=1

where ui and vi denote the ith columns of U and V, resp.
Moreover, [2] shows that a global minimum (U∗ , V∗ ) of
(2) yields a global minimum of minZ kY − Zk2F + λkZk2∗ ,
where Z∗ = U∗ V∗⊤ X and kZk∗ is the nuclear norm.
In addition, [8] shows that the optimal weights (U∗ , V∗ )
can be found in polynomial time and are balanced, i.e., the
product of the norms of incoming and outgoing weights,
kui k2 kX⊤ vi k2 , is the same for all neurons.
Paper Contributions. In this paper, we significantly generalize these results to more general Dropout schemes and
more general neural network architectures. We first study
DropBlock, an alternative to Dropout for convolutional networks which was recently proposed in [5] and displays improved performance compared to Dropout in practice. Instead of zeroing the output of each neuron independently,
DropBlock introduces a structural dropping pattern by zeroing a block of neurons within a local neighborhood together
to reflect the strong correlations in responses for neighboring pixels in a CNN. Specifically, for a block-size r, we will
look at the following optimization problem:
2

1
min Ew Y − U(diag(w) ⊗ I d )V⊤ X ,
r
U,V
θ
F

7671

(3)

