Cross-Modal Pattern-Propagation for RGB-T Tracking
Chaoqun Wang, Chunyan Xu∗, Zhen Cui∗, Ling Zhou, Tong Zhang, Xiaoya Zhang, Jian Yang
PCALab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Motivated by our observations on RGB-T data that
pattern correlations are high-frequently recurred across
modalities also along sequence frames, in this paper, we
propose a cross-modal pattern-propagation (CMPP) tracking framework to diffuse instance patterns across RGBT data on spatial domain as well as temporal domain.
To bridge RGB-T modalities, the cross-modal correlations on intra-modal paired pattern-affinities are derived to
reveal those latent cues between heterogenous modalities.
Through the correlations, the useful patterns may be mutually propagated between RGB-T modalities so as to fulfill
inter-modal pattern-propagation. Further, considering the
temporal continuity of sequence frames, we adopt the spirit of pattern propagation to dynamic temporal domain, in
which long-term historical contexts are adaptively correlated and propagated into the current frame for more effective information inheritance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the effectiveness of our proposed CMPP, and the
new state-of-the-art results are achieved with the significant
improvements on two RGB-T object tracking benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental and challenging
task in the field of computer vision, has achieved significant
progresses over the past few years with the breakthrough of
deep neural network [8, 9, 19, 36, 39]. However, there are
still various existing difficulties in the scenes of low illumination, heavy occlusion and dark night, etc. As the essential
loss of object information, the current RGB-based trackers are often overwhelmed in these scenes. On the contrary,
thermal infrared images can greatly reduce the influences
of lightings, and effectively compensate to RGB images for
identifying objects. This refers to the dual-modal RGB-T
∗ Corresponding author: {cyx; zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn

80%

Rate of Matched Pixels Pair On RGBT234
RGB

Thermal

Mean

40%

0%

Dissimilar Pair

Similar Pair

Rate of Matched Pixels Pair On GTOT
80%

RGB

Thermal

Mean

RGB-T images pair

Similar Pair
Dissimilar Pair
(a)

40%

0%

Dissimilar Pair

Similar Pair
(b)

Figure 1: The statistical observation across visible RGB
and thermal infrared images. (a) Visual exhibition. The
points colored white are similar pairs across visible RGB
and thermal infrared images, while the pairs of black points
correspond to dissimilar pairs. (b) Statistical finding. Similar/dissimilar pairs across two modalities as well as their
average statistics are with fairly high matching rates, which
provide strong cues for cross-modal pattern-propagation.
tracking, which has arisen increasing attention more recently due to the ease of use of thermal camera.
The existing RGB-T tracking methods [23, 24, 25, 29,
30, 31, 32] usually follow the conventional weighted fusion on dual-modal (patch) features, or extend those classic
RGB-based tracking techniques. For instance, the weights of modalities are integrated into sparse representation to
be learnt in [24, 27]; after splitting candidate regions into patches, patch weights are adaptively learnt to construct
target representation in [25, 31, 32]; some critical channels
of all modalities are selected in [29, 46] according to their
confidences. In [30], the part-based RGB tracking method
is revised for dual-modal case, where the patches from two modalities are ranked in their importances for driving
a confident tracking. However, all these methods do not
deliberate also utilize the inner pattern-correlations cross
modalities and even sequence frames, whist the patterncorrelations are high-frequently recurred therein.
To this end, we conduct statistical analysis about pattern correlations on two large RGB-T tracking datasets, RG-

7064

