TransMatch: A Transfer-Learning Scheme for Semi-Supervised Few-Shot
Learning
Zhongjie Yu∗1 , Lin Chen†2 , Zhongwei Cheng2 , and Jiebo Luo3
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
Futurewei Technologies
3
University of Rochester

Abstract
The successful application of deep learning to many visual recognition tasks relies heavily on the availability of
a large amount of labeled data which is usually expensive
to obtain. The few-shot learning problem has attracted
increasing attention from researchers for building a robust model upon only a few labeled samples. Most existing works tackle this problem under the meta-learning
framework by mimicking the few-shot learning task with an
episodic training strategy. In this paper, we propose a new
transfer-learning framework for semi-supervised few-shot
learning to fully utilize the auxiliary information from labeled base-class data and unlabeled novel-class data. The
framework consists of three components: 1) pre-training a
feature extractor on base-class data; 2) using the feature
extractor to initialize the classifier weights for the novel
classes; and 3) further updating the model with a semisupervised learning method. Under the proposed framework, we develop a novel method for semi-supervised fewshot learning called TransMatch by instantiating the three
components with Imprinting and MixMatch. Extensive experiments on two popular benchmark datasets for few-shot
learning, CUB-200-2011 and miniImageNet, demonstrate
that our proposed method can effectively utilize the auxiliary information from labeled base-class data and unlabeled novel-class data to significantly improve the accuracy
of few-shot learning task.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have been making impressive
progress in different areas of artificial intelligence in re∗ This work was done during Zhongjie’s internship at Futurewei Technologies.
† Corresponding author: Lin Chen. Email: gggchenlin@gmail.com

cent years. Nevertheless, most of the popular deep learning methods require a large amount of labeled data which is
usually very expensive and time-consuming to collect. The
straightforward adoption of deep learning methods with a
limited amount of labeled data usually leads to overfitting.
Therefore, the question of whether it is able to learn a robust
model from only a limited amount of labeled data arises. It
is well-known that humans have the ability to learn from a
single or very few labeled samples. This motivates recent
research efforts on learning a novel concept from a single
or a few examples, i.e., few-shot learning.
In the past couple of years, an increasing number of fewshot learning methods have been proposed. One family of
work focuses on training the model under the meta-learning
framework based on an episodic training strategy [25]. In
particular, a sequence of episodes are randomly sampled
where each episode consists of a few samples in the base
classes to mimic the test scenario where only a few labeled samples of the novel classes are available. The labeled samples in each episode are divided into supports and
queries, where supports are used for building the classifier and queries are used for evaluating. At the same time,
another family of work focuses on how to learn a classifier for the novel classes with only few-shot examples by
transferring the knowledge from a model pre-trained on
large amount of data from the base classes [16, 17]. This
paradigm shares similarity with human behaviors, by transferring past experience to new tasks. We denote this family of methods as transfer-learning based methods. Our
method is inspired by the latter family of work and aims
to learn a good classifier for the novel classes of few-shot
examples with the help of the pre-trained classifier on abundant data from base classes and auxiliary unlabeled data
from novel classes.
We believe the sufficient and proper utilization of extra
information is crucial to the success of applying few-shot

12856

