Learning to Autofocus
Charles Herrmann1 Richard Strong Bowen1 Neal Wadhwa2 Rahul Garg2
Qiurui He2 Jonathan T. Barron2 Ramin Zabih1,2
1

{cih, rsb, rdz}@cs.cornell.edu

Cornell Tech

2

Google Research

{nealw, rahulgarg, qiurui, barron, raminz}@google.com

Abstract
Autofocus is an important task for digital cameras, yet
current approaches often exhibit poor performance. We
propose a learning-based approach to this problem, and
provide a realistic dataset of sufficient size for effective
learning. Our dataset is labeled with per-pixel depths obtained from multi-view stereo, following [9]. Using this
dataset, we apply modern deep classification models and
an ordinal regression loss to obtain an efficient learningbased autofocus technique. We demonstrate that our approach provides a significant improvement compared with
previous learned and non-learned methods: our model reduces the mean absolute error by a factor of 3.6 over the
best comparable baseline algorithm. Our dataset and code
are publicly available.

1. Introduction
In a scene with variable depth, any camera lens with a
finite-size aperture can only focus at one scene depth (the
focus distance), and the rest of the scene will contain blur.
This blur is difficult to remove via post-processing, and so
selecting an appropriate focus distance is crucial for image
quality.
There are two main, independent tasks that a camera
must address when focusing. First, the camera must determine the salient region that should be in focus. The user
may choose such a region explicitly, e.g., by tapping on the
screen of a smartphone, or it may be detected automatically
by, for example, a face detector. Second, given a salient region (which camera manufacturers often refer to as “autofocus points”) and one or more possibly out-of-focus observations, the camera must predict the most suitable focus
distance for the lens that brings that particular region into
focus. This second task is called autofocus.
Conventional autofocus algorithms generally fall into
two major categories: contrast-based and phase-based
methods. Contrast-based methods define a sharpness metric, and identify the ideal focus distance by maximizing the

sharpness metric across a range of focus distances. Such
methods are necessarily slow in practice, as they must make
a large number of observations, each of which requires
physical lens movement. In addition, they suffer from a few
important weaknesses, which we discuss in Section 4.
Modern phase-based methods leverage disparity from
the dual-pixel sensors that are increasingly available on
smartphones and DSLR cameras. These sensors are essentially two-view plenoptic cameras [26] with left and
right sub-images that receive light from the two halves of
the aperture. These methods operate under the assumption that in-focus objects will produce similar left and right
sub-images, whereas out-of-focus objects will produce subimages with a displacement or disparity that is proportional
to the degree of defocus. Naively, one could search for the
focus distance that minimizes the left/right mismatch, like
the contrast-based methods. Alternatively, some methods
use calibration to model the relationship between disparity
and depth, and make a prediction with just one input. However, accurate estimation of disparity between the dual-pixel
sub-images is challenging due to the small effective baseline. Further, it is difficult to characterize the relationship
between disparity and depth accurately due to optical effects that are hard to model, resulting in errors [9].
In this paper, we introduce a novel learning-based approach to autofocus: a ConvNet that takes as input raw sensor data, optionally including the dual-pixel data, and predicts the ideal focus distance. Deep learning is well-suited
to this task, as modern ConvNets are able to utilize subtle
defocus clues (such as irregularly-shaped point spread functions) in the data that often mislead heuristic contrast-based
autofocus methods. Unlike phase-based methods, a learned
model can also directly estimate the position the lens should
be moved to, instead of determining it from disparity using a
hand-crafted model and calibration—a strategy which may
be prone to errors.
In order to train and evaluate our network, we also introduce a large and realistic dataset captured using a smartphone camera and labeled with per-pixel depth computed
using multi-view stereo. The dataset consists of focal
12230

