End-to-End Illuminant Estimation based on Deep Metric Learning
Bolei Xu 1,2 Jingxin Liu 2,3 Xianxu Hou 2 Bozhi Liu 2 Guoping Qiu 2,4
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
2
College of Information Engineering, Shenzhen University
3
Histo Pathology Diagnostic Center, Shanghai
4
School of Computer Science, The University of Nottingham

Abstract
Previous deep learning approaches to color constancy
usually directly estimate illuminant value from input image.
Such approaches might suffer heavily from being sensitive
to the variation of image content. To overcome this
problem, we introduce a deep metric learning approach
named Illuminant-Guided Triplet Network (IGTN) to color
constancy. IGTN generates an Illuminant Consistent and
Discriminative Feature (ICDF) for achieving robust and
accurate illuminant color estimation. ICDF is composed
of semantic and color features based on a learnable
color histogram scheme. In the ICDF space, regardless
of the similarities of their contents, images taken under
the same or similar illuminants are placed close to each
other and at the same time images taken under different
illuminants are placed far apart. We also adopt an endto-end training strategy to simultaneously group image
features and estimate illuminant value, and thus our
approach does not have to classify illuminant in a separate
module. We evaluate our method on two public datasets
and demonstrate our method outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our method
is less sensitive to image appearances, and can achieve
more robust and consistent results than other methods on
a High Dynamic Range dataset.

1. Introduction
Under a different light source, an object will reflect a
different color appearance. Color constancy is a feature of
the human visual system which ensures that the perceived
color of objects remains relatively constant under varying
lighting conditions. Computational color constancy tries
to develop digital imaging algorithms that mimic such
human vision ability.
In the literature, many color
constancy algorithms have been proposed to achieve this
goal including learning-based methods [1, 20, 31, 18, 15]
and statistical methods [7, 16, 27, 13, 37].

These traditional approaches usually define a
photographed scene image as:
Z
E(x, λ)S(x, λ)C(λ)dλ,
(1)
I(x) =
ω

where I(x) is the image value at the spatial coordinate x,
E(x, λ) is the color of light source, S(x, λ) is the surface
spectral reflectance, C(λ) is the camera sensor sensitivity
function, and ω is the visible spectrum of the wavelength
λ. According to the Von Kries coefficient law [6] and the
assumption of single light, it could be simplified as [2, 33]:
I = E × S,

(2)

where each observed RGB pixel in I is the product of
the RGB illumination E shared by all pixels and the RGB
value S of reflectance under canonical illumination (usually
white). The goal of color constancy can thus be defined as
estimating E from I.
Recently researchers have applied deep learning [28,
29, 22, 33, 5] to estimate the illuminations. They regard
color constancy as a regression problem that aims to learn a
mapping function f through a deep learning model to map
the observed image content to the illumination value:
E = f (I)

(3)

One problem with these deep learning approaches is
that the predicted illuminant is heavily influenced by the
scene content. For instance, two different patches xi
and xj from the same image could have different scene
contents. When directly inferring illumination from those
two different scene contents, it would lead to different
estimation results, i.e., f (xi ) 6= f (xj ), since the mapping
function f is fixed after training, any changes in the
input will directly affect the output. However, with the
assumption of single illuminant setting (Equation 3), the
estimation should be location independent, which means
an observation at any location of the scene should correctly
estimate the same illuminant color. On the other hand, most

3616

