Deformation-aware Unpaired Image Translation for Pose Estimation on
Laboratory Animals
Siyuan Li1 , Semih Günel1,3 , Mirela Ostrek1 , Pavan Ramdya3 , Pascal Fua1 , and Helge Rhodin1,2
1

CVLAB, EPFL, Lausanne
Imager Lab, UBC, Vancouver
3
Neuroengineering Lab, EPFL, Lausanne
2

Abstract
Our goal is to capture the pose of real animals using synthetic training examples, without using any manual supervision. Our focus is on neuroscience model organisms, to be able to study how neural circuits orchestrate behaviour. Human pose estimation attains remarkable accuracy when trained on real or simulated datasets
consisting of millions of frames. However, for many applications simulated models are unrealistic and real training
datasets with comprehensive annotations do not exist. We
address this problem with a new sim2real domain transfer method. Our key contribution is the explicit and independent modelling of appearance, shape and pose in an
unpaired image translation framework. Our model lets us
train a pose estimator on the target domain by transferring
readily available body keypoint locations from the source
domain to generated target images. We compare our approach with existing domain transfer methods and demonstrate improved pose estimation accuracy on Drosophila
melanogaster (fruit fly), Caenorhabditis elegans (worm)
and Danio rerio (zebrafish), without requiring any manual
annotation on the target domain and despite using simplistic off-the-shelf animal characters for simulation, or simple
geometric shapes as models. Our new datasets, code and
trained models will be published to support future computer
vision and neuroscientific studies.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based pose estimation on images has
evolved into a practical tool for a wide range of applications,
as long as sufficiently large training databases are available.
However, in very specialized domains there are rarely large
annotation databases. For example, neuroscientists need
to accurately capture the poses of all the appendages of

Source domain A
(simulation with annotation)

a) Unpaired
image and pose
transfer

Synthetic image

b) Training a
pose detector

Synthetic annotation

Target domain B
(real recording w/o annotation)
Real image

Real animal pose
c) Pose estimation
on real images

Neuroscience
applications

Figure 1. Approach. Our most morphologically complex example is the six-legged Drosophila: a) We transfer synthetic images
and their keypoint annotations to realistically looking images using only unpaired examples of the two domains. b) Our method
enables training of a pose detector that c) can be applied to real
images for neuroscientific studies.

fruit flies, as pose dynamics are crucial for drawing inferences about how neural populations coordinate animal behavior. Publicly available databases for such studies are rare
and current annotation techniques available to create such a
database are tedious and time consuming, even when semiautomated. Given the existence of motion simulators, an apparently simple workaround would be to synthesize images
of flies in various poses and use these synthetic images for
training purposes. Although image generation algorithms
can now generate very convincing deepfakes, existing image translation algorithms do not preserve pose geometrically when the gap between a synthetic source and a real
target is large. This is critical to our application, as creating
matching high-fidelity images would be time consuming.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to generate
realistic images of different kinds of laboratory animals—
flies, fish, and worms–from synthetic renderings for which
labels such as keypoint annotations are readily available.
113158

