Object-Occluded Human Shape and Pose Estimation from a Single Color Image
Tianshu Zhang∗

Buzhen Huang∗

Yangang Wang†

Southeast University, China

Abstract
Occlusions between human and objects, especially for
the activities of human-object interactions, are very common in practical applications. However, most of the existing approaches for 3D human shape and pose estimation
require human bodies are well captured without occlusions
or with minor self-occlusions. In this paper, we focus on
the problem of directly estimating the object-occluded human shape and pose from single color images. Our key
idea is to utilize a partial UV map to represent an objectoccluded human body, and the full 3D human shape estimation is ultimately converted as an image inpainting problem. We propose a novel two-branch network architecture
to train an end-to-end regressor via the latent feature supervision, which also includes a novel saliency map subnet to extract the human information from object-occluded
color images. To supervise the network training, we further build a novel dataset named as 3DOH50K. Several experiments are conducted to reveal the effectiveness of the
proposed method. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art comparing with previous methods. The dataset, codes are publicly
available at https://www.yangangwang.com.

1. Introduction
3D human shape and pose estimation from color images
attracts lots of research interests in the area of computer vision. It may promote several promising virtual reality applications, such as body shape animation, shape retargeting, motion mimic and etc. Conventionally, the full 3D human body shape estimation has experienced from complex
hardware (e.g., multi-view cameras, IMU sensors) to single devices (e.g., color camera, Kinect). In recent years,
deep learning based techniques [17, 33, 51] have witnessed
the rapid progress of recovering the full body human shape
from single color images, though most of the existing approaches are addressed for the scenarios that human bod∗ Contribute equally. The authorship was determined by a coin toss.
† Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn

Input image

Saliency map

Output mesh

Different views



Figure 1. Our method performs well for the human shape and pose
estimation from single object-occluded color images.

ies are well captured without occlusions or with minor selfocclusions. However, occlusions between human and objects, especially for the activities of human-object interactions, are very common in practical applications. It is hard
to achieve good performance for recovering the full 3D human body shape from object-occluded color images when
the occlusions are not explicitly taken into account. In this
paper, we mainly focus on the problem of estimating the
object-occluded full 3D human shape and pose from single
color images.
Historically, 3D human shape and pose estimation from
single color images is ﬂourished after the Skinned MultiPerson Linear model (SMPL) [27] has been presented. It
goes through several stages, including SMPL parameters
optimization via ﬁtting to 2D visual cues [3, 21], directly
regressing the SMPL parameters with Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) [33, 30], volumetric representation for 3D
human shape [15, 43], and 2D UV map representation for
the human body geometry surface [51, 54]. Although deep
learning has become the mainstream of full 3D human body
estimation due to its accuracy and runtime efﬁciency, it cannot be directly shifted to handle the object-occluded human
body estimation without explicitly considering occlusions.
There are two main challenges. The ﬁrst one is that there is
a lack of sufﬁcient data for the network training. Existing
datasets are not originally designed for the occluded human
shape estimation. The other one is object-occlusions would
introduce severe ambiguities into the network training, and

7376

