Learning to Cluster Faces via Confidence and Connectivity Estimation
Lei Yang1 , Dapeng Chen2 , Xiaohang Zhan1 , Rui Zhao2 , Chen Change Loy3 , Dahua Lin1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Group Limited, 3 Nanyang Technological University
{yl016, zx017, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {chendapeng, zhaorui}@sensetime.com, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Confident

Abstract
Face clustering is an essential tool for exploiting the unlabeled face data, and has a wide range of applications including face annotation and retrieval. Recent works show
that supervised clustering can result in noticeable performance gain. However, they usually involve heuristic steps
and require numerous overlapped subgraphs, severely restricting their accuracy and efficiency. In this paper, we
propose a fully learnable clustering framework without
requiring a large number of overlapped subgraphs. Instead, we transform the clustering problem into two subproblems. Specifically, two graph convolutional networks,
named GCN-V and GCN-E, are designed to estimate the
confidence of vertices and the connectivity of edges, respectively. With the vertex confidence and edge connectivity, we
can naturally organize more relevant vertices on the affinity graph and group them into clusters. Experiments on two
large-scale benchmarks show that our method significantly
improves clustering accuracy and thus performance of the
recognition models trained on top, yet it is an order of magnitude more efficient than existing supervised methods.

Unconfident

Affinity Graph

Strong Connectivity

Clusters

Figure 1: The core idea of our approach. Vertices with different

1. Introduction

colors represent different classes. Previous methods group all vertices in the box into a cluster as they are densely connected, while
our approach, learning to estimate the confidence of belonging to a
specific class, is able to detect unconfident vertices that lie among
multiple classes. With the estimated vertex confidence, we further
learn to predict the edge connectivity. By connecting each vertex to a neighbor with higher confidence and strongest connection,
we partition the affinity graph into trees, each of which naturally
represents a cluster.

Thanks to the explosive growth of annotated face
datasets [19, 11, 17], face recognition has witnessed great
progress in recent years [31, 27, 33, 7, 40]. Along with this
trend, the ever-increasing demand for annotated data has resulted in prohibitive annotation costs. To exploit massive
unlabeled face images, recent studies [14, 39, 35, 38] provide a promising clustering-based pipeline and demonstrate
its effectiveness in improving the face recognition model.
They first perform clustering to generate “pseudo labels”
for unlabeled images and then leverage them to train the
model in a supervised way. The key to the success of these
approaches lies in an effective face clustering algorithm.
Existing face clustering methods roughly fall into two
categories, namely, unsupervised methods and supervised
methods. Unsupervised approaches, such as K-means [22]

and DBSCAN [9], rely on specific assumptions and lack
the capability of coping with the complex cluster structures
in real-world datasets. To improve the adaptivity to different data, supervised clustering methods have been proposed [35, 38] to learn the cluster patterns. Yet, both accuracy and efficiency are far from satisfactory. In particular, to cluster with the large-scale face data, existing supervised approaches organize the data with numerous small
subgraphs, leading to two main issues. First, processing
subgraphs involves heuristic steps based on simple assumptions. Both subgraph generation [38] and prediction aggregation [35] depend on heuristic procedures, thus limiting
their performance upper bound. Furthermore, the subgraphs
required by these approaches are usually highly overlapped,

13369

