Probabilistic Structural Latent Representation for Unsupervised Embedding
Mang Ye, Jianbing Shen∗
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{mangye16, shenjianbingcg}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised embedding learning aims at extracting
low-dimensional visually meaningful representations from
large-scale unlabeled images, which can then be directly
used for similarity-based search. This task faces two major
challenges: 1) mining positive supervision from highly similar fine-grained classes and 2) generating to unseen testing categories. To tackle these issues, this paper proposes a
probabilistic structural latent representation (PSLR), which
incorporates an adaptable softmax embedding to approximate the positive concentrated and negative instance separated properties in the graph latent space. It improves
the discriminability by enlarging the positive/negative difference without introducing any additional computational
cost while maintaining high learning efficiency. To address
the limited supervision using data augmentation, a smooth
variational reconstruction loss is introduced by modeling
the intra-instance variance, which improves the robustness.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of PSLR
over state-of-the-art unsupervised methods on both seen
and unseen categories with cosine similarity. Code is available at https://github.com/mangye16/PSLR

1. Introduction
Supervised embedding learning focuses on optimizing a
network in which the low-dimensional features belonging
to the same class are concentrated, while features from different classes are separated [33, 35, 48, 61, 29]. Powerful
supervised learning models have achieved human-level performance in various tasks, such as face recognition [32] and
person re-identification [55]. However, enough annotated
data needed for supervised methods requires extensive human efforts. Consequently, this paper addresses the unsupervised embedding learning (UEL) problem [56], learning
discriminative representations without human annotation.
UEL requires that the similarity between learned features is consistent with the visual similarity/category rela∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

Unlabeled Images

UFL

45瀽

135瀽
Horse/Deer? Where is the horse?

Classifier
bus
car
truck

...

Detector

deer

deer

car

UEL
horse

truck
Search the visual similar images?

Nearest Neighbor Search

PSLR
horse

dog

Unseen Testing Categories

Seen Testing Categories

Figure 1: Comparison between the general UFL, UEL and the
proposed PSLR. UFL usually focuses on learning linear separable
“intermediate” features using supervision signal, e.g., rotation in
[12, 37]. The learned features may not preserve visual consistency,
while UEL aims at extracting visually meaningful representations
for similarity-based search. In contrast, our PSLR optimizes the
latent representation with intra-instance variation modeling to enhance the generalizability on unseen testing categories.

tions of input images, which can be subsequently used for
similarity-based search (as shown in Fig. 1). In comparison,
the general unsupervised feature learning (UFL) [4, 7, 30,
34, 37, 50, 57] mainly focuses on learning good “intermediate” features for downstream tasks, e.g. train linear classifiers or object detectors using the unsupervisedly learned
features from a subset of labeled images. However, the
learned features may not preserve visual similarity, i.e. the
performance drops dramatically for similarity search [56].
The major challenge in UEL is to mine the visual similarity relationship or weak positive supervision from unlabeled images. Following supervised embedding learning, MOM [20] was developed to mine hard positive and
negative samples in the manifold space. However, its la15457

