Instance Segmentation of Biological Images Using Harmonic Embeddings
Victor Kulikov
PicsArt Inc.∗
Moscow, Russian Federation

Victor Lempitsky
Samsung AI Center Moscow
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

victor.kulikov@picsart.com

lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We present a new instance segmentation approach tailored to biological images, where instances may correspond
to individual cells, organisms or plant parts. Unlike instance segmentation for user photographs or road scenes, in
biological data object instances may be particularly densely
packed, the appearance variation may be particularly low,
the processing power may be restricted, while, on the other
hand, the variability of sizes of individual instances may
be limited. The proposed approach successfully addresses
these peculiarities.
Our approach describes each object instance using an
expectation of a limited number of sine waves with frequencies and phases adjusted to particular object sizes and
densities. At train time, a fully-convolutional network is
learned to predict the object embeddings at each pixel using a simple pixelwise regression loss, while at test time the
instances are recovered using clustering in the embedding
space. In the experiments, we show that our approach outperforms previous embedding-based instance segmentation
approaches on a number of biological datasets, achieving
state-of-the-art on a popular CVPPP benchmark. This excellent performance is combined with computational efficiency that is needed for deployment to domain specialists.
The source code of the approach is available at
https://github.com/kulikovv/harmonic .

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation (object separation) in biological
images is often a key step in their analysis. Many biological image modalities (e.g., microscopy images of cell cultures) are characterized by excessive numbers of instances.
Other modalities (e.g., worm assays) are characterized by
tight and complex overlaps and occlusions. On the other
hand, in most situations the scale variations of objects of
interest in biomedical data are less drastic than in natural
∗ Work done while at Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology.

photographs due to the lack of strong perspective effects.
In this work, we propose a new approach designed for biological image instance segmentation that can address the
challenges (number of instances, overlaps) while exploiting
the simplifying properties (limited scale variation).
Our approach continues the series of studies [7, 21] that
perform instance segmentation by learning deep embeddings and using clustering in the embedding space to recover the instances at test time. While this approach is
appealing in its simplicity, learning good embeddings for
object instances with a fully-convolutional network is challenging, especially for biological data, where individual instances may have an almost indistinguishable appearance.
In order to utilize the specific nature of biomedical images, we depart from the end-to-end philosophy of the previous embedding-based instance segmentation works and
split the learning process into two stages. At the first stage,
we seek a small set of harmonic functions that can be used
to separate objects in the training dataset. The search is
implemented as an optimization process that tunes the frequencies and phases of the harmonics to a specific range
of scales and object densities in the data. The selected set
of harmonics then guides the second stage of the learning
process as well as the inference process at test-time.
At the second learning stage, we assign each ground
truth object instance its harmonic embedding based on the
expectation of the learned set of functions. We then learn
a deep fully-convolutional network to predict resulting embeddings at each pixel. We show that learning with a simple
pixelwise regression loss is feasible as long as the information about harmonic functions is provided to convolutional
layers in the network (which we achieve by augmenting the
input to these convolutional layers). The learned networks
generalize well to new images, and tend to predict pixel embeddings that can be easily clustered into object instances.
In the experiments, we compare our approach to direct
embedding-based instance segmentation [7] as well as to
other state-of-the-art methods. Four biomedical datasets
corresponding to plant phenotyping, bacterial and human
cell culture microscopy, as well as C.elegans assays, are
13843

