Non-line-of-sight Surface Reconstruction
Using the Directional Light-cone Transform
Sean I. Young
Stanford University

David B. Lindell
Stanford University

sean0@stanford.edu

lindell@stanford.edu

Bernd Girod
Stanford University

David Taubman
UNSW Sydney

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

bgirod@stanford.edu

d.taubman@unsw.edu.au

gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

𝑦′

Abstract

Visible surface

𝑥′

We propose a joint albedo–normal approach to non-lineof-sight (NLOS) surface reconstruction using the directional
light-cone transform (D-LCT). While current NLOS imaging
methods reconstruct either the albedo or surface normals of
the hidden scene, the two quantities provide complementary
information of the scene, so an efﬁcient method to estimate
both simultaneously is desirable. We formulate the recovery
of the two quantities as a vector deconvolution problem, and
solve it using the Cholesky–Wiener decomposition. We show
that surfaces ﬁtted non-parametrically using our recovered
normals are more accurate than those produced with NLOS
surface reconstruction methods recently proposed, and are
1,000× faster to compute than using inverse rendering.

𝑧

Collocated laser
and detector

Hidden object

1. Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging deals with the capture
and rendering of a scene that is not in the direct line of sight
from the sensor. In recent years, NLOS imaging has emerged
as an important vision problem, with applications in remote
sensing, defense, robotic vision and autonomous driving. A
common imaging setup is to “look around the corner” using
the confocal conﬁguration depicted in Figure 1. Typically, a
light source, such as a laser beam, indirectly illuminates the
scene by reﬂecting onto a surface that can be seen from both
the sensor and the scene. The sensor then captures the scene
reﬂections from the same surface location, and records them
as a time-resolved sequence of two-dimensional images (or
transients), from which one can computationally reconstruct
the scene. Apart from transient-based imaging, other NLOS
imaging modalities include those based on speckle [1–3], or
incoherent intensity measurements [4, 5], as well as passive
sensing [6–9] and acoustic imaging [10] techniques.
Here, we will consider exclusively NLOS imaging based
on transients [11–19], from which the hidden NLOS scene is
typically rendered as a spatial, three-dimensional volume of
albedo (volumetric albedo), or as a set of object surfaces. In
the volumetric albedo paradigm, the objective is to estimate
albedo values for scene voxels [11–16], while in the surface

(a) Our albedo

(b) Our normals

(c) Fitted surface

Figure 1. NLOS surface reconstruction via the D-LCT: Existing
NLOS imaging methods typically recover only the albedo of the
hidden scene. The Directional LCT recovers both the albedo (a)
and the surface normals (b) of the scene, allowing us to reconstruct
the hidden object surface with ﬁner detail (c).

reconstruction paradigm, one seeks more directly to recover
object surfaces in the three-dimensional scene by estimating
their surface normals [17–19]. While surface-based methods
have the potential to reconstruct object geometry with ﬁner
detail than the albedo ones, current approaches to estimating
surface normals are sensitive to noise, limited to scenes with
simpler object geometry [18], sensitive to initialization [19]
or entail a high computational complexity [13], all of which
motivate our present work. Embedded in transients is a mix
of surface normal and albedo information, so that explicitly
accounting for the presence of both in transients can present
new opportunities for recovering both quantities robustly.

1407

