Don’t Hit Me! Glass Detection in Real-world Scenes
Haiyang Mei1 Xin Yang1,4,⋆ Yang Wang1 Yuanyuan Liu1 Shengfeng He2
Qiang Zhang1 Xiaopeng Wei1,⋆ Rynson W.H. Lau3,†
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 South China University of Technology
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 Advanced Institute of Information Technology Peking University
https://mhaiyang.github.io/CVPR2020_GDNet/index

Abstract
Glass is very common in our daily life. Existing computer vision systems neglect it and thus may have severe consequences, e.g., a robot may crash into a glass wall. However, sensing the presence of glass is not straightforward.
The key challenge is that arbitrary objects/scenes can appear behind the glass, and the content within the glass region is typically similar to those behind it. In this paper,
we propose an important problem of detecting glass from a
single RGB image. To address this problem, we construct a large-scale glass detection dataset (GDD) and design
a glass detection network, called GDNet, which explores
abundant contextual cues for robust glass detection with a
novel large-field contextual feature integration (LCFI) module. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves more superior glass detection results on
our GDD test set than state-of-the-art methods fine-tuned
for glass detection.

1. Introduction
Glass is a non-crystalline, often transparent, amorphous
solid that has widespread practical and decorative usages,
e.g., window panes, glass doors, and glass walls. Such glass
objects can have a critical impact to the existing vision systems (e.g., depth prediction and instance segmentation) as
demonstrated in Figure 1, and would further affect intelligent decisions in many applications such as robotic navigation and drone tracking, i.e., the robot/drone might crash
into the glass. Hence, it is essential for vision systems to be
able to detect and segment glass from input images.
Some small glass-made objects such as cup and wine
glass can be detected well by the existing methods as they
have relatively fixed patterns. However, automatically detecting glass from images like the ones shown in Figure 1(a)
is an extremely challenging task. Due to the fact that a glass
⋆ Xin Yang and Xiaopeng Wei are the corresponding authors.
† Rynson W.H. Lau leads this project.

near

far

(a) glass images (b) w/o correction

near

(c) GDNet

far

(d) w/ correction

Figure 1. Problems with glass in existing vision tasks. In depth
prediction, existing method [16] wrongly predicts the depth of the
scene behind the glass, instead of the depth to the glass (1st row of
(b)). For instance segmentation, Mask RCNN [9] only segments
the instances behind the glass, not aware that they are actually
behind the glass (2nd row of (b)). Besides, if we directly apply an
existing singe-image reflection removal (SIRR) method [36] to an
image that is only partially covered by glass, the non-glass region
can be corrupted (3rd row of (b)). GDNet can detect the glass (c)
and then correct these failure cases (d).

region does not have a fixed pattern, i.e., arbitrary objects/scene can appear behind the glass, and the content presented in the glass region is typically similar to that behind the
glass. This makes the glass fundamentally different from
other common objects that have been well-addressed by
the state-of-the-art segmentation methods [9]. Meanwhile,
directly applying existing salient object detection methods [19, 24] to detect glass is inappropriate, as not all glass
regions are salient. Besides, a recent mirror segmentation
method [38] may segment mirrors by detecting content discontinuity at the mirror boundary. However, the content behind the glass is part of the real scene that often exhibits
weak content discontinuity with the scene outside the glass,
making the glass detection problem more difficult.
To address the glass detection problem, a straightforward solution is to apply a reflection/boundary detector for

3687

