Editing in Style: Uncovering the Local Semantics of GANs
Edo Collins1

Raja Bala2

Bob Price2

Sabine Süsstrunk1

1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
Interactive and Analytics Lab, Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, CA
{edo.collins,sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch {rbala,bprice}@parc.com
2

Target

Reference

Target

+

Reference

Target

+

Reference

+

Output

Output

Output

Conditioned
on the query
for nose

Conditioned
on the query
for eyes

Conditioned
on the query
for mouth

Figure 1: Our method performs local semantic editing on GAN output images, transferring the appearance of a specific object
part from a reference image to a target image.

Abstract
While the quality of GAN image synthesis has improved
tremendously in recent years, our ability to control and condition the output is still limited. Focusing on StyleGAN, we
introduce a simple and effective method for making local,
semantically-aware edits to a target output image. This is
accomplished by borrowing elements from a source image,
also a GAN output, via a novel manipulation of style vectors. Our method requires neither supervision from an external model, nor involves complex spatial morphing operations. Instead, it relies on the emergent disentanglement
of semantic objects that is learned by StyleGAN during its
training. Semantic editing is demonstrated on GANs producing human faces, indoor scenes, cats, and cars. We measure the locality and photorealism of the edits produced by
our method, and find that it accomplishes both.

1. Introduction
In the short span of five years, generative adversarial
neural networks (GANs) have come to dominate the field

of data-driven image synthesis. Like most other neural network models, however, the exact model they learn for the
data is not straightforwardly interpretable.
There have been significant steps towards alleviating this
issue. For instance, state-of-the-art image GANs such as
PG-GAN [15] and StyleGAN [16], by virtue of their progressive training, encourage each layer to model the variation exhibited at given image resolutions (e.g., 8×8 images
capture coarse structure, 32 × 32 add finer details, etc.).
The notion of a disentangled representation has been
used to describe such phenomena. While definitions of disentanglement are many and varied [12], the common idea is
that an attribute of interest, which we often consider semantic, can be manipulated independently of other attributes.
In this paper we show that deep generative models like
PG-GAN, StyleGAN and the recent StyleGAN2 [17] learn
a representation of objects and object-parts that is disentangled in the sense that various semantic parts (e.g., the mouth
of a person or the pillows in a bedroom) have a significant
ability to vary independently of the rest of the scene.
Based on this observation we propose an algorithm that
performs spatially-localized semantic editing on the outputs
15771

