Wavelet Synthesis Net for Disparity Estimation to Synthesize DSLR Calibre
Bokeh Effect on Smartphones
Chenchi Luo∗ , Yingmao Li∗ , Kaimo Lin∗ , George Chen∗ ,
Seok-Jun Lee∗ , Jihwan Choi+ , Youngjun Francis Yoo∗ , Michael O. Polley∗
∗
Samsung Research America
+
Samsung Electronics
{eric.luo, timothy.li, kaimo.lin, george.chen}@samsung.com

Figure 1. Example of our disparity map and rendered bokeh: (a) All-in-focus image. (b) Disparity map. (c) Rendered bokeh.

Abstract
Modern smartphone cameras can match traditional digital single lens reflex (DSLR) cameras in many areas thanks
to the introduction of camera arrays and multi-frame processing. Among all types of DSLR effects, the narrow depth
of ﬁeld (DoF) or so called bokeh probably arouses most interest. Today’s smartphones try to overcome the physical
lens and sensor limitations by introducing computational
methods that utilize a depth map to synthesize the narrow
DoF effect from all-in-focus images. However, a high quality depth map remains to be the key differentiator between
computational bokeh and DSLR optical bokeh. Empowered
by a novel wavelet synthesis network architecture, we have
narrowed the gap between DSLR and smartphone camera
in terms of bokeh more than ever before. We describe three
key enablers of our bokeh solution: a synthetic graphics
engine to generate training data with precisely prescribed
characteristics that match the real smartphone captures,
a novel wavelet synthesis neural network (WSN) architecture to produce unprecedented high deﬁnition disparity map
promptly on smartphones, and a new evaluation metric to

quantify the quality of the disparity map for real images
from the bokeh rendering perspective. Experimental results
show that the disparity map produced from our neural network achieves much better accuracy than the other state-ofthe-art CNN based algorithms. Combining the high resolution disparity map with our rendering algorithm, we demonstrate visually superior bokeh pictures compared with existing top rated flagship smartphones listed on the DXOMARK
mobiles.

1. Introduction
One of the major differences between a smartphone camera and a DSLR camera is the shallow depth of ﬁeld effect,
which forms the aesthetic blur in the out-of-focus part of
an image. Such an effect can be physically achieved by using a lens with a large focal length and/or a large aperture
size (e.g., an 85mm f1.8) [1]. Due to the limitations on size
and weight, a smartphone camera cannot generate the same
bokeh as DSLR can do. Most smartphone makers break this
limitation using computational methods to simulate bokeh
using the depth information obtained from either dual pixel
camera or stereo cameras [2, 3, 4]. These kinds of photo

2407

