Stereoscopic Flash and No-Flash Photography for Shape and Albedo Recovery
Xu Cao1

Michael Waechter1 Boxin Shi2,3 Ye Gao4 Bo Zheng4 Yasuyuki Matsushita1
1
Osaka University 2 Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Abstract
We present a minimal imaging setup that harnesses
both geometric and photometric approaches for shape and
albedo recovery. We adopt a stereo camera and a flashlight to capture a stereo image pair and a flash/no-flash
pair. From the stereo image pair, we recover a rough shape
that captures low-frequency shape variation without highfrequency details. From the flash/no-flash pair, we derive
an image formation model for Lambertian objects under
natural lighting, based on which a fine normal map is obtained and fused with the rough shape. Further, we use
the flash/no-flash pair for cast shadow detection and albedo
canceling, making the shape recovery robust against shadows and albedo variation. We verify the effectiveness of our
approach on both synthetic and real-world data.

1. Introduction
Shape recovery from images is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. Common methods typically fall into
one of two classes: geometric or photometric approaches.
Geometric approaches take images of a scene from multiple viewpoints, find point correspondences across images
and establish their geometric position to recover the shape.
They generally do not recover high-frequency shape details,
because their patch-based stereo matching has fundamental
limitations in spatial resolution [18]. On the other hand,
photometric approaches recover per-pixel surface orientation using shading cues. For example, Shape from Shading
(SfS) recovers per-pixel surface normal vectors from a single image taken under only one distant light from a single
direction [16]; photometric stereo recovers surface normals
and albedo using three or more images from the same viewpoint under different lighting conditions [29]. Photometric approaches generally only recover the first-derivative of
shape instead of shape itself.
Due to the complementary properties of geometric and
photometric approaches, several works have combined both
for high-quality shape recovery. Based on multi-view stereo
results from a set of images, Wu et al. [31] explored the

shading cues in those images to recover high-frequency details. Zhang et al. [35] combined active stereo and photometric stereo for edge-preserving shape recovery.
The problem of such a combination using geometric and
photometric cues, is that the imaging setup is complex:
geometric approaches require images from multiple viewpoints taken by multiple cameras or one moving camera.
Photometric approaches, on the other hand, require a capture setup that can generate multiple lighting conditions.
Zhang et al. [35] mounted 3 lights around a Kinect sensor
to acquire images under different lighting; Choe et al. [6]
mounted a bulb on a Kinect and turned on the Kinect’s
IR projector and the light alternatively during image capture. Several works do not employ a lighting setup and
only use the shading cues in the images that are used for
the geometric approach. This simplification, however, either puts strict limitations on what scenes can be reconstructed, for example uniform albedo [31, 11], or it requires
an additional albedo estimation step [34]. Consequently,
both can introduce texture-copying artifacts on the recovered shape [24, 38] where albedo or shading variation is
mistaken for shape variation.
In this paper, we present a minimal imaging setup for
shape and albedo recovery of Lambertian surfaces, while
benefiting from the strengths of both approaches and staying compact. A stereo camera and a flashlight are used to
take three images: a left image without flash, a right image without flash and a left image with flash, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). The left and right no-flash images constitute
a stereo pair providing geometric cues for coarse shape recovery, and the left flash/no-flash image pair provides shading cues for high-frequency detail recovery. The setup is
minimal in that, recovering surface normals only from the
flash/no-flash pair is an ill-posed problem without the regularization of the coarse shape estimate from the stereo pair;
three unknowns (one for albedo and two for a unit surface
normal vector) cannot be uniquely solved with two shading
constraints for each pixel. Similarly, high-frequency shape
details cannot be recovered from the stereo pair [18] without the shading constraints introduced by the flash/no-flash
pair. As a result, our setup allows high-fidelity shape and
13430

