Joint Demosaicing and Denoising with Self Guidance
Lin Liu1,2 Xu Jia2∗ Jianzhuang Liu2 Qi Tian2
1
CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

Abstract
Usually located at the very early stages of the computational photography pipeline, demosaicing and denoising
play important parts in the modern camera image processing. Recently, some neural networks have shown the effectiveness in joint demosaicing and denoising (JDD). Most
of them first decompose a Bayer raw image into a fourchannel RGGB image and then feed it into a neural network. This practice ignores the fact that the green channels are sampled at a double rate compared to the red and
the blue channels. In this paper, we propose a self-guidance
network (SGNet), where the green channels are initially estimated and then works as a guidance to recover all missing values in the input image. In addition, as regions of different frequencies suffer different levels of degradation in
image restoration. We propose a density-map guidance to
help the model deal with a wide range of frequencies. Our
model outperforms state-of-the-art joint demosaicing and
denoising methods on four public datasets, including two
real and two synthetic data sets. Finally, we also verify that
our method obtains best results in joint demosaicing , denoising and super-resolution.

1. Introduction
Image demosaicing is one of the beginning modules in
Image Signal Processing (ISP) pipeline and is a fundamental problem in computer vision. It aims at reconstructing a
full-resolution color image from an incomplete observation
after a color filter array (CFA) such as the Bayer pattern of
RGGB where two-thirds of the image information is missing. Recovering those missing information is an ill-posed
problem. In addition, the available one-third RGGB observation is often polluted by different kinds of noise, which
further increases the difficulty of the task. These two tasks
are important because they appear at the very beginning of
the camera imaging pipeline and their performance has crucial influence on the final results. The two tasks of demo∗ X. Jia is the corresponding author.

Ground Truth

MATLAB
PSNR: 30.31

FlexISP
PSNR: 30.34

Kokinnos
PSNR: 32.42

Deepjoint
PSNR: 32.35

ADMM
PSNR: 32.39

CDM*
PSNR: 32.67

Ours
PSNR: 32.95

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Comparison among six state-of-the-art JDD methods and ours on the MIT moire data set [5]. With the spatially adaptive green-channel guidance, ours removes the
color artifacts and recovers the textures significantly.

saicing and denoising are traditionally processed in a sequential way. However, recent studies show the advantages
of the joint approaches [13, 1] .
There has been several approaches proposed for image
demosaicing. Demosaicing with simple bilinear interpolation between values on neighboring positions and even deep
learning based methods [24, 46, 40, 33, 34] are prone to
producing zippering artifacts in regions with edges. To address this issue, a traditional way to alleviate this issue is
by applying edge-adaptive interpolation. To further explore

2240

