Spatially-Attentive Patch-Hierarchical Network
for Adaptive Motion Deblurring
Maitreya Suin∗
Kuldeep Purohit∗
A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
maitreyasuin21@gmail.com, kuldeeppurohit3@gmail.com, raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

32

1. Introduction
Motion-blurred images form due to relative motion during sensor exposure and are favored by photographers and
artists in many cases for aesthetic purpose, but seldom by
computer vision researchers, as many standard vision tools
including detectors, trackers, and feature extractors struggle
to deal with blur. Blind motion deblurring is an ill-posed
problem that aims to recover a sharp image from a given
image degraded due to motion-induced smearing of texture and high-frequency details. Due to its diverse applications in surveillance, remote sensing, and cameras mounted
∗ Equal contribution.

PSNR (dB)

31.5

This paper tackles the problem of motion deblurring of
dynamic scenes. Although end-to-end fully convolutional
designs have recently advanced the state-of-the-art in nonuniform motion deblurring, their performance-complexity
trade-off is still sub-optimal. Existing approaches achieve
a large receptive field by increasing the number of generic
convolution layers and kernel-size, but this comes at the expense of of the increase in model size and inference speed.
In this work, we propose an efficient pixel adaptive and
feature attentive design for handling large blur variations
across different spatial locations and process each test image adaptively. We also propose an effective content-aware
global-local filtering module that significantly improves
performance by considering not only global dependencies
but also by dynamically exploiting neighboring pixel information. We use a patch-hierarchical attentive architecture
composed of the above module that implicitly discovers the
spatial variations in the blur present in the input image and
in turn, performs local and global modulation of intermediate features. Extensive qualitative and quantitative comparisons with prior art on deblurring benchmarks demonstrate that our design offers significant improvements over
the state-of-the-art in accuracy as well as speed.

Ours(a)

Ours(b)

Zhang CVPR19
Gao CVPR19

31
30.5

Tao CVPR18

30

Kypyn ICCV2019
29.5

Zhang CVPR18

29
28.5
-1
10

Nah CVPR17

Kupyn CVPR18
10

0

10

1

Runtime for an HD image (seconds)

Figure 1. Comparison of different methods in terms of accuracy
and inference time. Our approach outperforms all previous methods.

on hand-held and vehicle-mounted cameras, deblurring has
gathered substantial attention from computer vision and image processing communities in the past two decades.
Majority of traditional deblurring approaches are based
on variational model, whose key component is the regularization term. The restoration quality depends on the selection of the prior, its weight, as well as tuning of other parameters involving highly non-convex optimization setups[14].
Non-uniform blind deblurring for general dynamic scenes is
a challenging computer vision problem as blurs arise from
various sources including moving objects, camera shake
and depth variations, causing different pixels to capture different motion trajectories. Such hand-crafted priors struggle
while generalizing across different types of real-world examples, where blur is far more complex than modeled [3].
Recent works based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) have studied the benefits of replacing the
image formation model with a parametric model that can
be trained to emulate the non-linear relationship between
blurred-sharp image pairs. Such works [13] directly regress
to deblurred image intensities and overcome the limited
representative capability of variational methods in describing dynamic scenes. These methods can handle combined
effects of camera motion and dynamic object motion and
13606

