Actor-Transformers for Group Activity Recognition
Kirill Gavrilyuk1∗ Ryan Sanford2

Mehrsan Javan2

Cees G. M. Snoek1

1

University of Amsterdam 2 Sportlogiq
{kgavrilyuk,cgmsnoek}@uva.nl
{ryan.sanford, mehrsan}@sportlogiq.com

Abstract
This paper strives to recognize individual actions and
group activities from videos. While existing solutions for
this challenging problem explicitly model spatial and temporal relationships based on location of individual actors,
we propose an actor-transformer model able to learn and
selectively extract information relevant for group activity recognition. We feed the transformer with rich actorspecific static and dynamic representations expressed by
features from a 2D pose network and 3D CNN, respectively.
We empirically study different ways to combine these representations and show their complementary benefits. Experiments show what is important to transform and how it
should be transformed. What is more, actor-transformers
achieve state-of-the-art results on two publicly available
benchmarks for group activity recognition, outperforming
the previous best published results by a considerable margin.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to recognize the activity of an
individual and the group that it belongs to [11]. Consider
for example a volleyball game where an individual player
jumps and the group is performing a spike. Besides sports,
such group activity recognition has several applications including crowd monitoring, surveillance and human behavior analysis. Common tactics to recognize group activities
exploit representations that model spatial graph relations
between individual actors (e.g. [27, 45, 60]) and follow actors and their movements over time (e.g. [28, 45, 48]). The
majority of previous works explicitly model these spatial
and temporal relationships based on the location of the actors. We propose an implicit spatio-temporal model for recognizing group activities.
We are inspired by progress in natural language processing (NLP) tasks, which also require temporal modeling to
capture the relationship between words over time. Typi∗ This paper is the product of work during an internship at Sportlogiq.

Embedding

Embedding

Embedding

Transformer
Group Activity

Figure 1: We explore two complementary static and dynamic actor representations for group activity recognition.
The static representation is captured by 2D pose features
from a single frame while the dynamic representation is obtained from multiple RGB or optical flow frames. These
representations are processed by a transformer that infers
group activity.

cally, recurrent neural networks (RNN) and their variants
(long short-term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit
(GRU)) were the first choices for NLP tasks [8, 41, 52].
While designed to model a sequence of words over time,
they experience difficulty modeling long sequences [14].
More recently, the transformer network [55] has emerged
as a superior method for NLP tasks [15, 17, 33, 62] since it
relies on a self-attention mechanism that enables it to better
model dependencies across words over time without a recurrent or recursive component. This mechanism allows the
network to selectively extract the most relevant information
and relationships. We hypothesize a transformer network
can also better model relations between actors and combine actor-level information for group activity recognition
compared to models that require explicit spatial and temporal constraints. A key enabler is the transformer’s selfattention mechanism, which learns interactions between the
actors and selectively extracts information that is important
for activity recognition. Therefore, we do not rely on any
a priori spatial or temporal structure like graphs [45, 60] or

839

