Private-kNN: Practical Differential Privacy for Computer Vision
Yuqing Zhu1,2

Xiang Yu2
Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1
University of California, Santa Barbara
2
NEC Labs America
3
University of California, San Diego

Yu-Xiang Wang1

Abstract
With increasing ethical and legal concerns on privacy
for deep models in visual recognition, differential privacy
has emerged as a mechanism to disguise membership of
sensitive data in training datasets. Recent methods like Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensembles (PATE) leverage a
large ensemble of teacher models trained on disjoint subsets
of private data, to transfer knowledge to a student model
with privacy guarantees. However, labeled vision data is
often expensive and datasets when split into many disjoint
training sets lead to significantly sub-optimal accuracy and
thus hardly sustain good privacy bounds. We propose a
practically data-efficient scheme based on private release of
k-nearest neighbor (kNN) queries, which altogether avoids
splitting the training dataset. Our approach allows the use
of privacy-amplification by subsampling and iterative refinement of the kNN feature embedding. We rigorously analyze
the theoretical properties of our method and demonstrate
strong experimental performance on practical computer vision datasets for face attribute recognition and person reidentification. In particular, we achieve comparable or better
accuracy than PATE while reducing more than 90% of the
privacy loss, thereby providing the “most practical method
to-date” for private deep learning in computer vision. 1

1. Introduction
Recent studies have shown that many machine learning
(ML) models trained on sensitive human subject data can
be used to re-identify individual subjects [24] or reconstruct
sensitive information such as social security and credit card
numbers [5]. Moreover, recent legislative steps such as the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) have elevated
privacy from a mere “risk” to a central “requirement” for
institutions and governments across the world.
Differential privacy (DP) [10] is a quantifiable and composable definition of privacy that provides provable guarantees against identifications of individuals in a data set. As of
1 Code is available at https://github.com/jeremy43/
Private_kNN

Figure 1. A comparison of PATE’s framework and ours.

today, DP has been widely adopted and has become the de
facto standard for defining privacy. Differentially private machine learning [12, 6] is a burgeoning area of research that
aims to train ML models with formal DP guarantees, which
ensures no attacker (with arbitrary side information) may
distinguish models trained with or without a specific training
example, thus, addressing the aforementioned problems.
The key idea of differentially private machine learning is
to appropriately randomize the training process (e.g. adding
noise), so the fitted model parameters can be thought of as
a sanitized “release” with individual information removed.
Several existing approaches do not apply for deep learning
[6, 9, 27, 23]. A notable exception – NoisySGD [25, 3, 1] –
requires privately releasing the gradients
for many iterations
√
by adding noise proportional to d to every coordinate of
the gradient in a model with d parameters, hence does not
scale to large models with millions of parameters that are
commonly used in computer vision.
A recent model-agnostic approach, termed “Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensembles” (PATE), introduces a model
aggregation strategy and gains privacy by injecting randomness into the aggregation [21, 22]. It assumes a teacherstudent knowledge transfer framework by leveraging an isolated private data and unrestricted public unlabeled data.
The most critical parameter to choose in PATE is the number of disjoint teachers k. It largely determines the margin
between the top two votes and is often as large as 250 for a
meaningful privacy guarantee while ensuring the sufficiently
accurate pseudo-labels. When the teacher model is a deep
neural network, large-scale data is required for each model
111854

