A sparse resultant based method for efficient minimal solvers
Snehal Bhayani1

Zuzana Kukelova2

Janne Heikkilä 1

1

2

Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
Many computer vision applications require robust and efficient estimation of camera geometry. The robust estimation
is usually based on solving camera geometry problems from
a minimal number of input data measurements, i.e. solving
minimal problems in a RANSAC framework. Minimal problems often result in complex systems of polynomial equations. Many state-of-the-art efficient polynomial solvers to
these problems are based on Gröbner bases and the actionmatrix method that has been automated and highly optimized in recent years. In this paper we study an alternative
algebraic method for solving systems of polynomial equations, i.e., the sparse resultant-based method and propose
a novel approach to convert the resultant constraint to an
eigenvalue problem. This technique can significantly improve the efficiency and stability of existing resultant-based
solvers. We applied our new resultant-based method to a
large variety of computer vision problems and show that
for most of the considered problems, the new method leads
to solvers that are the same size as the the best available
Gröbner basis solvers and of similar accuracy. For some
problems the new sparse-resultant based method leads to
even smaller and more stable solvers than the state-of-theart Gröbner basis solvers. Our new method can be fully automated and incorporated into existing tools for automatic
generation of efficient polynomial solvers and as such it represents a competitive alternative to popular Gröbner basis
methods for minimal problems in computer vision.

1. Introduction
Computing camera geometry is one of the most important
tasks in computer vision [17] with many applications e.g.
in structure from motion [39], visual navigation [38], large
scale 3D reconstruction [19] and image localization [37].
The robust estimation of camera geometry is usually
based on solving so-called minimal problems [35, 24, 23],
i.e. problems that are solved from minimal samples of input data, inside a RANSAC framework [14, 9, 36]. Since
the camera geometry estimation has to be performed many

times in RANSAC [14], fast solvers to minimal problems
are of high importance. Minimal problems often result in
complex systems of polynomial equations in several variables. A popular approach for solving minimal problems is
to design procedures that can efficiently solve only a special class of systems of equations, e.g. systems resulting
from the 5-pt relative pose problem [35], and move as much
computation as possible from the “online” stage of solving
equations to an earlier pre-processing “offline” stage.
Most of the state-of-the-art specific minimal solvers are
based on Gröbner bases and the action-matrix method [10].
The Gröbner basis method was popularized in computer vision by Stewenius [40]. The first efficient Gröbner basis
solvers were mostly handcrafted [41, 42] and sometimes
very unstable [43]. However, in the last 15 years much effort has been put into making the process of constructing
the solvers more automatic [24, 29, 30] and the solvers stable [6, 7] and more efficient [29, 30, 28, 5, 32]. There are
now powerful tools available for the automatic generation
of efficient Gröbner basis solvers [24, 29].
While the Gröbner basis method for generating efficient
minimal solvers was thoroughly studied in computer vision
and all recently generated Gröbner basis solvers are highly
optimized in terms of efficiency and stability, little attention
has been paid to an alternative algebraic method for solving
systems of polynomial equations, i.e. the resultant-based
method. The resultant-based method was manually applied
to several computer vision problems [25, 16, 16, 20, 23, 25].
However in contrast to the Gröbner basis method, there is
no general method for automatically generating efficient
resultant-based minimal solvers. The most promising results in this direction were proposed by Emiris [12] and
Heikkilä [18], where methods based on sparse resultants
were proposed and applied to camera geometry problems.
While these methods can be extended for general minimal
problems that appear in computer vision and can be automated, they usually lead (due to linearizations) to larger and
less efficient solvers than Gröbner basis solvers.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to generating minimal solvers using sparse resultants, which is based
on adding an extra equation of a special form to the in-

1770

