End-to-End Model-Free Reinforcement Learning
for Urban Driving using Implicit Affordances
Marin Toromanoff1,2,3 , Emilie Wirbel2,3 , Fabien Moutarde1
1

Center for Robotics, MINES ParisTech, PSL
1

2

Valeo Driving Assistance Research
2, 3

name.surname@mines-paristech.fr

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims at learning an optimal behavior policy from its own experiments and not rulebased control methods. However, there is no RL algorithm
yet capable of handling a task as difficult as urban driving. We present a novel technique, coined implicit affordances, to effectively leverage RL for urban driving thus including lane keeping, pedestrians and vehicles avoidance,
and traffic light detection. To our knowledge we are the first
to present a successful RL agent handling such a complex
task especially regarding the traffic light detection. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the effectiveness of our method
by winning the Camera Only track of the CARLA challenge.

1. Introduction
Urban driving is probably one of the hardest situations
to solve for autonomous cars, particularly regarding the
interaction on intersections with traffic lights, pedestrians
crossing and cars going on different possible lanes. Solving this task is still an open problem and it seems complicated to handle such difficult and highly variable situations
with classic rules-based approach. This is why a significant
part of the state of the art in autonomous driving [20, 4, 5]
focuses on end-to-end systems, i.e. learning driving policy
from data without relying on hand-crafted rules.
Imitation learning (IL) [27] aims to reproduce the behavior of an expert (a human driver for autonomous driving) by
learning to mimic the control the human driver applied in
the same situation. This leverages the massive amount of
data annotated with human driving that most of automotive
manufacturer and supplier can obtain relatively easily. On
the other side, as the human driver is always in an almost
perfect situation, IL algorithms suffer from a distribution
mismatch, i.e. the algorithm will never encounter failing
cases and thus will not react appropriately in those conditions. Techniques to augment the database with such failing

3

Valeo.ai

name.surname@valeo.com

cases do exist but they are currently mostly limited to lane
keeping and lateral control [1, 32].
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) on the other side
lets the algorithm learn by itself by providing a reward signal at each action taken by the agent and thus does not suffer
from distribution mismatch. This reward can be sparse and
not describing exactly what the agent should have done but
just how good the action taken is locally. The final goal of
the agent is to maximize the sum of accumulated rewards
and thus the agent needs to think about sequence of actions
rather than instantaneous ones. One of the major drawbacks
of DRL is that it can need a magnitude larger amount of data
than supervised learning to converge, which can lead to difficulties when training large networks with many parameters. Moreover many RL algorithms rely on a replay buffer
[21, 24, 12] allowing to learn from past experiments but
such buffers can limit the size of the input used (e.g. the size
of the image). That is why neural networks and image size
in DRL are usually tiny compared to the ones used in supervised learning. Thus they may not be expressive enough
to solve such complicated tasks as urban driving. Therefore
current DRL approaches to autonomous driving are applied
to simpler cases, e.g. only steering control for lane keeping
[18] or going as fast as possible in racing games [23, 16].
Another drawback of DRL, shared with IL, is that the algorithm appears as a black box from which it is difficult to
understand how the decision was taken.
A promising way to solve both the data efficiency (particularly for DRL) and the black box problem is to use
privileged information as auxiliary losses also coined affordances in some recent papers [2, 29]. The idea is to train
a network to predict high level information such as semantic segmentation maps, distance to center of the lane, traffic
light state etc... This prediction can then be used in several ways, either by a classic controller as in Sauer et al.
[29], either as auxiliary loss helping to find better features
to the main imitative task loss as in Mehta et al. [22] or also
in a model-based RL approach as in the really recent work
of Pan et al. [26] while also providing some interpretable
feedback on how the decision was taken.
17153

