Don’t Judge an Object by Its Context: Learning to Overcome Contextual Bias
Krishna Kumar Singh1 , Dhruv Mahajan2 , Kristen Grauman2,3 , Yong Jae Lee1 , Matt Feiszli2 ,
Deepti Ghadiyaram2
1

University of California, Davis, 2 Facebook AI, 3 University of Texas at Austin

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual context serves as a valuable auxiliary cue for the
human visual system for scene interpretation and object
recognition [4]. Context can either be a co-occurrence of
objects and scenes (e.g., “boat” is often present in “outdoor
waters”) or of two or more objects in a given scene (e.g.,
“skis” often co-occur with a “skier”). Context becomes especially crucial for our visual system when the visual signal
is ambiguous or incomplete (e.g., due to occlusion, viewpoint of the scene capture, etc.). Past research explicitly
models context and shows benefits on standard visual tasks
such as classification [30] and detection [13, 3]. Meanwhile,
convolution networks by design implicitly capture context.
Deep networks rely on the availability of large-scale
annotated datasets [22, 12] for training. As highlighted
in [32, 31], despite the best efforts of its creators, most

Cause of bias

Skateboard without person
vs.

CAM for skateboard

CAM for skateboard

Baseline

Proposed

Baseline

Proposed

Learning from the
wrong thing

Learning from the right
thing

Cannot recognize
when context is absent

Recognize even when
context is absent

Effect

Existing models often leverage co-occurrences between
objects and their context to improve recognition accuracy.
However, strongly relying on context risks a model’s generalizability, especially when typical co-occurrence patterns
are absent. This work focuses on addressing such contextual biases to improve the robustness of the learnt feature
representations. Our goal is to accurately recognize a category in the absence of its context, without compromising
on performance when it co-occurs with context. Our key
idea is to decorrelate feature representations of a category
from its co-occurring context. We achieve this by learning a
feature subspace that explicitly represents categories occurring in the absence of context along side a joint feature subspace that represents both categories and context. Our very
simple yet effective method is extensible to two multi-label
tasks – object and attribute classification. On 4 challenging
datasets, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in
reducing contextual bias.

Skateboard co-occurring with person

Figure 1. Top (cause of contextual bias): Sample training images of the
category “skateboard”. Notice how it very often co-occurs with “person”
and how all images are captured from similar viewpoints. In the rare cases
where skateboard occurs exclusively, there is higher viewpoint variance.
Bottom (effect of such bias): Such data skew causes a typical classifier
to rely on “person” to classify “skateboard” and worse, unable to recognize skateboard when person is absent. Our proposed approach overcomes
such contextual bias by learning feature representations that decorrelate
the category from its context.

prominent vision datasets are afflicted with several forms of
biases. Let us consider an object category “microwave.” A
significant portion of images belonging to this category are
likely to be captured in kitchen environments, where other
objects such as “refrigerator,” “kitchen sink,” and “oven”
frequently co-occur. This may inadvertently induce contextual bias in these datasets, which would consequently seep
into models trained on them. Specifically, in the process
of learning features that separate positive and negative instances in such a (biased) training dataset, a deep discriminative model can very often also strongly capture the context co-occurring with the category of interest. This issue
is exacerbated in a setting where we do not have explicit
location annotations (e.g., bounding boxes and segmentation masks) of such biased categories, and a model being
trained has to rely solely on image-level annotations to perform multi-label classification. Having a model implicitly
learn to localize such context-biased categories in the absence of location annotations is challenging.

11070

