Learning Longterm Representations for Person Re-Identification
Using Radio Signals
Lijie Fan∗ Tianhong Li∗

Rongyao Fang∗ Rumen Hristov
MIT CSAIL
Person A

Abstract
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to recognize a
person-of-interest across different places and times. Existing ReID methods rely on images or videos collected using RGB cameras. They extract appearance features like
clothes, shoes, hair, etc. Such features, however, can change
drastically from one day to the next, leading to inability to
identify people over extended time periods. In this paper, we
introduce RF-ReID, a novel approach that harnesses radio
frequency (RF) signals for longterm person ReID. RF signals
traverse clothes and reflect off the human body; thus they
can be used to extract more persistent human-identifying
features like body size and shape. We evaluate the performance of RF-ReID on longitudinal datasets that span days
and weeks, where the person may wear different clothes
across days. Our experiments demonstrate that RF-ReID
outperforms state-of-the-art RGB-based ReID approaches
for long term person ReID. Our results also reveal two interesting features: First since RF signals work in the presence
of occlusions and poor lighting, RF-ReID allows for person
ReID in such scenarios. Second, unlike photos and videos
which reveal personal and private information, RF signals
are more privacy-preserving, and hence can help extend
person ReID to privacy-concerned domains, like healthcare.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match a person-ofinterest across different cameras, and at different times and
locations. It has broad applications in city planning, smart
surveillance, safety monitoring, etc. It is challenging because
the visual appearance of a person across cameras can change
dramatically due to changes in illumination, background,
camera view-angle, and human pose. With the success of
deep learning, several ReID models [3, 25, 7, 8, 14, 39, 11,
60] have managed to extract appearance features that are
view-invariant across cameras, leading to good performance
on various person ReID datasets [6].
∗ Indicates equal contribution.

Yuan Yuan

(a)

Dina Katabi

Person A

RF-ReID :
0.878

(b)

Video ReID :
0.936

Person B

(c)

Figure 1. Similarity score between people as computed by RF-ReID and
a state-of-the art video-based ReID model (the larger the score, the higher
the similarity). (a) and (b) show the same person wearing different clothes,
and (c) shows a different person wearing the same pullover as the top-left
person. The video-based ReID model relies on appearance features and
thus wrongly predicts (a) to be close to (c), while RF-ReID captures body
shape and walking style and can correctly associate (a) with (b).

However, another great challenge has rarely been investigated: human visual appearance can also change drastically
over time. For example, people may revisit the same shop
on different days wearing different clothes and hair styles,
and a thief can deliberately change his clothes to mislead the
surveillance system. A robust person ReID system should
be able to match people despite appearance changes. Unfortunately, existing RGB-based person ReID systems have
severe limitations in achieving this goal since they intrinsically rely on appearance information such as clothes, shoes,
hair, bags, etc. [39, 49, 52]. All these features are short-lived
and can become ineffective the next day. To achieve robust
person ReID, the system should be able to extract longterm
identifying features that persist for weeks and months.
But how can we capture persistent features suitable for
person ReID? Wireless signals present a good solution. Radio frequency (RF) signals in the Wi-Fi frequency range
traverse clothes and reflect off the human body. Unlike cameras, wireless signals could extract intrinsic features of the
human body, such as body size or shape. These features
are relatively stable over days and months, enabling a more
110699

