From Patches to Pictures (PaQ-2-PiQ):
Mapping the Perceptual Space of Picture Quality
†

Zhenqiang Ying1*, Haoran Niu1*, Praful Gupta1 , Dhruv Mahajan2 , Deepti Ghadiyaram2 , Alan Bovik1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Facebook AI

†

{zqying, haoranniu, praful gupta}@utexas.edu, {dhruvm, deeptigp}@fb.com, bovik@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Blind or no-reference (NR) perceptual picture quality
prediction is a difficult, unsolved problem of great consequence to the social and streaming media industries that
impacts billions of viewers daily. Unfortunately, popular NR prediction models perform poorly on real-world
distorted pictures. To advance progress on this problem,
we introduce the largest (by far) subjective picture quality database, containing about 40, 000 real-world distorted
pictures and 120, 000 patches, on which we collected about
4M human judgments of picture quality. Using these picture and patch quality labels, we built deep region-based
architectures that learn to produce state-of-the-art global
picture quality predictions as well as useful local picture quality maps. Our innovations include picture quality
prediction architectures that produce global-to-local inferences as well as local-to-global inferences (via feedback).
The dataset and source code are available at https:
//live.ece.utexas.edu/research.php.

1. Introduction
Digital pictures, often of questionable quality, have become ubiquitous. Several hundred billion photos are uploaded and shared annually on social media sites like Facebook, Instagram, and Tumblr. Streaming services like Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, and YouTube account for 60%
of all downstream internet traffic [1]. Being able to understand and predict the perceptual quality of digital pictures,
given resource constraints and increasing display sizes, is a
high-stakes problem.
It is a common misconception that if two pictures are
impaired by the same amount of a distortion (e.g., blur),
they will have similar perceived qualities. However, this
is far from true because of the way the vision system processes picture impairments. For example, Figs. 1(a) and
∗† Equal contribution

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1: Challenges in distortion perception: Quality of a (distorted) image as perceived by human observers is perceptual quality. Distortion
perception is highly content-dependent. Pictures (a) and (b) were JPEG
compressed using identical encode parameters, but present very different
degrees of perceptual distortion. The spatially uniform noise in (c) varies
in visibility over the picture content, because of contrast masking [2].

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2: Aesthetics vs. perceptual quality (a) is blurrier than (b), but likely
more aesthetically pleasing to most viewers.

1(b) have identical amounts of JPEG compression applied,
but Fig. 1(a) appears relatively unimpaired perceptually,
while Fig. 1(b) is unacceptable. On the other hand, Fig. 1(c)
has had spatially uniform white noise applied to it, but its
perceived distortion severity varies across the picture. The
complex interplay between picture content and distortions
(largely determined by masking phenomena [2]), and the
way distortion artifacts are visually processed, play an important role in how visible or annoying visual distortions
may present themselves. Perceived quality correlates poorly
with simple quantities like resolution and bit rate [7]. Generally, predicting perceptual picture quality is a hard, longstanding research problem [8, 2, 7, 9, 10], despite its deceptive simplicity (we sense distortion easily with little, if any,
thought).

3575

