Weakly Supervised Fine-grained Image Classification via Guassian Mixture
Model Oriented Discriminative Learning

1

Zhihui Wang1,2 , Shijie Wang1 , Shuhui Yang1 , Haojie Li1,2∗, Jianjun Li3 , Zezhou Li4
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
4
Shanghai Pinlan Data Technology

Abstract
Existing weakly supervised fine-grained image recognition (WFGIR) methods usually pick out the discriminative
regions from the high-level feature maps directly. We discover that due to the operation of stacking local receptive
filed, Convolutional Neural Network causes the discriminative region diffusion in high-level feature maps, which leads
to inaccurate discriminative region localization. In this
paper, we propose an end-to-end Discriminative Featureoriented Gaussian Mixture Model (DF-GMM), to address
the problem of discriminative region diffusion and find better fine-grained details. Specifically, DF-GMM consists
of 1) a low-rank representation mechanism (LRM), which
learns a set of low-rank discriminative bases by Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM) to accurately select discriminative
details and filter more irrelevant information in high-level
semantic feature maps, 2) a low-rank representation reorganization mechanism (LR2 M) which resumes the space information of low-rank discriminative bases to reconstruct
the low-rank feature maps. By recovering the low-rank discriminative bases into the same embedding space of highlevel feature maps, LR2 M alleviates the discriminative region diffusion problem in high-level feature map and discriminative regions can be located more precisely on the
new low-rank feature maps. Extensive experiments verify
that DF-GMM yields the best performance under the same
settings with the most competitive approaches, in CUBBird, Stanford-Cars datasets, and FGVC Aircraft.

1. Introduction
Weakly Supervised Fine-grained Image Recognition
(WFGIR) focuses on distinguishing subtle visual differ∗ Corresponding author: hjli@dlut.edu.cn. This work was supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under
Grants No. 61772108, No. 61932020 and No. 61976038.

Figure 1. The motivation of Discriminative Feature-oriented Gaussian Mixture Model (DF-GMM). DRD denotes the problem of discriminative region diffusion. FHL denotes the high-level semantic
feature maps and FLR indicates the low-rank feature maps. (a) is
the original image, (b)(c) are the discriminative response maps to
guide network to sample the discriminative regions and (d) (e) are
localization results without and with DF-GMM learning, respectively. We can see that after reducing DRD, (c) is more compact
and sparse than (b) and the resulted regions in (e) are more accurate and discriminative than those in (d).

ences under more detailed categories and granularity with
only image-level annotations. WFGIR is still a challenging
task due to two reasons. First, the global geometry and appearances of sub-categories can be very similar, and how to
identify their subtle variances on the key regions is of vital
importance. Second, instead of object or part annotations,
WFGIR has only image-level annotations available which
brings more difficulty in extracting effective and discriminative features to distinguish the subtle variances between
subcategories.
Picking out the accurate discriminative regions plays
the key role in addressing aforementioned two challenges
of WFGIR. From this point, existing fine-grained image recognition approaches can be roughly grouped into
4321
9749

