ENSEI: Efficient Secure Inference via Frequency-Domain
Homomorphic Convolution for Privacy-Preserving Visual Recognition
Song Bian1

Tianchen Wang2
Masayuki Hiromoto1
Takashi Sato1

Yiyu Shi2

{sbian, hiromoto, takashi}@easter.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp
{twang9, yshi4}@nd.edu
1

Department of Communications and Computer Engineering, Kyoto University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame

2

Abstract
In this work, we propose ENSEI, a secure inference (SI)
framework based on the frequency-domain secure convolution (FDSC) protocol for the efficient execution of privacypreserving visual recognition. Our observation is that, under the combination of homomorphic encryption and secret sharing, homomorphic convolution can be obliviously
carried out in the frequency domain, significantly simplifying the related computations. We provide protocol designs
and parameter derivations for number-theoretic transform
(NTT) based FDSC. In the experiment, we thoroughly
study the accuracy-efficiency trade-offs between time- and
frequency-domain homomorphic convolution. With ENSEI,
compared to the best known works, we achieve 5–11x online time reduction, up to 33x setup time reduction, and up
to 10x reduction in the overall inference time. A further
33% of bandwidth reductions can be obtained on binary
neural networks with only 1% of accuracy degradation on
the CIFAR-10 dataset.

1. Introduction
The design and implementation of privacy-preserving
image recognition based on deep neural network (more generally, secure machine learning as a service (MLaaS)) attract increasing attentions [5, 12, 23, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31]. In
the field of vision-based MLaaS, proprietary model stealing [22, 35] and privacy violation [32] have become one of
the main limitations for the real-world deployment of ML
algorithms. For example, serious privacy concerns have
been raised against medical imaging [13], image-based localization [34], and video surveillance [6, 36], as leaking
visual representations in such applications can profoundly
undermine the well-beings of individuals. The threat model
in a secure inference (SI) scheme for visual recognition can

be informally formulated as follows. Suppose that Alice as
a client wishes to inference on some of her input images
using pre-trained inference engines (e.g., deep neural networks) from Bob. As the image contains her sensitive information (e.g., organ segmentation), Alice does not want
to reveal her inputs to Bob. On the other hand, it is also
financially unwise for Bob who owns the engine to transfer the pre-trained knowledge base to an untrusted or even
malicious client. A privacy-preserving visual recognition
scheme attempts to address the privacy and model security
risks simultaneously via advanced cryptographic constructions, such as homomorphic encryption [3, 11] and garbled
circuits [37].
Due to the multidisciplinary nature of the topic, SI on
neural networks (NN) involves contributions from many
distinct fields of study. Initial design explorations mainly
focused on the feasibility of NN-based SI, and generally
carry impractical performance overheads [12, 28]. Recent
advances in cryptographic primitives [15] and adversary
models [23, 25] have brought input-hiding SI into practical domain, where 32 × 32 image datasets can be classified
within seconds [23, 30]. Meanwhile, from a learning perspective, alternative feature representations are discussed to
reduce the computational complexity of SI [5]. We also observe that hardware-friendly network architectures [9, 10]
can be adopted in a secure setting to reduce the computational and communicational overheads [30]. Furthermore,
design optimizations on the fundamental operations (e.g.,
secure matrix multiplication [21], secure convolution [23])
in SI can also greatly improve its practical efficiency.
In this work, we propose ENSEI, a general protocol designed for efficient secure inference over images by adopting homomorphic frequency-domain convolution (FDC). It
is demonstrated that frequency-domain convolution, which
is a key component in reducing the computational complexity of convolutional neural networks, can also be performed
19403

