MetaIQA: Deep Meta-learning for No-Reference Image Quality Assessment
Hancheng Zhua,b , Leida Lia∗, Jinjian Wua , Weisheng Donga , and Guangming Shia
a

b

School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
School of Information and Control Engineering, China University of Mining and Technology
a

ldli@xidian.edu.cn, a {jinjian.wu, wsdong}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, a gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
b

zhuhancheng@cumt.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, increasing interest has been drawn in exploiting deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) for noreference image quality assessment (NR-IQA). Despite of
the notable success achieved, there is a broad consensus
that training DCNNs heavily relies on massive annotated
data. Unfortunately, IQA is a typical small sample problem. Therefore, most of the existing DCNN-based IQA metrics operate based on pre-trained networks. However, these
pre-trained networks are not designed for IQA task, leading
to generalization problem when evaluating different types
of distortions. With this motivation, this paper presents a
no-reference IQA metric based on deep meta-learning. The
underlying idea is to learn the meta-knowledge shared by
human when evaluating the quality of images with various
distortions, which can then be adapted to unknown distortions easily. Specifically, we first collect a number of NRIQA tasks for different distortions. Then meta-learning is
adopted to learn the prior knowledge shared by diversified
distortions. Finally, the quality prior model is fine-tuned on
a target NR-IQA task for quickly obtaining the quality model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
metric outperforms the state-of-the-arts by a large margin.
Furthermore, the meta-model learned from synthetic distortions can also be easily generalized to authentic distortions, which is highly desired in real-world applications of IQA
metrics.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the explosive growth of social networks
has produced massive amounts of images. Digital images
could be distorted in any stage of their life cycle, from acquisition, compression, storage to transmission, which leads to the loss of received visual information. Consequently,
∗ Corresponding author: Leida Li

a reliable quality assessment metric of digital images is in
great need to pick out high quality images for the end users. Although human’s subjective evaluation of images is accurate and reliable, it is time-consuming and laborious in
practical applications. Hence, objective image quality assessment (IQA) [20] is needed to imitate human beings to
automatically assess image quality, which has extensive applications in image restoration [6], image retrieval [13] and
image quality monitoring systems [23], etc.
Typically, IQA methods can be divided into three
categories: full-reference IQA (FR-IQA) [17], reducedreference IQA (RR-IQA) [11], and no-reference IQA (NRIQA) [54], depending on the amount of reference information needed during quality evaluation. Although FR-IQA
and RR-IQA methods can achieve promising performance,
reference images are often not available in real-world situations. Hence, NR-IQA methods have attracted extensive attention recently, as they operate on the distorted images directly. Meantime, the lacking of reference information poses huge challenge for NR-IQA methods. Early
NR-IQA methods mainly focus on specific distortion types,
such as blocking artifacts [25], blur [24] and ringing effects [29]. The prerequisite of these approaches is that there
is only one known type of distortion in the images. Since
the distortion types are usually not known in advance in
real-world applications, more and more attention has been
drawn in general-purpose NR-IQA methods over the past
few years [39, 32, 56, 51, 50, 12, 54, 49, 10]. These metrics attempt to characterize the general rules of image distortions through hand-crafted [39] or learned [54] features,
based on which an image quality prediction model can be
established.
Recent years have witnessed the great success of Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) [14] in many
computer vision tasks [4, 5], which has also spawned a
number of DCNNs-based NR-IQA approaches [16, 2, 28,
30, 52, 58, 57]. These approaches have achieved signifi-

14143

