Improving Action Segmentation via Graph Based Temporal Reasoning
Yifei Huang, Yusuke Sugano, Yoichi Sato
Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo
{hyf,sugano,ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Temporal relations among multiple action segments play
an important role in action segmentation especially when
observations are limited (e.g., actions are occluded by other
objects or happen outside a field of view). In this paper, we
propose a network module called Graph-based Temporal
Reasoning Module (GTRM) that can be built on top of existing action segmentation models to learn the relation of
multiple action segments in various time spans. We model
the relations by using two Graph Convolution Networks
(GCNs) where each node represents an action segment. The
two graphs have different edge properties to account for
boundary regression and classification tasks, respectively.
By applying graph convolution, we can update each node’s
representation based on its relation with neighboring nodes.
The updated representation is then used for improved action segmentation. We evaluate our model on the challenging egocentric datasets namely EGTEA and EPIC-Kitchens,
where actions may be partially observed due to the viewpoint restriction. The results show that our proposed GTRM
outperforms state-of-the-art action segmentation models by
a large margin. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of
our model on two third-person video datasets, the 50Salads
dataset and the Breakfast dataset.

1. Introduction
Video action segmentation plays a crucial role in various
applications such as robotics [31], anomaly detection [7]
and human behaviour analysis [56]. The task of action segmentation is to know when and what type of action is observed in a given video. This is done by temporally locating
each action segment in the video and classifying the action
category of the segment.
The topic of action segmentation has long been studied
by the computer vision community. Earlier approaches address this problem by applying temporal classifiers on top of
low-level video features, e.g. I3D [6] features. They include
1) sliding window approaches [29, 51], which typically
have very limited temporal receptive fields; 2) segmental

t

…

…

…

…

…

…

Backbone model
Take bottle

Pour water

Relation
reasoning

Graph
construction

Take bottle

Background?

Pour water

Drink water

Put glass

Y

Representation
update

Put glass

"
Y

Figure 1. Consider the example video in this figure. The backbone
model prunes to detect the segment after pour water to be background since no action is directly observable from the video. By
adding our proposed GTRM on top, we can successfully detect
this segment to be drink water by learning the temporal relation
between the actions. The relation among multiple actions can also
help to adjust the segment boundaries.

models [36, 46], which have difficulty in capturing longrange action patterns since an action is only conditioned on
its previous segment; and 3) recurrent networks [23, 53],
which have a limited span of attention [53]. Recently temporal convolutional networks [37] demonstrated a promising capability of capturing long-range dependencies between video frames [14, 16, 35], leading to good results on
third-person videos seen from a fixed viewpoint.
However, it remains difficult for existing methods to
work well when only limited observations are available (e.g.
due to occlusions by unrelated objects or a limited field of
view) [68]. Consider a simple example sequence shown in
Fig. 1 from the EPIC-Kitchens dataset [11]. Although this
is a first-person video with a limited point of view, we as
human beings can easily infer the action after take bottle
and pour water to be drink water, even though the drinking
action is not directly observed. This is because our brains
can reason about the relation of actions: a drink water action should have happened since we first see the camera
wearer takes the bottle, fills the glass with water, and then
observed he/she puts down the empty glass. Because of the
limited observation, it is difficult for existing methods based
on convolutional neural networks to perform well [68].

14024

