Local Non-Rigid Structure-from-Motion from Diffeomorphic Mappings
Shaifali Parashar, Mathieu Salzmann and Pascal Fua
CVLAB, EPFL, Switzerland
shaifali.parashar,mathieu.salzmann,pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a new formulation to non-rigid structurefrom-motion that only requires the deforming surface to
preserve its differential structure. This is a much weaker
assumption than the traditional ones of isometry or conformality. We show that it is nevertheless sufficient to establish local correspondences between the surface in two
different images and therefore to perform point-wise reconstruction using only first-order derivatives. To this end,
we formulate differential constraints and solve them algebraically using the theory of resultants. We will demonstrate that our approach is more widely applicable, more
stable in noisy and sparse imaging conditions and much
faster than earlier ones, while delivering similar accuracy. The code is available at https://github.com/
cvlab-epfl/diff-nrsfm/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D shape of deformable objects from
monocular images, known as Non-Rigid Structure-fromMotion (NRSfM), has applications in domains ranging from
entertainment [23] to medicine [20]. It was introduced in [4]
by expressing shapes in terms of a low-rank shape-basis.
Many variants of this idea have since been proposed with
a view to improve reconstruction stability [5, 2, 32, 11, 21,
14]. Over the last decade, physically-inspired NRSfM models [33, 34, 30, 8, 9, 18, 24, 25] have emerged as an attractive alternative. They exploit local surface properties to
draw constraints, can handle large deformations and outperform techniques relying on low-rank priors. Unfortunately,
most methods in both categories become prohibitively slow
as the number of images increases, due of their non-linear
complexity, and cannot handle missing data. This makes
them impractical for real-world scenarios.
[24, 25] buck this trend. By expressing isometry or conformality constraints in terms of differential properties, local reconstruction constraints can be established between
the deforming surface as seen in two different images. Thus,
the surface 3D shape in any frame can be obtained by pair-

ing that frame with the rest and the complexity only grows
linearly with the number of images. Furthermore, missing
data for example due to occlusions, can be easily handled by
using a parametric image registration warp. While effective
in theory, this approach suffers from two main drawbacks:
i) it requires the second-order derivatives of the image registration warps, which are usually noisy, and sometimes even
downright wrong when given only semi-dense correspondences to compute them. In the first case, an expensive
warp refinement [26] must be performed and in the second
the approach simply becomes impractical. ii) a deformation
model must be chosen a priori, which precludes using this
method for surfaces of unknown properties. In this paper,
we introduce a framework that overcomes these drawbacks.
To this end, we leverage the assumption that the deforming surface is locally diffeomorphic, that is, that the deformation preserves the local differential structure of the surface, which is a much more generic model than isometry or
conformality and encompasses both as well as equiareality.
We will show that it suffices to establish local reconstruction constraints between pairs of surfaces without requiring second-order derivatives or a priori knowledge about
the surface properties. This makes our approach immune to
the difficulties described above. Furthermore, if knowledge
about the surface properties is available, the corresponding
metric-preserving constraints can be incorporated.
We will show that, when the deformations are equiareal
instead of conformal and the correspondences semi-dense,
our approach delivers good results whereas [24, 25] cannot be used. Furthermore, in the conformal case with dense
correspondences, our approach delivers a similar accuracy
to [24, 25] and it is 10× faster. In addition, we require only
first order derivatives, which is at least 20× faster than computing second order derivatives for [24, 25]. We also compare with some of the best performing methods in state of
the art and show that we outperform most of them in terms
of both accuracy and computation time.

2. Related Work
NRSfM methods can be grouped into three broad classes
depending on how deformations are modeled.
12059

