Exploring Category-Agnostic Clusters for Open-Set Domain Adaptation
Yingwei Pan† , Ting Yao† , Yehao Li† , Chong-Wah Ngo‡ , and Tao Mei†
†

‡

JD AI Research, Beijing, China
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong

{panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc, yehaoli.sysu}@gmail.com, cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk, tmei@jd.com

Source samples

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation has received significant attention in recent years. Most of existing works
tackle the closed-set scenario, assuming that the source
and target domains share the exactly same categories. In
practice, nevertheless, a target domain often contains samples of classes unseen in source domain (i.e., unknown
class). The extension of domain adaptation from closedset to such open-set situation is not trivial since the target samples in unknown class are not expected to align
with the source. In this paper, we address this problem
by augmenting the state-of-the-art domain adaptation technique, Self-Ensembling, with category-agnostic clusters in
target domain. Specifically, we present Self-Ensembling
with Category-agnostic Clusters (SE-CC) — a novel architecture that steers domain adaptation with the additional guidance of category-agnostic clusters that are specific to target domain. These clustering information provides domain-specific visual cues, facilitating the generalization of Self-Ensembling for both closed-set and open-set
scenarios. Technically, clustering is firstly performed over
all the unlabeled target samples to obtain the categoryagnostic clusters, which reveal the underlying data space
structure peculiar to target domain. A clustering branch is
capitalized on to ensure that the learnt representation preserves such underlying structure by matching the estimated
assignment distribution over clusters to the inherent cluster
distribution for each target sample. Furthermore, SE-CC
enhances the learnt representation with mutual information
maximization. Extensive experiments are conducted on Office and VisDA datasets for both open-set and closed-set
domain adaptation, and superior results are reported when
comparing to the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have driven
vision technologies to reach new state-of-the-arts. The
achievements, nevertheless, are on the assumption that

Target samples

Source Domain

Source Domain

Target Domain

Target Domain

(a) Closed-set
Domain Adaptation

(b) Open-set Domain Adaptation
(Existing)

Unknown
classes

Clustering

(c) Open-set Domain Adaptation
with Category-agnostic Clusters (Ours)

Figure 1. A comparison between (a) closed-set domain adaptation,
(b) existing methods for open-set domain adaptation, and (c) our
open-set domain adaptation with category-agnostic clusters.

large quantities of annotated data are accessible for model
training. The assumption becomes impractical when costexpensive and labor-intensive manual labeling is required.
An alternative is to recycle off-the-shelf learnt knowledge/models in source domain for new domain(s). Unfortunately, the performance often drops significantly on a new
domain, a phenomenon known as “domain shift.” One feasible way to alleviate this problem is to capitalize on unsupervised domain adaptation [3, 6, 17, 21, 35, 37], which
leverages labeled source samples and unlabeled target samples to generalize a target model. One of the most critical limitations is that most existing models simply align
data distributions between source and target domains. As
a consequence, these models are only applicable in closedset scenario (Figure 1(a)) under the unrealistic assumption
that both domains should share exactly the same set of categories. This adversely hinders the generalization of these
models in open-set scenario to distinguish target samples of
unknown class (unseen in source domain) from the target
samples of known classes (seen in source domain).
The difficulty of open-set domain adaptation mainly
originates from two aspects: 1) how to distinguish the unknown target samples from known ones while classifying
the known target samples correctly? 2) how to learn a
hybrid network for both closed-set and open-set domain
adaptation? One straightforward way (Figure 1(b)) to alleviate the first issue is by employing an additional binary
classifier for assigning known/unknown label to each tar-

13867

