Context Aware Graph Convolution for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Xikun Zhang Chang Xu Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
xzha0505@uni.sydney.edu.au, {c.xu,dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Graph convolutional models have gained impressive
successes on skeleton-based human action recognition task.
As graph convolution is a local operation, it cannot fully
investigate non-local joints that could be vital to recognizing the action. For example, actions like typing and clapping request the cooperation of two hands, which are distant from each other in a human skeleton graph. Multiple
graph convolutional layers thus tend to be stacked together
to increase receptive field, which brings in computational
inefficiency and optimization difficulty. But there is still no
guarantee that distant joints (e.g. two hands) can be well
integrated. In this paper, we propose a context aware graph
convolutional network (CA-GCN). Besides the computation
of localized graph convolution, CA-GCN considers a context term for each vertex by integrating information of all
other vertices. Long range dependencies among joints are
thus naturally integrated in context information, which then
eliminates the need of stacking multiple layers to enlarge receptive field and greatly simplifies the network. Moreover,
we further propose an advanced CA-GCN, in which asymmetric relevance measurement and higher level representation are utilized to compute context information for more
flexibility and better performance. Besides the joint features, our CA-GCN could also be extended to handle graphs
with edge (limb) features. Extensive experiments on two
real-world datasets demonstrate the importance of context
information and the effectiveness of the proposed CA-GCN
in skeleton-based action recognition.

1. Introduction
Considering various applications ranging from video
surveillance and virtual reality to human-computer interaction and robotics, human action recognition has become
one of the most important and challenging tasks in computer vision. Traditionally, only monocular RGB videos
are investigated to conduct action recognition [40, 30, 35,
36, 16, 20, 12, 6, 25, 9]. However, with the fast develop-

Figure 1. Context aware graph convolution at the red vertex. Green
and purple arrows denote integration of context information and
graph convolution along spatial and temporal dimensions. Yellow
vertices are convolution participants

ment of low-cost 3D data capturing devices such as camera
arrays and Kinect, 3D action recognition is attracting increasingly more attention from both academia and industry
[34, 5, 22, 38, 43]. As a concise and high-level abstraction
of human action, skeletal data is invariant to viewpoint or
appearance. Human skeletons are naturally in the form of
graph, and thus it is straightforward to apply graph neural
networks on skeleton-based human action recognition task.
Inspired by the success of convolutional neural network
(CNN) in the Euclidean domain, different models have been
proposed recently to generalize convolutional network to
graph structured data [2, 10, 17, 24, 33]. [2] firstly formulated CNNs on graph by using the definition of CNN in
spectral domain. This work contributes a lot conceptually,
but is not practically useful due to significant computational
drawbacks. Followup works [10, 7] addressed these drawbacks, and gradually, graph convolutional networks (GCN)
can achieve state-of-the-art results on some tasks including
skeleton-based human action recognition [42].
Though some effective variants of graph convolution
have been made, they mostly accomplish the convolution
in a local manner. Features are only extracted from a small
neighborhood of the centered vertex, but local movements
conducted by a few adjacent joints could be rather ambiguous in practice. For example, action ‘writing’ and ‘typing
on a keyboard’ are accomplished with the cooperation of
both hands, which are distant from each other in the skele-

14333

