Computing the Testing Error without a Testing Set
Ciprian A. Corneanu
Univ. Barcelona, Tawny

Sergio Escalera
Univ. Barcelona, CVC

Aleix M. Martinez
OSU, Amazon

PROPOSED APPROACH
DEEP NEURAL NETWORK

TOPOLOGICAL SPACE

TOPOLOGICAL
SUMMARY

ESTIMATED PERFORMANCE GAP

ρ

ρtrain
ˆ
∆ρ

λ, µ

fˆ(.)

g(λ, µ)

ˆρ
ρ̂test = ρtrain − ∆

ρ̂test

(λk , µk , ∆ρk )

iteration

TRAINING DATA

TESTING DATA

ESTIMATION ERROR

X = {xi , yi }ni=1

Z = { xi , yi }m
i=n+1

|ρtest − ρ̂test |

ˆρ
∆

CLASSICAL APPROACH
PERFORMANCE GAP

DEEP NEURAL NETWORK

ρ

fˆ(.)

ρtrain

ρtest

∆ρ

iteration

(a)

λ∗ , µ∗

λ, µ

(b)

Figure 1: (a) We compute the test performance1 of any Deep Neural Network (DNN) on any computer vision problem using no testing
samples (top); neither labelled nor unlabelled samples are necessary. This in sharp contrast to the classical computer vision approach,
where model performance is calculated using a curated test dataset (bottom). (b) The persistent algebraic topological summary (λ∗ , µ∗ )
given by our algorithm (x-axis) against the performance gap ∆ρ between training and testing performance (y-axis).

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have revolutionized computer vision. We now have DNNs that achieve top (performance) results in many problems, including object recognition, facial expression analysis, and semantic segmentation,
to name but a few. The design of the DNNs that achieve
top results is, however, non-trivial and mostly done by trailand-error. That is, typically, researchers will derive many
DNN architectures (i.e., topologies) and then test them on
multiple datasets. However, there are no guarantees that the
selected DNN will perform well in the real world. One can
use a testing set to estimate the performance gap between
the training and testing sets, but avoiding overfitting-to-thetesting-data is almost impossible. Using a sequestered testing dataset may address this problem, but this requires a
constant update of the dataset, a very expensive venture.
Here, we derive an algorithm to estimate the performance
gap between training and testing that does not require any
testing dataset. Specifically, we derive a number of persistent topology measures that identify when a DNN is learning to generalize to unseen samples. This allows us to compute the DNN’s testing error on unseen samples, even when

we do not have access to them. We provide extensive experimental validation on multiple networks and datasets to
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are algorithms capable
of identifying complex, non-linear mappings, f (.), between
an input variable x and and output variable y, i.e., f (x) =
y [19]. Each DNN is defined by its unique topology and
loss function. Some well-known models are [25, 15, 18], to
name but a few.
Given a well-curated dataset with n samples, X =
{xi , yi }ni=1 , we can use DNNs to find an estimate of the
functional mapping f (xi ) = yi . Let us refer to the estimated mapping function as fˆ(.). Distinct estimates, fˆj (.),
will be obtained when using different DNNs and datasets.
Example datasets we can use to this end are [10, 13, 11],
among many others.
1 Let ρ

train and test be the performance of an algorithm computed
using a training and testing set, respectively; ρ̂test is the estimated testing
error computed without any testing data. The performance metric may be
classification accuracy, F1-score, Intersection-over-Union (IoU), etc.

12677

