Learning to Evaluate Perception Models using Planner-Centric Metrics
Jonah Philion
Amlan Kar
NVIDIA
University of Toronto

Sanja Fidler
Vector Institute

{jphilion, amlank, sfidler}@nvidia

Abstract
Variants of accuracy and precision are the gold-standard
by which the computer vision community measures progress
of perception algorithms. One reason for the ubiquity of
these metrics is that they are largely task-agnostic; we in
general seek to detect zero false negatives or positives. The
downside of these metrics is that, at worst, they penalize
all incorrect detections equally without conditioning on the
task or scene, and at best, heuristics need to be chosen to
ensure that different mistakes count differently. In this paper, we propose a principled metric for 3D object detection
specifically for the task of self-driving. The core idea behind our metric is to isolate the task of object detection and
measure the impact the produced detections would induce
on the downstream task of driving. Without hand-designing
it to, we find that our metric penalizes many of the mistakes
that other metrics penalize by design. In addition, our metric downweighs detections based on additional factors such
as distance from a detection to the ego car and the speed
of the detection in intuitive ways that other detection metrics do not. For human evaluation, we generate scenes in
which standard metrics and our metric disagree and find
that humans side with our metric 79% of the time. Our
project page including an evaluation server can be found
at https://nv-tlabs.github.io/detection-relevance.

1. Introduction
In the past, raw accuracy and precision sufficed as canonical evaluation metrics for measuring progress in computer
vision. Today, researchers should additionally try to evaluate their models along other dimensions such as robustness
[25], speed [18], and fairness [30], to name a few. In real
robotics systems such as self-driving, it is critical that perception algorithms be ranked according to their ability to
enable the downstream task of driving. An object detector
that achieves higher accuracy and precision on a dataset is
not guaranteed to lead to safer driving. For example, failing to detect a parked car far away in the distance, spanning
perhaps only a few pixels in an image or a single LIDAR
point, is considered equally bad as failing to detect a car

Figure 1. Not all mistakes are created equal A falsely detected parked
vehicle will not lead to dangerous maneuvers by the self-driving car, while
a false positive in front of it will. Metrics such as mAP penalize both cases
equally. Instead of hand-designing the error functions that we intuitively
believe should be important for the downstream task of self-driving, we
use a neural planner to rank object detectors for us. Our metric ranks the
above example as the worst detection made by the state-of-the-art 3D object detector MEGVII [35] on the validation set of nuScenes [5].

slamming the breaks just in front of the ego-car. Ideally, our
perception-evaluation metrics would more accurately translate to the real downstream driving performance.
One way to evaluate performance is by evaluating the
complete driving system either by having it drive in the real
world or in simulation. Collecting real data is surely cumbersome and time consuming: since the systems are getting increasingly good, one needs to collect statistics over a
very large pool of driven miles in order to get an accurate
measurement. Even so, the scenarios the autonomous driving car finds itself in vary each time, and typically it is the
very sparse edge cases that lead to failures. Repeatability
in the real world is thus a major issue which may lead to
noisy estimates. An alternative of course is to build a perfect driving simulator in which we could sample realistic
and challenging scenes and measure how different detectors
affect collision rates, driving smoothness, time to destination, and other high level metrics that self-driving systems
are designed to optimize for as a whole. Although progress
114055

