Smoothing Adversarial Domain Attack and p-Memory Reconsolidation for
Cross-Domain Person Re-Identification
Guangcong Wang1 , Jianhuang Lai1,2,3∗, Wenqi Liang1 , and Guangrun Wang1
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education
{wanggc3,liangwq8,wanggrun}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most of the existing person re-identification (re-ID)
methods achieve promising accuracy in a supervised manner, but they assume the identity labels of the target domain
is available. This greatly limits the scalability of person
re-ID in real-world scenarios. Therefore, the current person re-ID community focuses on the cross-domain person
re-ID that aims to transfer the knowledge from a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain and exploits
the specific knowledge from the data distribution of the target domain to further improve the performance. To reduce
the gap between the source and target domains, we propose
a Smoothing Adversarial Domain Attack (SADA) approach
that guides the source domain images to align the target
domain images by using a trained camera classifier. To stabilize a memory trace of cross-domain knowledge transfer
after its initial acquisition from the source domain, we propose a p-Memory Reconsolidation (pMR) method that reconsolidates the source knowledge with a small probability p during the self-training of the target domain. With
both SADA and pMR, the proposed method significantly
improves the cross-domain person re-ID. Extensive experiments on Market-1501 and DukeMTMC-reID benchmarks
show that our pMR-SADA outperforms all of the state-ofthe-arts by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at re-targeting person images across non-overlapping camera views given a
query image. Recently, most of the existing person re-ID
approaches achieve a dramatic improvement using a large
number of annotations. However, these person re-ID systems often assume that large-scale identity labels of a target domain are available, which greatly limits their scala∗ Corresponding author

bility in real-world scenarios. When applied to a new scenario, they suffer from serious performance degradation,
e.g., from 92.0% to 47.5% on the Market-1501 dataset [52].
How to transfer the knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain for person re-ID and
how to exploit the specific knowledge from an unlabeled
target domain to boost person re-ID methods become hot
topics in the current person re-ID community. It is widely
called cross-domain person re-ID.
Recently, lots of cross-domain person re-ID methods
have achieved promising progress. A common approach to
solve this problem is to directly apply a pre-trained model
of a source domain to a target domain for evaluation. However, there exists a large domain gap between the source
and target domains due to different lightings, backgrounds, poses, and camera views. To deal with the large domain
gap problem, several GAN based methods [6, 19, 4, 18] are
proposed. For example, [6] proposed to directly use a cycle generative adversarial model to reduce the domain gap
problem. However, due to the diversity of person images,
the person identity information of the generated images is
hard to preserve without any identity constraint. Based on
[6], [19, 44, 4] used person segmentation tools to extract
person masks as extra information to help GAN to preserve
the person identity information. Although they can greatly
improve the performance of the cross-domain person re-ID,
they largely depend on the performance of the person segmentation task that implicitly requires person mask annotations. These extra annotations could also limit their scalability in practice.
Instead of focusing on the image-based knowledge transfer, some researchers attempt to exploit the underlying data
distributions of the target domain by person identity clustering for self-training. For example, a progressive unsupervised learning method [8] that iterates k-means clustering and CNN fine-tuning is proposed to learn discriminative
features for person re-ID. Based on [8], several clustering
110568

