Transformation GAN for Unsupervised Image Synthesis and Representation
Learning
Jiayu Wang1

Wengang Zhou1 Guo-Jun Qi2,4 Zhongqian Fu3 Qi Tian1 Houqiang Li1
1
CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, Department of EEIS,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
3
Department of EST, University of Science and Technology of China
4
Futurewei Technologies

wjy1031@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{zhwg,zqfu,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn,guojunq@gmail.com,wywqtian@gmail.com

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) have shown
promising performance in image generation and unsupervised learning (USL). In most cases, however, the representations extracted from unsupervised GAN are usually
unsatisfactory in other computer vision tasks. By using
conditional GAN (CGAN), this problem could be solved to
some extent, but the main shortcoming of conditional GAN
is the necessity for labeled data. To improve both image
synthesis quality and representation learning performance
under the unsupervised setting, in this paper, we propose
a simple yet effective Transformation Generative Adversarial Networks (TrGAN). In our approach, instead of capturing the joint distribution of image-label pairs p(x, y) as in
conditional GAN, we try to estimate the joint distribution
of transformed image t(x) and transformation t. Specifically, given a randomly sampled transformation t, we train
the discriminator to give an estimate of input transformation, while following the adversarial training scheme of the
original GAN. In addition, intermediate feature matching
as well as feature-transformation matching methods are introduced to strengthen the regularization on the generated
features. To evaluate the quality of both generated samples and extracted representations, extensive experiments
are conducted on four public datasets. The experimental
results on the quality of both the synthesized images and
the extracted representations demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, representation learning has received lots of attention over the last
decades. Thanks to the strong representational power of

deep neural networks (DNN), models combined with DNN
have demonstrated tremendous successes in various computer vision tasks, including image classification, semantic
segmentation and image generation. Moreover, in practice,
with the DNN pre-trained on large scale datasets for classification, the extracted representations could be transfered
to other tasks [28], and even to other modalities [11]. However, the training methodology of deep neural networks is
mainly driven by fully-supervised approaches with a large
volume of labeled data. With such a limitation, when
only a limited amount of labeled data is available, it becomes a highly challenging problem to train DNN models effectively. Therefore, as an effective DNN training
method without the need for extensive manual annotations,
unsupervised learning has received more and more attention [9, 14, 33, 40].
Generative models, for example, governed by probabilistic approaches, are trained to capture real data distribution
using unlabeled datasets. In order to produce new content,
generative models are required to have a good understanding of the training data, which makes them also effective in
unsupervised learning tasks. One class of generative models
that has been applied to representation learning is Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [10]. Since the discriminator is trained to extract features that is essential for distinguishing real data from generated one, the intermediate
features from discriminator can be viewed as the extracted
representations of its input [27]. However, it has been observed that the training dynamics in GAN are often unstable. As a result, the generated distribution varies during the
training process, which poses negative influence on representation learning of the discriminator. This issue is usually
addressed by conditional image generation, i.e., conditional
GAN [24, 36]. For example, in TripleGAN [19], the model
characterizes the uncertainty of both the real data x and

472

