GAMIN: Generative Adversarial Multiple Imputation Network
for Highly Missing Data
Seongwook Yoon
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

Sanghoon Sull
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea

swyoon@mpeg.korea.ac.kr

sull@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel imputation method for highly missing data. Though most existing imputation methods focus
on moderate missing rate, imputation for high missing rate
over 80% is still important but challenging. As we expect
that multiple imputation is indispensable for high missing
rate, we propose a generative adversarial multiple imputation network (GAMIN) based on generative adversarial
network (GAN) for multiple imputation. Compared with
similar imputation methods adopting GAN, our method has
three novel contributions: 1) We propose a novel imputation
architecture which generates candidates of imputation. 2)
We present a confidence prediction method to perform reliable multiple imputation. 3) We realize them with GAMIN
and train it using novel loss functions based on the confidence. We synthesized highly missing datasets using MNIST
and CelebA to perform various experiments. The results
show that our method outperforms baseline methods at high
missing rate from 80% to 95%.

1. Introduction
In many cases of measurements, data is obtained as missing data which is partially observed due to various reasons.
To deal with such missing data, imputation transforms missing data into complete data to further process it without discarding missing values. There have been many imputation
methods and those are still being studied, recently using
deep learning in particular.
There are various straightforward methods such as zero
imputation, mean imputation and deck imputation. Zero
imputation substitutes each missing value with zero and
mean imputation substitutes each missing value with the
mean of observed values. Deck imputation performs selection from the stack of candidate imputations [1]. One of the
most promising non-straightforward approaches is regression imputation which estimates missing values based on

observed values. Recently, most of imputation methods use
regression imputation because it can appropriately handle
multivariate missing data and learn the statistics of missing
values.
Imputation methods can be divided into single imputation and multiple imputation methods. The single imputation method suggests one complete data per one missing
data. On the other hand, the multiple imputation method
suggests a set of multiple complete data per one missing
data. In this case, each imputation is processed independently, and the corresponding results are consolidated into
one result [2].
Learning from dataset is one of the most important part
of regression imputation methods [3, 4, 5, 6]. In deep learning literature, there are two major approaches to learn imputation from large dataset. First, deep autoencoders are
used in supervised learning from complete dataset [7], excluding the unsupervised version [8]. Second, based on the
recently popular generative adversarial network (GAN) [9],
a generator imputes missing data and a discriminator predicts missingness from the imputation in [10]. In the imputation method of [11], a generator imputes missing data
to deceive the discriminator which discriminates between
the imputation and fake complete data generated by another
GAN, called misGAN. Likewise, [12] performed multivariate time series missing data imputation using a discriminator which discriminates between the imputation and real
missing data.
In this paper, we focus on imputation of highly missing
data which is a challenging problem. Depending on how
much a given dataset is structured or distributed, multiple
imputation is desirable for highly missing dataset, because
high missing rate makes the distribution of the missing values multi-modal. For example, the digits of MNIST [13]
can be hardly recognized at 90% missing so that even a human can be confused between several candidate digits.
We also adopted GAN for missing data imputation.
While the imputation architectures of [10] and [11] are identical, we propose a novel imputation architecture which co-

8456

