Hypergraph Attention Networks for Multimodal Learning
Eun-Sol Kim1∗,†

Woo Young Kang1∗

Kyoung-Woon On2

Yu-Jung Heo2‡

Byoung-Tak Zhang2,3

1

2

Kakao Brain
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
3
AI Institute (AIIS), Seoul National University

Abstract
One of the fundamental problems that arise in multimodal
learning tasks is the disparity of information levels between
different modalities. To resolve this problem, we propose
Hypergraph Attention Networks (HANs), which define a common semantic space among the modalities with symbolic
graphs and extract a joint representation of the modalities
based on a co-attention map constructed in the semantic
space. HANs follow the process: constructing the common semantic space with symbolic graphs of each modality,
matching the semantics between sub-structures of the symbolic graphs, constructing co-attention maps between the
graphs in the semantic space, and integrating the multimodal
inputs using the co-attention maps to get the final joint representation. From the qualitative analysis with two Visual
Question and Answering datasets, we discover that 1) the
alignment of the information levels between the modalities
is important, and 2) the symbolic graphs are very powerful
ways to represent the information of the low-level signals
in alignment. Moreover, HANs dramatically improve the
state-of-the-art accuracy on the GQA dataset from 54.6% to
61.88% only using the symbolic information in quantitatively.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address multimodal learning tasks, which
deal with relating information from multiple sources, such
as Visual Question and Answering tasks (with image and
text), visual captioning (with image and text), and video
understanding (with image, text, and sound). As neural
network-based methods have been successively used to deal
with large-scale unimodal data, such as images, natural lan∗ These authors contributed equally to this study.
† Corresponds to eunsol.kim@kakaobrain.com
‡ Work done during internship at Kakao Brain.

guages, and audio signal inputs, those methods have been
applied to multimodal learning. However, there is a severe
lack of consideration regarding the adequate form of the input representations of the multimodal data to learn by using
the neural network-based methods.
Most of the previous researches on learning multimodal
inputs commonly take the following steps: to make input
features of each modality as vector forms after applying
pre-trained pre-processing methods, to integrate the multiple
input features into a common vector space, and to apply
problem-specific modules usually implemented with fully
connected neural networks. Specifically, in the integration
step, the feature vectors from different modalities are considered as abstracted information on the equivalent level,
even though those are obtained from totally different preprocessing steps. In this conventional process, we argue that
aligning the information level of heterogeneous modalities is
a fundamental problem of multimodal learning and suggest
a novel method to bind the modalities in a common semantic
level.
To tackle this problem, we suggest using the symbolic
graphs as the common semantic representation for multimodal learning. We define the symbolic graphs as directed
graphs which contain nodes and edges, the nodes present
semantic units with textual form and edges present the relationship between them. For example, scene graphs [19] can
be used as the symbolic graphs for the image modality and
dependency trees in natural sentences for the text modality.
By extracting the symbolic graphs from each low-level inputs, we can compare the semantics between modalities in
the same abstraction level.
Based on the symbolic graphs which are on the same
semantic space, multimodal inputs can be effectively integrated. Here, we suggest a new graph neural net-based
algorithm, called Hypergraph Attention Networks (HANs),
which exploit the sub-structure of the graph to integrate symbolic information. The main idea of HANs is to construct
the co-attention maps between multimodal inputs and to

14581

