Predicting Semantic Map Representations from Images
using Pyramid Occupancy Networks
Thomas Roddick
University of Cambridge

Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge

tr346@cam.ac.uk

rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Autonomous vehicles commonly rely on highly detailed
birds-eye-view maps of their environment, which capture
both static elements of the scene such as road layout as
well as dynamic elements such as other cars and pedestrians. Generating these map representations on the fly is a
complex multi-stage process which incorporates many important vision-based elements, including ground plane estimation, road segmentation and 3D object detection. In this
work we present a simple, unified approach for estimating
maps directly from monocular images using a single endto-end deep learning architecture. For the maps themselves
we adopt a semantic Bayesian occupancy grid framework,
allowing us to trivially accumulate information over multiple cameras and timesteps. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by evaluating against several challenging baselines on the NuScenes and Argoverse datasets,
and show that we are able to achieve a relative improvement of 9.1% and 22.3% respectively compared to the bestperforming existing method. 1

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles and other robotic platforms require a rich, succinct and detailed representation of their
environment which captures both the geometry and layout
of the static world as well as the pose and dimensions of
other dynamic agents. Such representations often provide
the foundation for all decision making, including path planning, collision avoidance and navigation. Rather than capturing the full 3D world in its entirety, one popular solution is to represent the world in the form of a birds-eyeview (BEV) map, which provide a compact way to capture the spatial configuration of the scene. Such maps are
convenient in that they are simple to visualise and process,
exploiting the fact that in many scenarios the essential in1 Source code and dataset splits will be made available at github.
com/tom-roddick/mono-semantic-maps.

Drivable
Ped. crossing
Walkway
Carpark
Car
Truck
Bus
Trailer
Constr. veh.
Pedestrian
Motorcycle
Bicycle
Traﬃc cone
Barrier

Figure 1. An example prediction from our algorithm. Given a set
of surround-view images, we predict a full 360◦ birds-eye-view
semantic map, which captures both static elements like road and
sidewalk as well as dynamic actors such as cars and pedestrians.

formation for navigation is largely confined to the ground
plane.
Construction of birds-eye-view maps is however at
present a complex multistage processing pipeline, involving the composition of multiple fundamental machine vision tasks: structure from motion, ground plane estimation,
road segmentation, lane detection, 3D object detection, and
many more. Intuitively, all these tasks are related: knowing
the layout of the road ought to inform us about where in the
image we should look for cars; and similarly a car emerging from behind a building may indicate the presence of a
hidden side road beyond. There seems to be a clear impetus towards replacing this complicated pipeline with a sim111138

