Filter Response Normalization Layer: Eliminating Batch Dependence in the
Training of Deep Neural Networks
Saurabh Singh
Shankar Krishnan
Google Research
{saurabhsingh,skrishnan}@google.com

78

Abstract

1. Introduction
Batch normalization (BN) [18] is a cornerstone of current
high performing deep neural network models. One often
discussed drawback of BN is its reliance on sufficiently large
batch sizes [17, 31, 36]. When trained with small batch sizes,
BN exhibits a significant degradation in performance. This
issue has been attributed to training and testing discrepancy
arising from BN’s reliance on stochastic mini-batches [31].
As a result, several approaches have been proposed that
ameliorate the issues due to stochasticity [17, 31] or offer
alternatives [2, 36] by removing batch dependence. How-

76
Accuracy (Precision @ 1)

Batch Normalization (BN) uses mini-batch statistics to
normalize the activations during training, introducing dependence between mini-batch elements. This dependency can
hurt the performance if the mini-batch size is too small, or
if the elements are correlated. Several alternatives, such as
Batch Renormalization and Group Normalization (GN), have
been proposed to address this issue. However, they either
do not match the performance of BN for large batches, or
still exhibit degradation in performance for smaller batches,
or introduce artificial constraints on the model architecture.
In this paper we propose the Filter Response Normalization
(FRN) layer, a novel combination of a normalization and an
activation function, that can be used as a replacement for
other normalizations and activations. Our method operates
on each activation channel of each batch element independently, eliminating the dependency on other batch elements.
Our method outperforms BN and other alternatives in a
variety of settings for all batch sizes. FRN layer performs
« 0.7-1.0% better than BN on top-1 validation accuracy
with large mini-batch sizes for Imagenet classification using InceptionV3 and ResnetV2-50 architectures. Further, it
performs ą 1% better than GN on the same problem in the
small mini-batch size regime. For object detection problem
on COCO dataset, FRN layer outperforms all other methods
by at least 0.3-0.5% in all batch size regimes.

74
72
70
68

BatchNorm
BatchRenorm
GroupNorm
FRN Layer

66
64

1

2

4
8
16
Images per GPU (Batch size / 8)

32

Figure 1: Our method consistently outperforms other normalization methods, even at the largest batch size where other
methods struggle in comparison to Batch Normalization
(see inset). The figure reports the validation performance of
ResNetV2-50 models trained using 8 GPUs with different
batch sizes on ImageNet.
ever, these approaches don’t match the performance of BN
for large batch sizes (Figure 1). Further, either they still
exhibit a degradation in performance for smaller batch sizes
e.g. Batch Renormalization, or introduce constraints on the
model architecture and size e.g. Group Normalization requires number of channels in a layer to be multiples of an
ideal group size, such as 32. In this work we propose Filter Response Normalization (FRN) layer, consisting of a
normalization and activation function, that eliminates these
shortcomings altogether. Our method does not have any
batch dependence, as it operates on each activation channel
(filter response) of each batch sample independently, and outperforms BN and alternatives in a wide variety of evaluation
settings. For example, in Figure 1, FRN layer outperforms
other approaches by more than 1% at all batch sizes for
ResNetV2-50 on ImageNet classification.
The reliance of BN on large batch sizes hinders the exploration of higher capacity models due to significantly higher
memory requirements and imposes limitations on the performance of tasks that need to process larger inputs. For
111237

