Learning User Representations for Open Vocabulary Image Hashtag Prediction
Thibaut Durand
Borealis AI
Simon Fraser University
thibaut.durand@borealisai.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce an open vocabulary model for
image hashtag prediction – the task of mapping an image
to its accompanying hashtags. Recent work shows that to
build an accurate hashtag prediction model, it is necessary
to model the user because of the self-expression problem,
in which similar image content may be labeled with different tags. To take into account the user behaviour, we propose a new model that extracts a representation of a user
based on his/her image history. Our model allows to improve a user representation with new images or add a new
user without retraining the model. Because new hashtags
appear all the time on social networks, we design an open
vocabulary model which can deal with new hashtags without retraining the model. Our model learns a cross-modal
embedding between user conditional visual representations
and hashtag word representations. Experiments on a subset
of the YFCC100M dataset demonstrate the efficacy of our
user representation in user conditional hashtag prediction
and user retrieval. We further validate the open vocabulary
prediction ability of our model.

1. Introduction
Understanding the content of an image is a fundamental and challenging computer vision task because an image
can contain a large variety of semantic concepts and a semantic concept can have diverse visual appearances. The
vocabulary to describe visual concepts in an image is very
large and it is necessary to go beyond the semantic categories used in standard classification datasets (e.g. COCO
[31], ImageNet [36]) which focus on a small subset of categories that have precise physical description. Moreover, the
annotations of these datasets are independent of the users
who take the picture and ignore sentiment/subjective concepts like fun or happy.
The hashtag problem serves as a lens into the general
problem of image understanding because the user’s intent
is not separable from the image content. Images annotated with hashtags are available in great abundance be-

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed user conditional joint embedding model for hashtag prediction. First, a user representation
(yellow) is extracted from the user history. Then, the model computes a user conditional image representation (green) which is projected into a joint embedding space with the hashtag representation
of #street (red).

cause of social networks, but hashtags are inherently subjective because they are provided by users as a form of selfexpression [43]. As a consequence, hashtags may have synonyms (different hashtags referring to the same visual content) and may be ambiguous (the same hashtag referring to
different visual content). This self-expression leads to userspecific variation in hashtag supervision that is independent
of the image content, and therefore limits the effectiveness
of standard image classification methods. To overcome this
problem, [43] introduced a user-specific model that models
the joint distribution of images, hashtags and users instead
of the image-hashtag pairs as in standard image classification models. But this approach has two main limitations: it
cannot deal with new users or new hashtags without retraining the model.
To deal with new users, we propose a new model that
extracts a representation of a user from his/her image history (top-left of Figure 1). Given a user, our model only
uses the images and their corresponding hashtags from the
user’s history to compute a user representation – our model
works like a standard image classification model if a user
does not have an image history. Our approach is inductive
and can extract a representation of a new user without retraining the model. Another advantage of our model is that

9769

