Multiview-Consistent Semi-Supervised Learning for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Rahul Mitra∗
IIT Bombay

Nitesh B. Gundavarapu∗
UC San Diego

Abhishek Sharma
Axogyan AI

Arjun Jain
IISc Bangalore

rmitter@cse.iitb.ac.in

nbgundav@ucsd.edu

abhisharayiya@gmail.com

arjunjain@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
The best performing methods for 3D human pose estimation from monocular images require large amounts of
in-the-wild 2D and controlled 3D pose annotated datasets
which are costly and require sophisticated systems to acquire. To reduce this annotation dependency, we propose
Multiview-Consistent Semi Supervised Learning (MCSS)
framework that utilizes similarity in pose information from
unannotated, uncalibrated but synchronized multi-view
videos of human motions as additional weak supervision
signal to guide 3D human pose regression. Our framework applies hard-negative mining based on temporal relations in multi-view videos to arrive at a multi-view consistent pose embedding. When jointly trained with limited
3D pose annotations, our approach improves the baseline
by 25% and state-of-the-art by 8.7%, whilst using substantially smaller networks. Lastly, but importantly, we demonstrate the advantages of the learned embedding and establish view-invariant pose retrieval benchmarks on two popular, publicly available multi-view human pose datasets, Human 3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP, to facilitate future research.

1. Introduction
Over the years, the performance of monocular 3D human
pose estimation has improved significantly due to increasingly sophisticated CNN models [55, 35, 46, 45, 30, 49].
For training, these methods depend on the availability of
large-scale 3D-pose annotated data, which is costly and
challenging to obtain, especially under in-the-wild setting
for articulated poses. The two most popular 3D-pose annotated datasets, Human3.6M [15] (3.6M samples) and MPIINF-3DHP [29] (1.3M samples), are biased towards indoorlike environment with uniform background and illumination. Therefore, 3D-pose models trained on these datasets
don’t generalize well for real-world scenarios [8, 55].
Limited training data, or costly annotation, poses seri∗ - equal contribution

ous challenges to not only deep-learning based methods, but
other machine-learning methods as well. Semi-supervised
approaches [10, 22, 24, 14] have been extensively used in
the past to leverage large-scale unlabelled datasets along
with small labelled dataset to improve performance. Semisupervised methods try to exploit the structure/invariances
in the data to generate additional learning signals for training. Unlike classical machine-learning models that use
fixed feature representation, deep-learning models can also
learn a suitable feature representation from data as part of
the training process. This unique ability calls for semisupervised approaches to encourage better feature representation learning from large-scale unlabelled data for generalization. Intuitively it’s more appealing to leverage semisupervised training signals that are more relevant to the final
application. Therefore, given the vast diversity of computervision tasks, it remains an exciting area of research to innovate novel semi-supervision signals.
To this end, we leverage projective multiview consistency to create a novel metric-learning based semisupervised framework for 3D human-pose estimation. Multiview consistency has served as a fundamental paradigm
in computer vision for more than 40 years and gave rise
to some of the most used algorithms such as stereo [42],
structure from motion [20], motion capture [32], simultaneous localization and mapping [4], etc. From humanpose estimation perspective, the intrinsic 3D-pose of the
human-body remains the same across multiple different
views. Therefore, a deep-CNN should ideally be able to
map 2D-images corresponding to a common 3D-pose, captured from different viewpoints, to nearby points in an embedding space. Intuitively, such a deep-CNN is learning
feature representations that are invariant to different views
of the human-pose. Therefore, we posit that perhaps it can
learn to project 2D images, from different viewpoints, into
a canonical 3D-pose space in RN . In Fig. 1b, we show
a few embedding distances between different images from
the Human 3.6M dataset [15] and provide empirical evidence to the aforementioned hypothesis via a novel crossview pose-retrieval experiment. Unfortunately, embeddingvectors, x, from such a space do not translate directly to
16907

