Estimating Low-Rank Region Likelihood Maps⇤
Gabriela Csurka1 , Zoltan Kato2,3 , Andor Juhasz2 , Martin Humenberger1
1
NAVER LABS Europe, France
2
University of Szeged, Institute of Informatics, Hungary
3
J. Selye University, Komarno, Slovakia
{kato,jandor}@inf.u-szeged.hu

{gabriela.csurka,martin.humenberger}@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Low-rank regions capture geometrically meaningful
structures in an image which encompass typical local features such as edges, corners and all kinds of regular, symmetric, often repetitive patterns, that are commonly found in
man-made environment. While such patterns are challenging current state-of-the-art feature correspondence methods, the recovered homography of a low-rank texture readily provides 3D structure with respect to a 3D plane, without
any prior knowledge of the visual information on that plane.
However, the automatic and efficient detection of the broad
class of low-rank regions is unsolved. Herein, we propose
a novel self-supervised low-rank region detection deep network that predicts a low-rank likelihood map from an image. The evaluation of our method on real-world datasets
shows not only that it reliably predicts low-rank regions in
the image similarly to our baseline method, but thanks to the
data augmentations used in the training phase it generalizes
well to difficult cases (e.g. day/night lighting, low contrast,
underexposure) where the baseline prediction fails.

1. Introduction
Many applications such as visual localization [20, 18,
17] or structure-from-motion (SFM) [23, 10] rely on analyzing correspondences between multiple images or images
and 3D point clouds (maps). In the case of SFM, the new
⇤ This work was partially supported by the NKFI-6 fund through project
K120366; ”Integrated program for training new generation of scientists
in the fields of computer science”, EFOP-3.6.3-VEKOP-16-2017-0002;
the Research & Development Operational Program for the project ”Modernization and Improvement of Technical Infrastructure for Research and
Development of J. Selye University in the Fields of Nanotechnology and
Intelligent Space”, ITMS 26210120042, co-funded by the European Regional Development Fund; Research & Innovation Operational Program
for the Project: ”Support of research and development activities of J. Selye University in the field of Digital Slovakia and creative industry”, ITMS
code: NFP313010T504, co-funded by the European Regional Development Fund.

image needs to be registered in the current reconstruction to
improve or extend the 3D point cloud, in the case of visual
localization a query image is used to estimate the location of
the camera in a given environment (map). All methods have
in common that for precise camera pose estimation (relative
between two cameras or absolute between camera and 3D
map) accurate pixel correspondences are crucial. In order to
obtain these correspondences, relevant pixels (keypoints) in
the query image and 3D points in the reference map need to
be described as uniquely as possible. These so called keypoint descriptors or local features are then used to compare
the pixels or 3D points and the pairs with the lowest descriptor distance are kept for further processing. All feature
types share similar challenges: textureless areas, perspective distortion, occlusions, strong illumination changes, and
repetitive patterns. A significant amount of work on local
features and feature matching (surveys in [6, 24, 3]) was
presented in the past 20 years to overcome these challenges
and excellent results have been achieved.
However, it is not possible to establish reliable local correspondences between pixels in textureless areas or within
repetitive pattern because of the inherent uncertainty in appearance (same color or pattern). Furthermore, feature
matching can only work if the two images actually show
the same scenery. If the environment changed between reference image and query image acquisition, even the best
descriptor cannot find valid correspondences.
Recent work [26, 29, 12] showed that it is possible to
rectify so called low-rank regions and to use them in order
to estimate the camera pose relative to a plane. Furthermore, knowing such a plane induced homography between
camera pairs in a camera network allows us to estimate the
relative pose of a complete camera network to a 3D plane
as shown in [16, 7, 14]. To be more precise, a planar region
in an image is low-rank if it is possible to recover a lowrank matrix and a sparse error matrix where the first one
is a canonical view of the region obtained via a rectifying
homography. While the estimation of such a homography
would require at least 4 point correspondences in a classi1
13776

