Learning Physics-guided Face Relighting under Directional Light
Thomas Nestmeyer∗
MPI for Intelligent Systems

Jean-François Lalonde
Université Laval

Iain Matthews
Epic Games

Andreas Lehrmann∗
Borealis AI

Abstract
Relighting is an essential step in realistically transferring
objects from a captured image into another environment.
For example, authentic telepresence in Augmented Reality
requires faces to be displayed and relit consistent with the
observer’s scene lighting. We investigate end-to-end deep
learning architectures that both de-light and relight an image
of a human face. Our model decomposes the input image
into intrinsic components according to a diffuse physicsbased image formation model. We enable non-diffuse effects
including cast shadows and specular highlights by predicting
a residual correction to the diffuse render. To train and
evaluate our model, we collected a portrait database of 21
subjects with various expressions and poses. Each sample is
captured in a controlled light stage setup with 32 individual
light sources. Our method creates precise and believable
relighting results and generalizes to complex illumination
conditions and challenging poses, including when the subject
is not looking straight at the camera.
Supplementary material can be found on our project page
https://lvsn.github.io/face-relighting

1. Introduction
In recent years Augmented Reality (AR) has seen
widespread interest across a variety of fields, including gaming, communication, and remote work. For an AR experience to be immersive, the virtual objects inserted in the
environment should match the lighting conditions of their
observed surroundings, even though they were originally
captured under different lighting. This task, known as relighting, has a long history in computer vision with many
seminal works paving the way for modern AR technologies [2, 3, 21, 34, 39].
Relighting is often represented as a physics-based, twostage process. First, de-light the object in order to recover
its intrinsic properties of reflectance, geometry, and lighting. Second, relight the object according to a desired target
lighting. This implies an exact instantiation of the rendering
∗ The majority of this work was performed while the authors were at Facebook Reality Labs. Corresponding author: T.Nestmeyer@gmail.com

(a) ℓsrc , input

(b) ℓdst , prediction

(c) ℓdst , ground truth

Figure 1: Overview. Given an unseen input image (a) from
the test set that was lit by the according directional light ℓsrc
above it, we relight it towards the directional light ℓdst in (b).
To judge the performance, we provide the corresponding
ground truth image in (c).

equation [17] operating on lighting and surface reflectance
representations capable of capturing the true nature of the
light-material-geometry interactions. In practice, errors occur due to imperfect parametric models or assumptions.
One common approximation is to assume diffuse materials [2, 39]. Another approximation is smooth lighting, e.g.
modeled as low-order spherical harmonics, which cannot
produce hard shadows cast from point light sources like the
sun. We consider the hard problem of relighting human
faces, which are known for both their complex reflectance
properties including subsurface scattering, view-dependent
and spatially-varying reflectance, but also for our perceptual
sensitivity to inaccurate rendering. Recent image-to-image
translation approaches rely on deep learning architectures
(e.g. [16]) that make no underlying structural assumption
about the (re)lighting problem. Given enough representational capacity an end-to-end system can describe any underlying process, but is prone to large variance due to overparameterization, and poor generalization due to physically
implausible encodings. Test-time manipulation is also difficult with a semantically meaningless internal state. While
this could potentially be alleviated with more training data,

5124

