Towards Unified INT8 Training for Convolutional Neural Network
Feng Zhu1

Ruihao Gong1,2 Fengwei Yu1 Xianglong Liu2∗ Yanfei Wang1
Zhelong Li1 Xiuqi Yang1 Junjie Yan1
1
SenseTime Group Limited
2
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
{zhufeng1, yufengwei, wangyanfei, lizhelong, yangxiuqi, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com
{gongruihao, xlliu}@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently low-bit (e.g., 8-bit) network quantization has
been extensively studied to accelerate the inference. Besides inference, low-bit training with quantized gradients
can further bring more considerable acceleration, since the
backward process is often computation-intensive. Unfortunately, the inappropriate quantization of backward propagation usually makes the training unstable and even crash.
There lacks a successful unified low-bit training framework
that can support diverse networks on various tasks. In this
paper, we give an attempt to build a unified 8-bit (INT8)
training framework for common convolutional neural networks from the aspects of both accuracy and speed. First,
we empirically find the four distinctive characteristics of
gradients, which provide us insightful clues for gradient
quantization. Then, we theoretically give an in-depth analysis of the convergence bound and derive two principles
for stable INT8 training. Finally, we propose two universal
techniques, including Direction Sensitive Gradient Clipping
that reduces the direction deviation of gradients and Deviation Counteractive Learning Rate Scaling that avoids illegal gradient update along the wrong direction. The experiments show that our unified solution promises accurate and
efficient INT8 training for a variety of networks and tasks,
including MobileNetV2, InceptionV3 and object detection
that prior studies have never succeeded. Moreover, it enjoys
a strong flexibility to run on off-the-shelf hardware, and reduces the training time by 22% on Pascal GPU without too
much optimization effort. We believe that this pioneering
study will help lead the community towards a fully unified
INT8 training for convolutional neural networks.

∗ corresponding author

Convergence boundary

𝐠𝐱

𝐠𝐱
𝛼 𝛽

Convergence boundary

𝛽
#𝐠 𝐱 Clipping

#𝐠 𝐱
Learning rate scaling

Figure 1. The fundamental idea of our unified INT8 training. gx
and ĝx represent the original float gradient and the quantized one,
respectively. α and β represent different direction deviations that
quantization brings. The red lines present crash cases when the direction deviation is large. The left subfigure indicates that clipping
gradient properly to reduce direction deviation within the convergence boundary can avoid crash. The right subfigure points out
that controlling learning rate (step size) could promise a stable parameter updating by counteracting negative effect of deviation.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in many fields, such as computer vision, natural language processing, etc. However,
training and deploying DCNNs usually require a large
amount of time cost and power consumption, which is
greatly challenging the extensive applications in industry.
As a result, many recent studies have been focusing on how
to accelerate the inference of neural networks by fixed-point
quantization on weights or activations [6, 3, 24, 29, 27, 64,
42, 52, 63, 54, 21, 44, 57], and design dedicated hardware
utilizing the efficient integer arithmetic [17, 5, 26, 23]. The
successful progress surprisingly shows that the bit-width
can be reduced to extremely low such as 4-bit while bringing quite little hurt to the accuracy for inference [15, 59, 13].
Besides inference, low-bit training can also promise considerable acceleration, which further quantizes gradients
and utilizes low-bit efficient compute kernel for both the
forward and backward propagation. As analyzed in [25], the

1969

