Predicting Cognitive Declines Using Longitudinally Enriched Representations
for Imaging Biomarkers*
Lyujian Lu, Hua Wang†, Saad Elbeleidy
Department of Computer Science,
Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, U.S.A.
lyujianlu@mymail.mines.edu, huawangcs@gmail.com, selbeleidy@mymail.mines.edu

Feiping Nie
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P. R. China
feipingnie@gmail.com

for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative

Abstract
With rapid progress in high-throughput genotyping and
neuroimaging, researches of complex brain disorders, such
as Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), have gained significant attention in recent years. Many prediction models have been
studied to relate neuroimaging measures to cognitive status
over the progressions when these disease develops. Missing
data is one of the biggest challenge in accurate cognitive
score prediction of subjects in longitudinal neuroimaging
studies. To tackle this problem, in this paper we propose
a novel formulation to learn an enriched representation for
imaging biomarkers that can simultaneously capture both
the information conveyed by baseline neuroimaging records
and that by progressive variations of varied counts of available follow-up records over time. While the numbers of the
brain scans of the participants vary, the learned biomarker
representation for every participant is a fixed-length vector, which enable us to use traditional learning models to
study AD developments. Our new objective is formulated
to maximize the ratio of the summations of a number of
ℓ1 -norm distances for improved robustness, which, though,
is difficult to efficiently solve in general. Thus we derive
a new efficient iterative solution algorithm and rigorously
* Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the
ADNI database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators
within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI
and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of
this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found
at:
https://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/
how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf.
† Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under the grants of IIS 1652943, IIS
1849359 and CNS 1932482.

prove its convergence. We have performed extensive experiments on the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) dataset. A performance gain has been achieved to
predict four different cognitive scores, when we compare the
original baseline representations against the learned representations with enrichments. These promising empirical results have demonstrated improved performances of our new
method that validate its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
As one of the most prevalent and severe type of neurodegenerative disorders, Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) strongly
impacts human memory, thinking and behavior, which is
characterized by progressive impairment of memory and
other cognitive capabilities, triggered by the damage of neurons. AD usually progresses along a temporal continuum,
initially from a pre-clinical stage, subsequently to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and ultimately deteriorating to AD
[36]. According to a recent report [1], AD is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States. It is estimated that
5.7 million individuals are living with AD and this number
is projected to grow to 13.8 million by mid-century, fueled
in large part by the aging of the Baby Boom Generation.
The number of AD sufferers worldwide is estimated to be
44 million now and 1 in 85 people will be affected by AD
by 2050 [1].
With all these facts, AD has attracted growing attentions in recent years. Over the past decade, neuroimaging
measures have been widely studied to predict disease status
and/or cognitive performance [8, 30, 31, 24, 40, 29, 22, 38].
However, these approaches routinely perform standard re-

4827

