Few-Shot Video Classification via Temporal Alignment
Kaidi Cao

Jingwei Ji∗ Zhangjie Cao∗ Chien-Yi Chang
Stanford University

Juan Carlos Niebles

{kaidicao, jingweij, caozj18, cy3, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Difficulty in collecting and annotating large-scale video
data raises a growing interest in learning models which
can recognize novel classes with only a few training examples. In this paper, we propose the Ordered Temporal Alignment Module (OTAM), a novel few-shot learning framework that can learn to classify a previously unseen video.
While most previous work neglects long-term temporal ordering information, our proposed model explicitly leverages
the temporal ordering information in video data through
ordered temporal alignment. This leads to strong dataefficiency for few-shot learning. In concrete, our proposed
pipeline learns a deep distance measurement of the query
video with respect to novel class proxies over its alignment
path. We adopt an episode-based training scheme and directly optimize the few-shot learning objective. We evaluate
OTAM on two challenging real-world datasets, Kinetics and
Something-Something-V2, and show that our model leads
to significant improvement of few-shot video classification
over a wide range of competitive baselines and outperforms
state-of-the-art benchmarks by a large margin.

Support Set

making sushi

making tea

Query

Figure 1. Our few-shot learning approach. We find the nearest neighbor match in the support set to make a prediction for the
query video. Pairs of semantically matched frames are connected
with a blue dashed line. The arrows show the direction of the ordered temporal alignment path.

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep learning has greatly advanced
the frontiers of action recognition [8, 26, 41]. Currently, a
major line of work focuses on learning effective representations for video classification using large amounts of labeled
data [2, 22]. When a pre-trained model needs to be adapted
to recognize an unseen class, typically we need to manually
collect hundreds of video samples for knowledge transfer.
But such a procedure is rather tedious and labor intensive.
What’s more, the difficulty and cost of labeling videos is
much higher compared to images.
There is growing interest in learning models capable of
effectively adapting themselves to recognize novel classes
with only a few training examples. This is known as fewshot learning [10, 14]. Meta-learning is a promising ap∗ Indicates equal contribution.

proach for few-shot learning, the model is explicitly trained
to deal with scarce training data for previously unseen
classes across different episodes [12]. While the majority
of recent few-shot learning work focuses on image classification, its extension to video classification is not trivial.
Videos are much more complicated than images with an
additional temporal dimension. Recognizing actions such
as “opening the door” requires careful modeling of temporal ordering. In the video classification literature, 3D convolution and optical flow are two main-stream methods to
model short-term temporal relations [38, 41], while longterm temporal relations are usually neglected. State-of-theart approaches commonly apply a temporal pooling module
(usually mean pooling) in order to make final predictions
[22, 41]. As observed in [47], averaging the deep features
only captures the co-occurrence rather than the temporal or110618

