Minimal Solvers for 3D Scan Alignment with Pairs of Intersecting Lines
André Mateus1 , Srikumar Ramalingam2 , and Pedro Miraldo1
1
Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa 2 Google

Abstract
We explore the possibility of using line intersection constraints for 3D scan registration. Typical 3D registration
algorithms exploit point and plane correspondences, while
line intersection constraints have not been used in the context of 3D scan registration before. Constraints from a
match of pairs of intersecting lines in two 3D scans can be
seen as two 3D line intersections, a plane correspondence,
and a point correspondence. In this paper, we present minimal solvers that combine these different type of constraints:
1) three line intersections and one point match; 2) one
line intersection and two point matches; 3) three line intersections and one plane match; 4) one line intersection
and two plane matches; and 5) one line intersection, one
point match, and one plane match. To use all the available solvers, we present a hybrid RANSAC loop. We propose a non-linear refinement technique using all the inliers
obtained from the RANSAC. Vast experiments with simulated data and two real-data data-sets show that the use of
these features and the combined solvers improve the accuracy. The code is available at https://github.com/
3DVisionISR/3DMinRegLineIntersect.

1. Introduction
3D sensors such as RGB-D and 3D LiDAR devices are
becoming less costly and more accurate. Since they provide
more information about the scene than perspective cameras,
they are becoming more useful in applications such as augmented reality [26, 3, 7, 15], navigation [29, 59, 40, 25],
and SLAM [65, 67, 28, 69]. A problem that naturally arises
is the 3D registration, which aims at finding the rigid transformation that aligns pairs of point clouds.
The 3D registration problem is usually solved by using
iterative techniques, such as the well known ICP [8, 4]. Incremental improvements on ICP have been proposed for almost thirty years. The majority of them attempt to improve
robustness to outliers, to reduce the chances of falling into
local minima, and to reduce the computational complexity of the problem. A way of dealing with these issues
if to use minimal solvers [46] and RANSAC [18]. These

Figure 1: Basic idea of this paper: We identify pairs of 3D
lines that intersect from two scans, i.e., a line from the first
scan (image on the top left) intersects with the line from
the second (image on the bottom left) in the common reference frame (image on the right). In this paper, we jointly
exploit this novel line intersection constraints along with
traditional point and plane correspondence constraints to
develop a family of minimal solvers for the task of 3D scan
registration.

consist in finding a consensus for the registration that is
obtained by randomly sampling and fitting minimum sets
of data. Both techniques are prone to drift when applied
to the visual odometry problem. To minimize the drift,
researchers use methods like rotation/transformation averaging (see for example [21, 23, 5]) or loop closure (e.g.
[24, 63, 73, 17, 10, 46]), that require more than two 3D
scans. In this work, we focus on just a pair of scans.
Most existing methods exploit the use of points in the
point cloud, either using all points from the 3D scan
(e.g., the ICP [4]) or using 3D descriptors (such as the
FPFH [61]). This paper aims at using other types of 3D
features. We focus on environments containing 3D planes
and straight lines, as shown in Fig. 1. Then, the questions
we aim at exploring are the following. What kind of constraints can we obtain from pairs of intersecting lines in 3D
scans? Does the use of pairs of line intersections improve

7234

