SiamCAR: Siamese Fully Convolutional Classification and Regression
for Visual Tracking
Dongyan Guo † , Jun Wang † , Ying Cui †∗ , Zhenhua Wang † , Shengyong Chen ‡
†
Zhejiang University of Technology, China
‡
Tianjin University of Technology, China
{guodongyan, 1111912011, cuiying, zhhwang}@zjut.edu.cn,

Abstract
By decomposing the visual tracking task into two subproblems as classification for pixel category and regression
for object bounding box at this pixel, we propose a novel
fully convolutional Siamese network to solve visual tracking
end-to-end in a per-pixel manner. The proposed framework
SiamCAR consists of two simple subnetworks: one Siamese
subnetwork for feature extraction and one classificationregression subnetwork for bounding box prediction. Different from state-of-the-art trackers like Siamese-RPN,
SiamRPN++ and SPM, which are based on region proposal, the proposed framework is both proposal and anchor
free. Consequently, we are able to avoid the tricky hyperparameter tuning of anchors and reduce human intervention. The proposed framework is simple, neat and effective.
Extensive experiments and comparisons with state-of-theart trackers are conducted on challenging benchmarks including GOT-10K, LaSOT, UAV123 and OTB-50. Without
bells and whistles, our SiamCAR achieves the leading performance with a considerable real-time speed. The code is
available at https://github.com/ohhhyeahhh/SiamCAR.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking has received considerable attention due to its wide application such as intelligent surveillance, human-machine interaction and unmanned vehicles.
Rapid progress has been made on visual tracking. However,
it remains a challenging task especially for real world applications, as object in unconstrained recording conditions
often suffers from large illumination variation, scale variation, background clutters and heavy occlusions, etc. Moreover, the appearance of non-rigid objects may change significantly due to extreme pose variation.
Current popular visual tracking methods [1, 21, 14, 35,
20, 42, 11, 33] revolve around the Siamese network based
architectures. The Siamese network formulates the visual

sy@ieee.org

#016

#064

#119

#020

#048

#085

#047

#200

#417

SiamCAR

SiamRPN++

SPM

ECO

Figure 1. Comparisons of the proposed SiamCAR with three state-of-theart trackers on three challenging sequences from GOT-10K. Our SiamCAR
can accurately predict the bounding boxes even when objects suffer from
similar distractors, large scale variation and large pose variation, while
SiamRPN++ and SPM give much rougher results and ECO drifts to the
background.

tracking task as a target matching problem and aims to learn
a general similarity map between the target template and
the search region. Since one single similarity map typically
contains limited spatial information, a common strategy is
to perform matching on multiple scales of the search regions to determine the object scale variation [1, 14, 35],
which explains why these trackers are time-consuming and
labor-intensive. SiamRPN [21] attaches the Siamese network a subnetwork for the extraction of region proposals
(RPN). By jointly training a classification branch and a regression branch for visual tracking, SiamRPN avoids the
time-consuming step of extracting multi-scale feature maps
for the object scale invariance. It achieves state-of-theart results on multiple benchmarks. Later works such as
DaSiam [42] , CSiam [11] and SiamRPN++ [20] improve
SiamRPN. However, since anchors are introduced for region proposal, these trackers are sensitive to the numbers,
sizes and aspect ratios of anchor boxes, and expertise on
hyper-parameter tuning is crucial to obtain successful tracking with these trackers.
4321
6269

